Randal  K  Quarles:  The  roles  of  consumer  protection  and  small
business access to credit in financial inclusion
Speech by Mr Randal K Quarles, Vice Chairman for Supervision of the Board of Governors of the
Federal  Reserve  System,  at  the  HOPE  Global  Forums Annual  Meeting, Atlanta,  Georgia,  26
March 2018.
 1
Good evening. Thank you to John Bryant and Operation HOPE for inviting me today to open the
HOPE Global Forums.  I commend our hosts for bringing together such an impressive group of
speakers  and  attendees,  diverse  in  their  perspectives,  yet  all  of  whom  share  the  vital  goal  of
advancing economic opportunity and inclusion. It is fitting that this event is being held on the 50th
anniversary of several notable events, including the publication of Dr. Martin Luther King’s last
book, Where Do We Go from Here: Chaos or Community, which urged unity in order to create
equal  opportunity,  and  the  enactment  of  the  Fair  Housing Act  of  1968,  which  enshrined  our
nation’s commitment to equal access to housing. These milestones remind us of the progress
we have made to date as well as the challenges that remain, and inspire us to persist in our
efforts.
The  conference  has  a  robust  agenda  ahead.  Over  the  next  few  days,  you  will  be  discussing
many  issues  relating  to  financial  inclusion—such  as  housing,  small  businesses,  workforce
participation, and other topics—to which we at the Federal Reserve share a commitment, and
that we view as critical to our mission. Our economy is stronger when everyone has a chance to
contribute  fully  and  share  in  our  national  prosperity.  And  I  personally  believe  that  financial
inclusion helps us realize a founding notion of our country—that this is a place where opportunity,
innovation, and productivity are encouraged and rewarded. I’m particularly pleased to see on the
conference agenda a number of sessions on issues to which we, at the Federal Reserve, devote
considerable  attention:  access  to  credit  and  financial  inclusion  for  consumers  and  small
businesses. Conversations like these are enormously important to understanding the challenges
Americans face and why a multitude of voices and approaches are needed to address them.
2
In my remarks today, I’d like to focus on the consumer protection and credit accessibility aspects
of  financial  inclusion,  and  some  of  the  ways  that  the  Federal  Reserve  promotes  a  fair  and
transparent consumer financial services marketplace. In recent speeches, I have emphasized
my view that we should aim for an effective safety and soundness regulatory approach that is as
efficient, transparent, and simple as feasible.  I consider these principles to apply equally to our
consumer protection supervision program; that is, we should also strive to promote consumer
protection  with  as  much  efficiency,  transparency,  and  simplicity  as  possible.  I  believe  that  a
commitment to these principles is not only compatible with financial inclusion, but in fact helps
promote it. Regulatory burden can make it harder for institutions to serve their customers and
communities.  This  is  especially  the  case  for  community  banks  and  minority  depository
institutions  (or  MDIs),  which  play  an  important  role  in  serving  the  needs  of  their  local
communities, including historically underserved populations. I’d also like to share some thoughts
on  an  area  to  which  I  have  devoted  a  good  portion  of  my  career:  the  importance  of  small
business  access  to  credit,  which  is  a  critical  part  of  financial  inclusion  and  a  catalyst  for
economic growth in local communities.
Financial inclusion
Let me start with the foundation of why financial inclusion is important. In broad terms, financial
inclusion  means  access  to  affordable  financial  products  and  services  that  meet  the  needs  of
individuals and businesses and that are delivered in a responsible and sustainable way.  At the
Federal  Reserve,  we  recognize  the  influence  that  financial  inclusion  has  on  the  broader
3
4
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
economic performance of our country.  Inclusion is essential to advancing the Federal Reserve’s
goal  of  promoting  maximum  employment,  as  well  as  supporting  the  stability  of  the  financial
system. Likewise, we support and share your goal of ensuring a fair and transparent marketplace
for  financial  products  and  services—including  credit—that  can  provide  a  pathway  toward
economic prosperity for all Americans.
4
6
Overall, our economy is performing well, and unemployment is low. However, many households
and communities continue to face financial challenges.  Consider that more than two-thirds of
white  households  own  their  homes  as  compared  to  less  than  half  of African Americans  and
Hispanics. And  consider  that  all  important  human  asset:  education.  One-third  of  white  adults
have at least a bachelor’s degree as compared to one in four African Americans and 17 percent
of  Hispanics.   This  matters  because  the  advantages  of  a  college  degree  for  accumulating
income  and  wealth  are  lifelong  and  inter-generational.   We  likewise  see  evidence  of  financial
disparities in the Federal Reserve’s Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking and
9
Survey of Consumer Finances.
5
7
8
When individuals have unequal or insufficient access to financial products and services, such as
credit, they may be deprived of a chance to fund an education, finance a business, or pursue
homeownership—opportunities  that  can  provide  greater  financial  security  for  themselves  and
their families and future generations. And as a nation, we are deprived of the benefits of their
potential contributions to the economy.
Consumer protection 
In the context of my earlier discussion of financial inclusion, federal consumer protection laws
are critical to ensuring consumers are treated fairly when offered financial products and services.
Discrimination  and  deception  have  no  place  in  a  fair  and  transparent  marketplace.  These
practices  can  close  off  opportunities  and  limit  consumers’  ability  to  improve  their  economic
circumstances, including through access to homeownership and education.
The Federal Reserve’s consumer compliance supervisory program reflects our commitment to
promoting financial inclusion and ensuring that the financial institutions under our jurisdiction fully
comply  with  applicable  federal  consumer  protection  laws  and  regulations.  Let  me  give  two
examples involving the Federal Trade Commission Act’s prohibition against unfair or deceptive
practices  in  products  and  services  that  will  undoubtedly  be  familiar  to  the  audience—student
financial aid and mortgage lending. In the last few years, the Federal Reserve has addressed
deceptive  practices  in  these  areas  through  public  enforcement  actions  that  have  collectively
benefited hundreds of thousands of consumers and provided millions of dollars in restitution.
In the financial aid context, our actions required restitution for students who were not given full
information about the potential fees and limitations associated with opening deposit accounts for
their financial aid refunds.
 And in mortgage lending, our action required restitution by a bank
that had given borrowers the option to pay an additional amount to purchase discount points to
lower their mortgage interest rate, but that did not actually provide the reduced rate to many of
those borrowers.
10
11
As we mark the 50th anniversary of the Fair Housing Act, the fair lending laws remain critical in
fostering  vibrant  communities  and  a  fair  and  transparent  consumer  financial  services
marketplace. For all state member banks, we enforce the Fair Housing Act, and for banks of $10
billion dollars or less in assets, we also enforce the Equal Credit Opportunity Act. Our examiners
evaluate  fair  lending  risk  at  every  consumer  compliance  exam.  While  we  find  that  the  vast
majority of our institutions comply with the fair lending laws, we are committed to identifying and
remedying  violations  when  they  occur.  Pursuant  to  the  Equal  Credit  Opportunity  Act,  if  we
determine that a bank has engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination, we refer the matter
to the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ). Federal Reserve referrals have resulted in DOJ public
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
actions in critical areas, such as redlining and mortgage-pricing discrimination. For example, in
our redlining referrals, the Federal Reserve found that the banks treated majority-minority areas
less  favorably  than  non-minority  ones,  such  as  through  lending  patterns,  marketing,  and
Community  Reinvestment  Act  assessment-area  delineations.  For  our  mortgage-pricing
discrimination  referrals,  the  Federal  Reserve  found  that  the  banks  charged  higher  prices  to
African American  or  Hispanic  borrowers  than  it  charged  to  non-Hispanic  white  borrowers  and
that the higher prices could not be explained by legitimate pricing criteria.
Efficiency, simplicity, and transparency of consumer compliance supervision
12
Consumers deserve to be treated fairly, regardless of the size of the banking institution. Yet, we
can achieve this goal and still reduce regulatory burden through a balanced program of tailored
and risk-focused supervision. Accordingly, we continue to seek opportunities to promote efficient,
simple, and transparent supervision where possible, so that the institutions we supervise can
focus on finding solutions that work for all consumers and communities. In an effort to promote
consumer compliance, our community bank supervisory program focuses our examinations on
the areas of highest consumer risk. This has improved the efficiency and effectiveness of our
examinations and reduced regulatory burden for many community banks. Banks and consumers
benefit when supervision is timely and effective.
Put simply, our role as supervisors should not be to play “gotcha” with our banks, but to support
their compliance efforts. The Interagency Consumer Compliance Ratings System, published in
November  2016,  is  an  example  of  this  approach.
  This  guidance  provides  incentives  for
institutions to focus on managing their consumer compliance risks, preventing consumer harm,
and helping to create a culture that identifies and corrects problems. Another example of how we
support our institutions is how we work with MDIs, which as I noted earlier, play an important role
in serving the needs of their local communities. We have dedicated Reserve Bank staff who are
in  frequent  contact  with  MDI  leadership.  Based  on  what  we’ve  learned  in  the  course  of  this
outreach,  we  have  expanded  our  Partnership  for  Progress—a  program  for  outreach  and
technical assistance to MDIs —to include staff from our Community Development function, and
we have enhanced our MDI-related programing.
13
14
Our  commitment  to  transparency  also  includes  a  robust  outreach  program  for  banks.  This
includes Consumer  Compliance  Outlook,  a  widely  subscribed  Federal  Reserve  System
publication focused on consumer compliance issues, and its companion webinar series, Outlook
Live.
 For example, in 2017, we sponsored an interagency webinar on fair lending supervision
with almost 6,000 registrants, a substantial share of which were community banks.
Small business access to credit
15
16
At  the  Federal  Reserve,  we  view  small  business  credit  from  several  perspectives.  For  the
economy,  small  businesses  need  adequate  and  affordable  credit  in  order  to  form,  grow,  and
succeed; otherwise they may underperform, slowing growth and employment. For many small
business  owners,  personal  and  business  finances  are  intertwined. A  well-functioning  housing
finance market is vital for small business owners who may draw upon the equity in their homes
to  fund  their  businesses.  Student  loans  may  be  needed  to  help  fund  the  education  that  is
important for both small business owners and their employees to boost profits and productivity.
And, short-term credit matters for day-to-day management of cash flow, while longer-term credit
is essential for capital investments. So, entrepreneurs—just like consumers—need access to a
variety of credit sources.
Recently, I had the pleasure of meeting a group of small businesses from across the country. By
“small,” I mean some of these companies have just a handful of employees. The group included
owners  of  a  catering  company  from  Dallas,  a  mechanical  engineering  company  from
Philadelphia,  a  marketing  consulting  firm  from  Cleveland,  a  combination  bar  and  bakery  from
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Brooklyn, and a gluten-free bakery from my hometown, Salt Lake City.
They shared with me the joys of running their own businesses, of creating jobs, and of providing
for their families as well as creating opportunities for their employees. They also spoke of their
challenges, which I’m sure are familiar to many of you in this room. For one, the owners wear
many  hats,  including  CEO,  chief  operating  officer,  chief  finance  officer,  head  of  sales  and
marketing,  and  some—quite  literally—chief  bottle  washer.  They  also  spoke  of  the  day-to-day
difficulties of finding, training, and retaining employees. And, they raised the challenges they often
face  in  gaining  access  to  working  capital,  the  lifeblood  to  sustaining  and  growing  their
businesses.
The  anecdotes  I  heard  touched  on  three  related  trends  we  have  been  observing  in  the  small
business credit environment. First, although lending standards have eased since the recession
and  the  financial  condition  of  businesses  has  improved,  some  small  business  credit  needs,
especially for the smallest of firms and minority small business owners, continue to go unmet.
According to a 2016 Small Business Credit Survey conducted by our 12 Federal Reserve Banks,
some small businesses still face persistent credit gaps, even though they often seek credit in
small  amounts.  Of  the  firms  that  apply  for  credit,  more  than  two-thirds  apply  for  less  than
$100,000, with substantial numbers of these applying for less than $25,000.
 However, smaller
firms  often  struggle  to  qualify  for  bank  credit,  and  among  firms  that  were  denied,  low  credit
scores  and  insufficient  credit  history  were  the  most  frequently  cited  reasons.  In  addition,  our
survey suggests that some low-credit-risk minority- and women-owned firms are less likely than
low-risk white-owned and male-owned firms to receive financing; and if they are approved, it is
for less than the amount sought.
17
18
Second,  there  have  been  shifts  in  the  composition  of  commercial  bank  lending  to  small
businesses.  Large  banks’  share  of  small  business  lending  has  grown,  especially  among  the
smallest loans. This represents a change from 20 years ago when small businesses relied more
on a relationship with local community banks for access to credit. For loans under $100,000,
small banks of less than $1 billion in assets now hold a 19 percent share, down from 60 percent
two decades ago. Today, it is the largest banks—those with greater than $50 billion in assets—
that account for more than 60 percent. Some of this trend may be due to industry consolidation,
which has reduced the number of very small banks.
19
The composition of credit offered also is shifting. Loans entail high fixed costs that are roughly
the same regardless of whether a loan is for $100,000 or $1 million, reducing the profitability of
smaller-dollar loans.
  Our  data  suggest  that  the  growing  share  of  small  business  lending  at
larger  banks  may  be  partly  due  to  their  use  of  automated  underwriting  for  credit  cards.
  By
providing credit cards, banks are expanding credit available to small businesses; however, some
small business advocates note that this form of credit is generally more expensive and lacks the
flexibility of other products.
 For example, personal or business credit cards may be suitable for
purchasing  supplies,  but  not  for  payroll.  In  addition,  this  automated  approach  may  be  more
“cookie cutter,” meaning that firms that don’t meet standard lending criteria may not qualify.
21
20
22
These  developments  have  created  a  space  for  the  third  trend  we  have  been  observing—the
emergence of nonbank online alternative lenders that provide small-dollar business credit. For
example, some of the large technology firms are providing credit, at a rapidly growing pace, to
their built-in customer base of merchants. Several of the businesses I met with mentioned they
had turned to nonbank online lenders after being turned down by banks. Some online lenders
obtain access to a prospective borrower’s accounting software, merchant accounts, shipping,
and payroll data in real time in order to underwrite businesses. Business owners can receive
funds in a couple of days or even hours.
This  emergence  of  online  lenders  is  part  of  a  broader  evolution  of  financial  technology—or
“fintech"—as  seen  in  a  wide  range  of  products  and  services  for  both  consumers  and  small
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
businesses. I’m not surprised to see this important topic on your conference agenda. The use of
fintech to expand access to credit has great promise and also associated risks. For example,
online  origination  platforms  and  more  sophisticated  algorithms  may  enable  credit  to  be
underwritten  and  delivered  in  a  manner  that  is  still  prudent  but  with  greater  efficiency,
convenience, and lower processing costs. And as regulators, we do not want to unnecessarily
restrict  innovations  that  can  benefit  consumers  and  small  businesses. At  the  same  time,  our
interest  is  in  ensuring  that  banks  understand  and  manage  their  risks  when  introducing  new
technologies or partnering with fintech companies, and that consumers and small businesses
remain  protected.
  This  is  why  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been  engaged  in  a  broad  and
multidisciplinary effort to develop a robust understanding of the technologies and activities in this
space,  in  order  to  study  fintech’s  opportunities  and  risks,  and  assess  policy  and  supervisory
implications.
23
24
Fintech  is  also  one  of  the  factors  driving  calls  for  regulators  to  modernize  the  Community
Reinvestment Act,  or  CRA,  as  technology  changes  how  financial  products  and  services  are
accessed. As I’m sure most of you know, the CRA is an important law that recognizes banks’
affirmative obligation to meet the credit needs of the communities they serve, including low- and
moderate-income communities. The CRA promotes financial inclusion by encouraging banks to
extend  mortgages,  small  business  loans,  and  other  types  of  credit  as  well  as  to  provide
investments and other services in communities where they take deposits, consistent with safe
and sound banking operations. The arrival of new financial technologies, along with significant
industry consolidation and other structural changes, has changed the way that financial services
are delivered to consumers and the ways in which banks lend in communities. We continue to
study  these  shifts,  and  share  the  common  goal  of  improving  the  current  supervisory  and
regulatory framework for CRA to further the statute’s core objective of promoting access to credit
and financial inclusion.
Conclusion
Finally, I’ll note that we will continue to learn about issues concerning financial inclusion through
our  research,  such  as  by  collecting  new  data  in  our  Survey  of  Household  Economics  and
Decisionmaking and Survey of Consumer Finances that I mentioned earlier. The information we
gather helps us better understand factors affecting consumers and households, including low-
and  moderate-income  and  historically  underserved  populations.  We  also  continue  to  convene
experts and practitioners from industry, academia, and community-based organizations to help
provide context on what we are seeing in the data, to identify emerging issues, and to consider
where there may be data gaps and opportunities for additional research. In addition to yielding
important  insights  that  inform  our  policymaking,  we  hope  these  efforts  can  support  the
conversations you are having at conferences like this one.
Thank  you,  again,  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  your  conference  as  we  mark  the  notable
anniversaries that this year brings. Together, our work clearly has a great deal of synergy, and I
thank you for your efforts. Making the economy work for the benefit of all Americans, including
lower-income communities, is of the utmost importance.
1
2
3
4
The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal
Open Market Committee.
See, e.g. Randal K. Quarles, “Early Observations on Improving the Effectiveness of Post-Crisis Regulation”
(speech at the American Bar Association Banking Law Committee Annual Meeting, Washington, DC, January
19, 2018).
"Financial Inclusion,” World Bank, last modified April 5, 2017.
See, e.g., Lael Brainard, “Why Opportunity and Inclusion Matter to America’s Economic Strength” (speech at the
Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
May  22,  2017);  Janet  L.  Yellen,  “Perspectives  on  Inequality  and  Opportunity  from  the  Survey  of  Consumer
Finances” (speech at the Conference on Economic Opportunity and Inequality, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,
Boston, MA, October 17, 2014); Ben S. Bernanke, “The Level and Distribution of Economic Well-Being” (speech
before the Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce, Omaha, NE, February 6, 2007).
The  Board’s Monetary Policy Report (PDF) has included a discussion of the economic experiences of major
demographic groups. See, e.g., “Have the Gains of the Economic Expansion Been Widely Shared?” in Monetary
Policy Report (Washington: Board of Governors, June 21, 2016), p. 6.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau’s “Quarterly Residential Vacancies and Homeownership” statistics for the
fourth quarter of 2017, the homeownership rates by race were 72.7 percent for non-Hispanic white households;
42.1 percent and 46.6 percent for black and Hispanic households, respectively; and 58.2 percent for Asian,
Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islanders. See www.census.gov/housing/hvs/files/currenthvspress.pdf.
U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 2017 Annual Social and Economic Supplement, “Educational
Attainment in the United States: 2017,” December 14, 2017.
William R. Emmons, Ana H. Kent, and Lowell R. Ricketts, The Demographics of Wealth: How Education, Race
and Birth Year Shape Financial Outcome (PDF), Essay No. 1 (St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
February 2018).
For example, data from our Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED) show that in 2016,
only about half of white households had three months of emergency savings, but this was the case for less than
two-fifths 
is
a t www.federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/shed.htm.  See  also  the  Survey  of  Consumer  Finances
at www.federalreserve.gov/econres/scfindex.htm.
households. 
Hispanic 
SHED 
black 
2016 
and 
The 
of 
In the Matter of Cole Taylor Bank, Docket Nos. 14–021-E-SMB, 14–021-CMP-SMB (July 1, 2014);In the Matter
of Higher One, Inc., Docket Nos. 15–026-E-I, 15–026-CMP-I (December 23, 2015);In the Matter of Customers
Bank, Docket Nos. 15–027-B-SM, 15–027-CMP-SM (December 6, 2016).
In the Matter of Peoples Bank, Docket No. 17–041-B-SM (November 28, 2017).
See,  e.g.,  DOJ  settlements  with Midwest  BankCentre;  SunTrust  Mortgage  Inc.;  and Countrywide  Financial
Corporation. More information about recent referrals to the DOJ can be found in the Federal Reserve’s annual
report at www.federalreserve.gov/publications/2016-ar-consumer-and-community-affairs.htm#14890.
See www.ffiec.gov/press/PDF/FFIEC_CCR_SystemFR_Notice.pdf.
See the partnership’s website at www.fedpartnership.gov.
See consumercomplianceoutlook.org/ and consumercomplianceoutlook.org/outlook-live/.
Federal Reserve System, "2017 Interagency Fair Lending Hot Topics," Outlook Live webinar series, November
16, 2017.
While there are many working definitions of “small,” figures from the Small Business Credit Survey (SBCS) use
firms with less than 500 employees as a proxy for small businesses. Some 28 percent are seeking credit in
amounts less than $25,000 and 42 percent reported seeking between $25,000 and $100,000. The SBCS is
available 
at www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/smallbusiness/2016/SBCS-Report-EmployerFirms-
2016.pdf.
According to special analyses of the Joint Federal Reserve Banks’ Small Business Credit Survey, among low-
credit-risk  firms,  60  percent  of  minority  firms  that  were  approved  received  only  partial  funding,  whereas  68
percent of low-risk, non-minority firms were approved for the full amount of financing requested. Women-owned
firms also reported a funding gap. Among low-credit-risk firms, 48 percent of women-owned firms received all of
the 
firms.  Reports  are  available
at www.newyorkfed.org/smallbusiness/small-business-credit-survey-employer-firms-2016.
to  57  percent  of  men-owned 
financing  requested,  compared 
BAI Banking Strategies, “Making Small Loans Profitably,” July 7, 2015.
Based on Federal Reserve analysis of FR-Y14 data for scored loans and cards (i.e., underwritten by owner’s
personal credit) for 2007 to 2016.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
21
22
23
24
Record of Meeting (PDF), Community Advisory Council and the Board of Governors, May 26, 2017, p. 2.
See Rebel A. Cole, Lawrence G. Goldberg, and Lawrence J. White, “Cookie Cutter vs. Character: The Micro
Structure  of  Small  Business  Lending  by  Large  and  Small  Banks," Journal  of  Financial  and  Quantitative
Analysis 39, no. 2 (June 2004): 227–51. Also see Karen Gordon Mills and Brayden McCarthy, “The State of Small
Business Lending: Innovation and Technology and the Implications for Regulation,” Working Paper No. 17–042,
(Harvard Business School, December 1, 2016), p. 36.
See, e.g., Carol A. Evans, “Keeping Fintech Fair: Thinking about Fair Lending and UDAP Risks, " Consumer
Compliance Outlook (Second Issue 2017).
See Lael Brainard, “The Opportunities and Challenges of Fintech”  (speech  at  the  Conference  on  Financial
Innovation at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC, December 2, 2016).
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
