Loi  M  Bakani:  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea's  achievements 
and milestones
Speech  by  Mr  Loi  M  Bakani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  at  PNG's  44th
Anniversary Ball, Port Moresby, 4 November 2017.
Good evening All.
 From here the view is wonderful! I see a sea of smiling faces of the people who contribute to the
success of the Bank of Papua New Guinea. What a glamorous audience!
I am again delighted to welcome you all to the Bank of Papua New Guinea’s 44th Anniversary
Ball. As well as our special guests and Members of the Board joining us here tonight, on behalf of
the  Bank’s  senior  executive  team  I  would  also  like  to  acknowledge  the  spouses  of  our  staff
members.  We  really  appreciate  the  support  you  give  our  staff  on  the  home  front.  All  your
presences tonight adds impetus to the occasion.
We are here tonight to mark the 44th anniversary of the Bank’s establishment and to celebrate
our achievements over the past 12 months.
In our journey, we can be proud of a number of great achievements and milestones in;
A. Conduct of Monetary Policy
2017  has  been  a  challenging  year  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  given  the  government’s
cashflow  constraints  and  the  2017  National  Election.  The  Bank  however  managed  its  price
stability objectives by keeping inflation at 6.0 percent in the first quarter and 5.8 percent in the
second quarter of 2017. This was done through the successful sterilisation of excess liquidity in
the financial system. Since price stability is the main objective of the Central Bank, critiques can
be silenced by the inflation outcomes for the first and second quarters of 2017.
Fiscal  considerations  continue  to  play  a  part  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  Bank
continues to coordinate with Government’s fiscal policy to achieve the right policy mix that will
sustain  growth  that  is  non-inflationary  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  As  part  of  the  new
Government’s 100 Day 25 Point Plan to restore confidence in the economy, it was agreed for the
Bank  for  foreign  exchange  intervention  of  USD100.0  million  to  assist  clear  some  of  the
outstanding import orders in FX market. That amount was completed by the week ending 27th
October 2017. So the Bank has honoured its commitment.
The Bank has introduced a new Tap facility to on-sell Government securities, comprising both
Treasury bills and Treasury bonds, to allow broader participation from individuals, businesses,
Government  agencies,  other  institutions  and  offshore  investors.  The  purpose  is  to  develop  a
savings  culture  in  the  country,  provide  additional  avenue  for  investment  and  encourage  the
development of the domestic capital market. The number of individual investments in the Tap
facility is continuously increasing.
Going forward, and into the new year 2018, current challenges to monetary policy will remain and
new opportunities arise with the country hosting the APEC Summit in 2018.
B. Financial System Supervision
In 2017, as in all past years, the financial system of our country continues to be stable as a result
of  prudent  oversight  and  management  by  boards  and  management  teams  of  the  respective
licensed financial institutions (LFIs). This is testament of our strong supervisory enforcements
1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
and our continuous prudential consultations with the LFIs. Key performance indicators of the LFIs
such  as  strong  capital,  very  low  non-performing  loans  and  so  forth  are  healthy  signs  of  the
financial  system.  This  is  essential  to  ensure  the  ongoing  protection  of  depositors’  money  in
banks,  finance  companies  and  microbanks,  contributors  funds  in  Super  Funds,  policyholders
covers with life insurance companies, and members’ funds in S&L societies.
Our commitment to financial inclusion and education has been strengthened through our close
connection to CEFI, the Centre for Excellence for Financial Inclusion. During the year we hosted
three important events, the Pacific Islands Regional Initiative, the first PNG blockchain seminar
and  the  Financial  Inclusion  Innovation  Summit,  all  aiming  to  help  bring  cost-effective  financial
services to people in our society who do not have easy access to traditional banking.
A. Blockchain.
We are keeping a close eye on the future, with innovations like blockchain technology, where our
society may use cashless financial solutions to fuel development, particularly in remote areas.
I  believe  that  Blockchain  can  help  us  tackle  some  of  the  biggest  problems  we  have  in  PNG
including identity, financial inclusion and access to green energy
But for now cash is also our business. We are making very good progress in the construction of
the Lae Currency Distribution Facility. We are now about to start staff recruitment planning.
B. Payment systems.
We  have  transformed  our  payment  system  to  world  standards  through  the  integration  of  IT
systems. These have increased efficiency in the payments, clearing, and settlement systems.
We now have the Real Time Gross Settlements (RTGS) Systems that allow settlements in real
time, full automation of the Clearing House, cheques that took more than 7 days to clear can now
be  cleared  in  just  two  days.  Direct  Credits  has  given  our  people  convenience  to  bank  at  any
bank.
We are now focusing on the national switch to provide our financial system and our people the
convenience of sharing payment devises offered by the various financial institutions.
C. Currency
Our staff have been on the road around the country talking to local PNGns about the important
every day money issues and investments.
We are committed to meet the demand of our cash based society. We are taking the Bank to our
people by building a fully integrated currency operation in Lae to be open in the third quarter of
2018. We have resized our family of currency Notes and introduced new sophisticated security
features on them – this is to ensure our bank notes have built in protection against counterfeiting.
The  Bank  will  issue  a  special  and  limited  K100  banknote  to  commemorate  the  2018 APEC
Summit to be hosted by the Government of Papua New Guinea.
The  new  K100  banknote  will  retain  its  original  design  elements  and  security  features  of  the
existing banknote except that it will have the overprint design of the APEC logo, and additional
security feature called SPARK Live will be added onto the banknote. This security feature will be
applied  on  the  K50  and  K100  banknotes.  The  Bank  will  also  issue  special  coloured  50  toea
circulation coin with the APEC logo design.
The  Bank  also  produced  a  special  coloured  K5  Silver  coin  depicting  the  logo  of  the  Rugby
League World Cup as numismatic item to commemorate the event.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
D. Administrative Support
Behind  the  scenes,  our  work  is  supported  by  corporate  services  machinery,  keeping  our
systems and technology up to the challenge of meeting our evolving requirements, working to
have  the  right  people  on  staff  who  have  the  appropriate  ongoing  training  and  development  –
ensuring our premises enable us to work safely and efficiently.
We recently commissioned the Bakani Data Centre to support our transformation from manual
to  fully  automated  and  integrated  processes  using  evolving  technologies.  This  has,  and  will
continue  to  deliver  efficiencies  to  our  work  process.  We  have  also  introduced  a  Time  and
Attendance system and improving our file management system and moving towards digitalising
records.
E. Board
We have a dynamic Board, made up of representatives from different sectors of the economy.
We  recently  had  the  first  Board  meeting  offshore  in  the  Bank’s  history,  in  FSM.  Whilst  we
received criticism, the trip achieved the desired outcome of fact finding mission for our business
entities in identifying potential business opportunities that will promote PNG business overseas.
F. Challenges
We have many challenges in front of us. The much talked about foreign exchange issues, the
unbanked, high liquidity, break-down in monetary policy transmission and sovereign wealth fund
are  just  some  of  the  issues  that  we  must  address  collectively  internally  and  with  other
government  institutions.  In  addition,  international  geopolitical  issues  that  has  economic
implication brings another dimension of challenge we are faced with; in our implementation of
policies  and  surveillance  of  the  financial  system  and  the  foreign  exchange  market.  We  must
develop in-house skills and resources to address these issues and withstand headwinds from
global economic developments.
G. One Bank
I have mentioned some of the areas within the Bank that have achieved important milestones
since our last anniversary. Be assured I am well aware that these were not the only significant
steps forward we made in our 44th year. With this in mind, let us think about the notion of One
Bank One BPNG, which is one of our key aims, outlined in the Bank’s Strategic Plan 2016–2020.
Our aim is to present one face to the world, rather than a number of units stitched together to
create departments. We have come a long way, through reworking the structure of the Bank to
reflect function rather than historical hierarchy.
Last but not the least.
I would like to thank my fellow Board members for their support during the past 12 months. Our
Board is active and involved. Ladies and Gentlemen, it is my pleasure to introduce our newly
appointed  Board  Member,  Mr  Christopher  Hnanguie,  who  is  the  Chairman  of  the  Securities
Commission of Papua New Guinea. Welcome to the Bank of Papua New Guinea Mr Hnanguie.
My sincere thanks go to our senior executives, Deputy Governor Dr Gae Kauzi (at this juncture, I
kindly ask everyone to remember Deputy Governor in your prayers for a continuous and speedy
recovery),  Assistant  Governors  Mrs  Elizabeth  Genia,  Mr  Joe  Teria,  Mr  Ellison  Pidik  for  their
commitment  and  leadership.  Thank  you  also  to  the  Director  FASU,  Mr  Benny  Popoitai  and
Department  managers  for  helping  us  establish  the  path  forward  to  One  Bank,  and  working
collaboratively to make it happen.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
And a heartfelt thank you to our staff. You really are the key to ensuring One Bank becomes a
reality. I look forward to standing here next year at our 45th anniversary ball, thanking you all for
playing your part in achieving that goal.
Finally, I have considered a new initiative, to support, recognise and reward best performing staff
(s) for going out of their way to create incentives that implement and add value to the bank. I have
directed  Corporate Affairs  Group  in  consultation  with  the  other  groups  to  put  the  framework
together for next year onwards. For this Year, I will be making some announcements towards the
end of the year after consultations with HR and the Respective Assistant Governors.
I am sure you will all agree I have spent enough time singing everyone’s praises and that now it is
well and truly time to relax and celebrate.
Welcome, one and all!
Enjoy the rest of the evening.
Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
