ON LAGS 
Luci Ellis 
Assistant Governor (Economic) 
Remarks at the Australian National University 
Canberra – 17 August 2018 
 ON LAGS 
I’d like to thank the Australian National University for providing the opportunity to 
speak to  you tonight. ANU is one of my three alma maters, and I’m pleased to be 
able to engage once again with the university community. It’s important that central 
banks and the academic community collaborate. We can learn a lot from each other. 
I’m conscious that this talk was originally scheduled to take place almost exactly a 
year ago, but I had to cancel due to illness. That seems especially pertinent on this 
occasion,  because  my  topic  tonight  is  lags.  By  choosing  this  topic,  I  hope  to 
encourage  those  of  you  who  engage  in  economic  analysis  of  any  kind,  and  the 
broader academic community, to think carefully about time, and in particular, about 
how the passage of time is built into your analysis. 
I want to talk about lags: where they come from; how they might change; and what 
they might be telling us. 
This  is  more  than  just  an  academic  point  about  what  our  models  should  look  like, 
though.  Understanding  lags  is  central  to  day-to-day  analysis  and  interpretation  of 
economic developments. As such, they are central to our work in economic policy. 
Before I get to that, I’d like to make some brief remarks about the current situation. 
We  released  the  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy  last  week,  and  earlier  today  the 
Governor  and  some  others  of  us  appeared  before  the  House  of  Representatives 
Standing Committee on Economics. I don’t have anything new to add but thought it 
would  be  worth  summarising  the  main  messages  from  the  Statement  and  the 
testimony.  
Unemployment is still a bit higher than our estimates of the rate consistent with full 
employment.  Inflation  is  still  a  bit  low.  It  is  therefore  appropriate  that  monetary 
policy should be supporting the economy right now.  
But  the  Australian  economy  is  growing  a  bit  above  trend,  which  has  helped  the 
progress  on  getting  unemployment  down  and  seeing  inflation  return  closer  to  the 
midpoint  of  the  Bank’s  target.  The  world  economy  is  continuing  to  expand  at  a 
good rate and that is also helping. We expect further progress on both the inflation 
and  unemployment  fronts  over  the  period  ahead.  If  things  turn  out  broadly  as  we 
expect, it is therefore more likely that the next move in the cash rate will be up than 
down.  
That progress on getting unemployment down and inflation up is likely to be only 
gradual, however. So any increase is still likely to be some time away. That’s been 
the story for a while, and these remain the key messages about the policy outlook, 
as the Governor explained earlier today.  
Of course, there are a number of risks that need to be kept in mind. Trade tensions 
have increased in recent months, which could worsen the investment climate as well 
as directly limiting global trade and growth. Conditions in a few emerging markets 
1 of 12 
ON LAGS 
have  worsened  for  country-specific  reasons.  The  Chinese  authorities  are  balancing 
the  need  to  support  growth  with  the  need  to  reduce  financial  risk.  It  is  hard  to 
predict how that balance plays out in their  macro policy settings in the short term, 
and how this will affect growth in China. The outcome will be directly relevant to 
the  prices  paid  for  Australia’s  bulk  commodity  exports,  as  will  be  global  energy 
demand  more  generally.  It  can’t  be  ruled  out  that  certain  commodity  prices,  and 
thus Australia’s terms of trade, remain higher for longer than we expect. That would 
be a positive income boost if it happened. 
Another  risk  to  the  upside  is  that  the  US  economy  is  currently  seeing  significant 
fiscal stimulus at a time when there is already not much spare capacity. So it can’t 
be  ruled  out  that  global  growth  and  inflation  turn  out  to  be  a  bit  stronger  than  we 
currently expect. In those circumstances, policy rates in the United States might rise 
a bit faster than some people expect.  
Domestically,  we  are  alert  to  the  risks  that  high  household  debt  could  pose  for 
household  spending,  especially  if  other  negative  events  should  occur.  We  are  also 
mindful that, as the labour market tightens, wages growth could be slow to pick up 
in earnest. This has been the pattern in some other countries where unemployment 
rates are already very low. Among the questions we have been grappling with lately 
are:  how  low  the  unemployment  rate  needs  to  go  before  wages  growth  picks  up 
more  emphatically;  how  quickly  wages  growth  will  respond  to  tighter  conditions; 
and  how  much  it  will  pick  up.  Fundamentally  these  are  questions  about 
distinguishing  between  structural  change  and  lags.  This  brings  me  to  my  topic 
tonight. 
What Lags Are 
A lag occurs in any instance where time passes between when an activity is initiated 
and when that activity has its impact. Almost all economic phenomena involve lags. 
Not all of these lags are significant, of course. The time taken to make a hamburger 
doesn’t matter that much for economic outcomes. The time taken to build a house is 
rather  more  important.  But  even  lags  that  are  short  individually  can  impose 
significant  costs  if  they  occur  frequently.  For  example,  tender  times  –  the  time 
needed  to  pay  and,  where  relevant,  receive  change  –  are  a  non-trivial  share  of  the 
cost of making payments (Stewart et al 2014). Waiting time is a cost, and can affect 
people’s choices. 
In  thinking  about  lags,  I  have  found  it  useful  to  categorise  them  into  three  types, 
which I will discuss in turn: 
  Process lags 
  Stock–flow lags, and 
  Learning lags. 
  2 of 12 
ON LAGS 
Process lags 
A process lag is the time taken for any readily defined production process. Think of 
laying a brick or baking a cake. It involves a more or less predictable delay, and its 
outcome is unambiguous. The brick gets laid or it doesn’t. (The cake might or might 
not turn out as you expect, but you have a cake.) 
One important but underappreciated example of a process lag is the time required to 
make  a  decision.  By  this  I  mainly  mean  the  formal  processes  and  governance  that 
organisations  place  around  decision-making.  Some  of 
involve 
information  gathering  or  other  analysis,  to  know  what  decision  to  make.  But  even 
with  all  the  facts  in  front  of  you,  there  are  lags  involved  in  any  formal  decision 
process.  Documents  must  be  prepared,  meetings  convened,  review  processes 
completed. Good governance takes resources; it also takes time. 
this  might 
Decision  lags  underlie  an  aspect  of  economic  policymaking  that  is  often  taught  to 
undergraduates.  They  account  for  an  important  difference  between  monetary  and 
fiscal  policies  as  tools  for  macroeconomic  demand  management.  Monetary  policy 
changes,  we  were  all  taught,  can  be  enacted  more  quickly.  The  decision  lag  was 
shorter.  But  that  change  might  take  longer  to  affect  the  economy.  The  ‘long  and 
variable lags’ of monetary policy are those after the decision is taken and enacted. 
Fiscal  policy  changes  can  have  more  immediate  effect,  but  the  decision  lag  is 
longer. Parliament must vote on the government’s budget. Other decision processes 
might  be  needed  before  funds  are  finally  disbursed  or  spent.  These  can  also  take 
some time. 
Many other decision lags can be relevant to our analysis of the economy. Consider 
the  approval  processes  for  building  projects,  or  for  loans.    Most  companies  have 
formal  decision  processes  for  allocating  budget  to  particular  investment  projects, 
based  on  a  written  business  case.  Tender  processes  for  awarding  contracts  and 
application  processes  for  hiring  workers  involve  lags  arising  from  the  search 
process,  which  is  a  process  lag  in  itself.  But  in  the  end,  there’s  a  decision,  which 
also involves a lag. 
It should be clear by now that time is an input into almost every economic activity. 
Certainly  anything  that  involves  a  labour  input  involves  a  time  input.  Often  we 
oversimplify  or  ignore  the  resulting  process  lags  in  our  models,  for  example  by 
thinking  of  everything  in  discrete  time  with  quite  long  discrete  periods.  But  those 
process lags are there. 
The  existence  of  process  lags  has  a  number  of  implications.  These  go  beyond  the 
standard lag assumptions in our models’ production functions. One is that for every 
production process with a material process lag, there is an ‘in-process’ state. Some 
of these provide important, additional information on the state of the economy. The 
stock of construction projects approved or commenced, but not completed, tells us a 
lot about near-term future construction activity. The number of job vacancies – the 
in-progress state between deciding to hire and actually hiring  – tells us a lot about 
the state of the labour market. 
  3 of 12 
ON LAGS 
A second important implication of process lags is that hog cycles can arise. It takes 
time  to  fatten  a  hog,  or  build  a  building,  or  ship  something  from  far  away.  In  the 
interim, prices can fluctuate significantly. Too many economic models forget about 
these dynamics. But the short-term fluctuations can matter a lot, on our way to the 
long-term. 
Stock–flow lags 
The  second  kind  of  lag  –  stock–flow  lags  –  also  produces  hog  cycles,  for  slightly 
different  reasons.  These  lags  are  the  inherent  implication  of  past  activity  having 
long-lived consequences. They can be seen in the property market, in the shipping 
fleet  –  indeed  in  most  classes  of  capital  goods.  Because  these  products  are  long-
lived, the increment to the stock in any one year is small. And because of that, the 
response  of  the  stock  is  usually  quite  sluggish.  Price  cycles  can  therefore  arise.  I 
have  spoken  about  these  kinds  of  hog  cycles  before  in  the  context  of  property 
markets (Ellis 2015).  
More  generally,  stock–flow  lags  by  definition  have  long-lived  consequences.  Past 
decisions affect outcomes far into the future. Because of this, they create an option 
value  of  waiting.  Economic  theory  has  long  allowed  for  this  in  models  of 
investment, for example. Vintage capital, s–S pricing and  many  other  mechanisms 
all arise from this type of lag. I don’t have much to add to that already rich literature 
tonight.  But  I  would  reiterate  a  point  I’ve  made  before  (Ellis  2014):  if  you  aren’t 
taking stocks and flows seriously, you probably don’t have a realistic model of the 
economy.  
Learning lags 
The third type of lag that I identify, I’ve loosely termed ‘learning lags’. This is the 
time taken to effect an intellectual change in a person or group of people. Think of 
the time taken to draw a conclusion, develop a skill,  or detect  a structural change. 
This type of lag is similar to the process lags I have already spoken about. But it has 
a number of important differences. I think these differences are central to many of 
the economic uncertainties that central banks must grapple with.  
Firstly,  the  time  taken  is  inherently  uncertain.  People’s  learning  styles  and 
development rates differ. And some people are just more decisive than others.  
Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, the input to the process can be noisy and 
uncertain. Think of the example of detecting and concluding that a structural change 
has occurred in the economy. That’s a signal extraction problem. How long it takes 
before  you  can  conclude  that  a  change  has  occurred  depends  on  many  things:  the 
noisiness  of  the  data,  the  signal  extraction  technologies  you  have  available  –  even 
the  strength  of  your  priors  versus  your  willingness  to  change  your  view.  That  can 
differ  depending  on  individual  psychology  or  organisational  culture.  It  also  means 
that the results of a learning process might not be replicable across people, time or 
circumstances. 
  4 of 12 
ON LAGS 
Thirdly, and related to the last point: the output of the process can be uncertain. You 
don’t know what conclusion  you will draw until you’ve drawn it. You don’t know 
how much skill you will build up until you have done the training. 
Building on all that, we can also see that micro learning lags lead to macro learning 
lags. Micro learning lags are when individual actors in the economy take uncertain 
amounts  of  time  to  learn  about  changes  in  their  circumstances,  before  they  can 
respond to those changes. Because of that, noise and uncertainty arise in the lags we 
see in macroeconomic developments. So it takes time to learn about changes in the 
economy – the macro learning lags. These macro learning lags could be as simple as 
the  time  it  takes  to  be  confident  that  growth  has  picked  up,  for  example.  Was  it  a 
change  in  trend  or  just  one  quarter’s  noise?  This  isn’t  always  easy  to  know. 
Detecting structural change in the economy is even more difficult. It depends on the 
variability of those learning-and-response processes at the micro level. 
One  might  think  that  the  presence  of  variable  lags  would  make  observers  more 
reluctant  to  conclude  the  economic  structures  have  changed.  In  fact,  it  seems  the 
opposite  is  true.  Too  often  we  see  confident  pronouncements  that  things  are  now 
different. In fact, often those observers just needed to be a little more patient, before 
the normal patterns reasserted themselves.  
A  typical  example  has  occurred  after  most  of  the  recessions  in  industrialised 
countries  over  the  last  several  decades.  Compared  with  earlier  recessions  in  the 
post-war period, those since the early 1990s have tended to involve more financial 
sector distress. The uncertainty this engenders – or perhaps simply the balance sheet 
distress – changes the nature of the recovery. 
In  particular,  it  tends  to  make  the  subsequent  pick-up  in  employment  quite  drawn 
out. We therefore start to see claims of “jobless recoveries” or “skills mismatch”. It 
is  often  assumed  that  there  has  been  a  structural  change  in  the  economy  to  which 
workers are not able to adapt. But in reality the labour market does start to pick up, 
eventually. It just takes longer than some of these observers seem to have expected. 
The economic structure and skills requirements aren’t changing in any unusual way. 
It was just that the lags had lengthened. Or maybe, they hadn’t lengthened. People 
just forgot that the lags are there. 
Three Important Lags in Australia 
I’d like to illustrate these different types of lags with some examples that have been 
important to economic developments in Australia in recent years. 
Perhaps  the  best  example  of  a  process  lag  is  the  multiyear  boom  in  mining 
investment.  Largely  spurred  by  the  increased  demand  for  commodities  in  China, 
earlier  this  century  mining  firms  decided  to  expand  production  capacity  for  coal, 
iron ore and LNG here in Australia. It would have taken some time for these firms 
to  make  those  decisions.  More  importantly,  it  took  several  years  for  each  of  these 
projects to be built.  
  5 of 12 
ON LAGS 
The  effect  of  the  resulting  process  lags  is  clear  in  this  graph  (Graph 1).  The  lags 
involved in decision-making and project preparation meant that this investment took 
a while to ramp up. And the process lag to  completion of these projects has taken 
many years; for LNG, there is still a bit more to go. 
Graph 1 
As  a  result,  the  ramp-up  of  resource  exports  flowing  from  this  decision  was  also 
quite lagged (Graph 2). For coal and iron ore, the process is more or less complete. 
But for LNG, again, some of the new production capacity is still to come on line. 
 Graph 2 
 More  recently,  there  have  been  announcements  of  new  mining  projects.  Most  of 
these  are  ‘sustaining  investment’,  that  is,  the  investment  you  need  to  do  to  keep 
production  at  its  current  level  (Jenner  et  al  2018).  However,  there  are  a  couple  of 
coal  projects  underway  and  one  planned  LNG  expansion  that  involve  increases  in 
productive capacity. These projects have in part been a response to stronger demand 
–  and  thus  higher  prices  –  for  these  key  commodities  than  some  observers  might 
have expected a couple of years ago. But again, it takes a while before this addition 
to capacity comes on line. 
  6 of 12 
ON LAGS 
It  is  typical  to  use  property  as  an  example  of  a  stock–flow  lag.  The  flow  of  new 
construction  is  small  relative  to  the  stock  already  existing.  That  flow  supply  is 
determined in part by the price, and thus the profit to be made from the construction 
project. But it is the balance of supply of and demand for the stock that determines 
prices.  Even  without  the  process  lags  involved  in  construction,  it  would  therefore 
take a while for any supply response to bring prices down. 
I’d like to emphasise a different example tonight, though, because it highlights how 
simple lags can sometimes be misinterpreted as something else. It also shows how 
the  existence  of  stock–flow  lags  means  that  cyclical  developments  can  have  long-
term consequences. That example is long-term unemployment.  
Data on unemployment durations first became regularly available in the early 1990s 
recession.  You  can  see  how,  at  the  beginning  of  this  graph,  the  rate  of  people 
unemployed  for  more  than  three  months  but  less  than  a  year  (‘medium-term 
unemployment’),  and  the  long-term  unemployment  rate  –  people  unemployed  for 
more  than  a  year  –  were  still  rising  even  after  short-term  unemployment  peaked. 
Both these rates start rising around the time that unemployment overall starts rising. 
This is because the stock of unemployed starts to rise partly because the flow back 
into employment slows down. This affects people who are already unemployed. But 
unemployment also rises because some previously employed people lose their jobs. 
This  is  especially  relevant  in  recessions  when  many  workers  are  laid  off.  So  of 
course  there  is  a  process  lag:  it  takes  more  than  a  year  before  someone  who 
previously had a job becomes long-term unemployed, just by definition. This is why 
long-term  unemployment  continues  to  rise  even  after  the  layoffs  decline  to  more 
normal  rates.  You  can  also  see  this  effect  during  the  smaller  increases  in  overall 
unemployment in the late 1990s and in 2001. 
recovering  economy,  solid  employment  growth,  but 
A 
long-term 
unemployment:  it  would  have  been  tempting  to  misinterpret  this  as  a  structural 
problem. Indeed, many did so at the time. But that probably is not what was going 
on. What this shows is the effect on a stock – unemployment – when the economic 
decision – to hire or lay off workers – is a flow in and out of that stock. 
rising 
Graph 3 
  7 of 12 
 ON LAGS 
Once  unemployment  starts  to  decline,  the  stock–flow  lag  becomes  more  relevant. 
Consider that, if the flow out of unemployment back into employment declines for a 
period,  a  stock  of  unemployed  people  can  build  up.  Even  if  that  flow  returns  to 
more normal levels in the subsequent recovery, it can take a long time for that stock 
to  return  to  low  levels.  That  is  exactly  what  we  saw  after  the  1990s  recession.  It 
took 15 years from the peak, before long-term unemployment finally troughed, at a 
bit above ½ per cent of the labour force.  
Again, this should not be interpreted as a structural deterioration in the performance 
of  the  labour  market.  It  just  took  a  long  time  to  work  down  that  stock  of 
unemployment.  
More recently, the end of the mining investment boom in 2013 induced a period of 
slower growth and softer labour market conditions. As a result, both medium-term 
and long-term unemployment increased for a time. They are currently a little below 
their peaks in 2015, but only a little.  
As  an  aside,  you  might  have  noticed  the  sharp  move  down  in  the  latest  data  for 
medium-term  unemployment.  One  should  never  make  too  much  of  one  month’s 
figures.  It’s  hard  to  know  whether  it  will  persist,  or  whether  it’s  a  result  of  the 
vagaries of our seasonal adjustment process.1 And it’s a good example of the signal 
extraction problem that gives rise to learning lags in economic policymaking. 
An  important  lesson  here  is  that,  most  of  the  time  in  an  expansion,  growth  at  so-
called ‘potential’ is not enough. There is a stock of unemployment that needs to be 
worked  down.  That  means  that  an  above-average  flow  out  of  unemployment  back 
into employment is needed. And that is one reason why macro policy might need to 
be supportive of growth for an extended period during an expansion.  
A natural question to ask is why one wouldn’t seek to run the economy even faster, 
to  open  that  spigot  back  into  paid  employment  even  wider  and  get  long-term 
unemployment  down  sooner.  It’s  a  legitimate  question.  In  essence  it  depends  on 
how quickly unemployed people can be matched with vacant jobs. It is possible that 
there are limits to the efficiency of the labour market’s ability to do that matching. 
Job  search  involves  process  lags,  such  as  the  window  of  time  that  an  employer 
chooses to receive applications, as well as the decision lag involved in selection. So 
beyond some point, running the economy faster might not open the spigot that much 
wider. 
There is also the question of how much faster the economy could be induced to run 
at  all.  For  the  economies  most  affected  by  the  financial  crisis  (by  which  I  don’t 
mean Australia), that might also have had its limits. Banks’ credit supply had been 
weakened  and  existing  spare  capacity  reduced  firms’  need  to  invest.  At  the  same 
time,  during  this  period,  it  was  not  always  the  case  that  the  various  arms  of 
macroeconomic policy in these countries were all pulling in the same direction.   
                                                           
1  
The  ABS  only  publishes  seasonally  adjusted  data  for  some  categories  of  unemployment  by  duration.  The  figures 
shown here have been seasonally adjusted by RBA staff. 
  8 of 12 
ON LAGS 
In  the  Australian  context,  as  the  Bank  has  explained  on  several  occasions,  there 
have instead been concerns regarding a different stock–flow dynamic. One key way 
expansionary  monetary  policy  works  is  by  getting  people  to  borrow  more  and 
spend. Lower interest rates also reduce the servicing burden on existing debt, which 
can free up some cash to spend more. Overall, though, we would ordinarily expect 
debt to rise when monetary policy is boosting growth. When household debt is high, 
it poses some risks. In particular, it could make household spending and well-being 
less resilient to shocks, including individual-specific outcomes. 
So  the  question  then  arises:  what  is  the  appropriate  balance  between  the  risk  of 
higher  debt  and  the  benefits  of  the  hoped-for  faster  decline  in  unemployment?  In 
part, this depends on whether a particular level of interest rates induces households 
to keep increasing debt indefinitely, or whether debt instead accumulates up to some 
point,  or  some  relativity  to  income,  and  no  further.  The  experience  of  recent 
decades, and the arithmetic of debt-servicing burdens, suggests the latter.2 But it is 
hard to be certain. 
Another question to ask when weighing up this balance is whether  the question of 
how  low  unemployment  can  go  depends  on  how  fast  you  are  getting  there.  It’s 
usually assumed that there is a level of unemployment, below which wages growth 
starts  to  pick  up.  This  is  sometimes  called  the  ‘full  employment’  rate  of 
unemployment.  A  more  technically  correct,  but  less  attractive,  name  is  the  ‘non-
accelerating inflation rate of unemployment’, or NAIRU.3 In some other countries, 
unemployment  has  fallen  well  below  previous  estimates  of  the  NAIRU  before 
wages growth actually started to pick up. As a result, more recent NAIRU estimates 
have tended to be revised down. 
That brings me to two examples of a learning lag that I consider to be particularly 
relevant to the current situation. The first is the simple one that it might just take a 
while before firms start to realise how hard it is to find suitable labour, and decide 
to offer higher wages. So it could be that it takes a little while for wages to pick up 
once unemployment has fallen below the NAIRU. If so, it would mean that NAIRU 
hasn’t really moved in these countries, and the revisions we see are just an artefact 
of the way this unobservable variable is measured.  
If that is what is going on, then this mechanism would also be relevant in Australia. 
As the Bank has explained on several occasions recently, although there appears to 
still be a deal of spare capacity in the labour market, many firms are reporting that 
they are finding it hard to recruit suitably skilled workers. Some of these issues are 
industry-specific. For example, we hear from contacts in our liaison program that it 
is particularly difficult to recruit certain kinds of specialists in construction and IT, 
as  well  as  local  workers  into  hospitality  roles  in  regional  areas,  where  foreign 
workers on short-term  visas had previously been more easily recruited. But so far, 
wages growth is not picking up much even in these areas, despite scattered reports 
                                                           
2  
3  
This is the implication of RBA (2003). 
Strictly  speaking,  it’s  the  non-accelerating  wages  growth  rate  of  unemployment,  but  ‘NAWGRU’  has  not  caught 
on. 
  9 of 12 
ON LAGS 
of high wage offers in some cases. It could be that, after a period of realisation and 
learning, we will see wages growth pick up more emphatically in these areas. 
But there is another kind of learning lag that might also be driving the outcomes we 
see. It might be that employers are learning that their definition of ‘suitable labour’ 
can  change.  After  a  long  period  where  there  is  plenty  of  unemployed  labour, 
employers get used to being able to pick and choose. As the labour market begins to 
tighten, they have to start looking at people who are less credentialed or who have 
less  prior  experience.  And  they  have  to  start  looking  at  the  way  they  organise  the 
work in their firm, and maybe investing in productivity-enhancing innovation. And 
if  they  do  that,  suddenly  previously  ‘unsuitable’  workers  start  looking  a  lot  more 
‘suitable’.  Productivity  isn’t  something  an  individual  has  handed  to  them  at  birth. 
Different  people  have  different  skills  and  experience  which  affects 
their 
productivity  in  a  given  context.  But  the  context  of  how  work  is  organised  and 
supported with capital is crucially important. 
If this is true, then a period where the labour market tightens gradually, and not in 
every  area  at  once,  could  induce  firms  to  realise  that  workers  are  more  ‘suitable’ 
than they previously assumed. And if they realise that before they start resorting to 
paying higher wages, the result is that unemployment can fall further before wages 
start  to  rise.  In  other  words,  the  NAIRU  falls.  And  if  that  is  what  is  happening,  it 
means  that  learning  lags  can  induce  path-dependence  in  the  macroeconomy,  in  a 
particularly consequential way. 
How Lags Change and Why That Can Matter 
Most lags can change in duration. Some are more stable than others.  Policymakers 
need to be alert to which lags can shift, and be ready to detect those shifts. It should 
be  obvious  that  technological  change,  by  increasing  productivity,  often  reduces 
process lags. Changes in rates of obsolescence or physical depreciation can change 
stock–flow  lags.  And  as  technology  makes  more  information  available  more 
frequently,  we  might  expect  that  learning  lags  could  speed  up.  This  particular 
implication is not guaranteed, though. Sometimes more information just adds noise. 
I shall talk more about that in a moment.  
Some lags, especially  decision lags, depend  on legal and social  processes.  So  they 
can change, if those responsible for those processes desire it. A good example here 
is the streamlining of building approval processes in some jurisdictions over recent 
years.  Decision  processes  can  also  slow  down,  if  more  and  more  rigorous 
governance is being demanded, whether by external parties or the decision-makers 
themselves.  
Whatever the reason for it, a change in the length of lags can have huge economic 
implications.  For  the  hog  cycle  examples,  price  dynamics  can  change  noticeably. 
And  where  a  shorter  lag  comes  from  increased  productivity  and  therefore  lower 
cost, we can see marked changes in relative prices. 
  10 of 12 
ON LAGS 
There can also be big  social implications  from a change  in lags. Probably the  best 
example  is  the  enormous  decline  in  the  cost  of  recording  and  transmitting 
information over the centuries. Ideas, good and bad, can now reach the whole world 
in seconds. In past centuries, each new copy of a text was done by hand and could 
take  months.  The  result  is  more  information  to  more  people,  not  all  of  it  better 
information. 
What it Means for Monetary Policy 
I’ve already referenced the long and variable lags of monetary policy. I would like 
to draw out three more general implications of lags for monetary policy making. 
First,  most  forecasts  leverage  known  process  lags.  For  example,  we  use  building 
approvals  to  help  forecast  residential  construction.  Stock–flow  lags  are  also 
important,  but  in  my  view  these  are  often  underappreciated  in  many  forecasting 
models. 
Second,  the  lags  from  monetary  policy  to  macroeconomic  effects  are  primarily 
learning  lags.  That  is  why  they  are  variable,  as  well  as  long.  People  take  time  to 
realise  that  demand  has  increased  enough  that  it’s  worth  hiring  a  new  employee. 
Likewise people take time to decide that demand has increased enough to be worth 
changing their prices. The time taken will depend on many factors. For example, the 
lags  to  changing  prices  are  determined  by  things  such  as  the  pricing  models 
prevailing  in  that  industry,  menu  costs,  and  the  level  of  competition,  which 
determines the cost of getting a pricing decision ‘wrong’. 
Third, both the learning lags involved in noticing stronger demand and the decision 
lags involved in responding to stronger demand depend in part on the stories we tell 
ourselves  –  our  narratives  and  beliefs.  That’s  because  these  help  determine  how 
readily we update our hypotheses, and change our minds. 
This  raises  the  question  of  whether  better  macroeconomic  outcomes  can  be 
achieved by telling ourselves better stories – more accurate stories, and stories that 
are more consistent with each other. I believe this supports the case for fulsome and 
frequent communication by the central bank. Many researchers have focused on the 
role of central banks’ public commitments to a nominal anchor such as an inflation 
target,  to  help  coordinate  expectations  around  that  target.  Others  have  focused  on 
central bank communication as a signal of future central bank actions, which other 
economic actors can respond to.  
I can’t help thinking that the case goes beyond that. When a central bank explains 
publicly how it interprets economic developments, it creates a public good. Putting 
out a view gives everyone something to compare with their own expectations. So by 
sharing  the  results  of  its  efforts  publicly,  perhaps  central  banks  can  help  everyone 
learn  a  little  faster,  just  as  we  learn  from  comparing  our  views  to  those  of  other 
observers. 
  11 of 12 
ON LAGS 
To conclude, lags pervade economic activities. They matter. As researchers, and as 
policymakers,  we  need  to  understand  when  lags  are  important,  and  develop 
techniques to detect when those lags are changing. The passage of time needs to be 
taken  seriously  in  economic  inquiry.  So  I’ll  take  no  more  of  yours  tonight,  and 
thank you for listening. 
Bibliography 
Ellis L (2014), ‘Future Directions in Financial Stability Analysis: Learning from Others, Learning 
from the Past’, Address to the Paul Woolley Centre for the Study of Capital Market 
Dysfunctionality Conference, Sydney, 9 October. 
Ellis L (2015), ‘Property Markets and Financial Stability: What We Know So Far’, University of 
New South Wales (UNSW) Real Estate Symposium 2015, Sydney, 8 September. 
Jenner K, A Walker, C Close and T Saunders (2018), ‘Mining Investment Beyond the Boom’, 
RBA Reserve Bank Bulletin, March. 
RBA (2003), ‘Household Debt: What the Data Show’, Reserve Bank Bulletin, March, pp 1–11. 
Stewart C, I Chan, C Ossolinski, D Halperin and P Ryan (2014), ‘The Evolution of Payment 
Costs in Australia’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 14. 
    12 of 12 
