Gent Sejko: The productivity slowdown and the secular stagnation
hypothesis
Opening address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the presentation by Mr
Patrizio Pagano, Executive Director for Albania at the World Bank Group, Tirana, 18 September
2019.
Dear friends, colleagues and media representatives,
Thank you for your participation!
 I have the honour to launch today a presentation on “The Productivity Slowdown and the Secular
Stagnation Hypothesis”.
The productivity and its role on economic growth is an argument, which, in the aftermath of the
last global crisis, is at the centre stage in the agenda of researchers and decision-makers of the
economy.
The  recent  decades  had  never  seen  before  such  a  duration,  intensity  and  complexity  of  this
crisis.  The  global  economy  experienced  the  longest  and  deepest  economic  slowdown  and
recession, since the Great Depression in 1930s.  Certainly, it was a real drama for the national
economies,  as  well  as  enterprises  and  households.  Nevertheless,  the  crisis  served  as  a
catalyser to re-assess the economic ideas and a great laboratory to test them.
The book titled “International Macroeconomics in the Wake of the Global Financial Crisis” has
been added to the existing vast body of economic literature that studies the challenges to various
economies  in  detail.  This  book  is  a  collection  of  research  work  by  experts  of  the  Banque  de
France, Banca d’Italia and Banco de España on the major topics in the post-crisis period.
Through the systematic investigation of:
structural  problems  in  the  economy,  in  more  concrete  terms,  the  correlation  between
advancements in technology, productivity, globalisation and potential growth;
problems incurred by the global trade and promotion of consumption and investments;
problems that the monetary policy has faced and continues to face, due to the heightened
uncertainties, fall in the natural interest rate and the chronic low inflation; and 
the increasing interdependence of global economies, due to the financial integration and the
role of financial flows and interest rates in small and developing economies,
the authors provide a precious contribution to the professional debate present in this field.
We  are  honoured  to  have  among  us  today  one  of  the  authors  of  this  publication,  Mr  Patrizio
Pagano.  He is present today as both the World Bank Group Executive Director for Italy, Albania,
Greece, Malta, Portugal, San Marino and Timor-Leste and as an academic with a long-standing
history  of  scientific  publications  while  serving  as  the  Head  of  Advanced  Economies  and
International  Finance  Division  within  the  Directorate  General  for  Economics,  Statistics  and
Research of the Bank of Italy. Mr Pagano has cooperated and co-authored several articles with
distinguished institutions, such as: Bocconi University and University of California, Berkeley.
As I emphasised earlier, Mr Pagano will discuss on the role of productivity on economic growth,
in  particular,  the  recent  debate  triggered  by  the  hypothesis  that  advanced  economies  are
doomed to experience a long period, why not decades, of slowdown of economic growth and
deceleration of welfare improvement.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
I would rather not anticipate the findings in the presentation, but I must say that I feel encouraged
by the finding that this hypothesis is likely not to be true.
Productivity and its role on economic growth has always been a central theme at the focus of the
attention  at  the  Bank  of  Albania.    Our  studies  suggest  that,  beyond  the  cyclical  fall  in  the
aggregate  demand,  the  economic  slowdown  in  Albania,  after  the  crisis,  has  had  a  strong
structural element.  In other words, the reduction by half of the economic growth pace before and
after the crisis, shows both the slowdown in the expansion of demand for goods and services,
and the slowdown in the capacity of the economy to provide these products. In particular, our
studies  have  found  that  the  degree  of  expansion  of  productivity  in  the  Albanian  economy  –
broadly defined as the capacity of an economy to utilise labour and physical capital to generate
output – is reduced in this period from 2% to 1%.  
For this reason, the growth of productivity has been and should remain a guideline in the agenda
of structural reforms in Albania. In this context, the conclusion in today’s presentation that the
currently slow growth in productivity, globally, does not necessary represent a new “normal” of
the economy, is a further encouragement for the success of reforms in Albania.
Let me now explain this argument in greater detail.
First, the Albanian economy has been going through a restructuring process of its growth model. 
Among others, this process envisages a higher reliance of growth on export oriented sectors –
such  as  industry  and  tourism  –  and  a  further  orientation  of  financial  resources  towards  the
expansion  of  investments.  The  shift  in  financial,  human  and  management  resources  between
sectors of the economy needs time and is followed by a temporary slowdown of productivity. 
Nevertheless, rebalancing the sources of growth – from construction and trade towards industry
and  export-related  services  –  has  already  started.    This  shift  is  noted  even  in  the  symmetric
rebalancing of banking credit portfolio.
Second,  the  level  and  speed  of  productivity  expansion  is  directly  connected  with  the  level  of
education and qualification of the labour force. The educational system reform and the emphasis
on vocational training are essential dimensions of the economy’s restructuring, whose benefits
will increasingly become clearer in the long run.  However, Albania still has a lot of work to do in
this regard, in particular with regard to containing the migration of its qualified labour force and
the renewal of its labour force skills by the private sector.
Third, productivity is closely connected with the improvement of business management skills.
The campaign to enhance formal business practices, the gradual increase of competition, and
the  revision  of  the  law  on  bankruptcy  will  provide  the  necessary  stimulus  in  this  regard.  In
particular, I am confident that the legal improvements regarding the enforcement of bank credit
contract  will  not  only  help  the  banks’  soundness,  but  will  also  contribute  to  increasing  the
discipline and effectiveness in the use of funds by the Albanian enterprises.
Finally, I would like to highlight that unlike the advanced economies, which are on the technology
frontier,  and  see  their  progress  related  to  their  ability  for  innovation, Albania  has  considerable
space for development through the adoption of the existing technologies and practices. In this
light, our task remains to choose and implement the tested models of development.
Based on the above, I am confident that Albania has all the premises to increase productivity
and,  in  this  way,  to  accelerate  the  economic  growth  pace  and  increase  the  welfare  of  the
Albanian people.  What is needed now is a consensus on the vision for the development of the
country and a shared will to implement it.
Dear participants,
I am fully convinced that this presentation will further enrich our debate on these issues.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thank You!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
