       RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
    ADDRESS AT THE LAUNCH OF THE 2018 RBF STUDENT DIARY   
MARIST BROTHERS HIGH SCHOOL, 30 January 2018 
 MR ESALA MASITABUA  
DEPUTY GOVERNOR, RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
  
The Deputy Secretary Primary/Secondary (DSPS), Ministry of Education, 
Mr. Timoci Bure; 
The Principal, Mr. Salacakau and Vice Principal, Ms. Elder;  
Students, teachers, school management, fellow Old Boys and friends. 
 Introductory Remarks 
Good morning to you all. 
I am extremely pleased to be here today to  officially launch the Reserve 
Bank  of  Fiji’s  2018  Student  Diary.  Like  Master  Salacakau,  some  of  my 
fellow  colleagues  that  I  brought  along  with  me  from  the  Reserve  Bank, 
and  my  fellow  officiant  DSPS  Bure,  we  all  once  walked  these  corridors 
and laughed and cried in your classrooms. And not only did we play and 
cheer  in  this  very  Hall,  but  we  also  spent  many  fitful  hours  here  during 
internal and external examinations! From the outset I would like to thank 
the Reserve Bank Governor, Ariff Ali for his gracious suggestion to have 
this launch here at MBHS. This is in fact my first public engagement as 
Deputy  Governor  and  it  is  fitting  that  I  share  this  moment  in  my  old 
school and amongst you all.  
 Of course this would not have been possible without the approval of the 
Ministry  of  Education,  Heritage  and  Arts  and  for  this  we  are  sincerely 
Private Mail Bag, Suva, Fiji         Tel: (679) 331 3611         Fax: (679) 330 2094        Email: info@rbf.gov.fj          Website: www.rbf.gov.fj  
        RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
  
 
grateful.  Last  but  not  least,  to  the  Principal,  staff,  management  and 
students of MBHS for warmly welcoming us this morning. 
 Student Diary 
The  student  diary  which  we  are  launching  this  morning  is  part  of  the 
Reserve Bank of Fiji’s financial inclusion work. Under this broad agenda 
we  have  a  raft  of  initiatives  that  the  Bank  implements  or  supports  to 
promote financial literacy. This is the eighth edition of our student diary. 
There are a total of 5,000 copies which the Ministry of Education will be 
distributing to 37 secondary schools around Fiji.  Again we are thankful 
to the Ministry of Education for their invaluable assistance.    
 It is our fervent hope that you will find the diaries useful and that it  will 
complement  your  financial  education  development.  Embedded  in  the 
diary  are  tools  for  learning  good  habits  of  managing  your  money  which 
we hope will inculcate good habits and help you to make good financial 
decisions as you grow in life.  
 Besides  enhancing  your  financial  literacy,  this  year’s  diary  revolves 
around the theme “The Climate is changing, we must change too”. We in 
the Pacific are all too familiar with this phenomenon. Climate change and 
the discourse on the global stage teach us so many life lessons.  
  We have a moral obligation as humanity to those that are following 
behind us, and those who have yet to come. We are merely passing 
through earth on our life’s journey. We have the obligation to leave 
our beautiful surroundings as good as if not better than we found it 
for the generations to come.  
Private Mail Bag, Suva, Fiji         Tel: (679) 331 3611         Fax: (679) 330 2094        Email: info@rbf.gov.fj          Website: www.rbf.gov.fj  
       RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
     We must be responsible and build sustainable habits or we risk 
inadvertently destroying things that are near, dear and valuable 
to us.  
  To  achieve  noble  and  worthy  goals  requires  commitment, 
dedication and frequently immense sacrifices. Our path is often too 
hard to be trodden on alone, so we must assist one another and seek 
help where we can.  
  Life can seem most unfair; sometimes we are at the mercy of others 
or suffer as a consequence of others. However we must not let that 
‘blind’ us from our abilities and capabilities.   Everyone is capable 
of  great  things.  We  saw  this  at  play  with  a  small  nation  like  Fiji 
assuming  global  leadership  of  this  issue,  described  as  one  of  the 
greatest  challenges  of  our  generation.  From  over  190  countries, 
fate,  circumstance  or  whatever  you  may  attribute  it  to,  chose  Fiji 
and  our  Honourable  Prime  Minister  to  assume  the  Presidency  of 
the  United  Nations  Climate  Change  Conference  of  Parties  or 
COP23 in Bonn, Germany.  
  Always  be  ready,  be  prepared,  when  destiny  or  fate  comes 
knocking  presenting  an  opportunity,  choosing  you,  choosing  us, 
rise and be counted.  
 Fiji  continues  to  make  numerous  efforts  to  address  climate  change 
including  having  introduced  a  “Green  Growth  Framework”  to  guide  the 
nation  in  building  a  sustainable  future.    The  Reserve  Bank  and  Fiji’s 
financial  sector  are  also  in  support  of  this  cause  and  are  committed 
towards  greening  Fiji’s  financial  sector.    Recent  RBF  initiatives  around 
this  include  joining  the  Sustainable  Banking  Network,  committing  to 
Private Mail Bag, Suva, Fiji         Tel: (679) 331 3611         Fax: (679) 330 2094        Email: info@rbf.gov.fj          Website: www.rbf.gov.fj  
        RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
  
 
develop  and  promote  sustainable  business  models  that  support 
communities’ 
response 
to  climate  change  under 
the  Maya 
Declaration  and  issuing  sovereign  Green  Bonds  –  a  world  first  for  an 
emerging market. 
 I also encourage you to use the financial pages in the diary to record your 
daily  expenses  as  it  will  help  you  develop  the  habit  of  tracking  and 
assessing your financial decisions to better plan for a sustainable future.   
 I wish to take this opportunity to acknowledge the continued commitment 
of  all  the  teachers  to  your  personal  development.    To  the  students,  my 
advice  to  you  is  to  continue  asking questions.  Be inquisitive and  further 
your learning whenever possible.  Your teachers play a key role in giving 
you  the  necessary  guidance  to  help  you  develop  your  financial  literacy 
but it is up to you to make the most of your opportunities.   
 Conclusion 
I hope you will find this year’s student diary both useful and engaging.  I 
encourage  you  to  use  it  well  and  develop  yourselves  to  become  not  just 
financially  responsible  but  environmentally-conscious.  Remember  that  a 
concerted  effort is required to  ensure a  sustainable  future  for  us  and  our 
planet, therefore every bit that you do counts. 
 Finally, I would like to wish the teachers and students all the very best for 
the new academic year. May you flourish always, thank you! 
 END 
Private Mail Bag, Suva, Fiji         Tel: (679) 331 3611         Fax: (679) 330 2094        Email: info@rbf.gov.fj          Website: www.rbf.gov.fj  
