Stephen S Poloz: Unveiling of new $10 note
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the unveiling of the new
$10 note, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 8 March 2018.
 It is the Bank of Canada’s job to design, produce and distribute bank notes that Canadians can
use with confidence and pride. Bank notes are designed to be not only secure and durable, but
also works of art that tell the stories of Canada. I am confident that you will agree that this new
$10 note fits the bill.
Trust is vital to everything we do as Canada’s central bank. And the most tangible way we earn
Canadians’  trust  is  by  supplying  the  highest  quality  bank  notes.  You  handle  them  every  day,
trusting that they are durable, safe and easy to use.  Even though people have more ways than
ever to make electronic payments, the number of bank notes in circulation continues to climb.
And thanks to past innovations, such as the introduction of polymer, counterfeiting rates remain
low, and our bank notes last longer and wear better. But at the Bank of Canada, we continually
strive to innovate and improve. I am immensely proud to say that a great deal of innovation went
into the note you are about to see.
For  starters,  there  was  the  question  of  whose  portrait  would  appear  on  the  front.  Both  the
Minister of Finance and I agreed that it was long past time for a bank note to feature an iconic
Canadian woman. That has been a goal of mine since I became Governor. But with so many
excellent choices, we took a new approach to involve Canadians directly in the decision-making
process. And boy, did Canadians get involved. We received over 26,000 nominations from coast
to  coast  to  coast. A  great  national  conversation  took  place—in  schools,  in  the  press,  and  in
social  media—about  the  important  contributions  so  many  iconic  women  have  made  to  our
history. I thank all Canadians for their engagement—it made the journey to develop this bank note
truly unique.
I would also like to give a special thanks to the independent advisory council that we set up to
help  us  narrow  down  the  nominations.  This  eminent  group  of  academics,  as  well  as  sports,
culture and other thought leaders, were invaluable throughout this process. Several of them are
here with us today—so thank you once again.
As you know, Nova Scotian Viola Desmond was ultimately chosen to appear on the new note.
With that choice made, our designers and scientists and historians then went to work. As you will
soon see, they brought together beautiful design, cutting-edge security features, and meaningful
symbolism in an exquisitely balanced way. The job they did was nothing short of brilliant. I could
spend hours thanking all the people who worked so hard to bring this innovative note to life –
many of whom are with us today or watching this webcast.
But  there  is  one  person  we  all  owe  a  debt  of  gratitude  to,  and  that  is  Viola’s  sister,  Wanda
Robson.
Wanda, you worked tirelessly to raise public awareness of the injustice done to your sister. And
you made sure that ultimately, justice was done. Thanks to your actions, Wanda, this important
Canadian story of your sister’s courage will never be forgotten.
Developing a new bank note is a huge undertaking, and I am happy and grateful that we got this
one  done  as  quickly  as  we  did. And  I  cannot  wait  any  longer  to  show  it  off.  It  is  time  for  all
Canadians to see the new $10 note.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
