William C Dudley: Comments on "A Skeptical View of the Impact of
the Fed's Balance Sheet"
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the 2018 US Monetary Policy Forum, New York City, 23 February 2018.
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  able  to  comment  on  this  year’s  U.S.  Monetary  Policy  Forum  paper. As
always, what I have to say here today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the
1
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.
To say that I was interested in this year’s topic is an understatement. The use of the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet has been an important element of U.S. monetary policy over the past
decade.  The  start  of  the  reversal  of  that  expansion—the  so-called  process  of  balance  sheet
normalization—has been a key focus of the FOMC’s monetary policy deliberations over the past
year. I am pleased that the start of this process—in contrast to the bond market taper tantrum of
2013—has been non-disruptive. The normalization process is now running in the background,
essentially on autopilot, with short-term interest rates serving as the primary tool for adjusting the
stance of monetary policy.
Let me start with my main point: Although I agree with many of the authors’ findings in this year’s
paper, I would take a much less skeptical view of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet as a tool
of monetary policy. While additional study of the effects of large-scale asset purchase (LSAP)
programs  should  be  encouraged—as  it  furthers  our  understanding  of  the  use  of  these
unconventional monetary policy tools—the paper’s findings do not, in my mind, invalidate the use
of LSAPs when the Federal Reserve is operating at or close to the zero lower bound for short-
term interest rates. That is the key issue—not the magnitude of the effects of LSAPs or whether
short-term interest rates should be the primary tool of monetary policy. On the latter point, which
is consistent with the FOMC’s statements about policy normalization, I see broad agreement.
Concluding that LSAPs are less powerful than suggested by some of the estimates from the
event study literature does not imply that there is no role for LSAPs at the zero lower bound. In
such  circumstances,  LSAPs  can  be  used  to  provide  additional  monetary  accommodation  by
depressing  bond  term  premia  and  the  spread  between  agency  mortgage-backed  securities
(MBS) and Treasury securities, as well as by strengthening the credibility of forward guidance on
the path of short-term interest rates. This can provide support to asset values more generally
and make financial conditions more accommodative. Thus, discarding such a tool or ruling out
its use seems counterproductive for two reasons. First, to the extent that such a tool can provide
accommodation,  ruling  out  its  use  would  raise  the  risks  of  insufficient  monetary  policy
accommodation when interest rates are pinned at the zero lower bound. Second, expectations
matter.  If  households  and  businesses  believe  that  the  Fed  has  run  out  of  tools  to  provide
monetary policy accommodation or is unwilling to use certain tools for that purpose, the risk of
inflation expectations becoming unanchored to the downside would increase, which would make
it even more difficult for the central bank to achieve its goals. For these reasons, LSAPs should
be viewed as a viable tool in our arsenal to be used when the zero lower bound is a relevant
policy concern.
In  terms  of  calibration,  if  LSAPs  are  not  as  powerful  as  some  of  the  event  studies  imply,  the
answer is not to simply discard the tool, but instead to look for ways to enhance its efficacy and
use it more aggressively. In this respect, I believe that LSAPs work best when they are open-
ended. In such circumstances, the use of the tool is likely to be helpful in reducing tail risks and
making  the  bad  states  of  the  world  less  likely  rather  than  signaling  to  market  participants  a
significant deterioration in the Federal Reserve’s outlook. LSAPs may also be a useful means of
making forward guidance more credible. If the monetary authority were to commit to a program
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
of asset purchases until some economic objective is reached and, at the same time, were to
make it clear that the policy rate would not begin to rise until the asset purchase program were
completed, these steps might help anchor expectations about the likely path of short-term rates
more effectively. The Federal Reserve’s third round of LSAPs, which was open-ended, was an
important innovation of policy that the paper might have discussed in greater detail.
I also don’t agree with the paper’s conclusions about agency MBS purchases. Such purchases
do  not  represent  “credit  easing”  as  argued  in  the  paper.  The  government’s  interventions  to
support Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have made it clear that there is no credit risk in the Federal
Reserve’s purchase of such obligations. Also, the authors don’t acknowledge that the ability to
purchase  agency  MBS  has  two  benefits.  First,  it  enables  the  Federal  Reserve  to  purchase
longer-duration  assets  at  a  faster  pace  without  disrupting  market  functioning.  This  facilitates
larger  LSAP  programs,  when  a  larger  program  is  viewed  as  necessary.  Second,  it  opens  up
another  channel  by  which  asset  purchases  can  provide  stimulus—by  narrowing  the  spread
between agency MBS and Treasuries, the Federal Reserve can drive down long-term mortgage
rates and provide support to the housing sector and to home prices. When monetary policy is
constrained  at  the  zero  lower  bound  for  interest  rates,  being  able  to  purchase  agency  MBS
seems like a good tool to have available.
I am also a bit baffled by the conclusion that the Fed should “consider larger and looser caps,
possibly specified in terms of quarterly rather than monthly changes, with caps perhaps removed
completely by 2019.” It seems to me that the current process of balance sheet normalization is
proceeding  very  smoothly.  We  placed  caps  on  redemptions  because  we  wanted  to  limit  the
potential  for  market  disruption  that  might  occur  if  the  amount  of  securities  that  had  to  be
absorbed  by  private  markets  fluctuated  unduly.  The  cost  of  the  caps  in  terms  of  delaying  the
shrinkage of the balance sheet is very low. Even if the caps were to be removed completely at
the end of 2018, it would most likely pull forward the timing of normalizing the balance sheet size
by only two quarters. The delay due to the caps is small because, when they are fully phased in,
they are likely to be binding only for Treasuries and then only in the middle month of each quarter.
While I don’t agree with some of the broader conclusions of the paper, I do agree that a healthy
skepticism about event studies is warranted. The major theme of the paper is that event studies
that have sought to measure the impact of the Federal Reserve’s three major LSAP programs
are flawed for a number of reasons. These include potential selection bias of the events chosen
and the fact that event studies may not capture all the factors that influence how market prices
respond to LSAP announcements.
The first problem with event studies, of course, is the issue of how much new information is
revealed by the actual policy announcement. I would argue that LSAPs were always a possibility,
so the probability of their use never went from 0% to 100%, even for the first LSAP program. This
suggests that event studies could lead to downwardly biased estimates of the impact of LSAPs.
In fact, if the announcement indicated that the program was smaller than expected, then bond
yields could rise on the program’s announcement. This scenario could occur even though the
overall  program—including  its  anticipation—was  effective  in  reducing  yields.  This  makes
interpreting the direction of changes in bond yields on the day of an announcement difficult.
The second problem with event studies is that there are always other things going on. When the
Fed announces an LSAP program, long-term rates might drop because of the announcement, or
because market participants were revising downward their views about the state of the economy
and the economic outlook in light of the Fed’s actions. Or, conversely, long-term yields could
conceivably  even  rise  as  market  participants  became  more  confident  that  the  policy  actions
would  be  sufficient  to  push  the  economy  toward  the  central  bank’s  goals  of  maximum
sustainable employment and price stability.
The third problem with event studies is the difficulty in disentangling the various factors behind
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  moves  in  long-term  yields.  If  an  open-ended  LSAP  program  pushes  back  the  perceived
timing  of  short-term  rate  hikes,  it  will  be  difficult  to  apportion  the  impact  on  long-term  yields
between LSAPs and an expectation of a flatter path for short-term rates.
These  conclusions  argue  for  putting  less  reliance  on  event  studies  to  measure  the  impact  of
LSAPs, rather than more. In this regard, I would advocate taking a different tack: rely more on an
evaluation  of  bond  term  premia  to  assess  the  potential  impact  of  LSAPs.  Bond  term  premia
currently are unusually low, and I suspect that LSAP programs here and abroad have been an
important  factor.  Evaluating  the  factors  that  have  been  affecting  bond  term  premia  over  time
might be a good alternative way of estimating the impact of LSAPs.
To  sum  up,  while  the  impact  of  LSAPs  on  long-term  bond  yields  is  likely  lower  than  what  is
implied by some of the event study literature, this does not mean that LSAPs aren’t a useful tool
when the FOMC is constrained by the zero lower bound. LSAPs can not only narrow bond term
premia, but also make forward guidance more credible. Thus, LSAPs remain useful to have in
the toolkit for those times when the short-term interest rate tool may not be available.
1
Lorie Logan and Paolo Pesenti assisted in the preparation of these remarks.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
