 
Speech  by  Governor  Kganyago  on  the  occasion  of  the  announcement  of  the 
winners of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) Schools Challenge  
  
17 August 2018 
 
Programme Director, 
Honourable Minister of Basic Education, Ms Angie Motshekga, 
Deputy Governors, Heads of Department, 
Guest Speaker, Aisha Pandor, 
Colleagues from the South African Reserve Bank and the Department of Basic Education, 
Parents, 
Representatives from schools, 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen 
 
 
 
I  am  honoured  to  be  standing  here  this  afternoon as  we  pay  tribute  to  some of  the 
most outstanding Economics learners in the country.  
 
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) Schools Challenge was launched as a pilot 
programme in 2012 by the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) in conjunction with 
the Gauteng Department of Basic Education (DBE). The challenge is a competition for 
Grade  12  Economics  learners,  which  exposes  them  to  how  the  MPC  sets  the 
repurchase (repo) rate. It also aims to increase the level of interest in Economics as a 
subject of choice among high school learners, and to encourage learners to pursue a 
career in Economics. 
 The SARB has since expanded the challenge to other provinces, as follows: 
 in 2014, to Limpopo Province; 
in 2015, to the Free State Province; 
 1 
 in 2016, to Mpumalanga Province; and 
in 2017, to the Eastern Cape, North West and Northern Cape provinces. 
 
Today is a major milestone in the history of the MPC Schools Challenge. This is the 
first time that schools from all nine provinces have participated in the challenge. 
 
In July 2017, the Minister of Basic Education, Ms Angie Motshekga and I launched the 
national roll-out of this challenge at a media conference here at the  SARB where it 
was  announced  that  the  KwaZulu-Natal  and  Western  Cape  provinces  would  be 
participating in the challenge from 2018, effectively opening the challenge to schools 
in all nine provinces for the first time. The number of participating schools has since 
risen from 70 (seventy) in 2012 to 813 (eight hundred and thirteen) in 2018 – impacting 
3 212 (three thousand two hundred and twelve) learners. 
 
The SARB believes the competition will raise the level of understanding of monetary 
policy, and contribute directly and indirectly to broad public economic education. The 
students  who  participate  in  the  MPC  Schools  Challenge  will  also  have  a  better 
understanding of the role of the SARB. 
 
At the onset, we must commend our school finalists (in alphabetical order):  
  Empucukweni Secondary School, Mpumalanga Province; 
Krugersdorp High School, Gauteng Province; 
  Mariathal Combined School, Kwazulu-Natal Province; 
  Orhovelani High School, Mpumalanga Province; 
   Potchefstroom Gimnasium, North West Province; 
Ridge Park College, Kwazulu-Natal Province; and 
Springs Girls Schools, Gauteng Province. 
 
We are indeed privileged to be in the midst of future governors and deputy governors 
of  the  SARB.  I  am  certain  that  you  will  all  join  me  as  I  say:  ‘well  done’  to  all  the 
participants. They are all worthy finalists and deserve a round of applause. Credit must 
also go to the other schools that put up a brave fight but, unfortunately, did not make 
it to the finals. We are  very  proud of the hard work and  effort  the learners put in to 
prepare for the challenge.  
  2 
This occasion is also about celebrating young minds that have given us a glimpse of 
the  incredible  talent  and  intellectual  capital  at  the  disposal  of  our  nation.  Given  the 
quality of data analysis and conclusions drawn by these young people, I can assure 
you, without any fear of contradiction, that tomorrow’s economy is in safe and capable 
hands.  
 
As we celebrate the winners of today, we must also celebrate a partnership between 
the SARB and DBE. Through this programme, we are investing in the nation’s human 
capital.  As  former  President  Nelson  Mandela  said:  “Our  children  are  the  rock  on 
which our future will be built, our greatest asset as a nation”. 
 
The SARB took the decision to embark on the MPC Schools Challenge based on our 
conviction  that  it  will  enhance  our  learners’  understanding  of  the  role  of  monetary 
policy and of economics; build relationships between the SARB, schools and learners; 
and generate interest among our schools and learners in Economics as a subject. 
 
We believe that the economy of our country will rise in the hands of our future leaders. 
Our minimum responsibility is to prepare them for their future roles. The MPC Schools 
Challenge is a humble contribution towards building a solid foundation for their future 
leadership roles in the economy.  
 
As we prepare to announce the winning teams, let me take this opportunity to invite 
the winning school as well as their Economics educator and principal to spend  the 
day  of  20  September  2018  at  the  SARB  as  my  special  guests.  You  will  have  the 
opportunity  to  watch  me  delivering  the  MPC  statement  during  a  live  media 
conference.  We  are  confident  that  all  these  experiences  will  empower  you  to 
understand how economic theory is translated into practice. 
 
Thank you 
 3 
