Luis  de  Guindos:  Coming  to  the  forefront  -  the  rising  role  of  the
investment fund sector for financial stability in the euro area
Speech by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Opening
Conference, 21st Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 12 November 2018.
 I am honoured to speak at this Opening Conference of the 21st Euro Finance Week.
People  often  think  that  central  bankers  –  by  profession  and  perhaps  even  by  nature  –  are
predisposed  to  constantly  warn  about  risks.  We  therefore  need  to  avoid  being  perceived  as
‘crying wolf’ too often. After all, persistently warning about threats that fail to materialise may be
just  as  counterproductive  as  being  over  optimistic.  Striking  this  delicate  balance  is  crucial  for
central bankers – but also for markets. And looking at how markets currently price risks across a
number of asset classes and geographies, I am not so sure that they are achieving this balance.
I am raising these doubts in particular in light of the economic and political developments that we
are currently witnessing – globally as well as in Europe.
In my remarks today, I will briefly discuss what we see as the main financial stability risks for the
euro  area,  before  zooming  in  on  the  situation  in  the  investment  fund  sector.  Over  the  past
decade, this sector has almost tripled in terms of total assets and has taken on more risk. So it
deserves greater attention from a financial stability perspective. I would also like to emphasise
today that regulation needs to adapt to the evolving financial system. In that vein, I will discuss
what  remains  to  be  done  in  developing  macroprudential  and  other  policy  tools  in  response  to
evolving risks in the investment fund sector.
Financial stability risks in the euro area
In the euro area, we have now seen 22 consecutive quarters of economic growth and declining
unemployment – a development which has also been bolstered by our accommodative monetary
policy  and  which  has  supported  financial  stability  overall.  Notably,  banks’  profitability  has
improved somewhat, though it is still at low levels, and they now have higher capital and liquidity
ratios, making them more resilient than they were before the global financial crisis. Indeed, the
results  of  the  recent  EU-wide  stress  test  show  that  the  banking  sector  has  a  good  level  of
resilience overall, albeit with some pockets of vulnerability.
However, while the fundamentals for solid growth rates over the next two years are still in place,
some risks are building up in the financial system. We are currently paying particular attention to
three major developments that could trigger financial stability concerns globally and in the euro
area.
First, the current expansion of the US is now significantly longer than historical norms and the
second  longest  in  US  modern  history.  Looking  ahead,  a  down-turn  in  the  US  macro-financial
cycle could trigger a reassessment of riskier asset classes.
Second, at the global level, tensions have grown in emerging market economies on the back of a
stronger  US  dollar  and  increased  trade  frictions.  These  developments  may  undermine  global
growth  prospects  and  ultimately  lead  to  abrupt  increases  in  risk  premia.  This  could  trigger  a
domino effect – leading to a sharp sell-off and further price pressures in assets with stretched
valuations – with the potential to spill over to euro area financial markets.
Third,  in  Europe  we  observe  re-emerging  debt  sustainability  concerns,  both  in  the  public  and
private sector. As regards public finances, Italy is the most prominent case at the moment in light
of the overall debt level and the political tensions around the Italian government’s budget plans.
The  strong  market  reactions  to  political  events  have  triggered  renewed  concerns  about  the
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
sovereign-bank nexus in parts of Europe. Although contagion has been limited so far, it remains
a  possibility.  This  underpins  the  call  for  fiscal  discipline  and  for  observing  and  applying  fiscal
rules in Europe.
But  in  the  non-financial  private  sector  too,  debt  levels  remain  high  by  both  historical  and
international  standards.  In  a  number  of  countries,  debt  is  above  thresholds  that  are  normally
associated with a debt overhang. And growing debt levels should also be seen in the context of
buoyant real estate market developments in a number of countries.
In light of the current global and domestic developments, a common concern is that we may see
a  large  and  abrupt  surge  in  risk  premia,  triggered  or  amplified  by  uncertainty  about  political
actions  or  a  shift  in  risk  perception.  At  the  same  time,  we  are  worried  about  the  possible
amplification  of  stress  in  financial  markets  through  deleveraging  and  forced  asset  selling  in  a
situation where asset prices are falling.
Now that the banking sector is shrinking and becoming more resilient, our radar is shifting to the
non-bank  financial  sector,  which  is  more  lightly  regulated.  In  particular,  we  need  a  better
understanding  of  the  role  of  asset  managers  and  of  the  broader  vulnerabilities  inherent  to
investment  funds.  The  asset  management  sector  now  plays  a  much  larger  role  in  financial
markets than it did ten years ago. It may harbour leverage and liquidity risks that could amplify
any potential shock from a reassessment of risks in financial markets.
I will now look in more detail at some longer-term developments and potential risks in the asset
management sector.
Risks associated with liquidity, leverage and interconnectedness in the investment fund
sector
One of the most notable developments since the financial crisis has been the rapid growth of
asset management in the euro area and at global level. In the euro area, investment funds have
1
been growing steadily, with total assets expanding by roughly 170% between 2008 and 2017 ,
reflecting both continued net cash inflows and rising asset valuations. As a result, the structure of
the euro area financial sector is changing. In 2008, total assets held by investment funds were
only 15% of banking sector assets. In 2017, euro area investment fund assets had grown to 42%
of total banking sector assets, amounting to EUR 12 trillion. This major growth in relative size is
likely to have far-reaching implications for the ability of the financial system to absorb shocks and
for the financing of the economy more broadly.
On  the  positive  side,  an  increase  in  market-based  finance  through  the  issuance  of  debt  and
equity instruments can help diversify the funding base of the real economy. It also gives investors
more  choice  and  enables  them  to  benefit  from  diversification  effects  offered  by  investment
products.  This  holds  true  for  retail  and  institutional  investors  alike,  as  an  increasing  share  of
institutional investors are using professional asset management services. The growing share of
investors outside the core financial system tends to increase the system’s risk-bearing capacity,
as  traditional  end-investors,  typically  not  leveraged,  can  absorb  any  potential  losses  more
smoothly. One should also acknowledge that thanks to significant efforts in the last ten years,
investment funds in the EU are subject to an enhanced regulatory framework. In particular, the
fund  specific  regulation  coupled  with  regulation  covering  certain  activities,  such  as  derivatives
and securities financing transactions, have addressed investor protection issues and risks from
2
a microprudential perspective.
At the same time, the growing fund sector is creating emerging vulnerabilities from a system-
3
wide perspective.
The  asset  management  sector  is  highly  connected  with  other  parts  of  the  financial  system
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
through  ownership  links,  common  asset  exposures  and  the  provision  of  wholesale  funding  to
banks. Investment funds are not only important depositors in banks; they also provide longer-
term funding through the purchase of bank-issued debt securities. Euro area investment funds
hold about EUR 400 billion or approximately 10% in outstanding debt securities issued by euro
area banks. Banks, on the other hand, lend to funds mainly through repo transactions. So any
potential shock to the investment fund sector may quickly spill over to other parts of the financial
system.
When identifying possible weak spots in the financial system, it is sometimes useful to look back
to past crisis events. I recall some 20 years ago, when Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM),
a large and highly interconnected hedge fund, collapsed, in the wake of turbulence from the 1998
Russian  crisis.  The  rapidly  changing  market  environment  effectively  turned  LTCM’s  business
model  into  a  key  amplifier.  LTCM  was  betting  on  longer-term  developments  in  fixed-income
markets  using  exceptionally  high  leverage.  When  the  fund  collapsed,  fire-sale  spillovers  and
counterparty exposures threatened to erode the stability of the financial system.
To be clear, I am  not predicting another LTCM crisis any time in the near future. But I would like
to use the case of LTCM to exemplify some key vulnerabilities which played a role in the collapse
– acknowledging that LTCM was not an open-ended fund and did not face redemption risk, as
most mutual funds do. In particular, let me focus on risks stemming from liquidity mismatches,
leverage and interconnectedness across the financial system.
The  asset  management  industry  keeps  reminding  us  that  vulnerabilities  in  funds cannot  be
presumed to resemble those of banks. And it is true that investment funds do not issue deposits
and  that  potential  losses  in  a  fund  are  borne  by  end-investors.  But  there  is  a  fundamental
difference between the equity in banks and the equity in funds. Investors in an open-end fund can
run  by redeeming their  units,  whereas  equity  holders  in  a  bank  can  only  run  by selling  their
shares to other market participants. A run by investment fund unitholders can therefore resemble
a run by bank depositors. In both cases, the institution is, in principle, forced to sell assets in a
fires sale in order to meet its short-dated liabilities.
In general, asset managers are highly aware of their fund’s liquidity position. In the interest of
investors, the fund managers have incentives to minimise any impact from their own actions on
financial markets, while at the same time accommodating share creations and redemptions. So
a bank-like run by unitholders in a fund may not be very likely.
But  a  system-wide  shock  with  a  broader  impact  on  market  liquidity  conditions  could  quickly
change the situation. Liquidity at fund level may be squeezed if many investors wish to liquidate
their unit shares at  the  same  time.  The  resulting  first-mover  advantages  and  selling  pressure
could amplify stress in financial markets, especially if conditions are already fragile.
One reason why the Federal Reserve Bank of New York decided to facilitate the private-sector
bail-out of LTCM was precisely because it was concerned about market dislocations should the
company fail on some of its obligations. Letting LTCM go into disorderly fire-sale liquidation was
seen  as  risking  a  severe  drying-up  of  market  liquidity,  which  could  have  damaged  financial
4
markets and the wider U.S. economy.
the  current  global  and  domestic  uncertainties  affecting 
Considering 
financial  market
developments,  I  am  seriously  concerned  about  declining  market  liquidity  and  the  role  that
investment funds might play in a possible stress scenario.
Liquidity mismatches and leverage are structural in nature and often build up slowly over time. In
the euro area, we observe that investment funds have been taking on higher credit and duration
risk  in  the  current  market  environment. And  we  have  strong  indications  that  liquidity  risks  are
building up in the fund sector. The share of less-liquid assets in that sector has been growing
constantly since the global crisis, while liquidity and cash buffers have been declining.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
From our market contacts we also hear that investors are increasingly using exchange-traded
fund (ETF) shares to gain exposure to less-liquid markets. ETFs have been growing extremely
fast thanks to their comparably low cost and high liquidity. ETFs are traded at higher frequencies
and are sometimes more liquid than the underlying instruments. But can we be sure that liquidity
in ETFs, in particular in bond ETFs, would remain stable if a sudden repricing in the markets
occurred? This is a concern in particular for bond ETFs – a small but rapidly expanding market –
which has not yet been tested in a larger distress event. Alongside liquidity risks, the ETF sector
is also subject to counterparty risks because of connections to banks through ownership links
and derivatives. Again, the fast-growing ETF segment deserves further attention from a risk and
policy perspective.
It  goes  without  saying  that  leverage  plays  a  critical  role  in  any  potential  stress  scenario  as  it
forces companies to deleverage, generating potential spillovers to asset markets. Our analysis
also shows that leverage increases the procyclical behaviour of investors and asset managers,
even if they are not excessively leveraged.
In any case, it is quite comforting that leverage in the European investment fund sector seems to
be low, on average. Average leverage multipliers reach only up to 1.3 across different fund types.
This  is  partly  because  about  60%  of  all  investment  funds  fall  under  the  Undertakings  for
Collective  Investment  in  Transferable  Securities  (UCITS)  Directive  and  so  face  tight  leverage
constraints.
On the other hand, many alternative investment funds do not face any binding restrictions on
leverage. Among those alternative funds, we find a tail of highly leveraged bond and hedge funds,
which sometimes have a leverage multiplier of more than 30.
I  urge  authorities  to  use  the  new  data  which  is  available  to  shed  more  light  on  this  highly
leveraged part of the sector.  This may help to better understand some of the lightly regulated
and less transparent activities where risks may be building up. For instance, private loan funds
may  potentially  erode  credit  standards  and  take  on  higher  credit  risk  in  the  current  market
environment, whereas private equity funds may facilitate excessive leverage in the non-financial
sector.
5
Some of these activities may be escaping our attention, as statistics on them are scarce and
they  are  often  conducted  by  funds  outside  the  euro  area.  Leverage  may  be  building  up,  for
instance,  by  the  use  of  derivatives  or  in  off-shore  centres.  Therefore,  consistent  reporting
frameworks have to be developed with a view to gaining a system-wide perspective on evolving
risks, also at global level. It will be important to develop comparable leverage measures in line
with the recommendations of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) to the International Organization
of Securities Commissions (IOSCO).  This will facilitate consistent monitoring and assessment
of the build-up of risks in the investment fund sector.
6
As the global crisis has shown, we cannot afford to be complacent and must remain vigilant to
possible new risks that might emerge in the financial system. So we need to better understand
the  macroprudential  dimension  of  risk  in  the  investment  fund  sector. And  we  need  to  further
enhance the sector’s resilience to system-wide shocks.
Possible macroprudential and other policy responses – what needs to be done?
Let me now set out a few regulatory actions which could contribute to mitigating risks arising
from interconnectedness, liquidity and leverage in the investment fund sector.
Let me start with interconnectedness and the links to banks in particular. The global financial
crisis showed that banks sometimes have incentives to step in to support unconsolidated entities
such  as  special  purpose  vehicles  or  investment  funds  with  which  they  have  a  business
relationship.  Explicit  contractual  obligations  are  already  captured  by  a  number  of  post-crisis
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
reforms,  in  particular  by  revisions  to  the  securitisation  framework  and  by  enhancements  to
consolidation  rules  for  off-balance  sheet  entities.   But  the  risk  that  a  bank  provides  financial
support  to  an  unconsolidated  entity  that  is  facing  stress,  over  and  above  any  contractual
obligations has not yet been addressed. Such risks may be particularly relevant in the context of
close ownership links between banks and funds. For example, banks in certain circumstances
may feel a need to step in to protect their brand. To tackle this issue, the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision (BCBS) has published guidelines on step-in risk that would require banks to
self-assess and report their material step-in risk exposures to supervisors, who should have the
8
possibility for supervisory action if deemed necessary.
We  also  need  to  work  on  the  different  layers  of  interconnectedness  between  ETFs  and  their
counterparties. In our view, the rapid growth of ETFs, coupled with their potential to transmit and
amplify  risks  to  financial  stability,  warrants  further  evaluation  of  regulatory  action.    This  may
include enhanced rules to limit counterparty risk exposure of ETF investors, and measures that
provide more transparency around ETF liquidity provision.
9
The  enhanced  microprudential  framework  for  the  European  fund  sector  is  a  key  element  in
boosting the resilience of the financial system overall. But the sector’s rising role in shaping the
financial  cycle,  and  the  potentially  systemic  nature  of  its  risks,  require  a  more  ambitious
approach.  We  should  aim  at  extending  the  macroprudential  framework  beyond  banks  to
encompass the asset management sector.
10
In particular, we need to equip macroprudential authorities with the necessary tools to address
systemic  risks  both  ex  ante  and  ex  post.  The  recent  ESRB  recommendation  to  address
systemic risks related to liquidity mismatches and leverage in investment funds   is  a  crucial
step  towards  this  goal.  Most  importantly,  from  a  macroprudential  perspective,  the  proposed
measures  would  help  national  authorities  in  setting  binding  leverage  limits  for  alternative
investment  funds  to  mitigate  systemic  risk.  The  recommendations  foresee  also  a  role  of  the
authorities in suspending redemptions in a stress scenario.
11
Going beyond the ESRB recommendation, I would argue in favour of complementing the powers
that are currently envisaged for authorities with ex ante tools targeting liquidity risks at system
level. Existing liquidity management tools may mitigate liquidity risk ex post, but they might not
suffice to prevent the build-up of vulnerabilities in exuberant times ex ante.
The  toolkit  available  to  macroprudential  authorities  should  therefore  include  additional  ex  ante
requirements  such  as  minimum  liquidity  buffers  and  redemption  notice  periods.
  Mandatory
liquidity buffers require funds to hold sufficient high-quality liquid assets for the fund to be able to
meet  redemptions  and  margin  calls  under  many  foreseeable  scenarios.  The  introduction  of
minimum notice periods would help align a fund’s liability structure with the liquidity- and risk-
profile on the asset side. Overall, such tools could be used to raise the sector’s resilience to
potential investor runs or spikes in margin calls. Setting these requirements would greatly limit
the sector’s ability to build-up liquidity risk in exuberant times.
12
Finally, given the cross-border nature of the investment fund sector, we need to strengthen the
European  perspective  in  the  supervision  of  investment  funds  while  also  ensuring  a  globally
consistent  approach  to  monitoring. Arguably,  the  investment  fund  industry  in  the  EU  is  highly
concentrated in a few jurisdictions, but – due to the diverse asset holdings and investor locations
– the impact of adverse developments in this sector may be felt across the EU. Hence, I call for
further  investigation  of  the  case  for  bringing  investment  fund  supervision  and  the  potential
activation of macroprudential tools to the European level.
13
In  a  related  debate,  the  FSB  announced  recently  that  it  will  no  longer  use  the  term  “shadow
banking”  in  its  future  communications  to  avoid  the  pejorative  connotations.  Hedge  funds  and
other asset managers will instead fall under a broader group of non-bank financial intermediaries.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
We very much welcome the change in terminology, as it supports a closer focus on emerging
vulnerabilities in the asset management sector, regardless of whether these are considered to
be bank-like or not.
Concluding remarks
We have come a long way since the financial crisis. We have implemented a range of regulatory
reforms that have addressed many issues that the crisis brought to light both in the bank and
non-bank financial sectors. Nevertheless, the ever evolving nature of our financial system and the
undisputable argument that the next crisis will be different require us to remain vigilant.
The tectonic shifts in the structure of the financial system brought about with the rise of asset
management call strongly for further policy work in this area. We need to better understand what
these  shifts  in  the  financial  system  imply  for  financial  stability  and  the  financing  of  the  real
economy. On the positive side, an increase in market-based finance can help to diversify the
funding base of the real economy and investors are increasingly benefitting from diversification
effects. However, as the risks arising from leverage and liquidity mismatches in investment funds
are potentially systemic, we need to take a more ambitious policy approach to systemic risk.
Extending  the  macroprudential  framework  to  the  asset  management  sector  and  developing
policy tools to address emerging risks will be an important step in preparing for possible future
stress scenarios.
 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Figures exclude money market funds (MMFs).
These  include  the  Undertakings  for  Collective  Investment  in  Transferable  Securities  (UCITS)  Directive,  the
Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive (AIFMD), the European Market Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR)
and the Securities Financing Transactions Regulation (SFTR).
E.g. see International Monetary Fund, Global Financial Stability Report, Chapter 3: “The Asset Management
Industry and Financial Stability”, April, 2015.
See Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan on private-sector refinancing of LTCM before the Committee on
Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, October 1, 1998.
E.g. new data is reported under the Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive (AIFMD).
See FSB “Policy Recommendations to Address Structural Vulnerabilities from Asset Management Activities”, 12
January 2017.
See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Guidelines on the identification and management of step-in risk,
October 2017 and Financial Stability Board, Assessment of shadow banking activities: risks and the adequacy
of post-crisis policy tools to address financial stability concerns, July 2017.
Ibid.
See  ECB  Financial  Stability  Review  Special  Feature  C,  Counterparty  and  liquidity  risks  in  exchange-traded
funds, forthcoming November 2018.
See European Systemic Risk Board, “Macroprudential policy beyond banking: an ESRB strategy paper”, July
2016.
See Recommendation of the European Systemic Risk Board of 7 December 2017 on liquidity and leverage
risks in investment funds (ESRB/2017/6) published 14. February 2018.
See  ECB  Macroprudential  Bulletin,  “Macroprudential  liquidity  tools  for  investment  funds  –  A  preliminary
discussion”. The article states that redemption duration restrictions could be differentiated based on the fund
type, or a limited number of fund “profiles” that represent a combination of key fund characteristics, including the
asset and liability side of the fund.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
13
See  also ECB contribution to the European Commission’s consultation on Capital Markets Union mid-term
review 2017.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
