SMALL COUNTRY INTERFACES WITH THE WORLD’S FINANCIAL RULE-MAKERS
John Rolle
Governor, Central Bank of The Bahamas
30 October 2018
Special Address to the 13th ASBA-BCBS-FSI High-Level Meeting on Global and Regional Supervisory
Priorities
1
Introduction
1
The Central Bank of The Bahamas is pleased and honoured to be able to co-host this gathering
of eminent persons from Latin America, the Caribbean, the Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision (BCBS), the Financial Stability Institute (FSI), and the Bank for International
Settlements (BIS).
My topic tonight is: “How Small Nations Interact with the International Financial Rule-Making
Architecture”.  The core elements in this architecture include:
- Multilateral  agencies,  among  which  the  IMF  is  probably  the  most  impactful for  small
   countries, and the BIS the most impactful for the world’s central banks;
Rule-making bodies, among which the Basel Committee is probably the most prominent,
but 
including  the international  Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  (IAIS),  the
International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), and similar groups, with
the Financial Stability Board (FSB) assuming prominence in recent years;
The ever-growing architecture on financial crime suppression, centred on the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF); and
A range of public, quasi-public, and private groups that create, impose, and/or enforce
standards  in  international  finance,  among  which  leading  examples  include  the  ratings
agencies, SWIFT1, ISDA2, LCH3 and many others.
The small country experience in general
2
What has been the experience of small countries in dealing with these groups?  In a few words:
generally positive, but mixed.
From  a  small  country  perspective,  the  ideal  engagement  with  an  international  rules-making
body would feature four key elements:
  The body explicitly considers small countries when making and enforcing rules;
The body  provides,  directly  or through  its  membership,  reasonable assistance to  help
small countries adopt and maintain the relevant rule set;
The  body’s  governance  arrangements  allow  for  small  country  representation,  and  for
staff from small countries to engage on working groups, task forces, secretariats, and
the like; and
- When  conducting  compliance  assessments  and  similar  engagements,  the  body’s
evaluation process gives small countries a fair chance to demonstrate compliance, in the
context of each country’s economy and society.
1 Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications.
2 International Swaps and Derivatives Association.
3 LCH is a London and European based clearing house for trades in financial instruments.
2
My experience, both directly and through engagement in the Caribbean and elsewhere, is that
most  international  rules-making  bodies  lack  comprehensive  policies  in  the above  areas, but
there  is  generally  sincere  goodwill  expressed  by these  bodies.    Put  another  way,  few
international  rules-making  bodies  are  set  up  to  disadvantage  small  countries,  but  several  of
them can bruise us inadvertently, and we would like to see international practice improve to
reduce this bruising.
The challenge in part relates to focus on rules making to affect outcomes of a globally systemic
importance; outcomes which are less likely to be the case for economic events and economic
actors in small countries. As such, conceding to small country concerns is often a question of
quantifying  and  recognizing  the  unintended  or  spillover  consequences  of  international
standards; and determining how or sometimes whether to act to offset adverse externalities.
Small  countries  often  have  difficulty  interfacing  with  the  major  international  rule-making
bodies,  and  it  is clearly  not  the  case  that  every  such  body  should  be  expected  to  engage
individually with about 200 countries. This is where regional groups shine, and among these
groups,  ASBA  has  been  particularly  helpful  for  Latin  American  and  Caribbean  small
countries. We thank ASBA for their past, present, and doubtless future good work.
The  FSB  has  also  made  good  progress  by  convening  non-members  through  its  regional
consultative grouping.
I can also  acknowledge  positive  strides  at  the  IMF  and  World  Bank.    Some  of the  recent
sensitivity take a more micro-state view that narrows the universe to just most countries in the
Caribbean, other Pacific Isles and parts of Africa. It has helped in tailoring policy prescriptions in
the Fund’s surveillance  framework,  for  us, particularly  around  capital  flow  management  and
exchange rate policies.
Let  me  clarify  that  from  my  perspective,  “small  countries”  are  usually  small  in  population,
though they could be large in financial terms, with say New Zealand or thereabouts the cutoff
between large and small.  This is clearly a flexible definition, perhaps closer to the economic
definition of small.
The experience with the Basel Committee
3
Now let’s consider how the Basel Committee, with strong input from the FSI, measures up on
my nominated criteria for ideal small country engagement.
3.1 Consideration of small countries in rules making and enforcement
First, how well does the BCBS consider small country issues when making and enforcing rules?
I commend you on two issues, and suggest a reconsideration regarding one other matter.
3
The first commendation flows from past years of reasonable receptivity to small country issues,
albeit  secondary  to  large  country  and  large  bank  issues,  at  the  Basel  Committee.    There  are
clearly routes through which a well-prepared small country can inject its views into the Basel
processes, often via regional consultation formats.
The second commendation, and it is difficult to overstate its value, is the Basel Committee’s
and FSI’s more recent and explicit adoption of proportionality as an accepted and important
part of the framework.  This allows small countries to adopt the Basel rules texts in ways that
are fully compliant with the texts, but very much simpler and cheaper to supervise and comply
with.    To take  a  topical  example, The  Bahamas  is currently  consulting  on  a  Basel  III
implementation that will require perhaps 10 per cent of the complexity of the full Basel rules
text.  Much of this simplification revolves around avoiding model-based approaches, but even
the new Standardised Approaches give a great deal more freedom for small countries to adopt
simpler  but  robust  rules.    Please  continue  with  proportionality,  and  encourage  the  IMF  to
support this approach as they conduct FSAP reviews.
The  matter  I  would  ask  you  to  reconsider  is  the  increasingly  fragile  assertion  that  the  Basel
Committee is only making rules for large, internationally active banks.  That may be the Basel
position, but it is not the IMF position when it comes to FSAPs.  This applies to the Basel Core
Principles  and  the  capital  and  liquidity  frameworks.
I  certainly  don’t  suggest  that  you  move
away from making rules for internationally active banks, but please try to remember, ideally not
just around the margins, that a great many non-member countries will strive to adopt the Basel
rules, both for international and domestic banks.
3.2 Assistance with rules adoption
The second question is, does the Basel Committee and FSI assist small  countries in adopting
new and almost always more challenging international rules?
Your record on this is particularly good, in our experience. That’s the whole point of the FSI.
We are also grateful that the Basel Committee, relative to some other international rule-making
bodies,  allows  considerable  time  for  consultation  and  for  implementation  of  new  rules. This
conference  is  an  obvious  example  of  part  of  the  extensive  assistance  given  to  non-member
countries, as is the biennial ICBS event. So please keep up the good work.
3.3 Opportunities to engage
Third, what about governance and use of staff?
The  BCBS  and  FSI  secretariats  and  working  groups  naturally  feature  staff  from  member
countries, but it is also the case that staff from non-member countries get opportunities from
time to time.  We would like to see this practice continue, and ideally expand.  I acknowledge
that  there  are  a  great  many  non-member  countries  for  the  Basel  Committee to  potentially
4
engage with, but on the other hand, engaging a single high quality person from such countries
can have a disproportionately positive effect in transferring best practices.
I note again the ICBS, and the regional consultation groups, as indications of good practice.
3.4 Getting a fair chance to demonstrate compliance
Finally, what about a fair chance to demonstrate compliance?
In the BCBS case, RCAPs are only relevant to member countries, and small countries generally
deal  with  Basel  rules  text  compliance  through the  IMF/World  Bank  and  FSAP  processes. Our
experience  has  been  that  we  do  get  a  fair  chance  to  demonstrate  compliance  on  the  core
principles, and aspects of the rules texts as they come up.
On  the  other  hand,  I  must  observe  that  small  countries  are  often  subject  to  regulatory  and
supervisory  fads  that  emanate  from  the  large  countries  that  constitute  the  bulk  of  your
membership.  Current examples include stress testing and resolvability of domestic systemically
important banks (DSIBs). On the stress testing front, North American and European banks are
spending billions of dollars a year on financial stress testing.  That is their business.  It should
not  be  our  business.  To  again  refer  to  the  Bahamian  example,  our  banking  system  has  a
Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratio exceeding 30 per cent.  Recession-type stresses generate
reductions in that ratio, but nothing remotely large enough to approach international minimum
capital levels.
But  what  about  our  obvious  stress,  which  in  common  with  many  small  countries  revolves
around  a  natural  disaster? Most  hurricanes  which  hit  The  Bahamas  have  not  presented  a
financial system threat.  But a Category 4 or 5 hurricane passing to the close north of this island
could hurt us very badly.  How badly?  We don’t know.  Why don’t we know? In part because
it’s  a  very  complex  question  requiring  coordination  across  a  great  many  agencies  plus  the
private sector.  But also because the relevant staff are working on financial stress tests that in
all honesty are more for FSAP consumption than our own use.  Plus, there is a huge amount of
work for a great many international agencies on a great many topics, not all of which are locally
helpful.
On the DSIB resolution front: we have a minimal equity and nearly no debt capital market, and
deposits handily fund loans.  So why would we do total loss absorption capacity (TLAC)?  And
what sort of resolution plan is possible when recapitalization from markets is most unlikely?
We can’t afford to close a DSIB, and we have no capital markets providers to take the failure
risk.    This  is  far  from  unusual  in  small  countries—so  why  are  we putting  a  lot  of  time  into
Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Processes (ICAAPs), recovery plans, resolution plans, and
the like?  Because that is the international expectation.  It would be better to develop a super-
simplified  but  pragmatic  approach  that  minimizes  but  does  not  eliminate  the  potential  for
public sector bailouts of DSIBs.
5
4 Conclusion
To  sum  up:  the  Bahamian  experience,  and  from  what  we  have  seen of other  small  country
experience with the Basel Committee, has generally been positive.  We are also deeply grateful
for  the  work  of  the  FSI,  which  is  an  extraordinarily  helpful  group.  The  same  applies  to  the
technical  assistance  on  offer  directly  from  Basel  Committee  member  agencies  and  their
associated national assistance bodies, plus the international multilateral development bodies.
There are a few areas where we would like to see more consideration given to small country
issues, but the bottom line is that the BCBS works for us, even though we aren’t a member and
are  unlikely  ever  to  become  a  member.    We  are  not  yet  in  a  position  to  say  that  about  all
international rule-making bodies, but that is a conversation for another day.
I will conclude by thanking you personally and your agencies for your good work, and for the
assistance and consideration you have shown The Bahamas and other small nations over the
years, and the assistance and consideration to come in the future.
6
