Some Thoughts on Credit Risk and Bank Capital Regulation1 
 It  is  a  privilege  to  be  welcomed  within  the  precincts  of  one  of  the  premier 
management institutes of the country and, more importantly, to get an opportunity to 
engage with some of the promising young minds and aspiring future leaders. All of 
you  are  going  to  enter  the  job  stream  at  a  very  interesting  point  in  our  country’s 
economic history.  We are all meeting today in the wake of a number of landmark 
economic  reforms,  of  which  I  would  like  to  touch  upon  two  in  particular–  the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC), 2016 and the RBI circular dated February 
12, 2018 on the Revised Framework for Resolution of Stressed Assets.  I will attempt 
to  give  you  a  regulator’s  perspective  on  the  above  reforms,  and  about  banking 
industry in general while debunking a few fallacies. Using this background, I will also 
segue into another contentious issue of adequacy or otherwise of prudential capital 
for banks, particularly for credit risk. 
 
Let us start with the fundamentals.  Banks bring together the liquidity surplus agents 
in  an  economy  with  the  liquidity  deficit  agents  by  establishing  an  intermediation 
channel, thus aiding the flow of savings in an economy towards investments.  The 
banking 
to  raise 
uncollateralised funds from the public in the form of demand deposits.  It is primarily 
from these deposits that banks give out loans to the borrowers.  Thus, it is not that 
banks have a huge coffer like that of Uncle Scrooge, holding their own money, from 
which they make loans, but it is the funds that they raise through deposits that are 
used for making loans.   
 
Do we need banks? 
The  above  description,  though,  does  not  immediately  make  it  clear  why  we  need 
banks to do this intermediation function – why the savers cannot directly lend to the 
borrowers, and why we need an intermediation infrastructure.  The answer is that the 
information  asymmetry  inherent  in  such  relationships  makes  direct  monitoring  by 
individual  savers  of  borrowers  both  costly  and  inefficient.  In  most  cases,  the 
borrowers  have  more  knowledge  of  their  ability  to  pay  than  the  lender.  Through 
specialised  skills  in  project  appraisals  and  risk  monitoring,  banks  are  expected  to 
                                                            
1 Address by Shri N.S. Vishwanathan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) at XLRI, Jamshedpur, 
October 29, 2018. 
the  regulator  allows 
issued  by 
institutions 
licence 
these 
Page 1 of 19 
 contain  default  by  a  borrower  and  thus  play  the  useful  role  of  delegated  monitors 
(Diamond, 1984) in an economy, at substantially lower cost than direct monitoring by 
agents.  
 
This  role  of  delegated  monitors  is  codified  by  banks  through  inclusion  of  suitable 
covenants in a loan contract.  This formalisation has two dimensions – well drafted 
covenants  that  protect  the  rights  of  banks  if  the  borrower  fails  to  perform  as 
expected,  and  proper  enforcement  of  covenants  in  the  event  of  a  deviation  in  the 
performance of the borrower from the expectations. A well-drafted covenant is to be 
more of a deterrent in normal times, as it serves to remind the borrower about the 
consequences  of  not  honouring  the  loan  contract.    Such  a  contract  would  be  the 
result of strong appraisal and monitoring systems that are put in place by a lender.  
The appraisal would properly price the risk the lender is taking upon by extending a 
loan to a borrower.  It would also involve proper understanding of the sector to which 
the loan is extended, including the vagaries and various risks that could potentially 
affect the projected cash flows of the venture that is being financed.  A good loan 
contract would account for all this and more, so that it serves as a blueprint for the 
bank as to how to react in a given scenario during the lifetime of the loan. 
 
However,  when  the  monitoring  by  banks  or  action  taken  by  them  on  covenant 
breaches  are  inadequate,  the  deterrence  effect  is  weakened  leading  to  further 
covenant breaks. Banks need to be exacting in their role as monitors of loans. This 
in turn would force the other actors to perform their roles diligently. Say, for example, 
if banks go easy on a particular borrower because the borrower has been affected by 
delays  in  receipt  of  his  claims  from  his  client,  the  delays  at  the  level  of  the  client 
would never get addressed, and in fact, may get accepted as the norm. When banks 
perform their monitoring roles properly, the borrower would be forced to take up his 
case with his client for timely realisation of his claims. Banks are not supposed to be 
shock-absorbers of first resort of the difficulties faced by their borrowers as banks do 
not have the luxury of delaying payments to their depositors. Of course, a bank can 
renegotiate  terms  of  a  loan  if  circumstances  warrant,  but  this  must  be  for  a  good 
reason  and  the  bank  should  recognise  the  consequent  risks.  This  renegotiation  of 
terms  should  be  an  exception  rather  than  the  rule,  as  resorting  to  it  often  would 
endanger the safety of deposits, dent a bank’s ability to lend further and imperil its 
existence as an intermediating entity.   
 Page 2 of 19 
 
Thus,  the  next  time  we  hear  about  a  bank  making  efforts  to  recover  loans  from 
borrowers, we should all note to remember that it is essentially trying to get back the 
depositors’  money.  In  this  context,  the  most  important  objective  of  the  Revised 
Framework  for  Resolution  of  Stressed  Assets  is  to  alter  the  balance  of  power  in 
favour of creditors. For long, the balance of power in our country was in favour of 
debtors, especially for debtors. 
 
Debtor vs Creditor: The Change in Roles  
This changing debtor-creditor equation disturbs the status quo and it is only natural 
that it is facing resistance. The earlier debtor-friendly environment made it possible 
for  the  defaulting  debtors  to  secure  moratoriums  and  force  write-downs  on  debt 
repayment,  while  retaining  management  control  over  the  borrowing  units  or  thwart 
banks efforts to realise their dues by indulging in serial litigations. The out-of-court 
restructuring  mechanisms  too  suffered  high  failure  rates  resulting  in  the  borrowing 
entities continuing to indulge in repeated defaults, being confident that the balance of 
power remained with them and the ability of banks to discipline errant borrowers was 
weak2.  
 
The debtor friendly environment had its effect on banks’ business preference, while 
also partly contributing to the ever-increasing stressed assets in the banking system. 
Banks’  ability  and/or  willingness  to  lend  to  persons  or  entities  that  needed  credit 
were hampered. The Bankruptcy Law Reforms Committee (2015) has observed and 
I quote:  
“When creditors know that they have weak rights resulting in a low recovery 
rate, they are averse to lend. Hence, lending in India is concentrated in a few 
large companies that have a low probability of failure. Further, secured credit 
dominates, as creditors rights are partially present only in this case. Lenders 
have an emphasis on secured credit. In this case, credit analysis is relatively 
easy: It only requires taking a view on the market value of the collateral. As a 
consequence,  credit  analysis  as  a  sophisticated  analysis  of  the  business 
prospects of a firm has shrivelled.” 
 
                                                            
2 Academic studies (Chang, Tom, and Antoinette Schoar, 2016) show that pro-debtor bias in the bankruptcy 
process results in lower success rates in sustainable revival of distressed firms than pro-creditor bias. 
Page 3 of 19 
 In India, before the enactment of IBC, the Reserve Bank as banking regulator had to 
design  resolution  mechanisms  that  tried  to  emulate  the  desirable  features  of  a 
bankruptcy  law  as  identified  in  the  literature.    However,  in  the  absence  of  a 
bankruptcy  law  in  the  country,  those  schemes  could  not  result  in  meaningful 
resolution of the stressed loans.  This resulted in significant mismatches between the 
book  values  of  loans  carried  by  banks  and  the  inherent  economic  value  of  those 
loans.    In  this  context,  the  enactment  of  the  IBC  is  a  watershed  event,  which  has 
completely  changed  the  legal  framework  governing  the  insolvency  regime  in  the 
country. The enactment of IBC also enabled the Reserve Bank to come out with a 
revised  framework  for  resolution  of  stressed  assets.  These  initiatives  by  the 
Government of India and the Reserve Bank are being challenged by the defaulting 
borrowers in various judicial fora. The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the matter 
of Innoventive Industries Ltd. vs ICICI Bank Ltd. (2017), observed that: 
“…….we thought it necessary to deliver a detailed judgment so that all Courts 
and  Tribunals  may  take  notice  of  a  paradigm  shift  in  the  law.  Entrenched 
managements  are  no  longer  allowed  to  continue  in  management  if  they 
cannot pay their debts.”  
 
As  observed  by  the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  of  India,  the  judicial  system  of  the 
country has internalized the paradigm shift in the law and defaulting debtors’ efforts 
to stymie the insolvency regime with frivolous litigation have not met with success so 
far.  
 
In  this  context,  it  needs  to  be  recognised  that  when  banks  take  recourse  to  legal 
remedies available to them when a borrower defaults on his debt servicing, including 
that  of  security  enforcement,  they  are  essentially  trying  to  recover  the  depositors’ 
money  from  a  defaulting  borrower,  whatever  be  the  reasons  for  default.  However, 
the defaulting borrowers portray such an action by banks as a case of a ‘ruthless big 
bank’  taking  over  the  assets  of  a  ‘hapless  borrower’.  This  is  the  kind  of  portrayal 
used even by the large corporates. Here, one needs to distinguish between a private 
moneylender lending his own money for making a profit and a bank, which to a large 
extent  uses  depositors’  money  (and  tax  payers’  money,  in  case  of  public  sector 
banks).  A correct portrayal of the situation would be: public interest (i.e., depositors 
+ taxpayers) vs borrowers’ interest.  
 Page 4 of 19 
 
Fallacy of ‘Genuine’ Defaulters  
 One argument that we hear quite often is that there are different reasons for default, 
and the regulations should treat them differently based on the reasons which lead to 
the default. The proponents of this line of thought argue that where the borrowers 
are  affected  by  external  factors  beyond  their  control,  they  should  be  treated  as 
‘genuine’ defaulters and some leniency in prudential norms is warranted. This is a 
fallacy,  even  though  it  is  important  to  appreciate  that  some  defaults  are  inevitable 
part of lending business. There are two issues here: recognition and resolution. The 
recognition of default or accounting for deterioration in the quality of asset should be 
independent  of  the  reasons  for  such  default  or  deterioration.  Whereas,  it  is    the 
resolution plan which should be a function of ability and willingness of the borrower 
to  honour  his  obligations.  Where  a  borrower  has  temporarily  lost  his  ability  to  pay 
due  to  circumstances  beyond  his  control,  a  quick  and  efficient  restructuring  of  the 
debt either outside the courts or within the insolvency framework would be in order. 
In  case  of  wilful  or  strategic  defaulters,  i.e.,  borrowers  with  the  ability  but  no 
willingness  to  pay  up  their  debt,  change  in  ownership  accompanied  by  punitive 
action against the defaulting management is the way to go. Finally, if the business is 
beyond revival, faster liquidation would help in reallocation of resources to productive 
use. This is what the Revised Framework for Resolution of Stressed Assets seeks to 
achieve. The following matrix illustrates this approach:  
 
Type of borrower 
Has ability to pay 
Unable to pay 
Willing to pay 
No action 
Unwilling to pay 
Change  in  ownership  and 
punitive  action  against  the 
defaulting management 
failing 
Restructuring  or  Ad-hoc 
funding, 
which, 
in  ownership  or  
Change 
Liquidation 
Restructuring with change in 
ownership or 
Liquidation 
 
Another  fallacy  is  the  claim  by  the  managements  of  defaulting  borrowers  that  the 
restructuring plan proposed by them will result in ‘zero haircut’ for banks; whereas, if 
banks  file  insolvency  application,  new  investor  would  be  willing  to  take  over  the 
defaulting entities only with ‘huge haircuts’ on debt.  What one needs to understand 
Page 5 of 19 
 is that while the payments offered by the existing management are usually spread 
over a long period, the new investors mostly come up with upfront cash payments. 
The choice before banks is: ‘illusory future payments’ vs ‘upfront real cash’. Banks 
need to arrive at the present value of ‘illusory future payments’ by discounting it for 
time  value  of  money  and  more  importantly  for  the  uncertainty  in  receiving  the 
payments taking into account the existing management’s past records.  
 
A  related  issue  is  the  liability  of  existing  promoters.  The  share  of  creditors  in  a 
successful project is limited to the agreed upon cash flows as per the loan contract, 
as  against  the  equity  holders  who  enjoy  unlimited  upside  in  a  successful  project.  
Further, if a project fails, the equity holders are protected by their limited liability even 
if the creditors are set to lose the entire amount lent to the borrower in the absence 
of  strong  creditor  rights,  given  the  capital  structure  of  most  of  the  projects.  At  this 
juncture, it would be useful to clarify that limited liability, even though is enshrined in 
modern  corporate  law  as  a  right,  should  rather  be  viewed  as  a  privilege  of  the 
shareholders.    While  the  argument  for  limited  liability  structure  is  that  it  promotes 
entrepreneurship  and  innovation,  an  investment  in  a  project  is  always  a  case  of  a 
risky bet that is calculated. For the shareholders to enjoy limited liability in a venture 
that has potential negative externalities to the society in the form of defaults and its 
further  ramifications,  someone  has  to  bear  the  costs  when  such  externalities  do 
materialise.   
In almost all such cases, the society ends up underwriting the limited liability enjoyed 
by  the  shareholders  through  bearing  the  cost  of  default  through  lost  jobs, 
concessions granted by the state, and above all, the haircuts taken by banks, which 
are  in  fact  potential  losses  of  depositors’/taxpayers’  money.    Societies  allow 
companies in default to reorganise themselves and attempt a resolution by allowing 
to renegotiate and rewrite private contracts under a formal bankruptcy mechanism.  
This is another reason why the equity holders are mostly wiped out in the bankruptcy 
of a corporate borrower since they already enjoyed the benefits of limited liability.   
 
While limited liability concept is fundamental for encouraging entrepreneurship and 
innovation, piercing of corporate veil i.e., disregarding the limited liability and making 
shareholders  personally  liable,  is  not  uncommon  now-a-days  considering  the 
negative  externalities  created  by  defaulting  firms.  Macey  and  Mitts  (2014)  have 
constructed a rational framework for conceptualizing the circumstances in which it is 
Page 6 of 19 
 appropriate and consistent with sound public policy to pierce the corporate veil. Their 
hypothesis is that the corporate veil will be pierced if, and only if, doing so is required 
for  any  one  of  the  following  three  reasons:  (1)    to  achieve  consistency  and 
compliance  with  the  goals  of  a  clear  and  specific  extant  regulatory  or  statutory 
scheme  such  as  environmental  law  or  unemployment  law;  (2)  when  there  is 
evidence of fraud or misrepresentation by companies or individuals trying to obtain 
credit (and particularly where such misrepresentations lead a creditor erroneously to 
think that an individual shareholder of a company is guaranteeing what ostensibly is 
corporate  indebtedness);  (3)  when  respecting  the  corporate  form  facilitates  or 
enables  favouritism  among  claimants  to  the  cash  flows  of  a  firm  and  thus  is 
inconsistent  with  the  well-established  bankruptcy  law  value  of  achieving  the 
resolution of a bankrupt’s estate that conforms both to contract law principles and to 
the priorities among claimants established by state law.  The Hon’ble Supreme Court 
of  India  has  also  observed  in  its  recent  judgement  in  ArcelorMittal  India  Private 
Limited versus Satish Kumar Gupta & Others (2018), as under:  
“…….where  a  statute  itself  lifts  the  corporate  veil,  or  where  protection  of 
public  interest  is  of  paramount  importance,  or  where  a  company  has  been 
formed to evade obligations imposed by the law, the court will disregard the 
corporate veil. Further, this principle is applied even to group companies, so 
that one is able to look at the economic entity of the group as a whole.” 
 
With this background I would like to move to the second but related subject of my 
talk,  prudential  bank  capital  regulations.  As  I  will  explain  later,  the  credit  recovery 
ecosystem has a bearing on prudential capital requirements, given that credit risk, in 
the Indian context, like in many other jurisdictions, is the major risk on the balance 
sheet of banks.  
 
Basel Capital Norms – The Prudential Imperative  
By nature, banks are susceptible to risks, viz., credit risk, market risk, liquidity risk 
etc.  A “run” on the bank is an extreme case of liquidity risk.  Banks try to mitigate the 
liquidity risk by holding liquid assets, which can easily be liquidated in times of need 
to  honour  the  payment  commitments  to  its  creditors,  majority  of  whom  are 
depositors.  Thus, the mitigants for liquidity risk are stable funding and holding liquid 
assets. While banks need liquid assets to mitigate liquidity risk, they need capital to 
 Page 7 of 19 
avert  solvency  risk  that  the  economic  value  of  assets  becomes  lower  than  the 
promised  debt  obligations.  If  banks  don’t  have  adequate  capital,  losses  erode  into 
deposits. Banks have to maintain adequate capital to ensure that the probability of 
deposits being eroded is close to zero. 
 
Banks are likely to face losses on their assets as it cannot be expected that all the 
loans will be repaid in full. There could be losses from other parts of the operations 
as  well.  The  losses  can  be  either  expected  or  unexpected.    Expected  losses  on 
account of credit risk can be reasonably estimated from historical data regarding a 
particular  class  of  borrowers  (e.g.,  rating  category)  or  sector  to  which  loans  are 
made.    However,  the  future  can  never  be  predicted  perfectly  –  the  actual  losses 
incurred may be higher than the expected losses.  This may be because of various 
reasons  –  for  example,  a  systemic  event  where  there  are  correlated  defaults  in  a 
particular  sector.    This  leads  to  unexpected  losses.  The  following  figure  (Chart  1) 
explains the loss curve of a bank:  
 Chart 1: Loss curve for banks 
 
The mitigants for expected losses are the provisions that are to be made from the 
current earnings, and for the unexpected losses (i.e., difference between peak loss 
for a given confidence level and average loss), it is the level of capital maintained by 
the bank (Chart 2). There are potential losses beyond unexpected loss, which are 
not covered by any buffer as it would be too costly to hold buffers to protect from 
such losses. 
 
 Page 8 of 19 
 Chart 2: Potential losses and mitigants 
To be met by 
provisions 
To be met by 
capital 
Partly covered by 
deposit insurance 
  
While  it  can  be  argued  that  the  quantum  of  capital  to  be  held  by  banks  for 
unexpected loss should be left to the market forces, any failure of the market forces 
has  significant  negative  externalities,  more  particularly  in  the  form  of  cost  incurred 
through loss of deposits or by taxpayers for recapitalising, say a government owned 
bank.  This  calls  for  entry  barriers  as  well  as  prudential  regulation  of  activities  of  a 
bank.   
One of the important and widely adopted prudential regulations is capital adequacy 
norms.  Internationally,  prior  to  the  introduction  of  Basel  I  norms  in  1988,  the  most 
common approach was to lay down minimum capital requirements for banks in the 
respective banking legislations and determine the relative strength of capital position 
of  a  bank  by  ratios  such  as  capital  to  deposit    ratio,  or  its  other  variants  for 
measuring the level of leverage. However, there were vast variations in the method 
and more importantly the risk sensitiveness of capital regulations across countries, 
rendering comparability difficult. 
Basel rules are an internationally accepted regulatory framework providing minimum 
standards  to  be  met  by  banks.  Since  1988,  the  Basel  framework  has  evolved 
responding to various developments. While the concept of regulatory capital that is 
aligned to risks in the balance sheet of a bank was enunciated through the capital to 
risk weighted assets ratio (CRAR) under Basel I, the Basel II framework, introduced 
 Page 9 of 19 
in  2004,  brought  about  better  determination  of  risks  by  introducing  greater 
granulation of risks of various categories of assets of a bank.  
Basel II norms hinged on three pillars – capital adequacy, supervisory review, and 
market  discipline.    In  particular,  capital  charges  were  to  be  made  for  credit  risk, 
market risk and operational risk that banks faced.  The main incentives for adoption 
of Basel II were (a) it was more risk sensitive; (b) it recognised developments in risk 
measurement and risk management techniques employed in the banking sector and 
accommodates them within the framework; and (c) it aligned regulatory capital closer 
to economic capital. These elements of Basel II took the regulatory framework closer 
to  the  business  models  employed  in  several  large  banks.  In  Basel  II  framework, 
banks’  capital  requirements  were  more  closely  aligned  with  the  underlying  risks  in 
the balance sheet. 
However,  the  weaknesses  of  Basel  II  standards  were  exposed  during  the  Global 
Financial Crisis of 2007-09 which forced a rethink of the regulatory approach towards 
capital  adequacy  requirements.    In  September  2010,  the  Group  of  Governors  and 
Heads of Supervision (GHOS) announced higher global minimum capital standards 
for commercial banks. This followed an agreement reached in July 2010 regarding 
the  overall  design  of  the  capital  and  liquidity  reform  package,  now  referred  to  as 
"Basel III". The enhanced Basel framework revises and strengthens the three pillars 
established by Basel II and extends it in several areas. Most of the reforms are being 
phased in between 2013 and 2019. The important elements of the framework are the 
following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
stricter  requirements  for  the  quality  and  quantity  of  regulatory  capital,  in 
particular reinforcing the central role of common equity; 
an  additional  layer  of  common  equity  -  the  capital  conservation  buffer  - 
that,  when  breached,  restricts  discretionary  pay-outs  to  help  meet  the 
minimum common equity requirement; 
a  countercyclical  capital  buffer,  which  places  restrictions  on  participation 
by banks in system-wide credit booms with the aim of reducing their losses 
in credit busts; 
a leverage ratio - a minimum amount of loss-absorbing capital relative to 
all of a bank's assets and off-balance sheet exposures regardless of risk 
weighting; 
Page 10 of 19 
 (v) 
(vi) 
liquidity  requirements  -  a  minimum  liquidity  ratio,  the  Liquidity  Coverage 
Ratio (LCR), intended to provide enough cash to cover funding needs over 
a 30-day period of stress; and a longer-term ratio, the Net Stable Funding 
Ratio  (NSFR),  intended  to  address  maturity  mismatches  over  the  entire 
balance sheet; and 
additional  requirements 
including 
additional  loss  absorbency  and  strengthened  arrangements  for  cross-
border supervision and resolution. 
important  banks, 
for  systemically 
In  India,  Basel  III  capital  regulation  has  been  implemented  from  April  1,  2013 
onwards in phases and it will be fully implemented by March 31, 2019.  The latest 
round  of  reforms  published  by  the  Basel  Committee  in  December  2017  have 
implementation timelines stretching up to 2022.  
 
Having understood the background for Basel regulations, let us go back to the issue 
of mitigating expected and unexpected losses in the credit portfolio, which, among 
other  reasons,  arise  due  to  loans  turning  bad,  leading  to  non-recovery  or  under-
recovery of the loan. Once a loan is recognised as a non performing asset (NPA), 
the prudent action is to start recognising the expected losses from that loan upfront 
so  that  when  the  actual  losses  do  materialise,  the  impact  on  the  profit  and  loss 
statement of the bank is spread over a period of time. Since expected losses can be 
reasonably estimated based on past experience, the provisions to cover the losses 
are made from the current earnings of the bank.  Provisions can be thought of as an 
expense from the income of a bank to mark a non-performing loan to its economic 
value in the books of banks. Sometimes, the actual realisation from a NPA could be 
higher  than  its  marked  down  value,  in  which  case  banks  write  back  the  excess 
provision  as  profits  in  the  accounting  year  in  which  the  recovery  takes  place. 
Provisions can, as such, be also thought of as prudential devices that smoothen the 
impact  of  bad  loans  on  profit  and  loss  of  banks,  and  not  as  a  forced  expense 
mandated by the regulator. The basic prudent behaviour always demands that banks 
should never be under provided. 
 
Ideally, banks should be able to test the loans in their books for expected losses and 
make provisions for such losses without any regulatory intervention.  However, in the 
absence  of  robust  models  built  by  our  banks  that  would  serve  this  purpose,  the 
 Page 11 of 19 
Reserve Bank has prescribed minimum mandated levels of provisions that are linked 
to  the  age  of  a  NPA.    Since  the  provision  methodology  should  be  tailored  to 
individual banks, and general regulations cannot do that, the regulatory expectation 
is  that  the  minimum  provisions  mandated  would  serve  as  a  guiding  floor  and  the 
bank managements, using their insider knowledge about their assets, would make 
adequate provisions.  However, unfortunately, banks in India remain one of the most 
under-provisioned ones, though there has been an improvement in this regard in the 
last few quarters. 
 
If  the  provisions  required  to  be  maintained  by  a  bank  exceed  its  earnings  before 
provision, it is bound to affect the equity of the bank. This leads to one of the poorly 
understood aspects of banking regulation – capital norms for banks in general, and 
Basel norms in particular.  One of the widely heard complaints in this regard is that 
the capital requirements for banks are unnecessarily high. In India, this relates to the 
CRAR  prescribed  by  Reserve  Bank  being  9  percent  as  opposed  to  8  percent 
required by Basel norms. To understand the response to this question, let us try to 
understand why capital is needed in the first place. 
 
Conceptually,  the  inherent  unpredictable  nature  of  unexpected  losses  calls  for  a 
buffer, and that is the function served by the capital maintained by the bank.  Before 
we go any further, capital should be understood as the “own funds” used to create 
assets by banks, as against borrowed funds like deposits.  The capital maintained by 
the  bank  merely  shows  the  proportion  of  own  funds  brought  in  by  the  bank  in  the 
total funds deployed towards creating assets.  There is a misconception that capital 
is  a  pile  of  money  stacked  away  as  some  sort  of  “rainy-day  fund”,  and  that  the 
economy is deprived of that pile of money. The reality couldn’t be farther from the 
truth  –  the  capital  maintained  by  banks  would  have  already  been  deployed  on  its 
balance sheet towards creating assets, including loans. 
 
Prudential  capital  regulations  aim  to  enable  banks  to  sustain  unexpected  losses 
without  defaulting  on  its  obligations,  especially  deposits,  by  maintaining  adequate 
levels of bank capital.  Higher capital levels in banks also have a stabilising effect on 
a country’s macro economy.  Further, higher levels of capital increases the skin in 
the  game  for  shareholders,  thus  potentially  leading  to  better  credit  appraisal  and 
screening.  Raising capital does involve costs – there is no free lunch – but the costs 
Page 12 of 19 
 to  the  economy  are  offset  by  the  savings  made  in  the  form  of  potential  losses 
avoided in averted banking crises.  As the equity component in a bank goes up, the 
leverage goes down, potentially making the bank safer, thus leading the investors in 
the bank equity to demand lower returns on equity, and the depositors too may be 
willing to accept a lower return in view of greater safety of their funds.  The holy-grail 
for  banking  regulators  is  to  find  the  sweet  spot  for  capital  prescriptions  for  banks 
where the benefits are equal to or slightly outweigh the costs involved. 
 
Multiple recent studies (Cline, 2017) trying to derive the optimal Common Equity Tier 
1  capital  (CET  1)  ratio  for  banks  have  arrived  at  figures  on  opposite  ends  of  the 
spectrum – Dagher, Dell'Ariccia, Laeven, Ratnovski, and Tong (2016) estimate the 
optimal CET 1 ratio of 9-17% of the risk weighted assets, Admati and Hellwig (2013) 
estimates  optimal  CET1  ratio  to  be  36-53%  of  risk  weighted  assets.    The  median 
estimate  arrived  from  these  and  other  similar  studies  is  about  13-14%  of  risk 
weighted  assets  of  banks.    In  contrast  to  the  above  estimates,  Basel  III  norms 
specify minimum CET 1 requirements of 4.5% of risk weighted assets.  Thus, it can 
be  seen  that  Basel  III  prescription  is  much  lower  than  the  median  estimates  by 
various researchers and should only be considered as a floor. 
 
In  India,  we  have  prescribed  overall  capital  requirements  of  9%  of  risk  weighted 
assets, with the common equity tier 1 capital of 5.5 percent as against 8 percent and 
4.5  percent,  respectively,  required  under  the  Basel  norms.  As  I  said  earlier,  the 
regulatory  capital  is  meant  to  serve  as  a  buffer  against  unexpected  loss.  The 
cumulative unexpected loss in the assets of a bank will be an aggregation of the past 
loss behaviour of various sub-portfolios of the asset portfolio. The sub-portfolios can 
be  built  on  the  basis  of  riskiness  of  the  assets.  So,  one  can  say  government 
securities can form one sub-portfolio with a zero loss probability and build other sub-
portfolios of different riskiness. The latter is normally classified on the basis of credit 
rating because an unexpected loss behaviour can be assigned to portfolios of similar 
rating. The risk-weights for each sub-portfolio are assigned based on the unexpected 
loss behaviour, normally based on their cumulative default rates. It thus goes without 
saying that the risk-weight assigned to a portfolio carrying a particular rating should 
be a function of the observed default behaviour of that portfolio in a jurisdiction. The 
higher CRAR of 9 percent prescribed by RBI basically reflects this difference.  Under 
Basel  III  norms,  unexpected  losses  are  a  function  of  the  cumulative  default  rates 
Page 13 of 19 
 (CDR) observed in the credit ratings provided by the credit rating agencies (CRAs). 
The CDR  is nothing  but the probability of  a non-default rating assigned by a CRA 
turning into a default rating within a certain period of time.   
 
Based  on  internationally  observed  CDRs  and  recovery  rates,  Basel  norms  have 
prescribed  risk weights for various credit exposures.  However, the CDRs  and the 
loss  given  default  observed  in  India  are  much  higher  than  that  observed 
internationally, though there are signs of improvement in these parameters after the 
enactment of the IBC and RBI’s Revised Framework. The following graph (Chart 3) 
shows  the  Basel  capital  requirement  for  various  rating  categories  vis-à-vis  the 
unexpected loss computed using the observed CDRs of a portfolio of loans rated by 
Indian CRAs3.  
 
Chart 3: Actual capital requirements based on observed CDRs 
 
It  would  be  evident  that  with  this  kind  of  default  behaviour,  applying  the  Basel 
specified risk weights would understate the true riskiness in the loan assets carried 
on the books of Indian banks.  This could be overcome by two ways: (i) by keeping 
the  minimum  capital  requirement  at  8%,  but  recalibrating  the  Basel  specified  risk 
weights for each type of credit exposure in accordance with the observed CDRs in 
India; (ii) by using the Basel specified risk weights, but prescribing a higher minimum 
                                                            
3 Based on the CDRs published by the credit rating agencies and methodology adopted from the BCBS Discussion paper on 
‘Regulatory treatment of accounting provisions’ (October 2016) 
Page 14 of 19 
 capital  requirement.  We  adopted  the  second  approach  and  prescribed  minimum 
capital requirement of 9% while largely retaining the Basel specified risk weights. In 
view of the above explanation it is clear that the suggestion by some that our capital 
requirements are more onerous than international standards is not correct at all. As 
the need for repeated recapitalisation has proved, banks in India need to aspire to 
have higher capital levels.  
 
Moreover, the current levels of provisions maintained by banks may not be enough 
to cover the expected losses, and hence adequate buffers have to be built into the 
capital maintained to absorb the expected losses which have not been provided for, 
if and when they materialise. Chart 4 below demonstrates that the Indian banking 
system has a high proportion of un-provided NPAs vis-à-vis the capital levels. As I 
said, there are signs of improvement in the default rates and recovery rates after the 
IBC and RBI’s Revised Framework, which may result in lower unexpected losses for 
banks  in  the  future.  However,  a  recalibration  of  risk-weights  or  minimum  capital 
requirements  would  need  to  wait  till  these  trends  are  firmly  entrenched  in  the 
economy.  Frontloading  of  regulatory  relaxations  before  the  structural  reforms  fully 
set-in could be detrimental to the interests of the economy. 
Chart 4: Net NPAs as a percentage of capital 
100.00
80.00
60.00
40.00
20.00
0.00
-20.00
  NPAs Net of Provisions to Capital 
(Source: IMF Financial Stability Indicators) 
58.00 
41.62 
2010
2014
2011
2015
2012
2016
2013
2017
13.61 
5.67 
2.94 
2.13 
-8.25 
-12.99 
Italy
India
South Africa United States
United
Kingdom
Korea,
Republic of
China, P.R.:
Mainland
Brazil
 Page 15 of 19 
 
One of the arguments for seeking a lower CRAR is that higher capital requirement 
leads to lower credit growth. While mathematically this may be correct, there are two 
important facts to underscore here. Firstly, such suggestions are being made when 
the credit growth in the economy is in line with the nominal GDP growth (see Chart 5 
below). Bank credit has grown 14.4 percent YoY as at fortnight ended October 12, 
2018. It may be mentioned as an aside that bank credit to NBFC sector, where there 
is perception of inadequate bank credit flow, recorded  a growth of 17.1 percent from 
March 31, 2018 to September 30, 2018  and a YOY growth of 48.30 percent as on 
September 30, 2018 on the back of a strong base. Getting back to Chart, it may be 
noticed  that  in  the  past,  high  levels  of  credit  growth  due  to  ‘supply  push’  have 
resulted in high corporate leverage and consequent NPAs in the banking system.  
 
Chart 5: Y-o-Y Growth in Nominal GDP, Bank Credit and NPAs 
100
80
60
 40
%
20
0
-20
-40
GDP-Credit-NPAs 
8
9
-
n
u
J
9
9
-
n
u
J
0
0
-
n
u
J
1
0
-
n
u
J
2
0
-
n
u
J
3
0
-
n
u
J
4
0
-
n
u
J
5
0
-
n
u
J
6
0
-
n
u
J
7
0
-
n
u
J
8
0
-
n
u
J
9
0
-
n
u
J
0
1
-
n
u
J
1
1
-
n
u
J
2
1
-
n
u
J
3
1
-
n
u
J
4
1
-
n
u
J
5
1
-
n
u
J
6
1
-
n
u
J
7
1
-
n
u
J
8
1
-
n
u
J
YoY Growth in GDP at Current Market Prices
YoY Growth in Bank Credit
YoY Growth in NPAs
  
Secondly, to make sure that the banking system is resilient enough to support higher 
credit  growth  going  forward,  it  should  have  higher  capital  levels.  Chart  6  below 
shows  that  countries  which  have  high  bank  credit  to  GDP  ratio  also  have  higher 
levels of bank capital.  
 
 Page 16 of 19 
 Chart 6: Domestic Credit to Private Sector by Banks vs Capital to Risk 
Weighted Assets Ratio 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Source: IMF and World Bank) 
 
Let me also clarify another oft repeated view that Public Sector Banks need not be 
subject  to  prudential  capital  regulations.  The  argument  is  that  the  sovereign 
ownership  of  these  banks  makes  them  de  facto  risk  free  and  impervious  to  bank 
runs.  In India, almost all commercial banks, except for the payment banks and small 
finance  banks,  are  actively 
involved  in  providing  credit  facilities  to  enable 
international trade/investment of Indian corporates in the form of documentary credit, 
stand-by letters of credit, etc. Acceptance and confirmation by the foreign banks of 
such  guarantees  issued  by  the  Indian  banks  is  based  on  the  soundness  of  Indian 
banks as perceived by the foreign banks. Conformity to an internationally accepted 
regulatory regime provides required credibility to the Indian banking system, which 
helps the Indian corporates to access international markets (both financial and real) 
on  the  strength  of  the  support  provided  by  Indian  banks.  Many  Indian  banks  also 
access  international  markets  for  their  own  capital  and  funding  requirements.  The 
correspondent  banking  relationships  of  the  Indian  banks  also  depends  upon  their 
financial soundness. Any slackening of the prudential norms may result in a reset of 
Page 17 of 19 
 their credibility/standing in the international markets. Such a reset could increase the 
cost and ease of doing business for their clientele and their clientele may need to 
migrate  to  other  banks  which  are  compliant  with  Basel  standards.  Moreover, 
differential prudential regulation for banks based on ownership structure, when they 
operate  in  the  same  market,  would  be  anti-competitive  and  could  create  systemic 
imbalances, which obviously are not  desirable outcomes.  
 
Let  me  conclude.  A  strong  and  stable  banking  system  is  essential  for  the 
development  of  the  economy.  This  strength  should  be  real  and  inherent.  The  real 
strength will come from recognising  weaknesses in the balance  sheet and  making 
provisions for them rather than pretending to believe that the balance sheet is strong. 
Everything that the Government of India and the Reserve Bank of India have been 
doing in the recent past is to provide India with a clean banking system. This is a 
work  in  progress,  which  has  started  yielding  results.  As  our  insolvency  and 
bankruptcy regime matures, many aspects of debt recovery and asset quality in the 
Indian  financial  system  will  match  the  global  standards.  Then  our  probability  of 
default and loss given default will also come down to global levels. Hopefully, those 
days are nearer than we think. Till then, we must guard against any push for dilution 
of  standards  in  the  name  of  aligning  them  with  international  benchmarks  because 
that will be cherry-picking and will result in our banks being strong in a make-believe 
sense and not in reality. It is by resisting such temptations, I believe, we will build a 
financial system that is lot stronger than today, with which you will be proud to be 
associated as future entrepreneurs, depositors, investors, managers and any other 
capacity that you would have an occasion to interact. 
 
With best wishes and Diwali Greetings. 
 
References: 
1.  Admati, Anat, and Martin Hellwig, The Bankers' New Clothes: What's Wrong 
with Banking and What to Do About It, Princeton University Press (2013) 
2.  Bankruptcy  Law  Reforms  Committee,  The  Report  of  the  Bankruptcy  Law 
Reforms Committee, Volume I: Rationale and Design, (November 2015) 
3.  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision, 
“Regulatory 
treatment  of 
accounting provisions”, BCBS Discussion Paper (October 2016) 
 Page 18 of 19 
4.  Chang, Tom, and Antoinette Schoar, “The Effect of Judicial Bias in Chapter 
11 Reorganisation”, mimeo (October 2016) 
5.  Cline,  William  R.,  The  Right  Balance  for  Banks:  Theory  and  Evidence  on 
Optimal Capital Requirement, Policy Analyses in International Economics 107 
(June 2017), Peterson Institute for International Economics 
6.  Dagher,  Jihad,  Giovanni  Dell'Ariccia,  Luc  Laeven,  Lev  Ratnovski,  and  Hui 
Tong,  “Benefits  and  Costs  of  Bank  Capital”,  IMF  Staff  Discussion  Note  16 
(February 2016). 
7.  Diamond,  Douglas  W.,  “Financial  Intermediation  and  Delegated  Monitoring”, 
The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 51, No. 3 (July 1984) 
8.  Farag,  Marc,  Damian  Harland,  and  Dan  Nixon,  “Bank  capital  and  liquidity, 
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2013 Q3 
9.  Macey, Jonathan, and Joshua Mitts, “Finding Order in the Morass: The Three 
Real  Justifications  for  Piercing  the  Corporate  Veil”,  100  Cornell  L.  Rev.  99 
(2014) 
10. McLeay, Michael, Amar Radia,  and Ryland Thomas, “Money creation in the 
modern economy”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2014 Q1 
 Page 19 of 19 
