Yandraduth Googoolye: Accountability at the Bank of Mauritius and
the importance of explaining its actions
Speech by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Annual Dinner
with major economic stakeholders, Port Louis, 23 November 2018.
 Your Lordship, Meghnad Desai
Excellencies
Ladies and Gentlemen
Good Evening! 
As  a  new  central  bank  governor,  but  having  been  serving  the  central  banking  community  for
nearly  34  years,  it  is  my  immense  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  the  Bank’s Annual  Dinner  in
honour of economic stakeholders.
Your  presence  tonight  pays  testimony  to  the  longstanding  cooperation  between  the  Bank  and
economic agents and players of Mauritius.  Over the years, we have been fortunate to forge a
bond together with you… a bond of friendship, trust and mutual respect.
A major thread that has been running throughout the years has been that of collaboration and
partnership.  As Charles Darwin put forth  “In  the long history  of humankind  (and animal-kind,
too), those who learned to collaborate and improvise most effectively have prevailed.”
When we started this event in the mid-90s, at the time when Governor Maraye was around, we
were never aware it would go on to become one of the much-sought happenings in the Bank’s
calendar of activities.
We have come a long way from the days when central banks were considered as mysterious
institutions, shrouded in secrecy, and markets left guessing on what the policies could actually
be. In 1981, Karl Brunner, a famous monetary economist, said, “Central Banking thrives on a
pervasive  impression  that  it  is  an  esoteric  art. Access  to  this  art  and  its  proper  execution  is
confined to the initiated elite, while its esoteric nature [is] revealed by an inherent impossibility to
articulate its insights in explicit and intelligible words and sentences.”
Since then, the veil on the mystique of central banks has been lifted and it is very well recognized
both  in  academia  and  in  central  banking  circles  that  central  banks  have  to  become  more
accountable. Accountability requires increased transparency and effective communication. But
this brings its own challenges of how to communicate and how much to communicate.  
It is imperative for not only stakeholders, but also the public, to fully understand what the central
bank is trying to do and the impact of its actions on the future course of the economy.  Nothing
can undermine independence more quickly than being opaque and unaccountable!
Over  the  years,  the  Bank  has  been  producing  and  disseminating  more  detailed  financial
accounts. We are in discussions with our external auditors to see how much more transparent
we  can  be  in  publishing  the  accounts,  while  at  the  same  time  not  compromising  the
requirements of international financial reporting standards.
Communication is not just about our interaction with markets. We have deemed it appropriate to
communicate with different stakeholder groups in the broader civil society through our financial
literacy  programme.    We  regularly  meet  business  associations  from  different  sectors  of  the
economy.  We  find  it  useful  not  only  to  express  our  own  views  but  also  to  hear  the  views  of
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
market  participants.  It  is  important  for  us  to  know  what  the  thinking  about  the  Bank  and  our
policies  are.  Although  we  may  not  be  always  successful  in  changing  perceptions  and
misconceptions  about  the  Bank  and  its  policy,  we  have  found  that  these  interactions  and
initiatives have helped to create a greater appreciation of the challenges we face.
A more candid relationship between the Bank and the media will accompany us in our mission. It
does not mean that the media should be our porte-parole nor report uncritically on our actions.
This has more value to the central bank than an uncritical media. Media is perceived as a source
of objective and independent information and analysis and whatever is reported in the local press
has  an  international  coverage,  which  could  affect  the  credibility  and  image  of  the  jurisdiction.
Even my predecessors have reiterated on this point in their previous addresses.
Let  me  reassure  you  that  we  operate  within  the  parameters  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius Act  and
assume  our  duties  and  responsibilities  independently.  The  Act  grants  the  Bank  operational
independence to implement its policies. Section 12 of the Act states that “the Board of Directors
… in the exercise of their functions, shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other
person or authority”.  I take this opportunity to thank all my Board Members for having displayed
an independence of thoughts and for their guidance and support.
Further,  Section  55(3)  stipulates  that  “in  the  discharge  of  its  functions,  the  Monetary  Policy
Committee  shall  not  be  subject  to  the  direction  or  control  of  any  other  person  or  authority”.
 Again,  let  me  commend  the  impartiality  of  the  Members  in  their  assessments  and  for  voting
independently on interest rate decisions.  The MPC Minutes are so transparent that they reflect
the voting pattern of each individual Member. 
We  are  also  mandated  to  manage  the  official  foreign  exchange  reserves  of  Mauritius  in  the
manner specified in the Act.  That is, we need to take into account, while investing,
first, the security of the reserves,
second, their liquidity and,
then, return.
Foreign exchange reserves are part of a country’s macroeconomic toolkit, and are considered a
key indicator of the strength of the economy. So it is fundamental that we judiciously manage
them for the benefit of the country.
It is but natural for me to start by giving you an overall perspective on the role of the Bank in the
Mauritian economy.  Of course, monetary policy formulation is a key function of the Bank, but the
public attention, at times, obscures the other important tasks that the Bank undertakes.  In this
respect, I will brush on some major achievements during the year and point on how they have
assisted in maintaining the stability and efficiency of the Mauritian economy and financial system.
We do not perform our work in isolation.  We require the participation and contribution of various
stakeholders in our decision-making process.
2018  has  been  quite  an  eventful  year,  as  it  coincided  partly  with  our  50   anniversary
celebrations.    I  dare  not  dwell  too  much  into  our  contributions  to  the  economy  over  these  50
years, but you will appreciate that we are here to serve society and ensure that macroeconomic
conditions are conducive to economic prosperity.
th
We marked our golden jubilee’s existence with the opening of the Bank of Mauritius Museum to
the  public.    The  Museum  displays  over  five  hundred  artefacts  related  to  the  history  of  our
monetary  system.  We  released  the  book  “From  Piastres  to  Polymer”,  which  provides  for  a
comprehensively  researched  work  on  the  history  of  banknotes  of  Mauritius.    I  strongly
recommend you and your family a visit to the Museum and to own the book, which is available in
the main libraries.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  banknotes  are  part  of  a  defining  symbol  of  a  country’s  identity.    We
encourage our people to cherish and respect our banknotes and know their characteristics and
features.  On this count, the Bank has issued a “Know Our Banknotes” leaflet incorporating the
security features of all banknotes currently in circulation.  To address counterfeiting issues, we
intensified media campaign on banknote security features and maximised public awareness on
how to detect fake banknotes.  We even brought over specialists from UK-based De La Rue to
conduct a two-day seminar on ‘Counterfeit Detection’ for our stakeholders, a first of its kind!  In
view  of  the  forthcoming  festive  periods,  we  intend  to  invite  the  specialists  again  to  talk  to
consumer associations, retail outlets and merchants.
The importance of savings is essential for both economic development and upholding macro-
financial stability. As individuals, we save in good times for bad times, thus protecting ourselves
from any contingencies.  We also save to plan long-term investments. Saving is also beneficial
for  the  entire  society,  as  it  is  one  of  the  key  factors  which  the  economy’s  investment  level
depends  on. A  significant  portion  of  the  savings  is  channelled  into  our  banking  system,  thus
providing stable sources of financing to domestic banks.
Deposit growth provides a solid basis for increase in lending activity and deepening of financial
intermediation.  There  is  no  doubt  for  a  need  of  investment  growth  in  our  country,  thereby
meaning an undisputed requirement for encouraging domestic savings in order to reduce the gap
between domestic savings and investments. Otherwise, the gap will need to be financed to a
significant extent by external sources.
Last  March,  the  Bank  came  up  with  the  issue  of  a  3-Year  Golden  Jubilee  Bond  for  retail
customers and NGOs. The issue was well received. The Bond is listed on the Stock Exchange
of  Mauritius  for  trading  and  I  thank  the  CEOs  of  banks  for  their  collaboration.    We  also  invite
banks to come up with attractive deposit schemes to enhance the savings culture.
Since the beginning of the year, the Bank has improved the operational efficiency of its monetary
policy,  bringing  the  short-term  money  market  rates  within  the  corridor  of  the  Key  Repo  Rate.
Through the conduct of open market operations to remove structural excess liquidity from the
system, the disconnect between the KRR and money market rates was corrected.  The excess
liquidity legacy which has hindered the transmission of monetary policy, and subject to concerns
in various quarters, has been addressed.  The focus on excess liquidity is often blurred by the
reference to balances that are kept over and above statutory requirement of the cash reserve
ratio. However, the excess liquidity comprises both rupee and foreign currency excess liquidity.
The Bank introduced a liquidity standard under BASEL III as from November 2017, which is the
liquidity coverage ratio (or the LCR for short).  The LCR was introduced to promote short term
resilience  of  the  liquidity  risk  profile  of  banks  to  ensure  that  they  have  sufficient  High  Quality
Liquid Assets (HQLA) to survive a significant stress scenario lasting 30 calendar days. Keeping
foreign currency balances with the Bank count towards the HQLA. Almost all of foreign currency
excess liquidity would be reckoned towards balanced held for the maintenance of the LCR.
We conducted a survey among banks as to why they were keeping rupee excess balances and
the  results  showed  that  a  sizeable  part  was  being  held  by  them  voluntarily  as  a  precaution.
  These  balances  have  been  estimated  between  Rs4-6  billion,  depending  on  circumstances.
 Therefore, the analysis of rupee excess reserves should exclude these balances. And currently,
we estimate that the true rupee excess liquidity in the system would be around Rs2 billion, which
is  more  or  less  manageable.  In  the  coming  weeks,  we  foresee  rupee  excess  reserves  to  go
down.
The Bank has recently been focusing on the 91-day Bill yield as its short-term operating target.
 The 91-day Bill yield, which is market-determined, can be viewed as an appropriate measure of
the efficiency of the Bank’s operations.  The Bank has successfully been able to manage liquidity
by sustaining the level of the 91-day Bill, since March 2018, at a level consistent with its monetary
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
policy stance.  The relative stability of the 91-day Bill also reflects on the rupee excess liquidity
situation.  If there would have been a higher level of excess liquidity, the yield on the 91-day Bill
would  have  dropped.    However,  as  mentioned  earlier,  the  91-day  Bill  yield  has  been  evolving
around the Key Repo Rate.
Our conduct of monetary operations entails costs, which have a bearing of the operations of the
Bank.  The  correction  of  the  interest  rate  disconnect  together  with  the  increase  in  the  Bank’s
issue of its own securities have cost the Bank Rs2.4 billion in 2017/2018 compared to Rs1.9
billion  in  2016/2017  and  Rs1.4  billion  in  2015/2016.    But,  you  will  appreciate  that  the  cost  of
monetary policy is nothing compared to the benefits that monetary policy imparts.
The rise in the short-term money market rates has widened the spread vis-à-vis savings deposit
rates.    For  instance,  the  weighted  average  yield  on  Bills  accepted  at  primary  auctions  has
increased from 1.78 per cent in November 2017 to 2.91 per cent in February 2018 and further to
3.60 per cent in October 2018.  While over this period, the weighted average savings deposit rate
has been around 1.7 per cent.  That’s why I have been making an appeal to banks to increase
their savings deposit rates so that savers can benefit from a higher return.  And I thanked those
banks which have already increased their rates.
The increase in yields on risk-free Government and BoM instruments can also benefit savers and
can prove to be viable alternative investment instruments.  We have engaged with banks with a
view  to  opening  up  access  to  these  instruments  to  the  public  for  trading  on  the  secondary
market.  It  is  noteworthy  that  outstanding  investment  by  individuals  on  the  secondary  market
increased from Rs1.8 billion as at end-December 2017 to nearly Rs6.0 billion as of date.  We
thank  banks  for  creating  the  awareness  for  these  attractive  instruments  and  broadening  their
access to the public at large.
The  development  of  bond  markets  has  been  on  the  agenda  of  the  Bank  since  long  and  we
cherish  the  idea  of  seeing  a  vibrant  bond  market  in  Mauritius.    We  issued  a  Guideline  on
Commercial Papers last June. Commercial papers are short-term money market instruments
issued by companies in the form of promissory notes, which can be subscribed by the public.
 The introduction of commercial papers in Mauritius is expected to support the development of
financial markets and allow issuers to diversify their sources of short-term borrowing and ensure
price  discovery.    We  recommend  companies  to  consider  issuing  these  new  types  of
instruments, which would be beneficial to the issuer and the local investor.
When I was appointed vice-Chair of the FSC last year, I saw the benefits of the synergy between
the  Bank  and  the  FSC.    Today  we  are  lucky  to  further  cement  the  bond  between  the  two
regulators, with our First Deputy Governor as Chairman of the Financial Services Commission.
 We are jointly collaborating to create a Centralised E-KYC Registry.  The Registry will be the
national repository for KYC information of individuals and corporates.  Our next project will be the
implementation of a staff exchange programme as from next year, for an effective surveillance of
the financial system. In the same spirit, we have signed a tripartite MoU with the FSC and FIU.
We shall soon start discussions with the Police for a memorandum of cooperation on money-
laundering and counterfeiting issues. 
Let me emphasise that the Bank considers AML/CFT supervision among its key priorities. You
will  recall  that  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  Mauritius  have  been  identified  in  the  mutual
evaluation report of the ESAAMLG. Already, a host of laws have been amended and regulations
passed to comply with recommendations of the ESAAMLG. We have also set up a dedicated unit
for AML/CFT supervision at the Bank and we are cooperating actively with the FSC, FIU, MRA,
ICAC and soon with the Police in this combat.  I would like, once again, to call upon CEOs of
banks to ensure that they take all precautions to keep our jurisdiction clean.
To accompany the country as international financial centre of repute, we need to ensure that our
banking industry is appropriately equipped and resilient. Capacity building was identified as a key
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
priority  to  the  banking  sector,  and  we  backed  the  MBA’s  initiative  for  a  Professional  Banker
Certificate course offered by the Chartered Institute of Bankers of Scotland. We will soon roll out
more targeted courses.
As  you  are  aware,  the  Government  has  set  up  the  Fintech  Regulatory  Committee under  the
chairmanship of Lord Meghnad Desai.  The Committee has already submitted its Report and the
main  recommendations  are  being  implemented.  We  even  had  a  meeting  today,  hence  the
presence of Lord Desai and Ms Loretta Joseph of the OECD.
The global financial crisis has been an eye-opener on so many counts and made us realised the
importance  of  a  well-regulated  and  supervised  banking  industry.    It  also  brought  forth  that
traditional micro-prudential regulation and supervision do not suffice.  We did not stay behind.
We  enforced  a  range  of  supervisory  and  regulatory  measures  to  make  our  banking  sector
resilient. The level of bank capital in Mauritius are broadly adequate to meet a range of shocks.
 We are toiling hard to roll out a risk-based supervisory framework, which will entail, amongst
others, the development of a risk profile for individual banks.  
A  more  resilient  banking  system  will  better  absorb  the  impact  of  future  downturns,  with  more
sustainable funding positions and greater capacity to tolerate a decline in the credit environment.
 This framework is data-intensive and we rely on the collaboration of our partners, including the
accounting firms, to bring to fruition this project.
The role of payment systems in an economy is critical. As the guardian of the stability of the
financial  system,  it  is  imperative  for  the  Bank  to  ensure  that  the  payment  system  operates
efficiently. I am therefore glad that the National Payment Systems Bill, whose main objective is to
provide  an  enabling  framework  for  the  regulation,  oversight  and  supervision  of  the  national
payments systems, has been approved at the National Assembly on Wednesday. In the same
vein, development of a payment infrastructure through the National Payment Switch has been an
item high and dear in the Bank’s agenda. I am pleased to announce that the National Payment
Switch is operational.
A  quick  word  on  the  global  economic  environment.    At  the  time  I  had  assumed  office  as
Governor, there was widespread optimism that the global economic outlook was robust.  This
optimism, unfortunately, did not last long. A series of events have created dimmer prospects for
2019 global growth. Against this uncertain backdrop, domestic economic and financial conditions
have  remained  largely  stable  and  commendable.  Our  concern  remains  the  recent  trends  in
private  investment  and  exports.  These  issues  need  to  be  addressed  to  sustain  growth  and
employment creation.
I am convinced that each and every Mauritian is proud of the progress we have achieved so far
since the independence. Mauritius has successfully reinvented itself in the wake of various global
shocks and following decades of positive growth momentum, we have emerged as a resilient
country. Let all the partners – public sector, private sector, civil society, the press – join hands to
capitalize on our strengths to tap opportunities emerging from our strategic location between the
two  fastest-growing  continents,  which  are  Asia  and  Africa.  As  Winston  Churchill  put  it, “A
pessimist  sees  the  difficulty  in  every  opportunity;  an  optimist  sees  the  opportunity  in  every
difficulty." 
I wish to thank all members of the Board of Directors, my Deputy Governors, MPC Members and
staff of the Bank for their unflinching support and commitment, without whom the Bank would not
have  been  able  to  achieve  so  much.    I  also  commend  all  economic  stakeholders  for  their
contributions to the economy. 
On behalf of the Board of Directors, the Members of the MPC, my Deputy Governors, staff of the
Bank of Mauritius, and my own behalf, I wish you all a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
2019.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
