Economic Policies, Trade Integration and Sustainable Job Creation:  
A View from the Mediterranean Countries
The regulation of non-bank finance:  
the challenges ahead’
Speech by Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy
Luigi Federico Signorini
Tunis, 16 November 2018
With the completion of Basel 3, the post-crisis overhaul of banking regulation is essentially 
over; with a limited number of exceptions, the only issues remaining for the next few 
years will be the implementation of reforms and the evaluation of their effects, intended 
or  otherwise,  over  time.  Banks,  however,  do  not  comprise  the  entire  financial  sector. 
Arguably, non-bank financial intermediation has taken on an increasing role in the global 
financial system and poses new challenges to regulators. The attention of international co-
ordinating bodies such as the FSB is therefore now mainly, and rightly, directed towards 
what used to be known by the vaguely derogatory name of ‘shadow banking’ but is now 
more neutrally termed ‘non-bank financial intermediation’. The aim of this speech will 
be to explore the emerging risks from non-banks, to describe the (not insignificant, but 
still inchoate) regulatory response so far, and to speculate about a possible agenda for the 
medium-term future.
Global non-bank finance concerns everybody, even countries where banks continue to 
play  a  dominant  role  in  the  internal  financial  system,  like Tunisia  –  or  Italy,  for  that 
matter.  In  a  globally  interconnected  financial  system,  no  country  stands  alone;  none 
can remain isolated from market shocks and turbulence whose ultimate source may be 
in faraway parts of the globe. This is a key point for emerging market and developing 
economies.  Witness  the  recent  experience  of  the  ‘taper  tantrum’,  when  a  number  of 
emerging economies faced external financial conditions that had tightened abruptly and 
higher generalised risk premia in reaction to a policy decision taken by the US authorities. 
On that occasion the countries affected found that the negative repercussions on their 
economy  stemming  from  the  generalised  repricing  of  assets  could  not  be  mitigated 
through policy actions (either by relying on floating exchange rates or through capital 
flow management measures). It has also become apparent that a low degree of financial 
deepening  may  actually  increase  the  sensitivity  of  emerging  asset  markets  to  external 
shocks.
The  issue  with  non-bank  finance,  it  will  be  argued,  is  not  the  stability  of  individual 
intermediaries—micro-prudential risk. As the risk connected to managed assets is borne 
almost  entirely  by  the  ultimate  investor,  rather  than  by  the  manager  itself,  it  is  not, 
or not mainly, the possible default of the manager that should concern regulators. On 
the other hand, the actions of asset managers may affect the financial system and the 
general  economy  through  their  systemic  consequences  on  market  developments.  The 
key questions are then whether, to what extent and under what conditions non-bank 
intermediation can amplify market movements and determine instability. It is, therefore, 
essentially  a macro-prudential  question.  Understanding  and  measuring  such  risks  will 
require data, research and careful reflection; tackling them is likely to require new or 
reinforced  supervisory  tools  and,  quite  possibly,  a  broader  mandate  for  supervisory 
authorities.
Why do we need a macroprudential framework for the non-bank financial sector?
We  shall  start  by  briefly  reviewing  certain  macro-stability  issues  and  the  reasons  why 
they may have become more significant than in the past. I shall focus on three main 
issues of concern: (i) pro-cyclicality, (ii) the size of non-bank financial institutions, and  
(iii) systemic liquidity risks (‘runs’) and leverage risks. 
Let me tackle the pro-cyclicality issue first. The collective behaviour of asset managers, insurers 
and pension funds can lead to undue amplifications of market volatility.1 Empirical analyses 
show  that  institutional  investors’  trading  may  cause  substantial  temporary  price  effects, 
both at the asset level and at the aggregate level.2 During downturns, trades by institutional 
investors in financial distress may turn into fire sales, and a temporary price effect may be 
further magnified so as to put severe pressure on market liquidity.3 This amplification effect 
can have wide-ranging negative repercussions on the banking sector, on households’ savings, 
on firms’ funding, and ultimately on the entire economy. A clear example was the outbreak of 
the financial crisis, when a complex network of connections through derivatives and shadow 
banking activities turned $500 billion of losses on sub-prime mortgages into $4 trillion of 
write-downs on assets at global level.4 
1  See for example Chan L. and Lakonishok J. (1995), ‘The behavior of stock prices around institutional trades’, Journal of 
Finance 50: 1147-1174; Keim D. and Madhavan A. (1997), ‘Transactions costs and investment style: an inter-exchange 
analysis of institutional equity trades’, Journal of Financial Economics 46: 265-292; Jones C. and Lipson M. (1999), 
‘Execution costs of institutional equity orders’, Journal of Financial Intermediation 8: 123-140.
2  See Mitchell M., Pulvino T. and Stafford, E. (2004), ‘Price Pressure around Mergers’, Journal of Finance 59(1): 31-63; 
estimates vary considerably. For example Edelen et al. (2001) find a 0.86 per cent price reduction on a single day on 
average (Edelen, R.M. and Warner J.B. (2001) ‘Aggregate price effects of institutional trading: a study of mutual fund 
flow and market returns’, Journal of Financial Economics 59: 195:220). Coval et al. find a 2 per cent price reduction on 
a monthly basis (Coval, J. and Stafford, E. (2007), ‘Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets’, Journal of Financial 
Economics 86: 479-512).
3  Shleifer A. and Vishny, R. (2011), ‘Fire sales in finance and macroeconomics’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 
25(1): 29-48.
IMF (2009), ‘Crisis and Recovery’, World Economic Outlook, April; Mishkin, F.S. (2011), ‘Over the cliff: from the 
subprime to the global financial crisis’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(1): 49-70.
4 
4
Second, a size problem also exists in the case of non-bank financial institutions, albeit of a 
different nature than in that of banks. Asset managers, insurers and pension funds provide 
agency services and hence they bear little credit, market or liquidity risks on their balance 
sheets compared with banks; the risks are borne by their clients. For example, BlackRock, 
the largest asset management company in the world, has around $6.3 trillion of assets 
under management, but only $220 billion (3.5 per cent) of its own. Clearly there is no 
‘too-big-to-fail’ problem as in the banking industry. The problem of size here concerns 
the externalities produced by the asset managers’ portfolio allocation.5 The failure of a 
‘too-big-to-fail’ asset manager may create systemic financial instability through its effects 
on markets. In the extreme event of a failure of a large asset manager, the massive sale 
of assets in its portfolio may dry up market liquidity, depress asset prices and heighten 
their volatility. These externalities will have an impact on other institutional investors. 
For example, they may reduce the liquidity and capital buffers of banks and insurance 
corporations,  or  cause  significant  outflows  from  other  asset  managers.  Furthermore, 
increasing size and concentration in the asset management industry also increases the 
potential for investor herding and for correlated market movements, which can in turn 
result in financial bubbles and heightened volatility, and which are not justified by market 
fundamentals.  
Third,  non-bank  institutions  also  carry  risks  similar  to  those  for  banks.  Open-end  funds 
providing liquidity transformation services are prone to the risk of ‘runs’ akin to deposit-taking 
institutions. Investors in open-end funds have the ability to redeem their shares (usually 
on  a  daily  basis),  while  funds  invest  in  relatively  illiquid  securities,  such  as  high-yield 
corporate bonds and emerging market assets. Shareholders have an incentive to sell their 
shares when they expect large redemptions since they anticipate that the liquidation value 
of  shares  declines  as  other  investors  sell  theirs.  This  decline  in  value  could  happen  for 
various  reasons:  for  example,  the  asset  manager  may  use  cash  buffers  and  sell  relatively 
more  liquid  assets  first.  Asset  managers  providing  securities  lending  activities  to  their 
clients engage in maturity/liquidity transformation, when the cash collateral is reinvested at 
term and into less liquid, higher-yield securities, and can take on significant leverage risks, 
including by engaging in synthetic leverage via derivatives (e.g. swaps to increase duration 
risk). Furthermore, asset managers acting as agent lenders also provide their clients with 
indemnification,6 bearing own risks against which no regulatory capital is allocated. At the 
global level, mutual funds and other retail investment funds account for around €6 trillion 
5  Haldane, A. G. (2014), ‘The age of asset management’, speech at the London Business School.
6 
Indemnification is a form of insurance associated with securities lending. When the borrower of a security defaults on 
the loan and the collateral received is insufficient to cover the repurchase price of the lent securities, the shortfall is borne 
by the indemnification provider.
5
in securities made available for lending (44 per cent of the total value of securities made 
available for lending at the global level).7 There is no precise information on the amount of 
indemnification provided on assets available for lending, but we know that the largest asset 
managers are mainly involved in providing indemnification services, and that the scale of 
exposures can be as large as that of some global systemically important banks. Note also 
that differently than for banks, the risks for non-bank financial intermediaries are to a large 
extent not on the balance sheets, making their monitoring and control more difficult.
How large are these risks?
We do not have a clear answer to this question, as we are still in the process of developing 
adequate tools to measure them. But there are reasons to argue that the significance of the 
risks associated with non-bank financial in8termediation has increased in recent years.
First,  there  are  quantitative  reasons.  In  the  last  decade,  assets  under  the  management 
of non-bank financial intermediaries have almost doubled. In 2016, the latest date for 
which data are available at the global level, they represented a little less than half of the 
total assets of the financial sector.8 Non-bank credit intermediation was around one third 
of total bank assets. The growth of non-bank finance has been significant in Europe too: 
total assets managed by euro-area investment funds have more than doubled in the last 
decade, from €5.7 trillion at the end of 2008 to €13.8 trillion at end June 2018. The 
investment fund sector now accounts for nearly 20 per cent of the total assets managed 
by the euro- area financial sector.9 
Second, the asset management industry is significantly more concentrated today than a 
few decades ago. In the United States, the top 10 managers owned about 5 per cent of 
the US stock market in 1980, whereas in 2016 they owned about 23 per cent.10 
There  are  further  qualitative  reasons.  The  portfolio  of  asset  managers,  insurers  and 
pension  funds  are  often  highly  diversified  but  less  diverse,  i.e.  their  investments  are 
often largely overlapping. This is the outcome of a global quest for risk diversification. 
7  These  refer  to  2015  (latest  available).  Source:  International  Securities  Lending  Association.  See  also:  FSB  (2013), 
‘Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking: Policy Framework for Addressing Shadow Banking Risks 
in Securities Lending and Repos’, August; FSB (2017), ‘Policy Recommendations to Address Structural Vulnerabilities 
from Asset Management Activities’, January. 
8  FSB (2018), ‘Global shadow banking monitoring report’.
9  European Central Bank (2018), ‘Financial Stability Report’, May.
10  I. Ben-David, F. Franzoni, R. Moussawi, and J. Sedunov, ‘The Granular Nature of Large Institutional Investors’, NBER 
Working Paper No. 22247, May 2016.
6
A  multitude  of  investors  diversifying  their  investments  must  end  up  with  the  same 
portfolios when the number of assets they can invest in is finite. While diversification 
helps  institutional  investors  to  reduce  the  risks  of  their  investments,  shocks  tend  to 
spread more easily across different institutions when portfolios overlap.11 In Europe, for 
example, investment funds invest more than three fourths (80 per cent) of their assets in 
securities which are also held by insurers and pension funds. Market stress can be more 
easily transmitted across markets and asset classes.12 The risks and costs of fire sales in 
the event of market stress may end up being less easily diversifiable at the macro level. 
While  investment  funds,  and  to  a  certain  extent  insurers  and  pension  funds,  tend  to 
diversify their portfolios across countries and sectors, banks invest a larger share of their 
assets in domestic securities. This simply reflects13 the different investment strategies of 
different financial intermediaries. Banks specialise in resolving asymmetric information 
issues, so they end up with greater knowledge of specific markets and borrowers than 
other investors. They have a comparative advantage from investing in the markets that 
they know better.
Like asset correlations, business activity correlations can vary over the cycle, turning all 
positive or intensifying in bad times. There is also evidence that there are fewer contrarian 
investors  in  the  market,  or  that  investors  traditionally  considered  as  contrarian  may 
behave pro-cyclically in episodes of severe market stress.14 
Another sign of increasing risks is given by the fact that asset managers’ activities have become 
structurally more correlated over the years, owing to the diffusion of common investment 
strategies  across  different  business  activities.  New  technologies  (HFT,  algo-trading  and  
robo-advisors) and financial products (ETFs) have made intermediaries more procyclical 
and quicker to react to market news. The growth of electronic and automated trading has 
given rise to a series of flash episodes in markets that are among the largest and most liquid 
in the world.15 
What policy instruments are available to limit such risks?
11  Nanda V., Wu W. and Zhou X. (2018), ‘Investment commonality across insurance companies: fire sale risk and corporate 
yield spread’, Finance and Economics Discussion Series No. 69-2017, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
12  Manconi A., Massa M. and Yasuda A. (2012), ‘The role of institutional investors in propagating the crisis of 2007–2008’, 
Journal of Financial Economics, 104; 491-518; Jotiikasthira C., Lundlbad C. and Ramadorai T. (2012) ‘Asset Fire Sales 
and Purchases and the International Transmission of Funding Shocks’, The Journal of Finance, 67(6): 2015-2050.
13  European Central Bank (2018), ‘Financial Stability Report’, May.
14  Bank  of  England  (2014),  ‘Procyclicality  and  structural  trends  in  investment  allocation  by  insurance  companies  and 
pension funds’, discussion paper by the Bank of England and the Procyclicality working group.
15  Bank of England (2017), ‘Financial Stability Issue – November Issue’.
7
There are some policy instruments to mitigate such risks. For example, most jurisdictions 
have measures in place that preserve the stability of mutual funds and limit the consequences 
of  a  sudden  run  on  the  part  of  their  investors,  such  as  liquidity  requirements,  rules 
restricting the amount of illiquid assets that can be held by open-end funds, redemption 
suspension and redemption gates. 
However,  the  policy  framework  is  still  under  construction;  most  importantly,  the 
approach has been mainly microprudential. There is a need to step up analytical thinking 
and craftsmanship in policy-making, starting by enhancing the policymakers’ ability to 
assess the relative importance of the different transmission mechanisms, using tools such 
as macro/systemic stress tests. The fact that we do not yet have a clear idea about how the 
policy instruments function does not mean that we should not start to experiment with 
them. A reference can be made for instance to stress testing techniques in bank supervision: 
stress test methodologies were not advanced before the crisis,16 but the financial crisis 
highlighted the importance of forward-looking capital adequacy assessment, and stress 
tests were then effectively employed as a supervisory tool in that perspective and have 
subsequently been included in the regular supervisory policy toolkit in many countries.
A specific issue that will play an important role in future policy debates is how to address 
liquidity  shortage  situations  for  non-bank  financial  intermediaries.  If  a  large  asset 
manager’s stressed liquidity condition puts the correct functioning of markets at risk, 
should central banks step in and provide liquidity? If so, who should the recipients of 
this liquidity be: the stressed asset manager or the market? Under what conditions? The 
experience during the recent financial crisis, when a number of central banks expanded 
the scope of their lender of last resort coverage (for example, the Fed provided liquidity 
to mutual funds, the Bank of England started providing liquidity support to selected 
broker-dealers and central counterparties and similar arrangements were made by the 
Bank of Japan) should be a starting point for a systematic approach to these issues. 
The institutional framework: which authorities should be involved in the supervision 
of non-bank financial intermediaries?
The expanded scope of the activities of non-bank financial intermediaries and the need for 
a better understanding of the risks posed for financial stability prompts a reflection on the 
adequacy of the institutional supervisory framework. In most countries, non-bank financial 
16  For instance, the pre-crisis attempt by U.S. supervisors to use stress testing for setting risk-based capital charges for 
Government Sponsored Organisations – Fanny Mae and Freddy Mac – turned out in retrospect to be a gross failure.
8
intermediaries are under the purview of securities and market regulators. These authorities 
traditionally have a mandate to safeguard investor protection and market integrity rather 
than to limit systemic risks. Should this change? In particular, should financial stability find 
a way into market supervisors’ mandates? Should these authorities develop macroprudential 
policy instruments designed to mitigate systemic risks stemming from non-bank finance? 
This process will require an adaptation of culture as well as new laws. Central banks must 
be involved, particularly in view of the ‘macro’ and financial stability perspective, and of 
their role in the provision of liquidity; for them too, rules, skills and practices will need 
to evolve further. Coordination between all the authorities involved will be important in 
order to ensure that supervision is carried out with a macroprudential perspective.   
FSB work on risks to financial stability from non-bank intermediation
At the international level the FSB, where central banks, banking and market regulators 
are  all  represented,  is  the  natural  forum  to  analyse  and  assess  financial  stability  risks 
stemming  from  non-bank  finance.  The  FSB  has  recently  taken  some  preliminary 
important steps in these areas.  
First, the FSB has been publishing annually what used to be known as the ‘Shadow Banking’ 
monitoring report, and has recently been retitled ‘Non-bank financial intermediation’ monitoring 
report, although it would probably take more than a terminology change to transform shadow 
banking into ‘resilient market-based finance’. The FSB has worked to improve its coverage by 
broadening the geographic scope of the data and refining its analysis of risks. The latest report, 
published in March 2018, also included data from China for the first time. 
As to the policy area, in 2017 the FSB issued policy recommendations to address structural 
vulnerabilities in asset management and to mandate the relevant Standard Setter Body 
(IOSCO) to implement them. This work has led to the development of policy tools for 
asset managers in the area of liquidity risk management as well as of leverage measures for 
investment funds to facilitate monitoring for financial stability purposes and to enable 
comparisons across funds at a global level.
The FSB has also made some initial progress in studying the impact of large investors’ 
strategies on market liquidity, starting with a ‘simulation exercise’ on fund redemptions. 
This  line  of  inquiry  is  important.  Differently  from  the  case  of  banks,  it  is  not  the 
resilience of individual institutions that needs to be tested, but rather the presence of 
shock amplifiers in the market. This is why potential investment-strategy loops are of 
interest to the FSB.
9
Difficult choices have been made, some of which have possibly led to setbacks. Some 
examples concern the abandonment of the early attempt to develop a list of systemic 
non-bank  financial  intermediaries,  together  with  the  preference  for  relying  on  an 
activity-based  approach  rather  than  an  entity-based  approach  in  addressing  the  risks 
from non-bank finance. These were difficult judgments to make. On the one hand, the 
activity-based approach has its own merits as it allows some activities to be subjected to 
the relevant rules regardless of which entities are undertaking them. On the other hand, 
relying  solely  on  an  activity-based  regulation  could  leave  significant  risks  unchecked: 
high levels of concentration and interconnectedness (e.g. large asset managers and CCPs) 
are good reasons to develop an entity-based regulation for non-banks as well.
The FSB will continue to carry out work in this area, focusing on continued monitoring 
and on the operationalisation of the agreed reforms. The improvement of systemic stress 
testing will also be an important goal for the FSB, especially as regards enhancing its 
ability to assess the relative importance of the different transmission and amplification 
mechanisms of risks and refining its analysis of the behaviour of institutional investors, 
especially  with  respect  to  their  willingness  to  act  as  contrarian  investors  in  times  of 
market stress.
Conclusions 
These works and debates matter not only in countries where the non-bank financial sector 
is  large.  In  a  globally  interconnected  financial  system,  countries  with  small  non-bank 
financial sectors are often the most vulnerable to these risks. In light of the rapid expansion 
of asset management activities, the authorities need to be provided with instruments to 
prevent or mitigate consequent systemic risks, especially for situations where the measures 
available to asset managers alone would not be sufficient. 
Managers of individual funds have a mandate to act in the best interests of their own 
investors  and  may  not  be  in  a  position  to  act  in  the  interest  of  financial  stability. 
Supervisors  of  individual  funds  may  not  have  the  information  or  means  necessary  to 
properly assess different funds’ contribution to systemic risk. Thus, a macroprudential 
approach to the supervision of non-bank financial intermediation should be developed. 
Different authorities need to work together for a better understanding of the risk of fire 
sales, spillovers to other financial counterparties and disruptions in credit intermediation, 
and to design and test potential tools to prevent and mitigate systemic risk.
10
by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Designed and printed  
