Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus: Value based intermediation - beyond
profit
Keynote address by Ms Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Global  Islamic  Finance  Forum  2018  (GIFF)  "Value  Based
Intermediation - Beyond Profit", Kuala Lumpur, 3 October 2018.
 Henry Ford, credited with revolutionising the American transportation industry in the 20th century,
once remarked that “Business must be run at a profit, else it will die. But when anyone attempts
to run a business solely for profit and thinks not at all of the service to the community, then also
the business must die, for it no longer has a reason for existence”.
Nearly a hundred years since, these words of wisdom remain true. Perhaps, even more so now
than ever. Indeed, we have witnessed time and again, episodes of excessiveness, and the sole
and  unchecked  pursuit  of  profits,  that  have  led  to  global  financial  crises.  The  theme  of  this
conference, “Value Based Intermediation – Beyond Profit”, is therefore a fitting reminder of the
role of finance, and Islamic finance in particular, in helping build a more resilient and sustainable
future. 
In the past half century, the world economy expanded sixfold, despite experiencing the worst and
most  expensive  financial  crisis.  Average  per  capita  income  more  than  doubled  to  about
USD11,000,  compared  to  only  about  USD5,000  in  1967.  People  are  living  longer,  with  better
quality of life, greater access to basic necessities, improved health and medical care, and better
education.
Despite such progress, we are faced with daunting challenges. These include harmful effects of
environmental  degradation  and  climate  change  that  threaten  global  prosperity,  stability  and
sustainable  living.  Socioeconomic  challenges  such  as  rising  inequality  and  lack  of  affordable
housing are affecting the well-being of many communities. At around 225% of global GDP, global
debt is at a record high level and may leave a heavy burden for future generations to bear.
It is increasingly clear that economic prosperity in the long run cannot exist without social equity
and  environmental  responsibility.  While  the  governments  of  150  countries  are  committed  to
realising the United Nation’s 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030, this must be a
shared responsibility. The private sector has a key role to play – a role, with finance at its centre,
that has yet to live up to its full potential.
With  much  at  stake,  the  call  to  action  for  sustainable  finance  is  one  that  the  financial  sector,
perhaps more particularly Islamic finance, cannot afford to ignore. Encouragingly, more, though
not  nearly  enough,  Islamic  financial  institutions  are  moving  beyond  Shariah  compliance  to
performance and risk management practices that reflect social and environmental impacts. A
key question for us present today, and for those beyond this forum, is how the value propositions
of Islamic finance can be further developed, to bring us closer to the reality of “finance beyond
profit”.
To my mind, the answers will invariably call attention to three imperatives – a rethinking of value;
a rethinking of risk; and a rethinking of human capital.  Allow me to briefly address these in turn.
Key  Message  1  –  Rethinking  value  through  a  renewed  focus  on  the  fundamentals  of
Shariah
First, rethinking value.  The industry must elevate the fundamentals of Shariah to realise its full
promise.  The  business  models  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  should  be  guided  by  the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
overarching objectives of Shariah (Maqasid Shariah) – which are to preserve and advance the
common interest of society at large, by preventing harm and maximising benefits. This is now
more important than ever to steer growth and development on a more sustainable path.
In Malaysia, the industry with the support of the Central Bank, is taking concrete steps to drive
strategies  aimed  at  increasing  the  positive  impact  of  finance  on  society.  This  is  outlined  in  a
Strategy Paper on Value-based Intermediation (VBI), which was released in July last year. The
commitment to adopt VBI is a significant step by the industry to clearly identify Islamic finance
with sustainable practices, as it should. It has also set in motion initiatives that will raise the bar
for  processes,  practices,  offerings  and  conduct  that  promote  sustainable  businesses  and
communities.
We expect that over time, the adoption of VBI will have a significant impact on business models
of  Islamic  financial  institutions,  including  the  drivers  of  profitability  and  risks.    Post-financing
expert  advisory  services  which  help  borrowers  mitigate  the  environmental  impact  of  projects
financed by the bank will feature more prominently in the product and service offerings of VBI
banks. VBI-oriented Islamic financial institutions can, and indeed should, also play an important
role  in  mobilising  resources  to  finance  climate  change  mitigation  and  adaptation  initiatives. 
Funding for climate adaptation in particular, remains critically low, despite millions already at risk
from  the  effects  of  climate  change  and  in  need  of  assistance  to  cope  with  the  effects.    For
example, in the agriculture sector, resources can be channelled towards building flood defences,
and developing local structures and facilities that are more resilient to harsh weather conditions.
Takaful solutions also have an important role in strengthening resilience against climate events.
These developments are likely to see important changes to the way financial institutions make
decisions, and to the characteristics of banking and takaful portfolios. 
In supporting these changes, two new tools will be published by Bank Negara Malaysia today for
public consultation – a VBI Impact Assessment Framework (VBIAF) and the VBI Scorecard. The
Assessment  Framework  provides  guidance  on  the  assessment  of  financing  and  investment
applications  taking  into  consideration  economic,  social  and  environmental  impacts,  while  the
Scorecard supports the implementation of performance measurement frameworks  for  Islamic
financial institutions that drive positive value and impact on society and the environment. I look
forward to receiving constructive feedback from the industry and interested parties, and to further
strengthen these frameworks to drive a renewed focus on sustainable financial solutions.
Key Message 2 - Rethinking risk
The  second  imperative  calls  for  a  re-thinking  of  risk  by  Islamic  financial  institutions.    Non-
traditional forms of risks such as social, political and environmental risks are business threats
that simply cannot be ignored. Research indicates that there are material benefits to managing
these  risks  more  proactively.  An  IFC  survey  of  global  banks  showed  that  around  86%  of
respondents  which  integrated  social  and  environmental  risks  in  their  business  have  yielded
positive business results. There are also growing calls by shareholders for financial institutions to
play a more proactive role in the sustainability agenda.
I am among those who believe that the true mark of a sustainable financial system ultimately lies
in the extent to which, the market’s and management’s view of risks reflect sustainability factors.
In June 2017, the Financial Stability Board published recommendations, for helping businesses
disclose climate-related financial information. In the context of “finance beyond profit”, this was a
significant development by a global standard setting body, and the broader G20 community, to
encourage the provision of better information on climate-related risks and their financial impact.
For many, this is both a reflection of, and catalyst for, the closer examination of risk- and impact-
adjusted returns, by capital and funding providers.
As natural stewards of sustainable finance models, Islamic financial institutions are well placed
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
to develop richer perspectives of social and environmental risks. This calls for a review of internal
risk  decision-making  processes  and  inputs  within  financial  institutions,  alongside  enhanced
disclosures to market participants. Yet little, if anything, is done today to consider how such risks
need to be managed – both for existing portfolios and future growth strategies.  Actions taken by
financial  institutions  to  mitigate,  transfer  or  control  the  risks  have  the  potential  to  generate
corresponding, broader responses by policymakers, businesses and other financial institutions. 
This in turn can create new markets for sustainability services, and a virtuous cycle of mutually
reinforcing market forces, that promote sustainable business practices across the economy. 
As we further develop the VBI systems for Islamic finance in Malaysia, this will be an area of
important focus. This work will also address the role of domestic regulations, in creating a level
playing field, for value-based banking practices, where appropriate. To date, policy documents
developed  on  14  Shariah  contracts,  serve  to  provide  a  clear  and  consistent  framework  for
lending, underwriting and investment activities of Islamic financial institutions. I am encouraged
by  efforts  among  some  Islamic  financial  institutions  to  introduce  value-adding  innovations,
building upon these Shariah contracts, and further differentiating their solutions from conventional
offerings. I would of course like to see much more traction in this direction going forward. 
Key Message 3 – Rethinking human capital
My third point relates to rethinking human capital.  Despite growing awareness on the importance
of sustainable business practices, in creating long term value and reducing risks, the challenges
of building internal human capacity to support sustainable practices continues to be left largely
unattended to.  For Islamic financial institutions, this goes beyond strategy alignment and culture,
which  has  been  the  primary  focus  to  date,  to  building  or  acquiring  the fundamental  skillsets,
required to implement sustainable financing and risk management practices. Without these, VBI
cannot hope to progress very far.
To illustrate, a study by the National Bureau of Economic Research found that jobs requiring a
higher  intensity,  and  concentration  of  “green  skills”  to  support  the  transition  to  greener
economies,  lies  among high-skilled  professional  profiles.  In  other  words,  if  Islamic  financial
institutions  are  serious  about  adopting  VBI,  the  complement  of  skillsets  at  the  management
levels of the organisation will need to be fundamentally re-assessed. Relevant skills that need to
be  brought  into  the  organisation  include  engineering  and  technical  skills  in  the  design,
construction  and  assessment  of  technology;  science  skills;  and  monitoring  skills  focusing  on
observing compliance with environmental laws and standards.  Even boards too have to learn
and adapt to the demands of the new operating environment.
Relevant  skillsets  are  also  critical  to  support  innovation  within  the  financial  sector  to  capture
opportunities and improve the delivery of Islamic financial solutions.  Indeed, technology can be
better optimised to revolutionise the way Islamic finance operates and offer innovative solutions
to  customers.  For  example,  blockchain  or  artificial  intelligence  applications  hold  enormous
potential  for  simplifying  documentation  requirements  associated  with  Shariah  contracts,  thus
improving the overall efficiency of business operations.
It should be abundantly clear by now to any financial institution that is serious about VBI, that, the
task of building the human and intellectual capital to achieve and sustain value-based business
models cannot be left solely to the human resource departments. It requires nothing less than
strategic direction and resourcing decisions at the highest levels of the organisation.    
Changing mindsets
Einstein  once  said  “The  world  as  we  have  created  is  a  process  of  our  thinking.  It  cannot  be
changed without changing our thinking”. The world today continues to push the limits of social
and environmental thresholds, that are posing increasingly serious threats to humanity. VBI is
therefore, much more than a current and passing fad, but a deeper conviction of the critical need
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
to begin the process of changing mindsets in a lasting way. Financial institutions are a key, but
not the only catalysts in this process. 
Customers and investors need to be supported with relevant information, along with the means
and ability to compare such information, in order to better understand the value propositions of
Islamic  finance.  The  encouragement  of  pension  and  institutional  funds  with  a  sustainable
investment orientation, particularly in markets where such funds remain largely underdeveloped,
would be important to provide a stronger impetus for VBI.  Credit rating agencies could also be
important  contributors  to  a  new  landscape,  with  stronger  emphasis  on  economic,  social  and
environmental  sustainability  in  assessment  frameworks  and  methods.  And  regulators  and
policymakers need to be appropriately responsive to the adoption of sustainable practices. 
Conclusion
In conclusion, the Islamic finance industry today faces an important, strategic choice – to either
continue on a path that largely ignores the stark social and environmental realities that confront
humanity,  or  to  thoughtfully  chart  a  new  path  that  fully  embraces  the  idea  and  philosophy  of
finance beyond profits. The latter will be an unfamiliar path in many respects, but one that is far
closer  to  the  fundamental  premise  of  Shariah  on  which  Islamic  finance  is  based  upon. 
Embarking  on  this  path  will  require  deep  conviction  and  visionary  leadership  across  financial
institutions, governments and policymakers. But the pay-offs will be immeasurable. For many in
society,  it  will  also  make  the  difference  between  economic  freedom  and  opportunities,  and  a
lifetime of hardship. 
Thank you.
See also:
1.  Implementation Guide for Value-based Intermediation
2.  Value-based  Intermediation  Financing  and  Investment  Impact  Assessment  Framework
(Consultative Document)
3.  Value-based Intermediation Scorecard (Consultative Document)
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
