Natasha Ahmetaj: Recovery and resolution planning for the banking
sector
Opening remarks by Ms Natasha Ahmetaj, Second Deputy Governor of the Bank of Albania, at
the Regional Conference on Recovery and Resolution Planning, Tirana, 15 November 2018.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
 Welcome  to  this  regional  conference  organized  by  the  Bank  of  Albania  in  cooperation  with
FinSAC, a valued partner in our path towards development.
The financial crisis of 2008 remains the starting point of a number of discussions, as many of our
present efforts originate from this period. The 2008 crisis was a tough test for the capability of a
state to manage national and cross-border crises. This test became even more relevant for its
global capability, if we take into account that the crisis originated in advanced economies, but
spilled over into emerging markets and developing economies.
In  order  to  safeguard  core  financial  services  for  their  citizens  and  firms,  governments  were
forced to use public funds, by injecting money and issuing guarantees for distressed financial
institutions  at  unprecedented  levels.  From  October  2008  to  October  2011,  the  European
Commission  approved  EUR  4.5  billion  from  public  funds  to  support  financial  institutions.
Naturally, this support helped to curb, at least in the short-term, a massive bankruptcy of banks
and the collapse of the real economy. On the other hand, it burdened taxpayers with deteriorated
public finances. This forced situation strengthened the need to reflect on the protection of the
taxpayers  and  public  finances  in  times  of  crisis,  without  sacrificing  the  prevalence  of  public
interest.  Such  reflection  served  to  promote  discussion  on  the  adequacy  of  financial  markets’
regulation  to  withstand  crises.  Two  important  shortfalls  in  the  regulatory  framework  were
identified.
First, the banking legislation established clear rules for the orderly entry of new participants in the
market but did not define the mandatory requirements for an orderly exit for the troubled market
participants.  Now  in  the  post-crisis  period,  almost  everyone  agrees  that,  in  the  absence  of  a
resolution regime, in order for a smooth and orderly exit of problematic banks, governments were
forced to use public funds. Second, as a result of the high level of financial integration internal
shocks in a given country were transmitted across borders to other countries, transforming them
into a global issue.
The  post-crisis  analysis  motivated  the  European  Union  to  assess  issues  related  to  banks’
recovery  and  resolution,  and  consider  strengthening  the  existing  cross-border  cooperation,  to
reflect better the actual integration of financial markets. Today, the banking union in Europe has
introduced  harmonized  rules  about  resolution  throughout  the  European  Union,  and  a  unified
application  for  the  euro  area.  More  specifically,  the  legislation  of  the  European  Union  has
activated  the  European  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD)  for  all  member
countries and has established the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) in the euro area, as well.
The BRRD creates such instruments for a preventive recovery and early intervention in a bank,
designed to avoid the failure of a bank, as well as facilitate an orderly resolution when banks are
failing, to protect the public interest. The new Law replaces the standard insolvency proceedings
of a bank with the resolution undertaken by the relevant authority. Banks’ failures and financial
crises may be common events. They are very costly, as well, which, in some cases, can be as
high as 40–60% of the Gross Domestic Product. This includes losses in deposits, weakening of
access to finance and loss of public confidence in the financial system, which, in turn, reduces
its  capacity  to  support  economic  growth  and  decrease  poverty.  Also,  standard  insolvency
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
proceedings for failing banks proved inadequate in times of crisis because they did not address
systemic  risk  nor  ensured  the  continuity  of  critical  functions;  moreover,  they  did  not  protect
depositors. These procedures require time, long negotiations as well as complex arrangements
with creditors, which may damage and further diminish the asset value of the distressed bank,
hence causing severe consequences for the real economy.
For  this  purpose,  the  new  Recovery  and  Resolution  Law  provides  the  Supervisory  and
Resolution Authorities  with  the  legal  capacity  and  the  necessary  instruments  for  restructuring
bank  operations,  in  the  event  its  possible  failure  jeopardizes  financial  stability  or  undermines
other objectives of the regulator. The aim is clear: on the one hand, we have the public interest
on financial stability, while, on the other hand, remain the shareholders of the bank, who have
voluntarily undertaken the risk by investing in the bank. If the shareholders rely on the possibility
of an implied state guarantee for banks, this constitutes a moral hazard on their part, therefore
increasing their risk appetite. The implementation of the Resolution Law formally eliminates the
basis for the expectation for any such guarantee.
Among the costs caused by the failure of a bank, contagion is probably the highest, since it turns
the problem of a single bank into a problem for the entire banking sector. It may happen for two
reasons:  due  to  the  spillover  effect  of  a  bank’s  exposure  towards  another,  as  well  as  due  to
public panic, that causes eventual massive bank runs. This channel is particularly pronounced
for  developing  economies,  where  contagion  is  faster  due  to  their  weak  financial  literacy,  the
historical  lack  of  bank  failures,  and  the  presence  of  weaker  institutions.  In  this  context,  the
resolution  regime  serves  as  a  tool  for  restoring  market  discipline  and  avoiding  the  risk  of
contagion. In essence, resolution is an integral part of banking supervision applied to the final
stage of a bank’s life, should measures taken during the standard or intensive supervision stages
fail to improve the situation of a distressed bank.
The drafting of the resolution regime was accompanied by the strengthening of the supervision
regulatory  requirements,  which  aim  to  increase  the  resilience  of  the  bank  and  strengthen  the
financial  market  structure  to  avoid  the  moral  hazard.  In  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  experts  have
reached the conclusion that there is no bank model that would perform well or poorly in times of
crisis. Different models of failing banks showed that the issue stemmed from undertaking high
risk,  financing  with  short-term  instruments  and  insufficient  protection  offered  by  capital,  even
where  minimum  requirements  were  met.  This  conclusion  has  been  reflected  in  higher
supervisory requirements for quantity and quality of capital and liquidity, limits on the leverage
ratio and maturity mismatch between assets and liabilities. The banking sector needs to comply
with these requirements within a defined medium-term framework.
Regulatory  measures  are  also  accompanied  by  the  consensus  on  the  need  for  structural
reforms in the financial system, namely, separation of risk-bearing financial speculation activities
from deposit collection activities, and issues related with too big to fail banks, by discouraging
their  excessive  growth.  The  biggest  lesson  of  the  financial  crisis  was  that  micro-prudential
supervision of banks was not sufficient to safeguard financial stability because the system as a
whole behaves differently from individual parts. In an effort to make themselves safer, financial
institutions  may  undertake  such  behaviours  that  collectively  damage  financial  stability.  The
banking  activity  takes  place  through  its  own  cycles,  known  as  financial  cycles,  which  may
deteriorate  the  business  cycle  of  the  real  economy.  Banks  are  exposed  to  collective
macroeconomic shocks, which weaken them, at the same time, thus affecting financial stability.
The understanding of this lesson dictated the need for macro-prudential supervision in addition to
the micro-prudential one. Among the most effective instruments of macro-prudential supervision
are the requirements for capital buffers to counter the creation of systemic imbalances, as well
as capital buffers for systemic banks, which being large enough, may cause social costs beyond
their  individual  dimension.  Through  this  new  capital  composition,  the  macro-prudential
instruments  manage  the  systemic  risk  before  it  materializes,  decreasing  the  probability  of
occurrence and, after its materialization, minimizing losses that are absorbed by the higher level
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
of capital.
But still a lot of work remains to be done.
It has long been recognized that a deeper financial integration also brings a better functioning of
the European Union. Yet, financial integration showed to be shallow and reversible and, after the
financial  crisis,  fragmentation  increased  against  centralization  and  integration.  The  measures
undertaken  to  reduce  liquidity  within  each  country  improved  the  national  financial  stability,  but
neglected  the  effect  on  other  countries.  The  banking  union  addressed  these  inadequacies  by
concentrating the national financial policies at the central level and aiming to fulfil two objectives:
to ensure banks’ soundness and promote a deeper integration of the banking sector.
The Single Supervisory Mechanism plays an important role in these objectives. A stronger and
more  uniform  supervision  enhances  banks’  stability  and  provides  them  with  a  more  coherent
framework  of  policies  on  cross-border  banking,  producing  benefits  compared  with  the
fragmented  system  of  national  supervision.  As  Mario  Draghi  says:  “Let’s  keep  in  mind  that
fragmentation starts with the decision by banks not to operate in regions where the risk-return of
lending is judged to be insufficient to remunerate their invested capital”.
Supervisors’ advice for banks in the post-crisis period remain the same: banks should adapt the
business model to be more effective and profitable, improve risk management and manage the
cleaning of the balance sheet from legacy assets. Despite the progress made, these tasks are
yet  to  be  completed  and  now  is  the  most  appropriate  time  to  finalize  them.  The  regulatory
framework is clearer and more complete (the implementation of Basel III is starting), supervision
is clearer in terms of methodologies and policies, and the application of FinTech allows banks for
new ways to do business efficiently. Lastly, and more importantly, the overall macroeconomic
framework is stabilised and the positive economic growth is stable.
The  framework  presented  above  is  a  good  guideline  to  address  the  remaining  post-crisis
challenges.  Is  the  adoption  of  international  standards  on  financial  stability  safeguarding
necessary?  The  answer  is  yes,  because  the  globalization  and  interconnection  of  the  banking
sector needs the standardization of prudential regulation. However, while adopting international
standards, it is important to keep in mind two issues: First, these standards have to adapt to the
development  level  of  the  country  and  calibrated  according  to  domestic  conditions.  Second,
international standards pose a minimum of requirements, leaving it at the discretion of individual
countries to undertake more stringent requirements.
The model of global integration is the economic model that has been adopted by most of the
transition  countries,  such  as Albania.  Under  this  guidance,  the Albanian  banking  market  has
demonstrated clear willingness and objectives for a swift harmonization with the legal framework
of  the  European  Union’s  banking  system,  as  well  as  with  its  significant  changes  since  2008.
Although there are no cases of bank failures in the history of the Albanian banking sector, we
have identified in our banking legislation the same loopholes found in other European economies.
The development of hypothetical scenarios for coping with a potential exposure of the Albanian
economy  to  the  Greek  sovereign  debt  crisis  evidenced  that  the  Bank  of  Albania  –  as  the
supervisory authority of the banking sector – did not have all the necessary legal instruments to
manage  insolvency  situations  in  systemically-important  banks.  This  need  for  a  new  legal
framework is addressed in both national and cross-border aspects, by the Bank Recovery and
Resolution Directive. In fact, the initial efforts to prepare and present the first recovery plan to the
Bank  of  Albania  started  in  2012.  The  relevant  Regulation  was  approved  by  the  Supervisory
Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  in  2014.  But,  of  course,  these  efforts  were  made  within  the
supervisory legal authority and, as such, they were not sufficient. For this reason, during 2015,
with  the  support  of  World  Bank’s  FinSAC  project,  the  Bank  of Albania  started  the  difficult  but
necessary work of harmonizing the European Directive into a new Albanian law.
The Law ‘'On the recovery and resolution of banks in the Republic of Albania'’ entered into force
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
in July 2017, vesting the Bank of Albania with a new attribute, i.e. the Resolution Authority. This
attribute  completes  the  financial  security  mechanism  of  the  banking  sector,  with  the  Bank  of
Albania responsible for regulating and supervising the banking sector, drafting macro-prudential
policies,  performing  the  function  of  the  lender  of  last  resort  as  well  as  the  implementation  of
banks’  resolution.  Together  with  the  deposit  insurance  scheme  provided  by  the  Deposit
Insurance Agency since 2002, the financial safety net framework in Albania is complete. For the
purposes  of  this  Law,  the  Resolution  Fund  was  created  with  contributions  from  the  banking
sector. This Fund aims to reach ALL 6.3 billion within 2027.
The  implementation  of  the Albanian  recovery  and  resolution  Law  consists  in  three  important
steps:           
The first step is the drafting of recovery plans by each bank operating in Albania, with reliable and
concrete scenarios, as well as defining the indicators that signal the deterioration of the financial
situation of a bank before it becomes irreversible. When drafting recovery plans, the bank should
create credible options to withstand stress scenarios, constructing mechanisms that are part of
the daily management of the banking business and that do not remain just part of a hypothetical
plan. Although drafting recovery plans is the task of individual banks, the Bank of Albania, in its
capacity  as  the  Supervisory  Authority,  plays  an  essential  role  in  assessing  the  quality  and
reliability of these plans.
During 2018, banks have prepared recovery plans based on a new bylaw adopted by the Bank of
Albania that sets out their detailed content. The opening panel of this Conference will present
concretely our assessment of these plans. In brief, we may say that our challenges remain the
same as those faced by other supervisory authorities, whether in European or regional countries.
In  sound  financial  situations,  such  recovery  planning  allows  the  Bank  of  Albania  to  deeply
understand  the  structure  and  activity  of  the  bank,  thus  supporting  our  supervisory  process  to
identify  areas  for  improvement,  as  well  as  bank’s  self-diagnosis  in  these  areas.  In  stressed
financial situations, the recovery plan is the main document the bank has to correct its difficulties
and, as such, it must be efficient, applicable and comprehensive.
The second step of the new crisis management framework is related with the early intervention
in the bank. This step is activated if, after the implementation of the recovery plans, the bank’s
actions  fail  to  improve  the  situation.  The  Bank  of Albania,  in  the  capacity  of  the  Supervisory
Authority, undertakes several concrete early intervention measures in the bank, before the bank
shows  signs  of  insolvency.  Currently,  we  are  in  the  process  of  drafting  bylaws  for  the  early
intervention implementation in accordance with the new legal requirements.
The  third  step  is  the  resolution  of  banks,  applied  by  the  Bank  of Albania  in  view  of  the  new
mandate. Similar to recovery plans, the resolution plans drafted by the Bank of Albania aim to
identify the legal and structural obstacles and difficulties with financial resources that banks face,
toward resolvability. In this regard, the resolution plans are one of the key instruments to facilitate
the Bank of Albania’s resolution implementation.
This year in April, the Bank of Albania approved a bylaw that defines the content of resolution
plans. Then banks were required to report a broad set of data for drafting these plans, based on
the  model  of  the  European  Banking Authority  and  we  are  currently  in  the  process  of  drafting
them.  The  drafting  of  the  banks  resolution  plans  is  complicated,  which  includes  complex  and
cross-border issues that must be implemented and coordinated within a short period of time.
Hence,  the  resolution  planning  is  an  on-going  process  and  a  long-term  mission  to  remove
obstacles  against  the  possibility  for  resolution  action  in  banks.  This  planning  does  not  mean
drafting an annual plan that is stored somewhere in some shelf and it is dusted off only when its
implementation is necessary; instead, it is the beginning of a long process of restructuring all
aspects  of  the  banking  business  that  may  hinder  this  process.  Our  point  of  view  is  that  this
process belongs equally to the Bank of Albania as the Resolution Authority and to the banks,
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
which must include its results into their daily business.
During the first cycle of this work in 2018, we have highlighted a number of issues that require
particular attention in planning, as well as in their following up by the banks:
The Bank of Albania must have access to qualitative data produced by banks, in order to
select the appropriate resolution strategy.
The  exact  identification  of  the  bank’s  operational  system  interconnected  with  the  critical
functions is important.
The  proper  understanding  of  contractual  agreements  and  their  respective  treatment  is
imperative, and, in particular
The provision of resolution funding sources constitutes a challenge.
Complying with the Minimum Requirement for Own funds and Eligible Liabilities (MREL), which
underpins  the  application  of  the  new  essential  resolution  instrument,  the  bail-in  instrument,
remain the key challenge for the medium-term period. Complying with MREL is a challenge for
countries  like  Albania,  due  to  the  capacity  of  the  domestic  market  to  absorb  (acquire  and
maintain) the subordinate debt that may serve to fulfil the Minimum Requirement as well as due
to the capacity of the banks to restructure funding resources, which currently consist largely of
deposits.  Consequently,  to  fulfil  this  obligation  an  interim  period  should  be  designed,  without
prejudice, in any case, to the main objective of resolution implementation.
Finally,  resolution  is  quite  a  challenging  process  for  emerging  and  advanced  economies.  The
banking sector in the Balkans is dominated by foreign-owned banks. In Albania, subsidiaries of
foreign  banks  account  for  around  78%  of  banking  sector  assets,  while  those  from  European
countries account for 48%. The Bank of Albania is the Resolution Authority for seven subsidiaries
of EU based banking groups, of which four are classified as systemically important under the
mandate  of  the  Single  Resolution  Board  (SRB).  Due  to  this,  the  signing  of  cooperation
agreements  between  the  resolution  authorities  of  the  banking  group  and  the  local  authorities
where  the  subsidiary  operates  is  very  important  for  coordinating  actions,  exchanging  data  for
planning  and  implementing  the  resolution,  and  coordinating  crisis  management.  I  have  the
pleasure  to  share  with  you  the  news  that  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  signed  an  important
cooperation  agreement  with  the  Single  Resolution  Board,  i.e.,  the  Resolution Authority  of  the
Banking Union, on 3 October 2018.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
This  Conference  is  the  culmination  of  our  work  over  the  past  18  months  for  developing  a
complete  framework  for  bank  recovery  and  resolution.  For  this  reason,  the  presence  of
colleagues  from  supervisory  and  resolution  authorities  from  various  entities  assumes  special
importance.  We  have  representatives  from  the  European  Union  at  the  central  level,  from
individual  countries  of  the  European  Union  and  representatives  from  countries  of  the  region,
national and foreign bankers as well as the representatives of the media. This presence means
sharing experiences and opportunity to evaluate what has been done.
I am confident that today, among other things, we will also build new bridges to coordinate our
efforts for a sustainable financial system, within and beyond geographical boundaries.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
