Bank of Uganda 
  Remarks by 
Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile,  
Governor, Bank of Uganda 
  18th East African Banking School: 
The Future of Banking in a Digital and Disruptive Environment 
   Pearl of Africa Hotel 
  August 6, 2018 
Mr.  Anthony  Mulindwa,  Chief  Executive  Officer  of 
the  Uganda  Institute  of  Banking  and  Financial 
Services 
Senior  Officials  from  the  EAC  Sister  Institutes  of 
Bankers 
Participants from our EAC Partner States 
 
Good morning ladies and gentlemen 
I would like to begin by welcoming you all to the East 
African Banking School and to commend the Uganda 
Institute of Banking and Financial Services for hosting 
the School. 
The  collaboration  between  the  Ugandan  Institute  of 
Banking and Financial Services and its counterparts in 
Kenya  and  Tanzania  in  organizing  this  Banking 
School  is  an  excellent  example  of  the  practical 
contribution,  which  regional  cooperation  at  the 
institutional  level  can  make  to  capacity  building  and 
professional training in our region.  
The  theme  for  this  year’s  Banking  School  is:  “The 
Future  of  Banking  in  a  Digital  and  Disruptive 
Environment”. It is a theme, which could not be more 
pertinent for the banking industry in East Africa. 
 Page 2 of 7 
The  adoption  of  digital  technologies  is  having  a 
profoundly  transforming  the  banking  industry.  Two 
aspects  of 
transformation  are  especially 
important.  
this 
First, digital technologies, such as mobile banking and 
internet banking, have made possible new methods of 
delivering  financial  services  to  customers.  This  has 
enabled  banks  to  expand  their  customer  base,  in 
particular  by  bringing  customers  into  the  banking 
market that had hitherto been excluded from access to 
banking  services,  because  it  was  not  commercially 
viable for banks to serve this segment of the potential 
market. As such, digitalization is making a substantial 
contribution 
inclusion, 
although its full potential in this regard has yet to be 
realised.  
enhancing 
financial 
to 
 financial  services. 
Over the last decade Kenya has been a global pioneer 
in  the  adoption  of  digital  technologies  to  transform 
the  nature  of 
this 
transformation  was  driven  by  the  growth  of  mobile 
money, which is primarily a payments service, but it 
is  now  evolving  into  mobile  banking  with  a  broader 
range of financial services.  
Initially 
 Page 3 of 7 
Secondly,  digital  technologies  have  enabled  the 
automation  of  a  wide  variety  of  tasks  previously 
performed  by  bank  staff.  It,  therefore,  offers  banks 
opportunities  to  reduce  their  operating  costs,  mainly 
through  automation  of  operations. 
Increasingly 
customers  can  conduct  transactions  with  their  banks 
around  the  clock  without  having  to  enter  a  banking 
hall or interact with any bank staff.  
The  adoption  of  digital  technologies  to  deliver 
financial services also creates challenges and risks for 
commercial  banks;  three  of  which  are  particularly 
worthy of note.  
First,  the  traditional  model  of  commercial  banking 
involves  establishing  long  term  relationships  with 
customers and supplying a range of financial services 
to  their  customers.  This  enables  banks  to  mobilise 
deposits  more  cheaply  and  to  reduce  the  costs  of 
transactions, thus making lending more commercially 
viable.  The  traditional  model  of  commercial  banking 
also  provides  synergies  between  different  types  of 
financial  services  –  payments,  deposits,  and  loans  – 
which allow banks to realise economies of scope.  
Digitalization  threatens  to  disrupt  the  traditional 
model of commercial banking.  
 Page 4 of 7 
In  particular,  digitalization  may  enable  non-bank 
service  providers  to  encroach  into  the  market  for 
some  of  the  key  services  offered  by  banks.  For 
example,  telecom  companies  can  offer  payment 
services  through  mobile  money.  This  will  diminish 
the incentives for the public to hold demand deposits 
in banks, which in turn threatens to erode the banks’ 
primary source of low cost funds.  
Secondly,  the  adoption  of  digital  technologies  will 
transform  the  spectrum  of  risks  which  banks  face.  In 
traditional banking business models, operational risks 
are  relatively  minor  compared  with  credit  risk  or 
market  risk,  but this  will  not  be  the  case  for  banking 
services which are dependent on digital platforms for 
their  delivery.  Banks  will  be  exposed  to  the  risk  that 
their digital platforms will suffer breakdowns, which 
will  disrupt  the  provision  of  services  to  their 
customers.  They  will  also  face  risks  of  cyber  fraud 
perpetrated on their customers’ accounts.  
Ensuring  that  their  IT  systems  are  resilient  and  that 
their customers’ accounts can be protected from cyber 
fraud  should  be  a  priority  for  commercial  banks. 
Banks  cannot  afford  to  lose  the  trust  of  their 
customers with respect to the safety of their accounts. 
 Page 5 of 7 
Digitalization will thus add a new layer of complexity 
to the risk management of banks.   
Thirdly,  digitalization  will  have  major  implications 
for  the  skill  requirements  of  bank  staff.  Banks  will 
need  to  employ  staff  with  highly  specialized  IT 
expertise  who  can  maintain  their  IT  systems  and 
rectify  faults  in  these  systems  very  quickly,  to  avoid 
disruption of services to their customers.  
Clearly people with these types of skills are in scarce 
supply  on  the  labour  market  in  East  Africa.  The 
demands  on  managerial  staff  will  also  evolve.  Bank 
managers will need to develop a good understanding 
of how their IT systems work and how they link into 
the  overall  operations  of  banks,  so  that  they  can 
identify  where  operational  risks  are  likely  to  arise 
from and make strategic decisions about the use of IT 
systems.  
Over the course of the next five days, you will hear a 
variety  of  presentations  from  experts  in  the  field  on 
topics related to the digitalization of banking services, 
including  presentations  on  how  banks 
can 
strategically position  themselves in rapidly changing 
financial  markets,  new  paradigms 
financial 
for 
 Page 6 of 7 
inclusion,  risk  based  oversight  and  regulatory 
compliance and career development.  
You  will  have  the  benefit  of  an  excellent  team  of 
resource  persons,  most  of  who  are  senior  officials  in 
the financial services industry in East Africa, and who 
have come here to share their expertise with you. I am 
confident  that  the  presentations  and  discussions  in 
this  Banking  School  will  offer  you  valuable  insights 
and contribute to the development of your careers. 
Thank you for listening. 
  Page 7 of 7 
