       Closing Remarks by Ms Caroline Abel 
Governor of the Central Bank of Seychelles 
4th ESAAMLG Public-Private Sector Dialogue on AML/CFT 
Saturday September 8, 2018 
Venue: Savoy Resort and Spa 
Ministers and Members of the ESAAMLG Council of Ministers, 
Permanent Secretaries, 
Chairman & members of the Task Force of Senior Officials, 
Executive Secretary of the ESAAMLG, 
Private Sector Participants, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 We have come to the end of this 4th ESAAMLG Public Sector Dialogue on 
Anti Money Laundering and Combatting the Financing of Terrorism. 
Over the last day and a half, we have gone to great lengths to explore the 
chosen  topics.  It  has  been  a  great  opportunity  for  us  to  have  a  better 
overview of the extent of the challenges that exist in our jurisdictions and 
the  region.  Government  officials,  policy  makers  and  private  sector 
representatives  present,  have  also  had  the  opportunity  to  make  their 
valuable contributions, share experiences, and propose solutions. 
 1 
All in all, it has been an enriching exchange. It is my sincere hope that 
as we leave here today, we will endeavour to bring this dialogue back to 
our respective organisations, and home countries, and further build on 
the foundation that has already been laid. 
It is evidently clear that we need to have strong AML/CFT frameworks in 
our countries and the region. However, it is not enough to say so, but we 
need to work towards achieving this objective. 
Several best practices have been shared, which we can apply or adapt 
to address our specific situations and challenges. We also have 
resourceful organisations, like the IMF, World Bank, the FATF & UNODC 
present here today, and I take this opportunity to call on these partners 
to assist us. 
It is imperative that we also have close collaboration between key 
stakeholders as this is crucial to addressing all of the issues that we 
have been discussing, because as we have seen these are all cross 
cutting issues and cannot be dealt with by the government, the law 
enforcement authorities or the private sector alone. 
Another key message that has come out of this dialogue is the need for 
increased communication and education. Having strong AML/CFT 
frameworks in place would not be effective, if there is no communication 
and engagement between the concerned partners to address critical 
issues. 
To conclude this evening, I would like to express my sincere 
appreciation to each and everyone who have contributed towards the 
success of this event. 
Firstly, I would like to thank the ESAAMLG Council of Ministers for the 
privilege afforded to the Central Bank of Seychelles to host this high 
level dialogue.  
I also wish to thank both the public and private sector participants, for 
the overwhelming response to the invitation to attend the event, and for 
your active participation. 
To our panellists, thank you for your well prepared presentations and 
eloquent sharing of your experiences and expertise. 
We also thank the moderators, who have also done a great job at 
chairing the presentation of each topics and engaging the audience to 
 2 
contribute towards the debate, as well as the rapporteurs for taking 
notes and highlighting the key issues that have been raised. 
I am hopeful that the ESAAMLG Secretariat will work towards the 
implementation of all recommendations that have come out of this 
exercise. 
My sincere appreciation also goes to the staff of the Central Bank of 
Seychelles for their hard work in putting this event together. 
As we end, I would like to wish our esteemed international guests and 
delegates, a safe and pleasant journey, back to your respective homes.  
For those who are staying in Seychelles for a few more days, do take a 
moment to explore the islands, which boast some of the most breath-
taking beaches and amazing sceneries. 
We look forward to welcoming many of you back in Seychelles, in April 
next year, when we host the ESAAMLG Workshop on Digital financial 
services, Bureau de Change and Money remittances. 
I thank you all for your attention. 
    3 
