Ong  Chong  Tee:  Technological  innovation  and  supervision  of
financial institutions
Keynote speech by Mr Ong Chong Tee, Deputy Managing Director (Financial Supervision) of the
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  Asia  Securities  Industry  &amp;  Financial  Markets
Association (ASIFMA) Annual Conference 2018, Singapore, 1 November 2018.
 Mr Mark Austen, CEO ASIFMA,
Distinguished guests,
Ladies and gentlemen,
1     Good morning. Thank you for inviting me to join you at this 2018 ASIFMA Annual Conference.
Post-crisis Regulatory Reforms
2     It has been ten years since the Global Financial Crisis. Many of you will be familiar with the
post-crisis reforms to make the financial system more stable and resilient, such as on the quality
and quantity of banking regulatory capital and the enhanced liquidity requirements. A minimum
leverage ratio has also been introduced as a “back-stop” to complement the risk-weighted capital
requirements.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  also  led  various  work  to  address  “too-big-to-fail”
concerns, and Global Systemically Important Banks (G-SIBs) are now subject to higher capital,
more intense supervision and resolution planning requirements.
3          In  the  capital  markets,  we  have  also  seen  important  regulatory  developments.  Take  for
example, the work of the G20 OTC derivatives reforms. Almost all the G20 jurisdictions as well
as key financial centres such as Singapore and Hong Kong have or are putting in place their
regulatory  frameworks  for  trade  reporting,  central  clearing  and  platform  trading.  These  will  be
supplemented  by  new  margin  requirements  for  non-centrally  cleared  OTC  derivatives  and
extension  of  regulations  to  all  derivatives  markets  intermediaries.  In  Singapore,  we  have  also
introduced a regulatory framework for financial benchmarks.
4     The actual implementation of the new requirements including those overseen by various
standard setting bodies are ongoing and will be done over several years for two good reasons:
one, a number of the reforms will require new regulations, as well as changes to systems and
processes  in  financial  institutions;  and  two,  a  phased  approach  allows  authorities  to  assess
impact and any unintended consequences, for review and fine-tuning of the new rules.
5     Meanwhile, national authorities have also sought to strengthen our respective regimes in
other  ways.  For  instance,  we  have  enhanced  a  number  of  areas  relating  to  retail  investor
protection. We have expanded our regulatory perimeter to include less conventional investment
products such as gold buy-back schemes and land banking. In doing so, such schemes will be
subject to similar safeguards such as information disclosures and authorisation requirements as
for conventional financial products. As another example, we have also imposed additional rules
on capital market intermediaries in relation to client protection such as safeguarding of monies
and assets for margined OTC derivatives, due diligence on custodians and better disclosures.
Technology Revolution and Financial Services
6     In the last ten years, the financial landscape has also been shaped by a potent force of
change – what some have referred to as the Technology Revolution.
7     Technology has always been an important driver for innovation in financial markets. But this
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
time, technology and its use has permeated into our lives through the ubiquity of smart devices.
This coupled with advances in “AIDA”, or Artificial Intelligence and Data Analytics, mean that new
technology can transform or create new business models in ways unseen previously. The rise of
social  networks  and  the  digital  ecosystems,  enabled  by  BigTech  and  FinTech  players,  have
spurred  new  business  collaborations  including  with  conventional  financial  institutions  that  cut
across economic sectors. Advancements in distributed ledger technology (blockchain) have also
opened up new possibilities to disrupt existing market infrastructure.
8         Already,  FinTech  developments  have  revolutionised  the  way  financial  services  can  be
delivered. Some examples in capital markets include:
(a)  In  fund  and  wealth  management,  the  rise  of  robo-advisory  services  and  AI-driven
investment management;
(b) In equity research, the use of AI to generate analyst reports; and
(c) In primary and secondary markets, blockchain-based platforms that can substitute for
central  trusted  parties  by  providing  an  alternate  reliable  protocol  for  fund-raising,  trade
execution, settlement and custody.
Regulatory Stance to Innovation
9      Let me broadly share MAS’ stance towards innovation in financial services.
10    Financial institutions have always been at the forefront of innovative use of technology. To
the  extent  that  new  developments  in  technology  and  business  models  bring  benefits  to  the
broader  economy,  allow  improvements  in  business  management,  and  give  customers  better
choices or services, these are to be encouraged and even supported. MAS therefore takes the
view  that  thoughtful  and  purposeful  use  of  technology  to  drive  innovation  have  been  and  will
continue to be important for the financial industry to progress. In our regulatory role, the MAS also
proactively  engages  the  industry  both  to  understand  and  even  to  shape  the  technology-driven
transformations in financial services.
11     Technology can bring about new or heightened risks when mis-used or abused. So while
MAS is supportive of financial institutions to experiment with technology to harness potential new
opportunities, or to innovate existing processes, we also require that they understand and can
manage the associated risks. It is this philosophy that underpins the MAS to be among the first
regulators in the world to adopt a regulatory sandbox regime.
12     MAS regulatory sandbox provides a constrained but more flexible space for players seeking
to test new technology or approaches before a full launch. Such sandbox pilots are held within
defined  risk  parameters  and  are  time-bound.  These  restrictions  help  to  limit  the  impact  from
unsuccessful applicants but equally important, they allow MAS to also understand the new model
up close – how it is run, how the technology or its application is used, how the risks are managed
and the value proposition to clients before mainstream use and scalability. This will also allow the
MAS to calibrate our final rules that are appropriate to the new business model or start-up while
addressing any level-playing field concerns.
13         As  another  example,  the  MAS  recently  issued  a  consultation  paper  on  changes  to  our
Recognised Market Operator (or “RMO”) regime. Under the current approach, Singapore-based
market  operators  must  be  Approved  Exchanges  if  they  are  systemically  important,  or  else
regulated as RMOs. But new forms of market places have emerged – such as trading facilities
that  make  use  of  blockchain  technology  or  peer-to-peer  platforms  without  intermediaries.  Our
regulatory  framework  will  need  to  be  flexible  to  accommodate  innovative  business  models  by
market operators with rules that are commensurate with the risks including factors such as retail
access and scale of business.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
14     There have been some queries on our regulatory stance towards crypto-currencies, or
more generally, digital tokens and ICOs (initial coin offerings). We have issued a public advisory
to  caution  those  who  “invest”  in  crypto-tokens  to  do  so  with  caution  and  to  understand  their
characteristics including being volatile and non-legal tender.
15          MAS  has  also  issued  a  guide  on  digital  token  offerings  last  year  to  explain  that  our
regulatory  treatment  depends  on  the  digital  tokens’  inherent  characteristics.  For  utility  tokens,
which are for restricted usage within a defined set of products or services, these are not subject
to MAS regulations. On the other hand, for payment tokens which are designed to be an alternate
form of a medium of exchange, the intermediaries processing these tokens will come into our
regulatory  ambit  under  the  proposed  Payment  Services  Bill.  This  is  to  ensure  that  these
providers  adopt  the  necessary  measures  and  controls  to  manage  money  laundering  and
terrorism financing risks. Finally, there are digital tokens that represent ownership interest akin to
securities,  debentures  or  collective  investment  scheme  products.  These  will  be  subject  to
existing  laws  under  our  Securities  and  Futures  Act  (SFA)  including  investor  protection
safeguards, as for conventional securities.
16     Technology is not only an enabler for the private sector. Many financial regulators also
actively use technology tools and solutions to augment or improve surveillance, supervision and
enforcement actions. More than a year ago, the MAS set up a dedicated SupTech Office to serve
as  an  expertise  hub  to  support  our  line  supervisors  across  banking,  insurance  and  capital
markets. There are several ongoing projects to support business process automation and the
adoption of enhanced supervisory tools and applications. We are also exploring the use of Data
APIs  to  streamline  the  submission  of  regulatory  data,  and  “live  dashboards”  for  better
visualisation  of  trends  and  analyses.  Our  supervisors  will  also  be  incorporating  the  use  of
Artificial  Intelligence  and  Machine  Learning  to  support  big  data  and  network  analytics  in  our
surveillance  and  enforcement  work.  Collectively,  these  and  other  SupTech  capabilities  will
complement  the  industry’s  drive  towards RegTech  for  better  risk  management  and  regulatory
compliance.
17     As financial services increasingly become digital, management of technology-related risks
especially  cybersecurity  is  paramount.  MAS  recently  issued  a  consultation  paper  on  a  set  of
mandatory  Cyber  Hygiene  requirements.  In  Singapore,  the  new  Cyber  Security  Act  also
established a legal framework for the protection of critical information infrastructure that include
those in our key financial institutions.
18     The increased uses of AI and data analytics have also led the MAS to work with industry
partners to develop a set of principles that promote fair, ethical and responsible use of data in
financial services.
Conclusion
19     Disruption is often an inevitable part of innovation. The ongoing waves of new technology
will present exciting possibilities to uplift the range, quality and delivery of financial services. They
also offer financial institutions new ways to be more effective and efficient. But the adoption of
technology  or  simply  being  more  digital  can  also  open  up  new  vulnerabilities  if  not  properly
understood and managed– such as in area of cybersecurity risks.
20     Notwithstanding the opportunities and challenges that technology and digitalisation present,
it  is  worthwhile  to  remember  that  the  fundamental  principles  underpinning  a  sound  and
progressive financial centre, and the capital market place, have not changed. These are:
(a) Markets should be fair, orderly and transparent;
(b) Intermediaries should act in their clients’ best interest;
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
(c) Infrastructure must be efficient, safe, and resilient;
21         A  financial  sector  must  ultimately  be  purposeful  in  supporting  the  broad  spectrum  of
economic activities including to facilitate savings, investments, insurance, payments for goods
and services and credit intermediation.
22     I am sure that the forum today will be a good occasion to exchange views and to gather
new insights.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
