Continuity Plus Plus in the Domestic FX Market 1 
Mr. Deng Jun, Bank of China Manila Branch Country Head, Bank Heads participating 
as  initial  members  of  the  Philippine  Peso  -  Renminbi  trading  community,  partners  in  the 
financial services industry, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
 
I am delivering this message on behalf of Governor Nestor A. Espenilla, Jr.  
 
The  Governor  conveys  his  sincere  congratulations  to  each  one  who  toiled  to  bring 
about  today’s  landmark  signing  of  the  Memorandum  of  Agreement  (MoA)  establishing  a 
local Renminbi trading market.  He wishes he was here to witness this milestone. 
 
Governor Espenilla and the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) fully support the signing 
of  the  MoA.  It  signals  the  start  of  a  non-discriminatory  and  well-functioning  trading 
community.  It  diversifies  currency  options  and  strengthens  the  FX  market  governance 
framework.    It  builds  trust  and  investor  protection  mechanisms,  supports  product 
innovation and market development. 
 Continuity ++ and BSP’s FX Reforms 
 
Part  and  parcel  of  the  BSP’s  Continuity  ++  policy  reform  agenda  is  the  continued 
liberalization and deepening of the FX market.   
 
 Our  goal  is  to  ensure  a  more  organized  and  smoothly-functioning  local  FX  market 
supportive of a flexible and market-determined exchange rate.   
 
The BSP acknowledges that a system of governance over the local FX market is key.   
 
Accordingly, it has proposed a governance framework where it shall oversee the FX 
market pursuant to its mandate to determine the exchange rate policy of the country.  The 
framework  will  allow  industry  players  with  legitimate  economic  reasons  to  establish  a 
market  in  any  particular  currency  pair.    The  framework  will  ensure  compliance  with  laws, 
rules  and  regulations,  and  market-determined  standards  to  instill  discipline,  integrity,  and 
accountability among market participants and to uphold orderly market operation.   
 
Under  the  framework,  non-discriminatory  prudential  rules  shall  cover  market-
determined  exchange  rates,  pre-  and  post-trade  transparency  and  efficient  settlement  of 
the peso leg central bank money.   
 
The  framework  will  depend  on  resilient  and  reliable  infrastructure  and  will  require 
effective audit and review. The BSP also envisions that there will be effective mechanisms 
for market participants to handle and respond to any improper practice and behavior. 
                                                  
1  Speech delivered by Deputy Governor Chuchi G. Fonancier, FSS on behalf of Governor Nestor A. Espenilla, Jr. during the 
signing ceremony of the Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) of the members of the Philippine RMB Trading Community on 
30 October 2018 at the Manila A & B, Makati Shangri-la, Makati City 
 Page 1 of 3 
This is the goal. 
 
The significance of today’s event is that ...  it is a bold step towards this goal. 
 
Today’s  MoA  signing  between  and  among  initial  members  of the  PHP-RMB  trading 
market is consistent with the BSP’s vision of allowing FX market participants to be involved 
in the rule-making process to enhance governance and transparency in the FX market.  
 
It promotes a level playing field, where participants multilaterally bind themselves to 
abide by their mutually-agreed upon FX market rules, as well as comply with the applicable 
laws  and  BSP  regulations.  Ultimately,  this  will  uphold  fairness  and  integrity in  the  local  FX 
market.   
  Why Establish a PHP-RMB Market? 
 
The  development  of  a  local  Renminbi  (RMB)  trading  market  in  the  Philippines  is 
timely and deserves particular attention.  
 
➢ China is the country’s top bilateral trading partner.  Total trade is worth USD 14.1 
billion or 16.6 percent of total trade as of end-June 2018.   
 
Development of a Philippine RMB trading market facilitates greater use of the RMB 
as  a  settlement  currency,  resulting  in  payment  efficiency  and  less  costs  for  Philippine 
exporters and importers. 
 
➢  The  RMB  has  been  included  in  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  Special 
Drawing  Rights  (SDR)  basket  as  a  fifth  currency,  along  with  the  U.S.  dollar,  the  euro,  the 
Japanese yen and the British pound.  Hence, the RMB has become one of the main freely 
usable currencies of IMF members like the Philippines. 
 
➢  The  RMB  is  now  one  of  the  most  actively  traded  emerging  market  currencies 
overtaking the Swedish Krona (SEK), the Hong Kong Dollar (HKD), the Swiss Franc (CHF), and 
the Australian Dollar (AUD) as most used currency for global payments. 
  
At  present,  the  Philippine  peso  and  RMB  are  priced  against  the  US  dollar  as  an 
intermediate peg.  This subjects them to conversion and other friction costs.  
 
By  establishing  the  PHP-RMB  Trading  Market,  the  Philippine  peso  can  be  directly 
priced  against  the  RMB.    Initial  participating  bank  members  can  streamline  their  currency 
conversion costs via a fair, transparent, and resilient domestic FX trading platform. 
 
Morever,  banks  can  now  manage  their  RMB  liquidity  requirements  and  improve 
services with RMB deposits dedicated to payment and fund transfer needs.  RMB users are 
allowed better liquidity management, faster conversion, and available hedging facilities for 
trade-related and payment requirements. The PHP-RMB trading market also enhances price 
discovery with supply and demand determining FX rates. 
 Page 2 of 3 
 
Establishment  of  a  PHP-RMB  Trading  Market  streamlines  currency  conversions 
through  a  fair,  transparent,  and  resilient  domestic  platform.    This  brings  about  efficiency, 
lowered costs and encourages investments. 
 
Today’s MoA signing is only the beginning.  
 
Pending  organization  of  the  Central  Governing  Body,  you  -  initial  members  of  the 
Philippine  RMB  trading  community  -  have  voluntarily  sought  to  enter  into  a  binding 
agreement setting a framework and the scope of the RMB Market. We at the Bangko Sentral 
ng Pilipinas commend and support you in this meaningful initiative. 
 
As our conduits in the FX reform agenda, we reaffirm our collaborative partnership 
with all of you in steering our financial market towards the right direction amid challenges in 
our economy and financial markets.  
 
You  are  our  staunch  partners  in  the  shared  responsibility  of  promoting  a  vibrant 
domestic financial market towards sustained economic growth for all Filipinos. 
 
Congratulations and mabuhay! 
 
Thank you for your kind attention.  
 
 
 
 Page 3 of 3 
