Gent Sejko: Address on remittances of the Albania diaspora
Welcome address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the high-level meeting
on the remittances of the Albanian diaspora, Tirana, 14 December 2018.
Your Excellency, Minister Majko,
Dear guests and colleagues,
 It  is  a  special  pleasure  to  open  today’s  meeting,  which  takes  place  after  a  year  of  intensive
coordinated  effort  between  our  institutions  toward  the  achievement  of  common  objectives  in
relation  to  remittances  of  the  diaspora,  and  other  important  issues.  Today,  a  year  after  the
Memorandum of Understanding was signed, I have the pleasure of noting that the materialization
of these efforts has been reflected in the undertaking of a number of commitments and projects
in pursuit of the objectives set out below.
The importance of remittances to the Albanian economy, to family welfare and to development in
general  is  highlighted  in  many  communications  of  the  Bank  of Albania.  In  this  context,  during
2018,  the  Bank  of  Albania  engaged  its  resources  in  developments  aimed  at  creating  the
necessary prerequisites for an efficient channelling of such incomes into the Albanian economy.
International initiatives in the field of remittances underline the importance of reducing the costs
and increasing the efficiency of remittance services, thus implying the need to intervene in the
retail payment market, in both remittance-sending and remittance-receiving countries.
For this reason, the Bank of Albania, as we have pointed out at the beginning of this cooperation,
has  engaged  in  a  series  of  projects  aimed  at  analysing  the  domestic  market  with  a  view  to
identifying and addressing the needs for intervention. These projects are assisted by the World
Bank and funded by the SECO.  I take this opportunity to once again thank these institutions for
their contribution and support.
Moreover,  the  Bank  of  Albania  and  the  National  Payment  Systems  Committee  has  already
adopted and is implementing the national strategy for the retail payments market. This strategy
aims  to  create  a  contemporary  and  comprehensive  market  of  retail  payments,  supported  by
secure  and  efficient  infrastructures,  as  well  as  by  a  wide  range  of  payment  instruments  and
services  that  meet  the  needs  of  financially  capable  individuals  to  make  payments  across  the
country. Incorporating financial inclusion into the Bank of Albania’s objectives, this strategy has
set ambitious quantitative targets aimed at doubling the number of bank account holders (from
38% in 2014 to 70% in 2022) and increasing the number of electronic payments per capita (from
4.3 to 2016, to 10 in 2022).
However, in order to achieve these objectives, a concrete and detailed action plan is needed.
This action plan would require the support of all the stakeholders in the payments market, as well
as interventions in many aspects, such as:
1.  improvement of the applicable legal and regulatory framework;
2.  development and improvement of financial services infrastructures;
3.  expansion of the number and use of accounts and payment services;
4.  expansion of access points for these services;
5.  increase of education, awareness and financial inclusion;
6.  increase of the volumes of transactions processed by payment systems.
While the strategy was only recently approved, in June, concrete steps have been taken in this
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
regard, for example, the drafting of the bill “On Payment Services in the Republic of Albania",
which transposes the revised directive of the European Union “On payment services” (PSD2).
The adoption and implementation of this bill is considered to have a direct impact for fostering
competition and innovation in the field of retail payments, thus promoting efficiency and reduction
of  the  costs  for  using  them.  Moreover,  the  bill  is  expected  to  enhance  transparency  in  the
services  provided  by  the  market  and  to  create  a  consolidated  framework  on  consumer
protection, a very important component for our market. Last but not least, the bill also aims to
expand the presence of bank services across the territory of the country (including rural areas).
Beyond  legal  improvements,  important  steps  have  been  noted  in  the  framework  of  financial
education. I would like to highlight the initiative undertaken in cooperation with the World Bank,
and funded by the SECO, for the implementation of Project Greenback 2.0 in Berat. This project
consists in enhancing financial inclusion and financial education for emigrants and their families,
who receive these funds, as well as in establishing effective channels in terms of costs for the
delivery of these funds.
In addition, to expand the market knowledge regarding remittances, in June, the Bank of Albania
published  “Remittances: A  support  for  development".  This  publication  is  entirely  dedicated  to
remittances and adopts a comprehensive approach to various aspects in the domestic market.
Some  of  these  aspects  are  the  macro-level  analysis  of  remittances  and  their  impact  on
development  in  general  and  on  the  receiving  families;  the  analysis  of  the  infrastructure  of  the
remittances  market  in  Albania,  and  the  need  for  intervention,  as  well  as  providing  adequate
statistics on remittances.
An important step in the framework of financial education was also undertaken by the Albanian
Association of Banks. In June, a memorandum of cooperation was signed on establishing the
Albanian  Network  for  Financial  Education  and  fostering  inter-institutional  cooperation  and
coordination in the field of financial education.
However, there is still much to be done, despite the developments I mentioned earlier. In this
context,  I  would  like  to  invite  you  all  to  continue  with  the  efforts  made  so  far,  with  the  same
intensity, in order to modernize the domestic payment market.
In the medium term, the Bank of Albania will focus its efforts on a number of initiatives, notably on
further legal developments and infrastructure improvements.
An important step in the medium term is the drafting of the bill “On the payment account". The bill
will  transpose  the  European  Union  Directive  “On  the  Payments  Account”  and  promote
transparency  by  creating  a  public  register  to  present  all  commissions  applied  by  institutions,
which can be easily compared.
At the same time, during this period, the Bank of Albania will engage in a number of infrastructure
developments that support financial inclusion, reduce the costs of using these instruments and is
estimated  to  have  an  impact  on  the  remittance  market,  mainly  from  the  point  of  view  of
remittance receivers and their use. Here we can mention the creation of a national platform for
processing  payments  in  real  time  (instant  payment  and  processing  of  card  payments).  The
platform  creates  conditions  for  the  development  of  innovative  and  low-cost  services  and  also
aims at market segments that create ample volumes by targeting state institution payments as
well as daily payments that Albanian citizens make.
Last but not least, I would like to thank the Government of Albania for the importance it places on
this matter and its continuous support. In particular, I would like to thank the ministries such as
the Ministry of Diaspora and the Ministry of Finance and Economy for their support and fruitful
cooperation.  I  am  confident  that  we  will  continue,  with  the  same  intensity,  our  joint  efforts  to
integrate this very important factor into the Albanian economy at the fastest and broadest extent
possible. 
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thank you!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
