Yannis Stournaras: The birth of inter-war central banks - building a
new monetary order
Welcome remarks by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the Bank of
Greece  Economic  History  Conference  "The  birth  of  inter-war  central  banks:  building  a  new
monetary order", Athens, 2 November 2018.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It is my great pleasure to welcome you to this international conference, devoted to the Birth of
inter-war  central  banks,  organised  by  the  Bank  of  Greece,  itself  one  of  the  offspring  of  this
institutionally fertile period.
It was 1926 when the Greek government first approached the Financial Committee of the League
of Nations, seeking its help to settle old debts and raise a new loan on international markets. The
money was needed quite urgently. After a decade of wars, which had culminated in the abortive
Asia Minor campaign and the forced population exchange of 1922, the Greek economy needed
an  injection  of  capital  to  heal  its  wounds,  settle  its  refugees  and  build  up  its  economic
infrastructure.  Yet  its  international  credit  standing  lay  in  tatters;  wartime  obligations  remained
unsettled; expenditures far outstripped public revenues; inflation was soaring, and the drachma
had lost more than 90% of its value.
The  League  of  Nations,  relying  heavily  on  input  from  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  Treasury,
promptly dispatched a group of experts to study the Greek situation and report back to Geneva.
Their report was published in 1927. Along the inevitable admonitions about fiscal prudence and
administrative reform, the foreign experts highlighted the absence of a modern central bank: an
institution  charged  solely  with  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  free  from  political  or  business
interference.  The  sole  note-issuing  authority  at  the  time  was  the  National  Bank  of  Greece  (or
Ethniki, as most in this audience know her). But Ethniki also happened to be the country’s largest
commercial  bank,  with  strong  ties  to  business  and  politics.  If  Greece  were  to  re-join  the  gold
standard and thus return to the fold of ‘stable’ countries, the National Bank would have to give up
its commercial operations and focus exclusively on central banking – or so the League argued, at
least.
The report was not well received. Neither by Greek politicians, who lamented foreign interference
in  the  country’s  domestic  affairs;  nor  by  the  National  Bank  itself,  which  faced  the  prospect  of
giving up its most profitable line of business. After several months of acrimonious negotiations, a
compromise was finally struck: the National Bank would maintain its commercial activities and
cede responsibility for monetary policy – along with all corresponding assets and liabilities – to a
new institution, which would simply be called the Bank of Greece.
And so it was. With a League of Nations Protocol as its birth certificate, the new bank began its
operations  in  the  spring  of  1928.  The  product  of  an  unpalatable  deal  to  obtain  much  needed
foreign credit, the bank was greeted with scepticism, if not outright animosity at first. As Horace
Finlayson, the British consultant appointed to monitor the agreement in Athens would explain in a
letter to Sir Otto Niemeyer, the Director of the Bank of England:
“the private banks still assume an attitude of sullen hostility […]. This is bound to continue so
long as the Bank of Greece continues to work in a position of semi-complete isolation. For the
time  being,  it  is  nobody’s  child  and  its  real  activities  are  little  more  than  those  of  a  rather
1
pretentious exchange-shop.”
Those lines were written in October 1928. A year later, stock markets in the City of London and
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Wall  Street  would  crash,  heralding  a  series  of  events  that  would  bring  inter-war  central  bank
cooperation and the gold standard crashing down with them. Greece’s stabilisation proved short-
lived: by 1932, the country was off gold and back in default. As a newly born orphan, the Bank
thus  took  its  first  steps  in  the  years  of  the  Great  Depression.  It  spent  its  early  childhood
navigating the treacherous waters of the thirties, tangled in the web of barter agreements and
foreign exchange controls that had become the norm.
Interestingly  enough,  it  was  these  very  dire  circumstances  that  helped  transform  the  “rather
pretentious  exchange-shop”  into  a  powerful  agent  of  economic  policy.  On  the  one  hand,  the
advent of the crisis forced commercial banks to come knocking to the door of their lender of last
resort.  On  the  other,  the  sudden  retreat  of  the  economic  liberalism  signalled  the  triumph  of
discretion over automaticity: as economic policy became more interventionist, the authority of the
Bank of Greece expanded. On the eve of the Second World War, the orphan had emerged as a
fully-fledged banking institution, albeit one closer to the state than originally envisaged.
The war brought further loss of independence, along with crippling hyperinflation, before stability
was gradually restored in the fifties and sixties. Yet through these many trials – if not because of
them – the Bank of Greece gradually regained its independence and earned its place at the heart
of the financial system, only to become one of the principal pillars of economic stability in the
country. This was the very role it was called upon to confirm during the recent financial crisis,
whilst maintaining its independence from political or business interference.
Today,  safeguarding  the  independence  of  central  banks  from  undue  political  and  business
influence  is  once  again  an  issue  that  draws  much  attention.  Defending  the  independence  of
Central Banks is not only an issue of price stability but also long-term economic sustainability
and  financial  stability.  I  am  sure  that  all  those  here  today  participating  in  the  Conference  are
keenly aware and sensitive to this issue.
Such  had  been  the  founding  principles  of  the  Bank  of  Greece  back  in  1928.  90  years  have
passed since those principles were first laid down. The Bank of Greece is no longer young. More
importantly,  however,  it  is  no  longer  an  orphan  –  despite  the  occasional  attempts  to  make  it
appear  so.  It  belongs  to  a  large  European  family  with  strong  institutional  ties  and  a  common
purpose.
On this, the 90th anniversary since we first opened our doors to the public, we are revisiting our
past and contemplating our future. But we have chosen to do this through a comparative and
international lens.
For the Greek experience was hardly unique: the 1920s and 1930s witnessed the creation of a
string  of  new  central  banks,  across  several  countries.  More  often  than  not,  their  birth  was
midwifed by ‘money doctors’ from the Bank of England, the Banque de France or the Federal
Reserve: people such as Niemeyer, Siepmann or Strakosh, whose names litter the archives of
many inter-war central banks, including that of the Bank of Greece. Some of the new institutions
were established to exorcise wartime inflation and restore access to credit; others were born out
of the dissolution of empires, or the weakening of ties to imperial colonies; all of them reflected
an  attempt  to  ‘return  to  normalcy’,  by  rebuilding  an  international  monetary  order  and  restoring
cooperation in the aftermath of a devastating world war.
This ‘return to normalcy’ proved an illusion. The Great Depression soon challenged the viability of
this order and forced many of the new-born institutions to re-evaluate their priorities and their
relationship to the state and with each other. The questions facing each one were similar; the
answers they gave – less so. Over the next two days, fifteen prominent scholars from eleven
countries will present their work on different institutional or national experiences in the inter-war
years; I thank them for being here and look forward to listening to their contributions.
I would also like to thank the Centre for Culture, Research and Documentation of the Bank of
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Greece,  and  its  Director,  Mr.  Panagiotis  Panagakis.  Our  economic  historian  and  Scientific
Advisor  to  the  Historical  Archive,  Mr.  Andreas  Kakridis,  who  is  the  heart  and  soul  of  the
conference. The staff at my Office, our valuable Communication Section, the security officers, as
well as numerous other colleagues at the Bank of Greece, without whom this conference would
not be possible.
The  Bank  of  Greece  is  committed  to  promoting  historical  research,  particularly  research  in
economic  history.  Yet  the  past  is  most  interesting  when  it  informs  our  understanding  of  the
present and future. Policy reactions to the recent financial crisis were shaped by perceptions –
and often misperceptions – of the past, particularly the inter-war years. In this context, I am also
pleased  to  welcome  several  of  my  esteemed  colleagues  from  other  European  central  banks,
who are joining us for this conference. Their presence honours us and underlines the connection
to the present and future of central banking. We will have much more time to talk about this later
today, during our panel discussion.
But first, let us turn our gaze to the past and start our journey through the inter-war years. I wish
everyone a fruitful conference and look forward to stimulating discussions!
1
Page 8 of memorandum by Η. Finlayson, Relations between the State and the Central Bank of issue, dated
10.10.1928, as found in the Bank of England Archive, Niemeyer Papers, OV9-206/2.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
