Stephen S Poloz: Making sense of markets
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Canada–UK Chamber
of Commerce, London, United Kingdom, 5 November 2018.
Introduction
 Making  sense  of  financial  markets  is  supposed  to  be  easy.  Stock  prices,  bond  yields  and
exchange rates are all expected to behave in line with economic fundamentals.
We  know  the  reality  is  more  complicated  than  that.  Yes,  financial  markets  react  to  new
information—in  fact,  they  usually  overreact.  Today’s  overreaction  becomes  tomorrow’s
retracement, and so on. It can be very difficult to reconcile high-frequency financial market action
with slower-moving economic fundamentals.
Often this process of reconciliation is just a matter of time, since economic data arrive with a lag
while financial markets live in the moment. But therein lies the essential problem: our view of
today’s economic fundamentals is actually a forecast because the data have not arrived yet. If
financial markets appear to diverge from those forecasted fundamentals, they may be telling us
that our forecast is wrong. The fact that financial market prices are formed with the discipline that
comes from putting real money on the line means that central bankers ignore them at their peril.
To illustrate the difficulty, consider some of the market action we have seen in 2018. Yield curves
were on a flattening trend in the first half of the year, raising questions about whether they were
pointing to slower economic growth ahead. At the same time, stock markets were on a steady
march upward, which we would normally associate with a positive economic outlook. This fall,
we have seen the reverse—higher yields and widespread stock market declines. While it may
not always be possible to make sense of all this, the effort itself is generally worthwhile.
Today,  I  want  to  touch  on  some  of  the  main  points  of  our  latest  outlook,  and  offer  some
reconciliation of recent financial market action with that view.
Of course, there are always risks in trying to interpret what financial markets are saying. Markets
are  not  monolithic—their  prices  represent  the  average  of  a  diverse  distribution  of  views.
Moreover,  markets  evolve  over  time.  Still,  we  glean  what  we  can  from  markets  and  use  the
information to cross-validate the signs we see in the economy.
The economic outlook
Let  us  discuss  the  economic  outlook  briefly.  The  big  picture  is  that  the  world  has  made
considerable progress in shaking off the effects of the 2007–08 financial crisis. Some countries
have made more progress than others, but, taken as a whole, the world economy is operating
close to potential, and monetary policy has begun the process of normalization.
In our latest Monetary Policy Report, we noted that the global expansion, which had been quite
synchronous across regions, has become less so recently. The US economy is now setting the
pace among advanced economies, primarily due to the additional fiscal stimulus that has been
applied. We forecast that global growth will moderate from about 3¾ per cent this year to 3½ per
cent next year, with the US strength expected to ease back by 2020.
Of  course,  various  trade  actions—and  the  threat  of  more—have  already  begun  to  affect  the
global economy. The escalation of tariffs between the United States and China is of particular
concern, weakening investment and the overall growth outlook, and putting downward pressure
on various commodity prices.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
A key implication of the divergence of growth between the United States and the rest of the world
is an appreciating US dollar. This has led to strains for certain emerging economies, and we
expect these to continue. Thus far, however, we have seen few signs of the strains becoming
generalized across all emerging markets. 
As for Canada, our forecast is a positive one. We project the economy will continue to operate
close to its capacity limits, with annual growth around 2 per cent over the next couple of years.
The  successful  conclusion  of  North  American  trade  negotiations  reduces  a  key  source  of
uncertainty for the Canadian economy.
Meanwhile, we project that inflation will continue to move back toward the 2 per cent midpoint of
our target range, after having peaked in the summer.
Messages from markets
Fixed-income markets
Now, let us look at what fixed-income markets are saying about all this. These are the markets
most directly relevant to central banks because bond yields can tell us what investors think about
the prospects for both growth and inflation.
In particular, the slope of the yield curve is often seen as a reliable predictor of economic growth.
Specifically, when the curve inverts—when short-term bond yields move higher than long-term
yields—this is often seen as a sign that a recession is imminent.
Of course, no indicator is ever perfect. To adapt the old quip, the yield curve has inverted before
10 of the last 6 Canadian recessions. But it is important to recognize that a number of factors
have held down long-term yields in recent years. That means short-term yields do not have to
rise as far as in the past to flatten or invert the yield curve.
One of these factors is that the neutral interest rate has been drifting downward for about 15
years, contributing to a long-term trend toward lower bond yields. A second factor is that years of
successful inflation targeting by central banks have reduced inflation risk steadily. A third factor
has been the buying of bonds by central banks as part of efforts to mitigate the effects of the
global financial crisis.
In light of these factors, it seems that the more important signal coming from the bond market is
not a flattening of the yield curve, but the reversal in the long-standing downward trend in long-
term yields. Indeed, since the start of the year, the US 5-year yield has risen by more than three-
quarters  of  a  per  cent,  to  over  3  per  cent,  while  the  10-year  yield  has  climbed  by  a  similar
amount, to about 3.1 per cent.
This  trend  reversal  is  consistent  with  the  view  that  a  decade  of  massive  monetary  policy
intervention is finally taking the risk of deflation off the table. Higher bond yields may reflect that
the market is becoming two-sided again, as central banks shift interest rate risk back out into the
marketplace. Investors can no longer expect yields to be suppressed by extraordinary monetary
policies.
Within  this  big-picture  theme,  some  important  sub-themes  are  emerging.  One  is  a  worrying
tendency  among  some  emerging  markets  to  encroach  on  the  independence  of  their  central
banks.  Another  is  the  consequences  for  the  corporate  bond  market.  Corporate  yields  and
spreads  have  for  some  time  been  compressed  by  the  post-crisis  provision  of  central  bank
liquidity, and the trend shift is leading to modestly wider spreads now, as we would expect.
Importantly, though, these effects are not uniform across the market—debt issued by companies
most exposed to international trade actions is underperforming other sectors. Specifically, since
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the start of the year, the spread on debt issued by basic materials and industrial companies has
widened  two  to  three  times  as  much  as  that  on  the  debt  of  technology  companies.  These
differences in spreads can be seen globally and tell us that investors see growing risks for these
firms in light of international trade actions already taken or in prospect.
I mentioned that most countries are not as far advanced in post-crisis recovery as the United
States.  However,  because  bond  markets  are  so  globalized,  movements  in  US  yields  will  be
reflected  in  bond  markets  elsewhere,  particularly  in  countries  where  central  bank  bond
purchases  are  not  distorting  yields.  Canada  is  a  case  in  point.  Traditionally,  Canadian  5-year
yields will import about two-thirds of any movement in US 5-year yields. This can affect Canadian
mortgage rates even with an unchanged stance of Canadian monetary policy.
Equity markets
Time now to turn to stock markets. Recent action has some commentators questioning whether
many economic forecasts, including ours, are too rosy. As I mentioned at the beginning, such a
divergence between the economic outlook and market action needs to be taken seriously.
Part  of  the  reconciliation  must  come  from  taking  a  longer-term  perspective  on  equity  market
performance. True, the S&P 500 Index has fallen about 7 per cent from its highest level earlier
this year. But even with that decline, the index is still about 35 per cent higher than it was three
years ago.
Several factors drove this performance over the past three years. Part of it reflected the strong
outlook for the US economy and, by extension, company earnings. Part of it was due to a small
number of technology companies—the so-called FAANG (Facebook, Apple, Amazon, Netflix and
Google) stocks, as investors saw the potential for tremendous earnings growth. Even though the
total assets of these companies equal about 1 per cent of US economic output, their total market
capitalization is almost 10 per cent of the entire US equity market. Over the past three years, the
increases in these companies’ stock prices were responsible for 17 per cent of the rise in the
S&P 500 Index, after accounting for reinvested dividends.
As  we  saw  with  the  bond  market,  the  era  of  extraordinary  central  bank  liquidity  helped  make
stock  markets  more  one-sided,  naturally  suppressing  their  volatility.  Investors  could  borrow
money  cheaply  and  take  leveraged  positions  in  stocks.  Now,  this  liquidity  is  becoming  more
expensive, so it is only natural to expect more volatility in stock prices as this support is removed.
But there is a more fundamental point to make if, as I suggested, the long-term downward trend
in bond yields is over. If investors are coming around to the view that expected earnings, as good
as they are, need to be discounted by higher interest rates, it naturally lowers the price they are
willing to pay for a given stock. Qualitatively, then, it is logical to expect stock prices to retrace
some of their earlier increases and to exhibit a more normal level of volatility.
The present situation is made even more complex by the overlay of international trade actions.
When we break down recent stock performance by sector, we see a message similar to the one
coming from corporate bonds. The 2 per cent rise in the S&P 500 Index for  the  year  to  date
masks some very divergent performances. The companies most exposed to international trade
actions  have  done  the  worst.  Materials  companies  are  down  12  per  cent  on  the  year,  while
industrials are down 7 per cent. Technology companies, in contrast, have risen 8 per cent over
the same period. The same basic pattern holds in Canadian stock markets.
The  main  Canadian  stock  index  has  declined  by  7  per  cent  this  year  because  the  TSX  is  so
heavily  weighted  with  companies  that  rely  on  trade.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  rising  interest
rates can explain only part of what we have observed in stock markets—trade actions are playing
a central role.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Commodity markets
Concerns  about  the  impact  of  ongoing  international  trade  actions  by  the  United  States,  and
China’s retaliation, can also be seen in commodity markets.
One  common  interpretation  of  commodity  markets  is  that  rising  prices  signal  future  global
economic  strength,  and  a  slump—along  the  lines  of  what  we  are  seeing  in  many  commodity
markets—signals weakness in demand.  But  a  nuanced  look  at  certain  markets  gives  a  more
focused interpretation.
Of course, oil is the global economy’s most important commodity and Canada’s largest export.
However, movements in the oil market tend to reflect more the impact of unexpected changes in
supply or demand than shifts in global economic trends. And, in the case of Western Canadian
Select (WCS) crude, a shortage of pipeline capacity has been weighing on prices. The WCS
discount  has  been  especially  large  of  late,  due  to  maintenance  shutdowns  of  some  key  US
refineries, which will be temporary. Although most of Canada’s exports move by pipeline and see
relatively  modest  price  discounts,  the  newest  barrels  are  discounted  the  most,  and  this  is
suppressing capacity investment in the sector.
Looking beyond oil, we have seen particular weakness in base metals. A generic index of base
metals prices has fallen 13 per cent since the start of the year. This reflects, in part, concern
about  the  prospects  for  China’s  growth  amid  ongoing  trade  disputes.  We  are  also  seeing
investors  taking  fewer  speculative  positions  on  copper—a  commodity  closely  associated  with
prospects for Chinese growth.
Another contributor to the slump in commodity prices is the fact that they are generally priced in
US dollars. So, a period of US-dollar strength relative to other currencies can lead to lower prices
for those commodities, all else being equal.
Foreign exchange markets
This  brings  me  to  currency  markets,  which  can  give  another  perspective  on  prospects  for
economic growth.
Many factors affect exchange rates on any given day. Still, at the root, exchange rates signal
expectations for the relative strength of economies and differences in interest rates. So, it is not a
surprise that the US dollar has outperformed virtually every major currency since the start of the
year. This reflects both the prospects for continued US growth and policy-rate increases by the
Federal Reserve.
The  prospect  for  higher  US  interest  rates  is  slowing  or  reversing  capital  flows  to  emerging
markets.  In  previous  years,  this  would  have  raised  fears  of  capital  flight,  leading  to  sharp
increases in interest rates and significant currency weakness across many emerging markets.
So far, at least, the message from currency markets is somewhat more encouraging. Virtually all
emerging markets have seen their currency decline against the US dollar, as you would expect.
And  while  several  emerging-market  currencies  have  shown  significant  weakness  this  year,
extreme movements have been confined to two currencies—the Argentine peso and the Turkish
lira.
In fact, the weakness in the currencies of those two countries may well reflect a risk I mentioned
earlier—among other risks, of course—that the independence of those central banks has been
put into serious doubt. It can be perilous for an economy if investors come to believe that the
outlook for inflation is coming under political influence. By the way, this highlights one of the best
attributes of Canada’s monetary policy framework. Every five years, after extensive research and
consultation, the government agrees in writing on the Bank’s inflation target, and gives us the
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
operational independence to pursue that goal.
Interest rate expectations—OIS
And finally, to the money markets. Expectations for Canadian short-term interest rates are best
captured in the overnight index swap market, or OIS. Participants in the OIS market can use the
swaps  to  hedge  exposure  to  future  Bank  of  Canada  policy  rate  changes,  or  to  speculate  on
them.
We watch this market closely because it provides the average forecast of market participants for
the path of our policy rate. When the market shifts with some event or the release of economic
data, this tells us how participants think our monetary policy will react. As such, the OIS market
is crucial for telling us when there is a disconnect between expectations in the market for the
economy and interest rates and our own expectations.
This  is  an  important  reason  why  we  are  generally  reluctant  to  fine-tune  market  expectations
about our interest rate decisions through our communications. If we tried to guide market views
so  they  were  always  aligned  with  our  own,  we  would  lose  the  cross-validation  that  financial
markets provide.
Conclusion
It is time for me to conclude.
When you take a broad look at financial markets, the messages they are sending appear to be
generally consistent with our economic outlook and our understanding of the main risks to that
outlook.
After a decade of extraordinary effort by central banks to flood markets with liquidity, the global
economy has reached the stage where stimulus can be steadily withdrawn. Investors are now
confronting two-sided risks to inflation, as central banks are shifting those risks back out to the
marketplace, and the long-standing trend toward lower bond yields seems to be over. This, in
turn, is producing a recalibration in equity markets, both overall and in the details, and creating a
more  normal  level  of  market  volatility.  The  US  economy  is  leading  the  way,  and  this  is
strengthening the US dollar.
These characteristics do not point to a gloomy economic outlook by any means—rather, they are
welcome symptoms of normalization.
On top of this, market action shows considerable evidence of investors’ preoccupation with the
downside  risks  associated  with  international  trade  actions,  both  actual  and  threatened.  This
preoccupation is understandable, but we must not lose sight of the fact that trade risks are two-
sided.  Yes,  trade  disputes  may  escalate,  with  obvious  negative  consequences.  But  it  is  also
possible that resolutions will be found, in which case the world economy will enjoy a new source
of lift. We have seen exactly this dynamic play out in Canada, as fears that NAFTA would be torn
up have been replaced with relief after agreement on the United States–Mexico–Canada trade
agreement.
In general, it is not appropriate for a central bank to formulate policy based on only one side of a
risk  distribution.  Rather,  the  Bank  of  Canada  must  attempt  to  weigh  both  the  upside  and
downside risks and take a middle, risk-balanced path. Given our outlook for growth and inflation,
the  Bank’s  policy  rate  will  need  to  rise  to  a  neutral  stance  to  achieve  our  inflation  target.  In
determining  the  appropriate  pace  of  interest  rate  increases,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  the
economy’s adjustment to higher interest rates, given the elevated level of household debt. And
we will pay close attention to new developments on the international trade front.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
