Burkhard  Balz:  How  is  Brexit  transforming  the  global  financial
landscape?
Speech by Mr Burkhard Balz, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at
the 2018 Bavarian Banking Day (Bayerischer Bankentag), Munich, 9 November 2018.
 1 Introduction
Mr Diederich,
Ladies and gentlemen,
I would like to thank you very much for inviting me to Munich.
I  am  delighted  to  have  the  opportunity  to  talk  to  you  here  at  the  Bavarian  Banking  Day
(Bayerischer Bankentag) about the implications of Brexit for the global financial landscape. I am
especially looking forward to our discussion afterwards.
Many of you have no doubt been following the Brexit negotiations over the past few weeks.
As  things  stand,  whether  the  two  sides  can  come  to  a  joint  and  orderly  agreement  on  exit
arrangements remains highly questionable. Consequently, we may not be spared a hard Brexit.
As much as I personally regret the UK’s decision to leave the EU, we cannot close our minds to
the uncertainty it brings with it and to the changes that will need to be made, particularly in the
financial  sector.  On  the  contrary,  all  stakeholders,  chief  among  them  banks  and  regulators,
should be actively tackling these issues. In the current situation, which is fraught with uncertainty,
adopting  a  wait-and-see  attitude  and  hoping  for  the  best  is  not  the  right  strategy.  Or  to  put  it
another way: “If you fail to plan, you plan to fail.”
2 Brexit as a driver of change
Ladies and gentlemen,
So  what  needs  to  be  done  and  what  specific  changes  can  we  expect  on  the  global  financial
stage? As I see it, this question concerns two key topics.
First, credit institutions domiciled in the UK and the EU will need to restructure their cross-border
business in the face of Brexit and the regulatory changes that will accompany it. Only by doing so
will  they  be  able  to  continue  trading,  potentially  in  a  slightly  modified  form.  Up  to  now,  credit
institutions domiciled in the EU have been able to manage their EU-wide business from the UK
as well thanks to the EU financial services passport. This will probably no longer be an option in
the future.
On the one hand, the UK wishes to no longer be subject to Single Market rules after Brexit.
On the other hand, however, the British government is calling for greater flexibility and room for
manoeuvre with respect to the financial sector. Given these points, a continuation of the current
regime is not a realistic prospect.
The  conclusion  that  can  be  drawn  from  this  is  clear.  Credit  institutions  with  cross-border
business will be forced to either relocate to the EU or expand their already existing EU sites if
they  want  to  continue  conducting  business  in  the  EU  –  and  most  likely  vice  versa,  too.  This
should be the current working hypothesis for all credit institutions concerned.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
And  it  goes  without  saying  that  the  impact  of  this  will  be  felt  by  more  than  just  European
institutions.  International  big  banks,  in  particular,  including  some  from  the  United  States,  have
been managing a large part of their EU operations from the UK – that is to say, the City of London
–  using  the  EU  financial  services  passport.  They,  too,  will  have  to  respond  to  Brexit  and
reposition themselves.
Looking at the current market structure of European financial centres, I expect that the inevitable
relocations triggered by Brexit and the expansion of already existing sites will further strengthen
major  financial  centres  on  the  continent,  such  as  Frankfurt  and  Paris,  in  the  medium  to  long
term. Furthermore, institutions domiciled in the UK should also bear in mind that, after leaving the
EU, it will no longer be possible to participate in the TARGET2 payment system in the same way.
The affected credit institutions therefore need to take action. The Bunde​sbank has already been
in touch to this effect with account holders that may be affected and, where necessary, offered
support.
3 Central clearing in the derivatives market
Ladies and gentlemen,
In  addition  to  responding  to  changes  relating  to  the  EU  financial  services  passport,  I  see  a
second major area in which the financial community will have to adapt: the central clearing of
derivatives.
To put things better into context, I would first like to briefly look back at how things used to be.
Some of you will doubtless still recall that the current global regulatory framework for derivatives
trading is a direct result of the last financial market crisis. In light of the lessons learned from this
crisis,  the  G20  heads  of  state  and  government  formulated  two  key  objectives  concerning  the
treatment of OTC derivatives: first, improve market transparency with a view to making existing
risks easier to identify and, second, strengthen the management of risks incurred so as to make
the derivatives markets more secure.
The result was an ambitious effort at reform on the part of the G20 – more specifically, better
regulation  of  the  global  derivatives  market.  Focal  points  included  the  increased  use  of  central
counterparties (CCPs). The G20 advocated that, going forward, OTC derivatives be subject to a
clearing obligation, at least in those cases where they are sufficiently standardised. The CCP, as
a neutral party, would then assume the risk management, in particular, of what were previously
bilaterally concluded derivatives contracts. This was a crucial paradigm shift.
As a result, adjustments were made to the regulatory frameworks both in the United States and
the EU. In 2010, the United States was the first country to pass a comprehensive law on the
regulation of its financial sector in the form of what is commonly referred to as the Frank-Dodd
Act. As suggested by the G20 countries, the regulations on OTC derivatives were tightened and
clearing obligations were imposed, requiring transactions to be cleared through CCPs. Within the
EU, this was achieved through the introduction of the European Market Infrastructure Regulation
(EMIR) in 2012.
This new regulation ultimately led to a substantial increase in the importance of CCPs offering
services for derivatives contracts which were now subject to a clearing obligation. Among the
main beneficiaries of this development within the EU were the CCPs domiciled in the UK, with
their  focus  on  clearing  interest  rate  and  credit  default  derivatives.  Both  the  size  of  London’s
financial centre, which is the most important one in the EU in its current form, and the liquidity
available there certainly contributed towards the success of these CCPs.
For  historical  reasons,  many  CCPs  specialise  in  certain  products  and  currencies.  For  global
market players, in particular, there is thus always s certain need to make use of CCPs outside
their own jurisdiction. It is, consequently, not unusual for global credit institutions to be a member
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
of or participant in several EU and US CCPs, either directly or indirectly through a subsidiary.
However,  market  participants  are  only  able  to  use  third-country  CCPs  and  thus  participate
across  regulatory  borders  if  the  supervisory  authorities  responsible  for  them  recognise  the
regulatory  framework  of  the  third  country  in  question  as  being  equivalent.  This  has  been  the
common practice to date regarding the EU and the United States. I will elaborate on the future
relationship between the two jurisdictions later on in my speech.
4 Brexit and central clearing
Ladies and gentlemen,
let us now return to the present – and specifically to the impact of Brexit on the central clearing
landscape.
The need for change in light of Brexit is obvious. As things stand, EU market participants make
intensive use of UK CCPs to clear their transactions.
From my point of view, this already appears to be of systemic importance for the EU’s financial
system. In future, the UK CCPs will no longer be governed by the EU’s common supervisory and
regulatory framework, EMIR. The combination of the systemic importance of UK CCPs and the
loss  of  supervisory  control  and  powers  of  intervention  on  the  part  of  the  EU  calls  for  the
supervisory and regulatory framework for third-country CCPs to be revised.
The  option  currently  available  under  EMIR  to  recognise  third-country  CCPs  once  their
supervisory  and  regulatory  regimes  have  been  deemed  equivalent  is  not  a  viable  long-term
solution for the United Kingdom after Brexit. There is therefore a general risk that the regulatory
framework  for  the  UK  financial  system  will  diverge  from  the  EU’s,  which  means  that  the  EU
financial  system  and  ultimately  EU  taxpayers  could  face  losses  in  the  billions  if  risks
materialised. In addition, the decisions to recognise third-country CCPs based on equivalence do
not take adequate account of their systemic importance for the EU’s financial system. This is
why the current provisions do not serve as a basis for the UK’s large CCPs after Brexit.
EU lawmakers view the situation similarly and have put forward corresponding proposals over
the past year on how to reshape the European supervisory regime for third-country CCPs; I am
referring  to  the  EMIR  II  directive  here.  These  proposals  are  currently  still  subject  to  intense
debate within the Council. Nevertheless, three fundamental changes seem almost certain.
First, the systemic importance of third-country CCPs or parts thereof shall become the decisive
factor determining which supervisory obligations third-country CCPs will have to fulfil in future in
order to be recognised by the European Securities and Markets Authority, ESMA.
Second,  if  there  is  an  ongoing  threat  to  the  financial  stability  of  the  EU  or  individual  member
states, there should be an option to deny recognition of a third-country CCP or parts thereof.
The consequence for EU market participants would be that they would no longer be able to use
the  affected  third-county  CCPs  to  meet  their  clearing  obligations.  These  third-country  CCPs
would only be able to continue conducting business with EU market participants if they moved
their operations to the EU and applied for authorisation under EU rules.
Third, the Eurosystem, as the central bank issuing euro currency and thus also the central bank
of issue (CBI), should be involved in determining third-country CCP’s systemic importance and in
supervising systemically important third-country CCPs.
Naturally,  changes  of  this  magnitude  to  the  supervisory  and  regulatory  regime  are  always
accompanied by criticism and a degree of uncertainty. EU market participants, in particular, are
wondering which third-country CCPs they will be able to use going forward, and rightly so. It is
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
not my intention to gloss over the fact that the current situation is unsatisfactory for many. It also
remains unclear to date whether the UK’s systemically important CCPs will be able to continue
to conduct business with EU market players indefinitely in the current form or whether they will
be denied recognition. What we need here is a thorough review. Looking ahead, what is crucial in
my view is to ensure the stability of the EU’s financial system. The announcement by the Bank of
England to forcibly uncouple EU clearing members from UK CCPs in order to ensure that they
remain functional in the future and to avoid jeopardising financial stability is just one example of
how fragile the current situation is. This process, referred to as “off-boarding”, has caused great
concern amongst market participants.
5 Consequences for the United States
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  these  market  participants  are  not  the  only  ones  who  are  currently
criticising the revision of the supervisory and regulatory framework for third-country CCPs.
In  the  United  States  there  is  mounting  criticism  of  the  path  that  the  EU  has  embarked  upon,
particularly  on  the  part  of  the  Commodities  Futures  Trading  Commission  (CFTC),  which  is
responsible for major US CCPs. The CFTC has said that it finds it difficult to imagine that US
CCPs will also be directly supervised by the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA)
and the Eurosystem as the CBI for the euro.
Admittedly, the American CFTC is rather unfamiliar with the idea of central banks participating in
the  supervision  of  CCPs  –  which  is  now  a  long-standing  practice  within  the  EU.  This  is
undoubtedly  also  related  to  the  historical  differences  in  European  and  American  regulatory
practices. Parts of the supervisory structure that arose within the EU through EMIR are far more
complex. EU CCPs are primarily supervised by their respective national supervisory authority,
which  takes  on  a  leading  supervisory  role  and  is  thus  comparable  to  the  CFTC  in  the  United
States.  However,  there  is  also  a  joint  supervision  component,  known  as  the  EMIR  college  of
supervisors, which has to give its approval to major supervisory decisions. This college includes
various national banking supervisors as well as national central banks from across the EU.
The inclusion of the Eurosystem in its role as the central bank of issue is also a particularity of
the European supervisory regime for CCPs. This is deliberate, however, as, in the event of a
crisis at a CCP or one of their clearing participants, i.e. banks, it is the central banks that are able
to support them with liquidity assistance.
This,  in  my  view,  makes  the  Eurosystem’s  involvement  in  the  regulation  of  CCPs  absolutely
essential. EMIR2 will now continue to pursue this path and will assign the Eurosystem, as the
CBI for the euro, a corresponding supervisory role for systemically important third-country CCPs.
It is understandable that our American supervisory colleagues want to continue the equivalence
regime that was mutually agreed after long and intense negotiations. Nonetheless, our need for a
secure  financial  system  in  the  EU  should  also  be  recognised.  It  is  also  not  at  all  clear  how
individual US CCPs will be classified by supervisory authorities in future. At this point, I’d like to
emphasise once again that EMIR2 will not classify individual third-country CCPs automatically. It
will only set out the path and the criteria that are to be applied, and these criteria will be applicable
to all third-country CCPs and not just to the central counterparties in the UK. This is because the
aim is to ensure an appropriate level of supervision and regulation of third-country CCPs, with the
security  of  the  EU  financial  system  being  paramount.  In  light  of  this,  the  future  European
supervisory regime will be very flexible. For example, CCPs that the EU considers to be less
important could continue to be recognised on an equivalence basis.
This could also apply to US CCPs, depending on the outcome of a review into their systemic
importance, at least for the current transaction volume. That said, this cannot be guaranteed.
Incidentally, US supervisors also have stronger powers of intervention in third-country CCPs that
they consider to be systemically important.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
From the EU’s perspective, I think it would be preferable if, after Brexit, clearing services were
again settled to a greater extent via EU CCPs and thus governed by the EU’s own supervisory
standards. But this is not guaranteed. It is also conceivable, for example, that US CCPs, too, will
benefit to a greater extent from changes in the derivatives market following Brexit. If EU market
participants use the latitude they have to rely more and more on US CCPs, the EU needs to be
able  to  react  appropriately  for  the  purposes  of  achieving  sufficient  supervisory  control  and
avoiding risks to its financial system. EMIR does not currently have this flexibility, so all the more
reason to ensure its implementation in EMIR2.
6 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, the final date for the United Kingdom’s exit from the EU is getting closer
and closer and the fact that the Brexit negotiations do not appear to be making progress means
that  uncertainty  continues  to  grow  among  market  participants.  This  makes  it  all  the  more
important for all market participants to prepare for a “hard” Brexit. We should not be deluded into
thinking  that  everything  will  somehow  continue  as  before.  Quite  the  opposite,  in  fact,  is  true.
Brexit will bring about fundamental changes in the global financial community. In my view, it is
ultimately only a question of how fast this will happen.
On that note, I would like to end with an old Chinese proverb:
“When the wind of change blows, some build walls, others build windmills.”
Thank you for your attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
