Jon Nicolaisen: Challenges for the payment system
Speech by Mr Jon Nicolaisen, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at
Finance Norway's payments conference, Oslo, 1 November 2018.
 Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation.
Changing payment landscape
The way we make payments is changing. New services and operators are constantly appearing.
The underlying infrastructure, our payment system, must be adapted to the changes. But where
is this all heading? How will we make payments in the future? And what will the future form of
money be?
The  forces  driving  payment  market  developments  are  new  technology,  changes  in  consumer
behaviour,  globalisation,  and  new  regulations,  such  as  the  new  Payment  Services  Directive
(PSD2).
PSD2 requires banks to grant third-party providers (TPPs) access to their systems to enable
TPPs  to  offer  payment  and  account  information  services.  PSD2  is  both  a  response  to
developments in the payments market and a catalyst for future developments.
At  the  same  time,  a  number  of  large  international  technology  companies  are  moving  into  the
payments market. Apple offers mobile payment services to Norwegian customers. Google has
just launched its own mobile payment solution in Norway. Other operators will follow suit. The
role companies such as Facebook, Amazon and Alibaba may take remains to be seen.
Vipps  is  now  the  only  Norwegian  mobile  payment  solution.  A  planned  merger  of  the  Vipps,
BankAxept  and  BankID  systems  was  announced  towards  the  end  of  2017.  The  merger  was
approved  by  the  authorities  in  summer  2018.  One  of  the  aims  of  the  merger  is  to  be  better
positioned to compete with global companies.
New  market  entrants  and  lower  entry  barriers  promote  competition,  but  there  are  other
mechanisms that could weaken competition in the longer term. One example is if one or a small
number of multinationals become dominant payment service providers at the global level. The
key words are digital platforms and network effects.
Marketplaces such as stock exchanges and shopping centres have existed for a long time. But
digital marketplaces, known as platforms, are far more scalable. Well-known examples of digital
platforms are Google, Facebook and the classified ad portal Finn.no. These platforms achieve
competitive  advantage  by  gathering  information  about  customers,  eliminating  time-consuming
tasks and simplifying users’ everyday lives.
Platforms have network effects. Competition can be impaired if platform companies exploit their
market  power.  A  large  user  base  makes  it  profitable  for  other  service  providers  to  develop
complementary services. Because of network effects, dominant platforms can achieve a near-
monopoly position.
Operators  that  control  parts  of  the  payment  infrastructure  can  shut  out  competitors.  For
instance,  Apple  Pay  is  the  only  option  for  contactless  payments  based  on  near-field
communication (NFC), using Apple’s iPhones. A number of countries are considering whether
this constitutes abuse of a dominant market position. In Norway, this would be a matter for the
competition authorities.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Payment solutions should build on a common underlying infrastructure that enables payments to
be  carried  out  swiftly,  safely  and  at  low  cost.  Providers  can  compete  freely  for  customers
through various apps and interfaces.
Future payment infrastructure
Norway was one of the first countries to modernise its payment system and still ranks at the top
of  international  comparisons  of  payment  system  efficiency.  However,  some  countries  have
caught up with us and have taken the lead in some areas.
With regard to providing real-time payments, we have lagged behind our neighbours. Real-time
payments, or instant payments, provide immediate payment into the recipient’s account. Instant
payment  is  now  available  through  the  Vipps  system  and  from  many  online  banks.  This  is  a
positive step, but banks are still exposed to settlement risk, and the solution cannot be used for
all types of payments. It is particularly problematic that the current instant payment solution is not
very suitable for corporate transactions.
Norges Bank has played a catalyst role in bringing about improvements. Just over two years ago,
the Bank expressed the opinion that it was necessary to step up efforts to establish a real-time
payments infrastructure without settlement risk. The financial industry and Norges Bank agreed
on  a  joint  initiative  called  BRO, Betalinger  med  Raskere  Oppgjør  [payments  with  faster
settlement]. BRO was scheduled to be in place by the end of 2019.
In February 2018, seven large Nordic banks announced their intention to establish a pan-Nordic
payment  infrastructure,  P27.  The  aim  is  to  replace  existing  domestic  clearing  and  instant
payment infrastructures in the Nordic countries with one common system.
When the P27 initiative was announced, the BRO project was put on hold in order to consider
whether  a  future  common  Nordic  infrastructure  as  proposed  by  the  P27  banks  could  be  a
satisfactory replacement.
Norges Bank has engaged in joint discussions with the other Nordic central banks since P27
was  launched.  The  central  banks  have  given  preliminary  feedback  on  the  P27  project  and
appreciate the project’s ambition to improve payment system efficiency in the Nordic area. At the
same time, there are issues that need to be addressed before the authorities can take a position
on any transition from domestic infrastructures to a common Nordic solution. This process may
take time and will also involve authorities other than the central banks.
Security legislation is one of these issues. If P27 is realised, it will probably be viewed as an
important  critical  infrastructure  for  the  countries  involved.  National  security  concerns  may
influence  the  conditions  governing  whether  a  payment  system  infrastructure  can  be  operated
across national borders. In the case of Norway, one likely condition could be that satisfactory
contingency arrangements must be in place in Norway. Domestic control of the payment system
must be possible in a crisis.
The European Central Bank has launched a European solution for real-time payment settlement
in  central  bank  money  called  Target  Instant  Payment  Settlement,  or  TIPS.  The  system  is
scheduled to commence operations this month and may be expanded to include non-euro area
countries. According to Sweden’s central bank, the Riksbank, settlement of instant payments in
SEK may be made available on the TIPS platform. If so, this would mean that at least some
Swedish real-time payments will not be cleared through P27, which could affect the profitability of
the project.
Norges Bank is aware that the industry is also assessing other possible Norwegian solutions for
better real-time payments in Norway. In its letter sent in October to Finance Norway and the P27
banks in Norway, Norges Bank called upon the banks to continue this work. The objective must
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
be to make the necessary adjustments to the Norwegian infrastructure as quickly as possible to
give both businesses and private individuals in Norway access to modern real-time payments on
a 24/7/365 basis. The technological set-up should be adapted to customers’ needs, particularly
businesses, while also eliminating interbank settlement risk. As far as possible, the set-up should
also be suitable for use in future solutions, such as P27, including a system for control of reserve
cover at Norges Bank. Reusing a technological set-up will keep total costs down.
Establishing a satisfactory Norwegian solution for instant payments will also decouple P27 work
from  any  deadlines  for  the  system  in  Norway,  which  in  time  may  increase  the  chances  of
success for the P27 initiative.
A common infrastructure for all payments has given Norway an important competitive advantage,
provided economies of scale and facilitated interaction across the banking sector. It is important
to avoid fragmentation of the infrastructure for clearing payment transactions in NOK, otherwise
we will lose the advantages we have today. An efficient and secure common infrastructure must
still  be  a  main  feature  of  the  Norwegian  payment  system,  whichever  solution  the  industry
ultimately chooses.
Looking further ahead, a number of broad issues need to be addressed. Norges Bank will initiate
a project to assess the payment and settlement system of tomorrow as a whole. The aim is to
make active and constructive contributions to an efficient and secure payment system, today and
in  the  future.  We  will  seek  long-term  solutions  to  several  of  the  issues  mentioned  above,  in
particular the following two key questions:
Should  we  continue  to  have  a  completely  domestic  payment  infrastructure  in  Norway,  or
could  it  become  more  international?  How  would  we  then  solve  issues  related  to  national
security?
How should the infrastructure be changed to facilitate the services needed by end-users in
the future? Should payments still be cleared before they reach the central bank, or is gross
settlement the best option?
The first phase of the project is scheduled to be completed by the end of 2019.
Cyber security
As the payment system is centralised and ICT-dependent, it is vulnerable to cyber attacks. If an
attack were to succeed, payments could come to a halt and financial losses could occur. An
attack could also result in unauthorised access to or manipulation of sensitive information.
The  system’s  vulnerability  can  be  reduced  in  a  number  of  ways,  for  example  through  well-
established cooperation within the financial industry and between the industry and the authorities,
sound  security  procedures  and  recovery  capabilities.  System  owners  are  responsible  for  the
resilience  of  their  own  systems.  Norges  Bank  monitors  the  systems  under  its  supervision  to
ensure that satisfactory defence mechanisms are in place.
A number of payment system participants have outsourced the operation of their systems to a
few  ICT  service  providers.  This  is  a  source  of  concentration  risk.  The  failure  of  key  service
providers could bring important parts of the payment system to a halt. The problems at EVRY on
6  October  2017  affected  approximately  40  banks  in  Norway,  as  well  as  Norway  Post  and
Telenor.  This  incident  illustrates  the  potential  broad  repercussions  of  the  failure  of  a  key  ICT
service provider.
Such  concentration  risk  is  difficult  for  individual  system  owners  to  address  alone.  The  entire
infrastructure served by the provider is exposed to risk, not merely the individual system. ICT
service providers are not subject to the same regulation and supervision as licensed banking and
payment system participants. It is Norges Bank’s view that the authorities should explore how
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
key ICT service providers can best be supervised. Such an evaluation must be based on the
work of the ICT Security Commission, which publishes its report in December 2018.
Distributed ledger technology
Distributed  ledger  technology  (DLT)  offers  interesting  opportunities.  A  shared  decentralised
digital  asset  register  can  enhance  efficiency,  as  business  ledgers  no  longer  need  to  be
reconciled, and can reduce counterparty risk. DLT solutions can also reduce operational risk as
this technology does not rely on a central operator.
DLT  has  many  potential  applications  in  the  financial  infrastructure,  such  as  in  the  securities
settlement system. The Australian exchange ASX is replacing the existing system for clearing
and settling trades with a new DLT-based system. Another example is cross-border payments;
several  projects  have  been  launched  and  the  potential  for  improvement  is  considerable.  A
number  of  Norwegian  operators  are  exploring  opportunities  for  using  DLT-based  solutions  in
Norway’s infrastructure.
Central banks have also explored the use of DLT. The European Central Bank and the Bank of
Japan have considered how secure delivery versus payment systems could be organised where
the assets are stored in a decentralised accounting system. Some central banks, such as the
Bank of Canada, have evaluated and tested DLT for use in central bank settlement. At the same
time, the use of DLT poses a number of challenges, including the immaturity of the technology
and how to prevent unauthorised access to confidential information.
New technology also makes new forms of money possible. The functions of money as a medium
of exchange, a store of value and a unit of account are dependent on public confidence in the
currency. Most of our money is in the form of bank deposits or cash. So-called cryptocurrencies
have  attracted  considerable  attention  in  recent  years.  Owing  to  their  substantial  day-to-day
volatility and the interfaces with money laundering and other criminal activity, cryptocurrencies
are  unsuitable  as  a  universal  means  of  payment.  On  the  other  hand,  cryptocurrencies  are
attractive as speculative assets. Crypto-assets is therefore a better term than cryptocurrencies.
Central bank digital currencies
Another possibility is central bank digital currencies (CBDC). A CBDC is a digital form of central
bank money made available to the general public. A number of central banks, including Norges
Bank, are assessing whether introducing a CBDC would be advisable and, if so, in what form.
For the time being, banknotes and coins are the only form of central bank money, with a role to
play  both  in  a  contingency  and  under  normal  circumstances.  Effective  electronic  contingency
arrangements are crucial for ensuring that the payment system is resilient to disruption. Cash is
part  of  the  overall  contingency  arrangements,  in  the  role  of  last  resort  should  the  electronic
contingency arrangements fail.
Banknotes and coins will continue to be in use into the foreseeable future. However, the use of
cash  is  relatively  low  in  Norway  compared  with  other  countries  and  is  declining.  It  is  not
impossible that cash usage, at some point in the future, will fall to such a low level that banknotes
and coins can no longer be regarded as a generally accepted means of payment.
We must therefore consider whether cash has any important characteristics that are not shared
by bank deposits and whether there is a need for other forms of central bank money in addition to
cash. Cash has a number of unique characteristics:
It is a credit risk-free alternative to deposit money.
It is an independent back-up solution if electronic systems fail.
It is legal tender that can be used by all.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
For  Norges  Bank,  the  question  is  whether  a  CBDC  could  supplement  cash  to  maintain
confidence in the monetary system and ensure that Norway’s future payment system is safe and
efficient.
A list of factors that should be given weight in an assessment of whether Norges Bank should
issue  a  CBDC  was  presented  by  a  Norges  Bank  working  group  in  May.  Phase  2  of  the
assessment is now in progress. The working group is focusing on the purposes of a CBDC, the
solutions that best serve these purposes and their impact. The working group’s report will be
published in spring 2019. This is a long-term process and it is too early to draw any conclusions.
A premise underlying the work is that a CBDC must not impair the ability of banks and other
financial institutions to provide credit.
Conclusion
The various developments reflect a payment system in change. It is important to look up and
envision  the  situation  a  few  years  ahead.  Where  do  we  want  to  be  then?  How  will  we  make
payments,  what  will  our  means  of  payment  be,  and  what  kind  of  payment  system  will  we  be
using?
Our common goal must be that Norway has an efficient and safe payment system, today and in
the  future.  That  we  have  confidence  in  the  means  of  payment  we  use,  that  we  base  our
infrastructure  on  cost-efficient  common  solutions,  and  that  we  together  can  safeguard  the
interests related to efficient payments, personal privacy and security.
There  are  numerous  challenges  to  be  faced.  The  best  course  of  action  is  for  businesses  to
come together and agree on good common solutions.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
