Encik  Adnan  Zaylani  Mohamad  Zahid:  Distribution  in  a  digital
economy - Customer @ Core
Keynote address by Mr Adnan Zaylani Mohamad Zahid, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of
Malaysia 
-
&quot;Distribution  in  a  Digital  Economy  -  Customer  @  Core&quot;,  Bangsar  South  City,  18
October 2018.
Insurance  Agents  Convention 
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at 
the  General 
 Let me first begin by thanking Persatuan Insurans Am Malaysia (PIAM) for hosting this convention
and inviting me to deliver the keynote address. This is my first ever engagement with the general
insurance agency force but also the insurance industry as a whole and I am very pleased to be
here at this fittingly themed convention, “Distribution in a Digital Economy – Customer @ Core”.
There is no question that we are now in an era of the Digital Economy. According to the World
Bank  there  has  been  an  accelerated  growth  of  internet  access  of  more  than  170%  in  global
accessibility in the past ten years. In 2006, only 17% of the world’s population was estimated to
have an Internet connection – but now that number is 46% in 2016.  During the same period,
Malaysians with Internet access has increased from 52% to 79%, which is a very high number
amongst many countries. 
With  such  widespread  accessibility,  a  market  presence  on  the  Internet  has  never  been  more
important.  E-commerce  activity  has  boomed  in  recent  years,  especially  in  the  Asian  region
because  according  to  the  Asian  Development  Bank,  Asia’s  e-commerce  transactions  now
makes  up  one  quarter  of  global  business  in  consumer  markets.  Not  surprisingly,  the  largest
proportion  and  number  of  these  transactions  originate  from  the  People’s  Republic  of  China;
where  the  size  of  the  retail  e-commerce  market  has  seen  a  fourfold  increase  from  USD200
billion to USD800 billion in a period of  three years between 2013 to 2017 . Here in Malaysia, the
trend in e-commerce transactions has been encouraging as well, with an increase of more than
69%, from USD1,856 million in 2016 to over USD3 billion in 2018.
All  this  affirms  the  shift  in  the  mode  of  our  economy:  The  future  is  not  so  much  in  brick  and
mortar – but in bits and bytes. In Malaysia, an estimated 62% of businesses are connected to the
Internet.  More  will  migrate  to  the  virtual  marketplace,  and  there  is  little  doubt  that  digital
entrepreneurship will be a key component of economic growth and job creation.
Of  particular  importance  in  this  shift  is  the  role  of  intermediaries:  In  a  market  which  is
increasingly defined by customisation and speed of service, the role of matching customers to
providers has become absolutely critical; the reliance on both parties being on the know-how and
expertise of the go-between. And this certainly applies to your role as the main intermediators of
insurance.
Another  important  feature  to  note  is  the  decentralisation  of  knowledge:  With  a  touch  of  their
screen, consumers are now able to access an almost infinite repository of information about the
products  that  they  want;  including  comparisons  and  peer  reviews.  The  days  of  the  insurer  or
agent knowing best have passed, and it is important to recognise how this tilts the bargaining
power in favour of the consumer. From this, there are fundamental questions that need to be
asked  of  the  agency  force:  Are  the  current  incentives  of  the  industry  aligned  with  the  best
interests of consumers? Should insurance companies still be thought of as the main principals
that agents serve, or should consumers be seen as an equal principal in that relationship? How
can the remuneration and more generally, culture, change from one focused on volume of sales
to one where agents are recognised for more customer-centric, and a consultative role? These
are some of the questions that I hope this convention will touch on, and perhaps for me to share
some thoughts.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
There  are  many  concerns  over  the  potential  upheaval  of  the  status  quo  arising  from  the
digitalisation of services. But I can share with you that we firmly believe that the agency force will
continue to have a role to play in the general insurance sector even as it evolves into the Digital
Economy. The reason for this is simple: insurance products can be complex and coupled with
the sophisticated needs of clients such as individuals and SMEs, the human and personal touch
of  an  agent  can  come  in  handy.  It  is  these  functions  that  will  remain  relevant  in  the  Digital
Economy;  those  that  require  intuition,  discretion  and  sometimes,  empathy;  traits  that  are  not
easily programmable.
Having  said  that,  the  Digital  Economy  will  revamp  the  distribution  landscape  for  general
insurance and these changes are currently in progress as we speak. General insurance agents
must  accept  and  embrace  the  shifting  business  dynamics  towards  digitalisation.  The  agency
force must not only reinvent themselves to reflect the latest digital trends, but also upgrade their
capabilities in line with the latest technological developments. Thus, I would like to suggest three
strategies that general insurance agents can take in not just surviving, but also thriving in the
Malaysian Digital Economy, namely:
First, improving the customer experience by enhancing your service capability.  
Compared  to  other  financial  products,  such  as  banking  products  and  investment  products,
insurance products are inherently more complex to understand. It is perhaps not a surprise that
customer  satisfaction  of  the  local  insurance  industry  is  lower  than  other  financial  services
industries. According to BrandIndex , in its study of the health of brand names in Malaysia, the top
5 insurance brands in Malaysia scored relatively lower than that of their top 5 counterparts in
other financial service sectors (especially banking). This is a challenge to the industry to raise
this till we meet again in two years.  
Given  that  the  agency  force  are  the  insurers’  first  contact  point  with  customers,  agents  wield
significant influence over how customers perceive and experience insurance. It is thus critical for
agents  to  provide  the  highest  levels  of  service  via  continued  and  consistent  displays  of
attentiveness and value adding, to build trust with their clients.
There are many possibilities to improve the current insurance value chain.  One area that Bank
Negara Malaysia strongly supports is the use of electronic payments. We have been undertaking
a major initiative since 2013 to promote e-payments and reduce use of cash and cheques now.
In increasing e-payments among financial institutions, government agencies, retail transactions,
we have made some inroads. The insurance industry’s uptake however, still remains low. 
Perhaps agents can do more to help us in this. Promoting and using e-payments could remove
the  many  pain  points  associated  with  the  manual  handling  of  cash  and  cheques  that  are
experienced by the consumer, agent and even the insurer. Some of the data still indicate a high
number  of  cheques.  From  January  to  July  2018,  about  35,000  cheques  were  issued  by  the
general  insurance  companies  to  their  customers  for  the  payment  of  claims  and  refunds.
Likewise for collection purposes, about 1.1 million premium payment transactions were still being
made using cash and cheque in the first 7 months of 2018. This figure could be a lot higher if we
take  into  account  the  mode  of  payment  used  by  customers  to  pay  agents,  which  based  on
anecdotal evidence, are primarily in cash and cheque. On this front, agents should work hand-in-
hand  with  insurance  companies  to  encourage  and  incentivise  their  customers  to  adopt  e-
payments. Besides enhancing the customer experience, higher adoption of e-payments could
also boost the agents’ efficiency and productivity. In this regard, time and effort saved from less
handling of cash and cheques can be directed to more productive tasks such as to increase
sales, even by usage of WhatsApp.
Second, increasing your digital accessibility to prospective clients.
For  a  long  as  I  am  aware,  the  agency  force  has  always  dominated  the  insurance  distribution
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
channel.  In  2017,  there  was  a  total  of  over  56,000  agents  constituting  a  market  share  of
approximately 63%.  Irrespective of whether in general or life insurance, the agency force has
traditionally  been  the  physical  point  of  contact  and  engagements  with  clients.  But,  with  the
Internet  and  improved  access  amongst  a  growing  number  of  the  Malaysian  population,  online
insurance solutions will not only become more viable, but also easier to adopt.
In  this,  the  agency  force  cannot  afford  to  stagnate.  Other  industries  with  heavily  digitalised
services, like the air travel, hospitality and retail sectors, have elevated the digital literacy of the
Malaysian population and improved their appetite for efficient delivery and transparent pricing of
services.  In  this  sector,  there  remains  significant  untapped  demand  for  general  insurance
products  as  a  whole.    The  low  penetration  rate  of  1.4%    for  general  insurance,  which  is
measured in terms of premiums as a share of the nation’s Gross Domestic Product, is actually
symptomatic of this. Thus, agents who move quickly to improve their digital outreach will have a
first mover’s advantage and are likely to gain a growing group of digitally literate Malaysians.
Thirdly, conducting robust suitability assessment for customers.
One thing worth emphasising repeatedly is this; financial services offered must be suitable to the
needs of the customers. While the Bank’s Guidelines on Product Transparency and Disclosure
attempts this by stipulating the ‘rules of the game’, we look to insurers and the agency force to
‘play’ according to these rules and seek out ways to achieve the outcome of ensuring consumers
obtain financial services that are suitable to their needs.
Agents should develop their individual capacity to analyse customer requirements to identify their
needs  and  develop  risk  profiles  to  match  them  with  suitable  products  or  combinations  of
products. For example in the case of motor insurance policies, agents should create awareness
on  optional  add-on  covers  that  are  available  and  underwriting  factors  that  will  affect  motor
insurance premiums. Appropriate profiling of a customer can be crucial in helping agents identify
customised product recommendations efficiently.
Finally,  perhaps  I  should  bring  your  attention  to  two  upcoming  developments.  Firstly,  we
understand  that  the  industry  is  in  the  midst  of  finalising  a  recent  independently-conducted
Customer  Satisfaction  Index  (CSI)  that  will  be  a  means  to  gauge  the  insurers’  performance
against the enhanced insurance industry’s Customer Service Charter which was introduced in
January 2018. This survey includes minimum service standards that reflect the guiding principles
for good customer service. The results of the CSI survey is expected to be finalised by end-2018.
I  would  urge  you  to  familiarize  yourself  with  the  Customer  Service  Charter  of  your  principal
insurers and use it to guide you in your dealings with customers so as to ensure good customer
experience.
Secondly,  the  Bank  is  at  a  fairly  advanced  stage  of  finalising  the  policy  document  on  fair
treatment  of  financial  consumers.  This  will  address  the  Bank’s  increased  expectations  on
financial  institutions,  including  insurers,  to  cultivate  a  culture  of  fair  dealing  and  responsible
behaviour. The onus will be on insurers to ensure agents observe new standards to exercise due
care, skill and diligence in dealing with financial consumers. We should expect principal insurers
to  accord  greater  emphasis  on  the  importance  of  (1)  providing  clear  and  concise  product
information to customers to enable them to make informed choices, (2) offering products that are
appropriate to the customers’ needs and financial circumstances, and (3) providing individualised
advice that is in the best interest of the consumer.
Let me conclude.
Agents have always been and will continue to be important agents, including agents of change in
the insurance sector as they are uniquely positioned to read the pulse of customers. This change
could involve the insurer-agent relationship and the balancing of customers’ interests. The time
could  be  appropriate  for  general  insurance  agents  to  reorganise  themselves  into  an  industry
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
association that can effectively mobilise the power of collective action and enable the agents as a
cohesive force to better serve customers’ interests. This will also put in place a foundation for the
possibility  of  setting  standards  on  conduct,  education  and  self-regulation  of  individual  agents.
Cultivating a solid industry association is neither an easy nor a short-term task but the benefits
are immense.
The Bank remains optimistic that agents will continue to play a key role in Malaysia’s insurance
industry, and will be crucial to take us to the next level. In all this, agents must not deviate from
their raison d’etre, i.e. intermediating between the insurer and the customer. Ultimately, we all
should recognize that it is the interests of the customers, which is at the heart of it. Jack Ma of
Alibaba, aptly said it, “Customers should be number one.” The challenge presented upon you
today, is to embrace the Digital Economy and not lose sight of this.
On that note, let me once again thank PIAM for the opportunity to share some thoughts with you
today and I wish you a productive convention ahead.   
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
