   WGCR round table 
 14 September 2018 
 Remarks by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France 
 Key notes 
            Press contact: Mark Deen (mark.deen@banque-france.fr). 
Page 1 sur 3 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Cher Benoît, Cher Jean-Paul, 
Welcome to Paris, 
The guidance released by CPMI-IOSCO two years ago was one of the precursors in the field 
of  cyber  risks.  Since  then,  the  level  of  cyber-threats  has  obviously  increased.  According  to 
different  public reports, the  number  of  cyber-attacks (700 million  in  2017)  has  increased  by 
over 100% in two years. 
This  is  why  cyber  security  will  be  one  of  the  priorities  of  the  G7’s  French  Presidency  next 
year.  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  three  considerations  and  put  forward  three  concrete 
measures so that these principles do not remain at the conceptual level but  actually lead to 
tangible actions. 
 I.  Three considerations, or three S’s: Silos / Security of Systems / Speed 
1) The first is of a general nature. Considering that “security is a block”, we need to explore 
how  to  break  the  silo  within  the  financial  sector,  which  does  not  take  account  of  the 
multiplicity  of  its  stakeholders:  the  CPMI-IOSCO  principles  rightly  emphasise  the  need  to 
take into account interconnections, meaning the link between FMIs, between FMIs and their 
service  providers  and  suppliers.  Nowadays,  we  should  also  take  into  account,  alongside 
regulated  and  supervised  participants,  the  existence  of  Fintechs,  as  well  as  “big  techs”. 
They  are  indeed  service  providers,  usually  unregulated,  vulnerable  to  cyber  risks  and,  in 
some  cases  creators  of  the  most  powerful  new  technologies,  which  could  significantly 
contribute to spreading risks (application  programming  interfaces (API), artificial intelligence 
software,  cloud  computing  structures,  etc.).  The  lack  of  substitutability  of  some  of  these 
services increases the vulnerability of the financial sector.  
2)  The  second  consideration  regards  the  embedding  of  security  in  systems  from  the 
earliest stages of conceptualisation. The CPMI-IOSCO guidance refers to this principle as 
“resilience by design”. It makes perfect sense, since it is the most efficient way to ensure the 
security of IT systems. This principle is however no doubt difficult to implement in the case of 
urgent  and  costly  IT  projects.  This  is  why  it  requires  a  more  proactive  approach  from 
executives  and  closer  attention  from  regulators  and  supervisors.  The  same  principle  has 
already  been  emphasised  in  the  European  General  Data  Protection  Regulation  which 
entered into force some months ago. It gives us one more reason to enforce this principle. 
 
3)  The  third  consideration  regards  speed:  the  capacities  to  resume  critical  activities 
within two hours after a cyber-attack, the two-hour Recovery Time Objective mentioned by 
Benoît.  In  this  regard,  in  today’s  environment  it  would  be  both  unrealistic  and  unwise  to 
resume activities without ensuring first that IT data have not been corrupted or that recovery 
of the activity affected does not trigger a higher risk exposure on its own, and for the whole 
Page 2 sur 3 
financial ecosystem. 
 II. Three short-term concrete measures 
Now,  I  would  like  to  share  three  initiatives  that  the  Banque  de  France  is  striving  to 
encourage: 
1)  Promoting  a  homogeneous  approach  to  conducting  penetration  tests  among 
various  players  in  the  financial  sector.  From  this  perspective,  the  TIBER-EU  framework 
that the ECB provided earlier this year is a tool that would be helpful to implement in order to 
test  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  and  especially  the  capacity  of  cross-border 
companies.  In  this  respect,  TIBER-EU  will  have  to  be  rolled  out  at  the  national  level, 
especially  for testing market  infrastructures,  while  taking  into  account  specific  local  aspects 
and  respecting  core  requirements  in  terms  of  responsibilities,  risk  management  and  the 
conduct  of  the  tests.  Through  “coordinated  frameworks”  it  will  therefore  be  possible  to 
achieve  the  much-needed  harmonisation  of  practices  and  a  mutual  recognition  of  tests 
across the European Union.  
2) Carrying out simulation exercises in the particular context of extreme but plausible 
cyber-attack  scenarios,  possibly 
including  cross-border  exercises.  Against 
the 
backdrop  of  the  rising  number  of  cyber-attacks  in  the  financial  sector,  there  is  a  need  to 
supplement  on-site  and  off-site  supervision,  beyond  merely  conducting  response  exercises 
at domestic level, and possibly even across many countries at the same time.  
The G-7 has given priority to the enhancement of cross-border coordination in the event of a 
significant cyber incident: the Banque de France chairs the sub-group in charge of preparing 
and performing this exercise in 2019. Such an initiative could usefully be extended to include 
similar  simulation  exercises  at  the  domestic  level,  and  even  across  many  countries  at  the 
same time. This would help to meet the following objectives:  
(i) 
assess the degree of preparation of all stakeholders, namely financial institutions as 
well as public authorities;   
(ii) 
be sure of their capacity to implement common and  consistent measures in order to 
restart operations after a cyber-attack;  
 
(iii) 
test dedicated crisis communication tools.  
Page 3 sur 3 
3)  Monitoring  the  degree  of  cyber  security  and  the  progress  of  cyber  resilience 
programmes.  Irrespective  of  the  nature  of  our  organisation  (a  central  bank,  a  commercial 
bank, an insurance company, a FMI), we have to not only deal with a large number of cyber 
security  issues,  but  also  to  coordinate  a  large  number  of  stakeholders  (boards,  senior 
executives,  Chief  Information  Officers,  Chief  Risk  officers,  Chief  Information  Security 
Officers, etc.,).  
Therefore it is of utmost importance, but at the same time difficult to  obtain an  overview of 
cyber security. All levels of management (technical, operational and executive) need to have 
appropriate  information  to  monitor  cyber  resilience  and  cyber  risks.  Above  all,  monitoring 
cyber  security  at  the  executive  level  (“tone  at  the  top”)  may  prove  to  be  challenging.  Of 
course,  there  is  a  broad  range  of  different  metrics  and  it  is  necessary  to  select  a  limited 
number of them. For instance, if I had to mention three of them, I would choose: 
(i) 
overseeing the development of awareness and training within the organisation; 
(ii) 
monitoring  patch  management  in  order  to  make  sure  that  identified  flaws  are 
corrected in due time; 
(iii) 
and,  last  but  not  least,  capturing  the  effectiveness  of  the  identification  and 
authentication processes. 
In a nutshell, key indicators help to improve the governance of the IT security system. 
 To conclude, I believe that it is necessary to better structure the international  governance 
of cyber security in the financial sector: it is clear that the different regulatory and supervisory 
authorities  are  aware  of  “cyber  risks”.  This  is  becoming  apparent  through  the  numerous 
initiatives at various levels (domestic, European, and international). While this is welcome, it 
is both delicate but necessary to strengthen international cooperation in order to ensure that 
there  are  neither  loopholes  nor  overlaps  and  that  there  is  convergence  towards  proposals 
and solutions that can easily be shared with others.  
