 Central Bank of Chile’s Twenty-Second Annual Conference: 
“Changing Inflation Dynamics, Evolving Monetary Policy” 
Opening remarks by Mario Marcel, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile 
October 25, 2018 – Santiago, Chile 
Central Bank of Chile 
October 2018 
 
Welcome remarks 
 
Good  morning  everybody  and  welcome  to  the  Twenty-Second  Annual  Conference  of  the 
Central Bank of Chile. It is a pleasure to host this event that every year gives us the opportunity to 
reflect and discuss about issues that have direct implications on our work as central bankers and 
stimulate  the  related  academic  agenda.  I  am  looking  forward  to  active  discussions  today  and 
tomorrow  on  this  year’s  conference  theme:  changing  inflation  dynamics  and  its  implications  for 
monetary policy. This conference is being followed online via live streaming on our website. 
 Inflation dynamics and monetary policy in recent years 
 
The last ten years have been an extraordinary time for macroeconomics. The deepest financial 
crisis  since  the  Great  Depression  was  followed  by  an  unprecedented  bold,  coordinated, 
unorthodox  and  persistent  response  by  central  banks  in  advanced  countries.  In  all,  a  decade  in 
which  the  world  economy  stood  a  long  way  from  normal  and,  as  it  depended  so  much  on 
emergency support, it was not easy to detect how much the economy was changing underneath. 
 
 So  it  is  perhaps  not  that  surprising  that  once  the  same  central  banks  began  to  envisage  a 
gradual,  cautious  and  well  communicated  approach  to  monetary  policy  normalization,  some 
challenges appeared on the road. True, some of them had to do with political change and policy 
uncertainty  to  the  heart  of  the  developed  world,  but  on  top  of  that,  major  empirical  and 
theoretical puzzles are challenging central tenets of monetary policy.  
 
In  particular,  inflation  appears  not  to  be  responding  to  monetary  policy  as  expected  in 
advanced  economies.  Despite  record-  low  interest  rates  over  many  years  and  massive  liquidity 
injections  by  central  banks  through  asset  purchase  programs,  inflation  has  not  picked  up  as 
expected.  Explaining  the  apparent  unresponsiveness  of  inflation  has  become  a  theoretical  and 
empirical  challenge  that  has  drawn  great  attention  from  academia  and  policymakers  in  the  last 
couple of years. 
 
Inflation  dynamics  and  the  way  they  interact  with  other  economic  variables  are,  of  course, 
crucially important to central banks that have price stability as their core mandate. Most of them 
currently  deliver  on  this  mandate  under  a  forward  inflation  targeting  framework,  whereby  the 
stance of monetary policy seeks to achieve convergence of forecasted inflation to the target over a 
medium-term  horizon.  This  prevents  central  banks  from  having  to  respond  to  short-term  price 
volatility,  but  if  inflation  does  not  respond  to  monetary  impulses  as  predicted  by  models, 
policymaking may become a much more complex game. If price responses get delayed in a highly 
accommodative  environment,  financial  imbalances may build up, fiscal discipline  may  be  eroded 
and  inflation  risks  may  get  underpriced  by  markets,  exposing  themselves  to  reversals  with  data 
surprises in the future. 
 
It is in this context where the topic of this year’s conference falls right into the core business of 
central banks: understanding inflation dynamics, and how they influence monetary policymaking. 
 1 
Central Bank of Chile 
October 2018 
  
Indeed, throughout the post crisis period we have observed a puzzling behavior of inflation in 
many  developed  countries,  as  standard  Phillips  curve  approaches  have  done  a  rather  poor  job 
predicting price pressures. During this period, the unemployment rate has reached historically low 
levels, but inflation has remained low.  
 
Economists  have  referred  to  a  “twin  puzzle”  in  inflation  dynamics  and  several  explanations 
with different policy implications have been put  forward. Some have pointed to the existence of 
“hysteresis” as causing a drop in potential output and, consequently, smaller gaps in the economy 
after the crisis. Others argue that the weakening of the relationship between activity and inflation 
responds  to  structural  changes,  like  globalization  forces  pulling  wages  down,  or  technological 
innovation prompting changes in industrial organization. Another alternative, a sort of “catch 22” 
for  central  bankers,  is  that  the  flattening  of  the  Phillips  curve  may  be  the  consequence  of  the 
success of central banks in targeting inflation.  
 
Measurement issues should not be ruled out either. Measuring a common movement of prices 
throughout the economy has never been a straightforward task, but this may be getting harder as 
standardized  goods  take  a  smaller  and  smaller  share  of  household  consumption  compared  to 
services  and  to  goods  that  are  subject  to  fast  change.  Some  have  argued  that  output  gaps  and 
prices retain their historical association if the right measure of “output gap” is compared to prices 
that are responsive to it. But then, what is a “correct measure” of the output gap, given that this is 
a not directly observable variable? In recent months, the Fed has been underscoring that some key 
structural  variables  for  monetary  policy,  like  the  output  gap  itself,  the  neutral  interest  rate  and 
natural  unemployment  are  estimated  with  considerable  uncertainty  and  may  have  shifted  in 
recent years. We will  hear about measurement challenges  and structural parameters  across this 
conference. 
 
Inflation dynamics in emerging countries 
 
As  we  hold  these  discussions  in  an  emerging  country,  it  is  also  important  to  note  some 
differences  with  the  advanced  world  concerning  price  dynamics  and  monetary  policy.  For  one, 
average  inflation  in emerging  economies  has  been traditionally  higher  and more  volatile  than  in 
advanced countries. This keeps our countries generally far from the risk of deflation, but has also 
contributed  to  the  buildup  of  indexation  mechanisms  and  more  volatile  inflation  expectations, 
which may make inflation targeting more difficult. Also, in many emerging countries, the domestic 
economy is relatively small compared to foreign trade, and pass-through from the exchange rate 
to  prices  is  a  much  more  relevant  determinant  of  short  term  inflation.  The  larger  size  of  the 
informal sector also tends to weaken the relationship between wages and prices. So the relative 
weight of past inflation, the exchange rate, wage inflation, market expectations and output gaps in 
inflation dynamics may differ significantly from advanced economies. 
 
Chile has pioneered monetary policy innovation in the emerging world. After four decades of 
double-digit  inflation,  our  Central  Bank  was  given  independent  status  and  a  mandate  of  price 
stability nearly 30 years ago and exercised it swiftly, with the support of a first version of inflation 
targets in the early 1990s. The monetary policy framework further evolved after the Asian Crisis to 
a fully-fledged forward inflation targeting regime with a floating exchange rate in 1999. This was 
soon  complemented  by  a  major  upgrading  of  monetary  policy  communications  and  a  structural 
fiscal policy rule.  
 2 
Central Bank of Chile 
October 2018 
  
This framework has basically remained in place for the last 18 years and its effectiveness has 
improved  as  markets,  agents  and  institutions  have  adapted  to  it.  Over  time,  markets  have 
developed adequate FX hedging mechanisms, inflation expectations have become more anchored 
at  the  monetary  policy  target  level,  the  Central  Bank  has  overcome  fear  of  floating,  financial 
markets have  deepened  and the  labor market has gained some  flexibility. As an open economy, 
we are not immune to external shocks but the ability to cushion them through the exchange rate 
and countercyclical policy response has improved significantly. 
 
At the time of the 2007 Global Financial Crisis, this framework helped us to avoid large costs 
and contain financial problems despite our strong ties with the global economy. In the aftermath 
of the Global Financial Crisis, the local currency depreciated around 45 percent in seven months, 
while  the  monetary  policy  rate  was  reduced  from  a  relatively  high  level  of  8.25  percent  in 
December  2008  to  a  0.5  percent  in  July  2009,  where  it  stayed  for  about  a  year.  Together  with 
lowering  the  interest  rate,  the  Central  Bank  implemented  a  program  of  liquidity  provision  that 
significantly reduced the market interest rates to a level much closer to the monetary policy rate. 
 
The active monetary policy response, together with an expansionary fiscal policy, facilitated a 
speedy adjustment. After only one year of negative annual growth in 2009, the economy was able 
to  sustain  growth  rates  above  4  percent  in  the  years  that  followed.  The  inflation  rate  fell  well 
below  the  target  range  for  about  a year,  but  inflation  expectations  remained anchored  at  the  3 
percent target in the two-year horizon. 
 
Undoubtedly,  this  is  the  strongest  countercyclical  macroeconomic  policy  response  we  have 
ever articulated, proportional to the magnitude of the shock, but our monetary policy framework 
has  also  been  useful  to  face  subsequent  challenges  at  home  and  abroad,  like  the  end  of  the 
commodity price boom in 2013-2014, delivering lower price and output volatility. In each of these 
episodes, anchored inflation expectations,  automatic  fiscal stabilizers,  foreign exchange  hedging, 
and a sound financial sector have contributed to provide monetary policy with sufficient room for 
maneuver.  But  it  is  crucial  to  remark  that  these  factors  are  not  exogenous  to  macroeconomic 
policy. They  were  nurtured  by  a  consistent macro  policy  framework  built  and maintained  in the 
last two decades. 
 The challenge for central banks 
 
The  Chilean  experience  illustrates  that  for  forward  inflation  targeting to  work,  central  banks 
need  to  develop  the  right  set  of  tools—data  sources,  models  and  judgment—to  formulate  and 
communicate  a  policy  path  that  is  coherent  with  such  convergence.  As  the  local  and  world 
economy evolve, the relevance of all these tools needs to be kept constantly in check. 
 
Over  time,  economies  are  subject  to  major  changes,  especially  in  the  case  of  emerging 
economies, and this may alter well-established relationships. The current focus in the relevance of 
the Phillips curve and price dynamics is a good example of this. But the extent to which structural 
changes  involve  a  permanent  change  in  the  responsiveness  of  prices  to  output  gaps  or  one-off 
changes  delaying  inflationary  responses  for  some  time  is  equally  relevant,  especially  for 
policymaking.  This  also  applies  to  structural  changes  that  are  especially  relevant  for  emerging 
countries, like demographic transition or the lengthening of international value chains. 
  3 
Central Bank of Chile 
October 2018 
 The quantity and quality of data available to make monetary policy decisions may also change 
substantially  over  time.  The  traditional  dominance  of  regular  economic  surveys  is  increasingly 
challenged by growing administrative datasets and big data. In this regard one should never forget 
that  data  is  only  an  instrument  to  capture  true  economic  behavior.  From  a  policymaking 
perspective, data collection, processing and statistical methods are a way to produce evidence for 
better  decision  making.  A  central  bank  that  operates  in  a  forward-looking  environment,  dealing 
with  a  large  number  of  unobservable  concepts,  has  an  ultimate  responsibility  to  use  all  the 
relevant  information  at  hand.  Monetary  policy  making  is  not  a  bureaucratic  procedure,  but  an 
intense exercise of judgment. Of course, we must be able to share such information and judgment 
with the public to make our decisions easier to understand. 
 
As for judgment, a major challenge for central banks is to connect incoming information with 
medium-term prospects. While central bank boards generally meet at regular intervals, they need 
to  assess  when  accumulated  information  is  sufficient  to  indicate  a  change  in  the  medium-term 
scenario,  possibly  demanding  a  change  in  the  trajectory  of  monetary  policy.  In  the  case  of 
emerging  countries,  FX  pass-through  poses  a  major  challenge,  as  currency  parities  may  exert 
substantial pressure on inflation in the short run, gaining a lot of public attention, but they may 
not prevail in longer spells. The source of currency volatility and the exposure of economic agents 
to  FX  risk  are  key  factors  that,  in  our  experience,  may  help  assess  the  medium-term  impact  of 
exchange rate movements and condition the need for a monetary policy response. 
 
A  similar  challenge  to  the  exercise  of  judgment  by  central  banks  is  to  distinguish  between 
“normal” times and stressed scenarios. While in normal times, economies can adjust gradually and 
tolerance  for  deviations  for  a  charted  path  may  be  higher,  a  stressed  environments  is 
characterized by a very low tolerance to risk, shorter time horizons and powerful feedback loops 
with  financial  markets.  The  recent  experience  of  fast-shifting  conditions  for  some  emerging 
economies that were caught in the ebbing tide of capital movements is in stark contrast with the 
slow-motion  of  monetary  policy  in  advanced  countries,  which  is  also  a  source  of  theoretical 
puzzles and information challenges. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
To guide our discussions on these issues over the next two days, we can rely on a distinguished 
group  of  economists  that  have  joined  us  to  present  and  discuss  issues  concerning  inflation 
dynamics and monetary  policy. I would  especially like  to  thank  Gonzalo Castex, Jordi Galí, Diego 
Saravia,  and  Joaquín  Fuenzalida  for  putting  together  the  program,  and  Carolina  Besa,  Paloma 
Navarro, and María José Reyes for helping with the organization. I wish you all a fruitful discussion 
and a pleasant stay in Santiago. 
    4 
