         AMSE | Aix-Marseille School of Economics 
Marseille, 11 December 2018 
   Speech by Denis Beau 
First Deputy Governor 
   “Trends in financial intermediation and implications for the regulation and 
supervision of the European financial sector” 
 1/9 
Ladies and Gentlemen, dear students, 
It’s  a  pleasure  to  be  at  the  Aix-Marseille  School  of  Economics  today  to  discuss  the  trends 
affecting  a  key  channel  of  the  financing  of  the  real  economy:  financial  intermediation.  This 
topic  is  well  chosen  the  year  of  the  tenth  anniversary  of  both  Lehman  bankruptcy  and 
Nakamoto’s  paper  underlying  the  Bitcoin.  This  is  not  just  a  coincidence.  For  crypto-assets’ 
proponents, the “old world” of bank-centric financial intermediation failed in 2008 and had to 
be replaced by disintermediated peer-to-peer systems like Bitcoin.  
Where do we stand now?  
Central  bankers,  regulators  and supervisors  have  worked to  strengthen the  traditional  bank 
centric  model  of  intermediation,  and  the  highly  intensive  finalisation  of  Basel  III  has 
concluded ten years of regulatory efforts in that field. Banks are stronger and more resilient 
than  before  2008.  At  the  same  time,  quite  ironically,  the  Bitcoin  itself  has  generated  the 
biggest bubble ever, which is now bursting.  
So, in 2018, are there new developments in financial intermediation?  
Yes,  indeed.  A  number  of  factors  contribute  to  push  the  European  bank-centric  model 
towards a more diversified, unbundled financial intermediation model. Hence, I will focus the 
first part of my presentation on those drivers and their impact on financial intermediation (I). I 
will  then  highlight  the  financial  risks  that  go  hand-in-hand  with  the  changes  underway  (II). 
Finally, I would like to emphasise that a safe move towards a more diversified intermediation 
model  as  we  see  it  developing  cannot  be  achieved  without  further  financial  integration  at 
European  level.  To  that  end,  advancing  the  European  regulatory  agenda  is  of  prime 
importance (III). 
 1.  From  bank-centric 
financial 
intermediation 
towards  unbundled 
financial 
intermediation in the digital era 
To  date,  in  Europe,  we  have  been  accustomed  to  a  bank-centric  intermediation  model. 
However, this model is being increasingly challenged by new players emerging in the digital 
era,  the  so-called  Fintechs  and  Bigtechs,  as  well  as  by  the  growing  weight  of  the  asset 
management industry. We thus need to prepare to new intermediation models, which can be 
classified in four categories: 
 2/9 
-  The 
traditional  banking 
intermediation  model 
for  certain 
financial  services, 
like 
mortgages; 
-  A  non-bank  financial  intermediation  model  (formerly  known  as  “shadow  banking”) 
performed  by  the  asset  management  industry,  to  finance  in  particular  the  corporate 
sector; 
-  A re-intermediated model, in which Fintechs and Bigtechs intermediate the banks, on the 
retail segment in particular; 
-  And  a  fully  disintermediated  model  supported  by  the  blockchain  and  the  peer-to-peer 
economies. 
Let  me  first  discuss  the  new  models  stemming  from  the  digital  era  (A)  and  I’ll  come  back 
afterwards to asset management (B).  
(A)  The  digitalisation  of  finance  is  prospering  thanks  to  cutting-edge  technologies  (big  data 
analytics, cloud computing, artificial intelligence and blockchain) that beyond the promise of 
better  consumer  experiences  is  lowering  the  entry  barriers  to  the  financial  sector  for  new 
players,  the tech firms, and  make  it  possible  to unbundle financial  services  into  an  array of 
distinct core functions such as channelling payments and money, providing financing, sharing 
risk, and allocating capital.  
Balance-sheet-light  payment  services  have  so  far  been  the  main  gateway  to  the  financial 
sector  for  tech  firms,  but  after  doing  so  tech  firms  may  then  expand  their  business  further 
along the value chain, from payment to retail and commercial banking, wealth management 
and insurance. 
Among these tech firms, the Fintechs and the Bigtechs will have a different impact on 
financial intermediation.  
Fintech  startups  have already  been  a  game  changer in  the  financial  sector: they have 
imported  from  the  internet  industry  a  customer-centric  culture  into  the  financial  sector  and 
they  have  targeted  and  called  into  question  many  of  the  long-standing  financial  rents. 
However,  Fintech  start-ups  do  not  have  the  capital  resources  to  disrupt  incumbent 
banks and their future role is likely to be shaped by two main alternatives: to be acquired by 
an incumbent bank or to compete on niche segments such as equity crowdfunding or market 
place lending. 
 It  could  be  different  with  Bigtechs. The market  capitalisation of the GAFA companies  - 
Google,  Amazon,  Facebook,  Apple-  is  25  times  higher  than  that  of  the  whole  Fintech 
 3/9 
universe. Bigtechs already have a material footprint in financial services, and not least 
in payment services: Amazon Pay operates in 10 countries, Google Pay in 22 countries and 
Apple Pay in 25 countries. Facebook Messenger allows peer-to-peer payments in 3 countries 
and a Facebook wallet is reportedly in preparation.  
Moreover,  Bigtechs  like  the  GAFA  companies  have  competitive  advantages  in  terms  of 
expanding  their  activities  further  in  this  area,  including  massive  financial  resources  to  strong 
brand  recognition,  a  worldwide  customer  base  and  privileged  access  to  cutting  edge 
technologies. 
Therefore, Bigtechs more than Fintechs have the potential to fundamentally redefine financial 
intermediation:  not  to  recreate  the  universal  banking  model,  but  rather  to  integrate  the 
entire landscape of financial services into their own digital ecosystems. This does not 
mean that banks will be disintermediated; but rather that banks may be interfaced by 
Bigtechs’ platforms. Such a move is already gaining considerable traction in China. 
So,  to  conclude  on  the  new  players  emerging  in  the  digital  era  and  their  impact  on 
financial  intermediation,  digital finance  may  not  lead  to  a  more  decentralised  system 
as the centripetal forces of network effects may benefit large conglomerates the most. 
Rather than eliminating intermediation, if left on its own, digital finance will more likely 
lead  to  reshuffling  the  cards,  with  the  most  digitally-agile  incumbents  and  the  most 
financially-able  challengers  becoming  the  new  dominant  (and  potentially  systemic) 
intermediaries. 
(B)  Beyond  native  digital  intermediaries,  we  have  also  witnessed  the  steady  growth  of  the 
asset management industry in the wake of the great financial crisis.  
The  asset  management  industry  plays  a  key  role  in  the  economy  by  channelling  savings 
towards  investment,  both  for  companies’  and  governments’  capital  needs.  In  other  words, 
asset managers play an important intermediary role in the financial system. 
In 2008, assets in the fund industry amounted to about EUR 13 trillion. Ten years later, the 
outstanding amount of assets is more than 3 times higher at EUR 42 trillion. Half is located in 
the United States and about 35% in Europe.1 
The asset management sector is the largest component of non-bank financial intermediation 
defined  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  as  “credit  intermediation  involving  entities  and 
                                                           
1 Sources : EFAMA, International Statistical reports  
 4/9 
activities  outside  the  regular  banking  system”.  It’s  true  that  in  many  respects,  investment 
funds have bank‑like financing activities: they don’t collect deposits but they do collect funds, 
they carry out liquidity and/or maturity transformation and, in certain cases, they perform their 
intermediation  with  leverage.  And  like  banks,  more  than  two-thirds  of  investment  funds  (in 
asset value) are susceptible to runs.2 
I  would  like  to  conclude  this  first  part  of  my  speech  by  some  anecdotal  evidence  showing 
how  the  traditional  bank-centric  intermediation  model  is  shrinking,  while  a  more 
diversified intermediation model is gaining traction: 
  in  2010,  60%  of  the  new  leveraged  loans  (that  is,  loans  made  to  indebted  corporates) 
were granted by banks in Europe;  
in  2018,  69%  of  the  new  leverage  loans  were  granted,  not  by  banks,  but  by  asset 
managers.  
A  more  diversified  financial  intermediation  model,  with  new  players,  Fintechs  but 
above all Bigtechs and Asset Managers, is welcome in that it will bring more sources 
of  financing  for  the  real  economy.  This  nevertheless  raises  a  big  issue:  they  are 
performing  bank-like  activities  without  being  regulated  in  the  same  way  as  banks. 
Beyond unlevel playing field considerations, this situation could have major financial stability 
implications. 
 2- Old issues, and new ones that need to be addressed by regulators and supervisors 
This  leads  me  to  my  second  point.  The  move  from  a  bank-centric  intermediation  model 
toward  new  unbundled  financial  intermediation  models  performed  by  multiple  players  does 
not eliminate the need for central bankers (fortunately!) and regulators. But it does force us to 
revisit old questions (A) and to address new ones (B). 
(A) I would like to highlight three of the old issues we must revisit.  
First,  the  question  of  the  scope  of  financial  regulation. Just as an example,  the use of 
the  public  cloud  is  becoming  mainstream  for  performing  core  banking  operations.  Fintechs 
and  Bigtechs  have  adopted  a  strategy  of  “all  in”.  Incumbents  are  also  migrating,  although 
more  cautiously,  to  the  public  cloud.  However,  the  cloud  computing  market  is  highly 
concentrated  and  Amazon  Web  Services  has  built  a  dominant  position.  As  the  core 
                                                           
2 Sources: FSB, Global Monitoring Report on NBFI 2017 
 5/9 
financial  functions  lift  and  shift  to  the  cloud,  the  risk  of  a  single  point  of  failure  will 
emerge,  and  yet,  cloud  providers  are  unregulated  and  to  a  large  extent  out  of  the 
reach of supervisors. 
Second,  the  question  of  conduct.  Our regulation deems certain practices acceptable and 
others  not.  Technological  developments  are  making  it  possible  to  use  information  that  was 
previously  out  of  reach  of  a  financial  intermediary.  This  could  potentially  allow  a  more 
accurate  assessment  of risk  or  a  more  “responsive”  pricing  of service.  But  what  is  possible 
may not be (socially) acceptable  – to take one example,  the current development of “social 
network  informed  credit  scores”  raises  questions  when  privacy  concerns  or  discriminatory 
bias are at stake.  
Third, the question of anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing. Consider, 
for  instance,  crypto-assets:  the  pseudo-anonymity  of  Bitcoin  and  altcoin  has  facilitated  the 
laundering  of  money  stemming  from  illegal  activities  such  as  drug  transactions  or  tax 
evasion.  Not  surprisingly,  the  sharpest  decline  in  Bitcoin  prices  thus  far  happened  in  2013 
when the infamous darknet marketplace, The Silk Road, was shut down by the FBI.   
(B)  Let  me  now  turn  to  new  risks  which  are  non-financial  in  nature  but  closely  intertwined 
with the digitalisation of finance. Three in particular merit central banks’ scrutiny. 
First, the question of strategic independence of incumbent banks. If incumbents depend 
on Bigtechs for key infrastructure such as cloud computing, if they rely on the same Bigtech 
to distribute their products through their platforms and then compete with Bigtechs on certain 
segments, they see their strategic independence challenged in the same way as hotels and 
retailers  did.  This  process  of  commoditisation  of  incumbents  may  lower  credit  standards  to 
compensate  for  higher  pressure  on  margins  and  exacerbate  their  funding  gap  because  of 
lower customer stickiness. 
Second,  the  question  of  cyber-risk.  With  greater  interconnections  between  technologies 
and the financial system, the Banque de France observed in its Financial Stability Report of 
December  2017 that  cyber-risk  is moving from an  idiosyncratic  risk  to  a  potential  source of 
systemic risk  which  need  to  be  addressed. This  perspective  is  widely  shared  among  public 
and private decision markers and it should not come as a surprise that cyber-security will be 
one of the priorities of the French presidency of the G7 next year.  
Third, the question of market structure and private monopolies, in particular as regards 
clearing services.  In Europe,  this topic has a specific dimension that results from the Brexit 
 6/9 
outlook. The clearing of interest rate derivatives deserves in particular attention since the UK 
clearing houses have a virtual monopoly in the sector.  Beyond handling transition issues in 
case of a “hard Brexit” we must ensure that critical key players do not become “too big 
to fail”. Of course, by its very nature clearing is an activity that generates major economies 
of scale, and thus encourages concentration. But greater competition is absolutely necessary 
to  stimulate  financial  innovation.  In  addition,  it  translates  in  a  market  structure  that  is  more 
attractive  from  a  financial  stability  perspective  and  easier  to  oversee  from  a  supervisory 
standpoint.  
So,  to  conclude  my  second  point,  the  completion  of  the  regulatory  decade  to  strengthen 
banking financial intermediation is not the end of the story; it’s just the end of the beginning. 
The transformation of financial intermediation is full of opportunities but it also highlights the 
limitations  of  sectoral  and  entity-based  regulations  and  the  need  to  adapt  regulation  and 
supervision to a morphing financial intermediation. To manage the financial stability risks 
stemming  from  an  unbundled  financial  intermediation  model,  what  we  need  is  to 
develop: 
-  First, well-articulated and complementary regulation and supervision going from micro-
prudential  to  macro-prudential,  from  prudential  to  consumer  protection,  anti-money 
laundering, data protection and anti-trust laws;   
-  Secondly, a technology-neutral  stance, which accommodates Fintech innovation while 
preserving financial stability; and 
-  Thirdly,  an  activity-based  regulation  and  supervision,  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field 
between all entities pursuing the same financial activity.  
 3- The need to advance the European regulatory agenda to support a more diversified 
and integrated intermediation model 
All  these  new  trends  in  financial  intermediation  –  digitalisation,  non-bank  financial 
intermediation,  Brexit  –  plead  for  advancing  the  European  agenda  to  support  a  more 
diversified  and  integrated  intermediation  model.  At  the  same  time,  these  changes 
represent  an  incredible  opportunity  to  restructure  the  European financial  system  in  order  to 
unleash growth and innovation. 
 7/9 
Steps towards a more integrated financial system at European level have already been taken 
since  the  crisis,  with  the  Banking  Union  and  the  Capital  Markets  Union  projects.  These 
projects need to be further developed and implemented. 
The Banking Union, which was set up to put an end to the link between sovereign risk and 
banking  risk,  is  now  operational.  What  remains  to  be  done  in  order  to  finalise  it  includes 
completing  the  resolution  pillar  by  implementing  a  backstop  and  adopting  a  common 
framework  to  enhance  the  provision  of  liquidity  and  putting  in  place  a  European  deposit 
insurance scheme. Finalising the Banking Union is of prime importance for the development 
of  pan-European  banks,  and  will  make  it  possible  to  achieve  a  better  balance  of  risks, 
economies  of  scale,  a  better  allocation  of  savings  towards  productive  investments  and 
increased competitiveness of European banks at the international level. 
The  other  major  initiative  at  the  European  level  to  strengthen  financial  integration  is  the 
Capital  Markets  Union  project  which  aims  to  boost  investment  in  the  EU.  Speeding  up  this 
Union  will  not  only  foster  growth  but  will  also  enhance  risk-sharing  across  European 
countries  and  mitigate  the  procyclicality  of  bank  financing.  We,  at  the  Banque  of  France, 
support  in  particular  three  initiatives  which  should  have  a  decisive  impact  on  cross-border 
investment:  First,  the  harmonisation  of  the  insolvency  procedures  framework  and  its 
implementation  by  companies  to  promote  investment  in  equity  across  Europe.  Second,  the 
development  of  pan-European  individual  retirement  savings  products  to  increase  workers’ 
mobility  and  offer  a  new  source  of  long-term  financing  for  European  companies.  Third,  the 
reinforcement  of  ESMA  which  is  necessary  to  supervise  capital  markets  in  a  harmonised 
way, while duly involving national authorities when appropriate.  
Completing the Banking Union and accelerating the Capital Markets Union will therefore be 
essential  in  order  to  lay  the  basis  for  a  sound,  diversified  and  integrated  financial 
intermediation.  Yet,  we  should  go  even  further  and  achieve  a  real  “financial  Eurosystem”, 
made  up  of  stronger  and  pan-European 
financial 
institutions  and  shared  market 
infrastructures. Brexit, in this sense, represents an opportunity. Let’s be clear: there will not 
be  a  single  City  for  the  continent,  but  rather  an  integrated  polycentric  network  of  financial 
centres, with specialisations based on areas of expertise.  
Our ability to adequately regulate and supervise these changes in financial intermediation will 
be determinant for growth and innovation. Europe must effectively transform its own savings, 
in order to enhance its ability to finance the real economy. This is what Governor Villeroy de 
Galhau calls the Financing Union for Investment and Innovation. This involves better steering 
the euro area’s abundant savings to absorb shocks within the euro area more effectively and 
 8/9 
to  meet  investment  and  innovation  needs  in  fields  such  as  digital  technology,  energy 
transition and the equity financing of SMEs.  
 I would like to conclude my speech by quoting Bill Gates:  
“We always overestimate the change that will occur in the next two years and underestimate 
the change that will occur in the next ten. Don’t let yourself be lulled into inaction”.3 
The  Banque  de  France  tries  to  heed  this  warning.  Although  we  do  belong  to  the  (very)  “old 
world” – the Banque de France was created more than 200 years ago by Napoléon –, as any 
incumbent, we need to adjust and adapt to the “new world”. In order to do so: 
  we have adapted our organisation and governance with the creation of a Fintech hub 
within  our  supervisory  function  (which  has  supported  more  than  300  Fintechs),  the 
appointments  of  a  Chief  Digital  Officer  and  a  Chief  Data  Officer,  and  the  launch  of  a 
Lab to foster innovation within the Banque.  
  We experiment with new technologies: the Banque de France was the first central bank 
to  implement  a  full-scale  project  based  on  DLT  which  is  fully  operational 4 and  we 
successfully run eight artificial intelligence projects.  
  We  also  host  discussions  between  regulators,  academics  and  the  industry:  the  latest 
working group on artificial intelligence will deliver its conclusion by end of this year.  
But this call for action is addressed to everyone, and especially to you, the next generation. 
As students at the AMSE and as future economists, analysts and researchers, you will have 
a  big  role  to  play  to  ensure  that,  irrespective  of  the  big  changes  to  come  in  tomorrow’s 
financial  intermediation,  our  compass  continues  to  point  toward  the  common  good  of 
financial stability. 
                                                            
3 The Road ahead, 1995 
4 Madre 
 9/9 
