Burkhard  Balz:  Germany  and  America  -  (economically)  stronger
together
Speech by Mr Burkhard Balz, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at
the Thanksgiving Dinner of the AmCham, Chapter Lower Saxony, Hannover, 22 November 2018.
 1 Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen,
Mr Barsch,
It is a pleasure to be here today to talk about something I very firmly believe in, as reflected by the
title I have given my speech:
Germany  and  America  –  stronger  together:  stronger  in  economic  terms,  and  in  more  ways
besides.
I am particularly happy to be talking about this particular topic because I know that the American
Chamber of Commerce in Germany generally sees things as I do.
So I can pretty much lead on from what was said at your New Year's Reception back in 2004,
which  some  of  you  might  have  attended  nearly  15  years  ago.  The  speaker  back  then  was
Professor  Werner  Weidenfeld  who,  previous  to  that,  had  been  the  Federal  Government’s
coordinator for German-US relations, a post he occupied for more than ten years [between 1987
and 1999]. In his address to the AmCham in 2004, Professor Weidenfeld remarked that Europe
and  the  United  States  need  a  calculated  partnership  strategy.  America  needs  partners  in
leadership. And Europe is essentially the natural partner.
My impression is that the partnership between the United States and Germany is in need of care
and attention right now.
Your decision to invite me, a representative from the Bundesbank, to speak on this topic today is
particularly  fitting.  That  is  because  the  Bundesbank  has  been  nurturing  major  transatlantic
relations from day one.
2 The Bundesbank’s transatlantic relations
To  be  precise,  the  very  creation  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  –  or  should  I  say,  that  of  its
predecessor, the Bank Deutscher Länder – is very much tied up with an American, and British,
project: the currency reform in 1948.
The Allies  deemed  this  reform  necessary  in  order  to  combat  the  steady  depreciation  of  the
German  currency.  To  put  the  project  into  practice,  it  was  also  necessary  to  create  the  right
German institutions.
But  the Americans'  support  didn't  end  there.  Would  you  believe  that  the  first  Deutsche  Mark
banknotes were designed and printed in the United States?
Take a look at one of these original Deutsche Mark notes and you will quickly see the signature
style of the responsible Bureau of Engraving and Printing and the similarity to US dollar notes.
So  the  Bundesbank  –  and  its  predecessor,  the  Bank  deutscher  Länder  –  enjoy  close  and
amicable relations with the Federal Reserve System that go back a long way.
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
For one thing, there is the quasi-institutionalised cooperation at the international level which came
into being when the Deutsche Mark was pegged to the US dollar as part of the Bretton Woods
monetary system.
Nowadays,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Bundesbank  meet  at  regular  intervals  to  share  their
views, such as within the G 20 framework or at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel.
And for another thing, the Bundesbank has been a fixture at the New York financial centre since
back in 1963, and it has had its own representative office there since 1986.
You  see,  the  United  States  and  the  New  York  financial  centre  were  becoming  increasingly
important  for  the  Bundesbank’s  operations.  We  do,  after  all,  hold  a  great  deal  of  our  reserve
assets in US dollars.
Our team of employees in New York observe and analyse the US financial system and capitalise
on their network of public and private institutions, particularly their link with the Federal Reserve
System.
Our  team’s  first-hand  assessments  help  the  Bundesbank  to  evaluate  the  state  of  the  global
economy. And  I  dare  say  that  developments  which  might  jeopardise  financial  stability  can  be
identified sooner at close proximity than from afar.
Incidentally, this intense exchange of views and ideas is not a one-way street. The team at the
New York Bundesbank representative office also report on economic developments in Germany
and  the  euro  area.  Plus,  they  explain  the  Bundesbank’s  views  on  matters  of  monetary  and
economic policy. Their expertise in this capacity was particularly sought after in the midst of the
European sovereign debt crisis.
The more interconnected our world becomes, the more important it is to engage in an intensive
exchange  of  facts  and  opinions.  This  is  why  I  firmly  believe  that  nurturing  objective  and
constructive dialogue – in a way that covers as many relationships in society as possible – is of
crucial importance these days.
You,  the  stakeholders  of  the  American  Chamber  of  Commerce  in  Germany,  have  been
contributing to this worthy goal for more than a century now.
This evening it is my turn to make a contribution to this dialogue, and I expect that my speech will
be followed by stimulating debate over the course of the evening.
I  will  use  some  figures  in  my  speech  to  illustrate  the  economic  relations  between  the  United
States  and  Germany  and  shine  a  light  on  various  aspects  of  the  protectionism  debate  which
should not, under any circumstances, be allowed to drive a wedge between our two countries.
And in closing, I will also touch upon the challenges facing the United States and Germany alike.
But let me begin with an account of the economic situation on both sides of the Atlantic.
3 Economic activity
Both Germany and the United States have been enjoying one of the longest periods of expansion
in post-war history. The upswing that kicked off in 2009 is as intact as ever, despite what the
less-than-unanimously-positive economic reports for Germany in recent months might suggest.
Various institutions are in the process of revising their growth forecasts downwards for a number
of countries, many of them reportedly spooked by the spectre of uncertainty raised by the trade
conflicts.
The Bundesbank recently dedicated  an  article  in  its  October  Monthly  Report  to  examining  the
macroeconomic effects of uncertainty in greater detail and came to the following conclusion.
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
While  it  is  true  that  uncertainty  noticeably  depressed  economic  activity  during  the  global
financial crisis ten years ago,
there  is  no  evidence  that  it  has  been  dampening  growth  in  the  more  recent  past.  So  the
relationship between uncertainty and the real economy is not as clear, or as close, as is
often supposed.
This  view  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  global  activity  was  not  affected  by  the  Brexit
referendum or by various political developments in Europe and the United States.
The current IMF staff projections expect the global economy to expand just as strongly in 2018
and 2019 as it did last year.
It’s striking to note that the IMF staff left their projections for the current year unchanged for the
United States and China in particular – the protagonists in the trade conflict. I find that hard to
reconcile with the theory that major uncertainty effects are at play.
Projections were instead downgraded significantly for a number of emerging market economies
in  particular  on  account  of  country-specific  vulnerabilities.  These  weak  spots  are  becoming
increasingly  telling,  because  as  the  United  States  normalises  its  monetary  policy  stance,  the
emerging market economies as a whole are finding it more and more difficult to attract investors.
However, at present, there is no question of a looming large-scale emerging markets crisis.
The IMF staff are expecting activity in Germany, and in the euro area, too, to expand by around 2
per cent this year and next, and are forecasting an even stronger rate of growth for the United
States.
Joblessness in Germany has fallen to its lowest level since reunification and to its lowest point in
nearly 50 years in America. At the same time, employment levels are continuing to increase, and
it looks like wage growth is picking up speed. Skilled labour is becoming increasingly hard to find.
It's hardly surprising, then, that capacity constraints are on the rise. Germany’s economy has
been outpacing its potential growth rate for five straight years now.
Fiscal policy will probably stimulate growth further – and this stimulus is already making itself felt
in the United States.
The  tax  cuts  and  spending  increases  pushed  through  by  the  US  administration  effectively
represent  a  major  economic  stimulus  package. A  model-based  analysis  by  the  Bundesbank
indicates that the tax reform alone will probably add substantially to the pace of US economic
growth  this  year  and  next.     However,  this  expansionary  fiscal  policy  stance  will  also  tend  to
widen the current account deficit.
1
But before I look in greater detail at what is currently the widely debated topic of current account
positions  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic,  there  are  a  few  facts  about  German-US  economic
relations I would like to share with you.
4 Close economic relations
There’s no doubt about it – the trade ties spanning the Atlantic Ocean are significant.
The  United  States  was  Germany’s  number  one  trading  partner  in  2017  –  not  just  for  goods
exports, but for services exports and imports as well. Only when it comes to goods imports does
the United States rank fourth among Germany's main trading partners. 
In the other direction, Germany is a major partner for America, but not quite such a crucial one.
Naturally, that’s down to the size differences between the two economies.
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Germany ranks sixth for US exports of both goods and services. Based on its share of US goods
imports, Germany comes in as America’s fifth most important major trading partner, though it
does garner a respectable silver medal for imports of US services, behind the United Kingdom.
Some  of  the  transatlantic  trade  flows  are  intracompany  transactions  that  take  place  within
multinational  enterprises. And  there  are  some  cases  where  companies  cater  for  a  market  by
producing within that market instead of exporting goods or services. So foreign direct investment,
or FDI, is another component of German-US economic relations.
Roughly  8  per  cent  of  FDI  in  Germany  comes  from  the  United  States.  In  the  other  direction,
German foreign direct investment as a share of total FDI in the United States likewise comes to
approximately  8  per  cent.  Measured  as  a  percentage  of  total  German  FDI,  the  United  States
account for a substantial 15 per cent.
When we view the economic ties between the United States and Germany from both angles, we
can see just how close, and how important, the economic relations between the two countries
are. Conclusions are more difficult to reach when economic relations between the two countries
are expressed in terms of bilateral trade and current account balances, for example.
5 Bilateral balances reveal little
Ladies and gentlemen,
If the United States posts an overall deficit in its trade balance while Germany generally posts a
surplus, we expect to see this reflected in bilateral trade as well.
A Bundesbank study shows that the deficit in the United States’ bilateral trade in goods correlates
to the overall trade balance of its partner countries. The greater the overall balance of the partner
country, the greater the US bilateral deficit. The balance of German-US trade in goods does not
2
deviate noticeably from this empirical regularity.
Having  said  that,  bilateral  balances  generally  are  not  very  meaningful  because  they  disregard
relations with third countries. Many US enterprises, for instance, have chosen to do business
from the Netherlands as a way to cover the European market.
Thus, it makes sense to consider the EU as a whole as a partner of the United States. Trade
expert  Gabriel  Felbermayr  rightly  pointed  out  that  the  United  States  actually  has  a  current
account surplus with the EU: income from services and primary income more than compensate
for the trade in goods deficit.
And ultimately, current account balances are the result of all savings and investment decisions in
an economy. A distortion of the market or competition cannot be directly identified from these
balances.  What's  more,  current  account  balances  can  only  by  steered  by  policy  to  a  limited
extent.
And the notion of reducing Germany’s current account surplus so as to deplete the US deficit is
unfeasible  simply  on  the  basis  of  size.  The  US  economy  is  over  five  times  as  large  as  the
German economy.
In  addition,  increased  demand  in  Germany  would  have  knock-on  effects  on  other  trading
partners. Greater demand for imports in Germany would primarily benefit our neighbours, such
3
as Austria, the Czech Republic, the Netherlands and Poland.
To reduce the US current account deficit, it would make more sense to influence savings and
investment decisions in the United States. As I’ve already indicated, a good starting point would
be a change of direction in US fiscal policy, shifting away from its expansionary track.
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Indeed, simulation exercises conducted by the Bundesbank reveal that the tax cuts passed in the
United  States  will  probably  push  up  government  debt  and  the  current  account  deficit
4
considerably.
6 The danger of protectionism
I  would  like  to  warn  against  thinking  of  tariffs  as  a  cure  for  the  current  account  deficit.  By
introducing new tariffs, the United States is actually running the risk of putting its own economy,
5
not least, on a worse footing.
This is because tariffs don’t just lead to lower imports; exports are also likely to take a hit due to
depressed income in customer countries and appreciation of the dollar.
What's more, tariffs can increase domestic inflation and thus reduce the purchasing power of
households. Taken together, these factors threaten to damage the economy in question.
Increased inflationary pressures would also lead to higher interest rates. For a debtor country like
the United States, though, this means higher interest payments to other countries. Factoring in
lower exports, the result is that the desired improvement in the current account balance may not
materialise.
And when partner countries retaliate with their own measures, at the very latest, there will clearly
be  welfare  losses  for  everyone  involved.  World  trade  and  global  economic  activity  will  be
impaired. In 2017, the Bundesbank published macroeconomic model-based analyses showing
that there can only be losers in trade wars.
This brings me to the heart of the protectionism debate. It may seem easy to point the finger in
this discussion.
Germany is quite rightly determined in calling for free trade in goods. And restrictions on capital
flows are something that is difficult to reconcile with this.
But  Gabriel  Felbermayr  also  points  out  that  the  EU  is  by  no  means  a  free  trade  paradise,
6
especially compared with the United States.
For 48 per cent of all products, the EU imposes a higher tariff than the United States, while the
reverse is true for 30 per cent of products.
It  is  a  welcome  development  that  the  two  sides  are  now  discussing  how  to  dismantle  trade
barriers. Lowering tariffs would boost welfare and benefit consumers, in particular.
For example, a study carried out by the European Commission shows that EU consumers have
saved €60 billion a year since the 1990s as a result of tariff reductions. Nowadays, thanks to the
conclusion  of  a  free  trade  agreement,  purchasing  a  car  from  Korea  with  an  import  value  of
€13,300 is tariff-free, but a 10% import tariff that was previously in place would have resulted in
7
additional costs amounting to €1,300.
It’s  also  encouraging  to  see  that  the  United  States,  Mexico  and  Canada  have  agreed  on  an
updated free trade agreement.
But  the  most  important  thing  here  is  to  preserve  the  rule-based  multilateral  trading  system
overall.
This also means that existing rules have to be upheld. Unfair trading practices such as dumping
in the steel industry cannot be tolerated.
The  rules  also  have  to  be  enhanced.  Many  parties  are  now  pushing  for  better  protection  of
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
intellectual property rights.
Just recently, 13 partners – among them the EU – signed a communiqué with the intention of
reforming the World Trade Organization and making it more sustainable.
On  the  whole,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  threat  of  an  all-encompassing  global  trade  war  has
diminished, if anything, of late.
Having said that, the measures already adopted in the trade dispute between the United States
and China are certainly likely to have macroeconomic repercussions. It is chiefly the two main
players that can expect to sustain losses.
According to model-based analyses performed by the Bundesbank, economic output could be ½
per  cent  lower  in  both  the  United  States  and  China  over  the  medium  term  compared  with
potential developments in the absence of the trade dispute.
Other economies would also tend to be harmed, albeit to a lesser extent.
The euro area and Germany would suffer only a little. But nor should Germany assume that it will
benefit from the spat while remaining unscathed itself.
In total, the punitive tariffs are likely to dampen global trade by just under 1 per cent after a certain
interval.
7 Challenges of globalisation and technological advances
From  an  economic  perspective,  it’s  clear  that  free  trade  gives  a  long-term  boost  to  general
prosperity.
Yet a shift is under way in employment prospects and also relative wages. Globalisation has its
winners and losers.
Studies show, for instance, that China’s integration into the global economy, in particular, led to
notable job losses in manufacturing in the United States. More new jobs were probably created –
but in other sectors and often in completely different locations. Local labour markets seem to
have  adapted  only  slowly,  and  the  lifetime  income  of  workers  who  lost  their  jobs  declined
8
considerably.
For Germany, on the other hand, globalisation created major opportunities to export to eastern
Europe and China.  In this way, it helped Germany to retain manufacturing jobs – although this is
also in net terms.
9
Equally, technological progress has its winners and losers as well. The OECD estimates that
nearly one in ten occupations could be automatable over the next few years.
10
Politicians  have  a  responsibility  to  create  the  conditions  needed  for  new,  future-proof  jobs.
People who are affected by globalisation or, for example, by digitalisation also have to be capable
of recognising and taking advantage of opportunities in a changing environment.
Education is the key to this. In a recent interview, Nobel Prize winner Robert Shiller pointed out
that  the  United  States  has  been  lagging  behind  for  some  years  now.  In  Germany,  too,  the
business community has bemoaned the insufficient credentials of many young job applicants.
But education cannot just be confined to the first third of a person’s life. Rather, learning should
be a lifelong process. For employers, this basically means that they need to facilitate access to
professional training and development for their staff.
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
And at the same time, a targeted tax and transfer system should be designed to cushion social
hardships.
8 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
The United States, Germany and also Europe are facing very similar challenges.
The persistent economic upswing is giving policymakers greater opportunities to actively shape
these challenges – just as it lies in their hands to preserve and strengthen free trade and the rule-
based multilateral trading system.
I’ve already indicated that I currently see no reason to believe the situation will escalate into a full-
blown  trade  war  –  and  that’s  not  chiefly  the  optimist  in  me  speaking,  but  the  analyst.  The
particular interests of the countries involved should prevail.
In the long term, after all, protectionism leads to a dead end. Open, competitive markets, on the
other hand, boost productivity and prosperity. They allow everyone to do what they are best at
and also ensure that innovation spreads quickly.
Today,  let’s  use  Thanksgiving  as  a  chance  to  be  thankful  that  poverty  has  decreased  and
prosperity  increased  worldwide  over  the  past  few  decades  –  the  result  of  competitive,  open
markets.
At the same time, we have to set out the tasks that currently have to be faced, of which there are
many.  One  such  important  task  is  to  maintain  transatlantic  links,  preserving  the  partnership
between the United States and Europe – and Germany.
On that note, I’d like to thank you for inviting me here today.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
See Deutsche Bundesbank, The potential macroeconomic impact of US tax reform, Monthly Report, February
2018, pp. 14–16.
See Deutsche Bundesbank, The magnitude of the United States’ bilateral trade balances, Monthly Report, July
2017, p. 87 f.
See Deutsche Bundesbank, The international spillover effects of an expansion of public investment in Germany,
Monthly Report, August 2016, pp 13–17.
See Deutsche Bundesbank, The potential macroeconomic impact of US tax reform, Monthly Report, February
2018, pp. 14–16.
See  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  The  danger  posed  to  the  global  economy  by  protectionist  tendencies,  Monthly
Report, July 2017, pp. 77–91.
See  G.  Felbermayr  (2018),  Zölle  im  transatlantischen  Handel:  Worauf,  wie  viel  und  wie  gerecht?,  ifo
Schnelldienst 6/2018. >
See L. Cernat, D. Gerard, O. Guinea and L. Isella (2018), Consumer benefits from EU trade liberalisation: How
much did we save since the Uruguay Round?, European Commission, DG Trade, Chief Economist Note, No 1.
See D. H. Autor, D. Dorn and G. H. Hanson (2016), The China Shock: Learning from Labour-Market Adjustment
to Large Changes in Trade, Annual Review of Economics, Vol. 8, pp. 205–240.
See W. Dauth, S. Findeisen and J. Südekum (2017), Trade and Manufacturing Jobs in Germany, American
Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 2017, Vol. 107, pp. 337–342.
M. Arntz, T. Gregory and U. Zierahn (2016), The Risk of Automation for Jobs in OECD Countries: A Comparative
Analysis, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, No 189, OECD Publishing.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
