Luís  Máximo  dos  Santos:  Banking  conduct  supervision  -  new
challenges 10 years after the financial crisis
Closing address by Mr Luís Máximo dos Santos, Vice-Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the
Conference  on  "Banking  Conduct  Supervision:  new  challenges  10  years  after  the  financial
crisis", hosted by the Bank of Portugal, Lisbon, 25 September 2018.
 Allow  me  to  begin  my  address  by  greeting  and  thanking  the  following  for  being  present:  the
Minister  of  State,  Pedro  Siza  Vieira;  the  Chairman  of  the  Committee  on  Budget,  Finance  and
Administrative Modernisation of the Portuguese Parliament, Teresa Leal Coelho; the Chairman of
the  Portuguese  Insurance  and  Pension  Funds  Supervisory Authority,  José Almaça;  the  Vice-
Chair of the Portuguese Securities Market Commission, Filomena Oliveira; and the chairs and
directors  of  the  financial  institutions  represented.  I  also  give  my  heartfelt  thanks  to  all  the
speakers for having accepted Banco de Portugal’s invitation to join us at this Conference and
enrich it with their excellent speeches. 
I  would  also  like  to  give  a  special  mention  to  those  participants  from  central  banks,  banking
conduct and government authorities of other countries, namely South Africa, Germany, Belarus,
Brazil, Croatia, Spain, Italy and Malta. We are very pleased to have welcomed you. I hope that the
work of our Conference has corresponded to your expectations and permit me to assume that it
has, given the exceptional quality of the interventions.    
 Ten years ago, the world was plunged into a major financial crisis centred on the United States
and Europe. It has been considered the greatest economic and financial crisis since 1929. This
time international cooperation and the actions taken by public authorities, namely central banks,
prevented the onset of a Great Depression like that of the 1930s.
However, we did not  escape  a  Great  Recession  which  had  tremendous  consequences  at  an
economic and social level, seriously affecting the lives of many millions of people and the effect
of which are still felt today.
Also ten years ago, the Portuguese legislator – by way of Decree-Law No 1/2008 of 3 January
2008  –  recognised  that  the  legal  framework  hitherto  in  existence  was  clearly  insufficient  to
adequately protect the interests of bank customers. The new legislation was designed to enable
more  active  intervention  by  the  supervisory  authority,  aiming  to  reinforce  powers  of  oversight,
decision  and  sanction.  Quoting  the  preamble  of  the  aforementioned  decree-law,  it  enshrines
“conduct supervision of the credit institutions and financial companies, within the framework of
the powers of Banco de Portugal, providing the latter with the competences that enable it to carry
on  effective  action  to  ensure  compliance  with  conduct  regulations,  be  it  via  out-of-court
procedures or customer complaints.”
But this Conference was not intended to mark past events regardless of how important they may
be.
As we all know, the Conference programme is aimed at the problems of the present and near
future and the new challenges they create. Its main objective is to reflect on these challenges
collectively, obtain the contributions of players in other experiences nationally and internationally,
some of whom do not necessarily have coinciding interests or points of view, but who – I am
sure – share the common objective of contributing to a market in retail banking products that is
efficient and innovative as well as characterised by a high level of compliance with consumer
rights. 
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
If  it  is  true  that  this  Conference  does  not  aim  to  commemorate  past  events,  it  would  be  very
unfair on this occasion not to pay recognition to the teams that, under the leadership of Lúcia
Leitão, ensured Banco de Portugal’s mission of banking conduct supervision, and which became
a separate department in 2011. It is worth highlighting that this role is exclusively carried out at
the national level, which makes it even more important. 
 As we know, the financial crisis profoundly shook the confidence of society in general in banking
institutions.  This  meant  that  the  essence  of  the  business  of  banking  itself  was  affected.
Restoring  confidence  in  the  financial  sector  therefore  became  a  public  priority,  taken  up  by
political actors, regulators, supervisors and of course by the institutions themselves.
A great many of the problems resided precisely in the existence of serious shortcomings in the
conduct of institutions with their customers; the result of unsuitable or inoperative governance
systems and a deeply wrong institutional culture. 
In  fact,  the  crisis  came  to  expose  the  risks  faced  by  bank  customers  even  more  clearly,
especially at the level of credit, and the consequence of such risks to the financial system and
economic activity in general.
The acquisition of products unsuited to customers’ risk profile and financial capacity, especially
in terms of mortgage credit, generated a significant number of default situations, with a strong
impact on households’ economic situation and the quality of financial institutions’ asset quality.  
Retail  banking  products,  traditionally  simple  and  easy  to  understand,  grew  in  complexity,
incorporating characteristics that increased their risk, making them more difficult to understand
and  assess,  thus  accentuating  the  asymmetry  of  information  between  customers  and
institutions. In a context of greater access to credit by households and the management of their
savings through the banking  markets,  exposure  to  these  risks  and  their  effects  became  even
more dangerous. 
The  financial  crisis  and  its  consequences  made  it  inevitable  that  these  issues  took  on  great
importance  in  the  agendas  of  legislators  and  supervisors.  Their  discussion  was  intensified  in
various international fora, leading to the systematisation of recommendations as to which best
practices should be adopted in the sale of banking products and the preparation of regulatory
legislative initiatives. 
This additional regulation has led to a process of change in the scope of intervention and way in
which the retail banking market supervisor acts, with frequent discussion of the transition to a
new paradigm in conduct supervision.
In  this  new  paradigm,  as  well  as  the  traditional  concerns  related  with  the  transparency  of
information and conduct obligations that the institutions are obliged to observe in their relationship
with customers, banking conduct supervision intervenes in new areas.
The conduct supervisor acts upstream  in the contracting process, by assessing compliance
with  the  internal  procedures  adopted  by  the  institutions  within  the  scope  of  the  creation  and
distribution of banking products and services, guaranteeing the suitability of such products and
services and their chosen distribution channels, to the characteristics, needs and aims of their
respective target markets. 
Rules have been created for the institutions to implement approval and monitoring mechanisms
for the remuneration policies of their employees involved in the preparation, sale and granting of
mortgage credit and the credit intermediaries with whom they have contracts, aiming to prevent
the occurrence of conflicts of interest. 
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Complementarily, specific knowledge and skills requirements have been established which the
aforementioned staff must possess. These aim to ensure that, in addition to the information that
is  provided  to  bank  customers,  the  institutions’  employees  possess  a  level  of  knowledge  and
skills  that  enable  them  to  provide  the  required  information  to  customers  so  that  the  latter
understand the characteristics and risks of the products they aim to contract. 
At  another  level,  and  considering  the  impact  of  their  role  in  the  credit  market,  the  supervision
perimeter of credit intermediaries has also been widened through the regulation and supervision
of their activity through the recognition of the importance of their role in ensuring the responsible
contracting of credit.
From 1 January 2018, credit intermediaries have been included in requirements for access to
and the exercise of credit intermediation as well as duties of conduct and provision of obligatory
information to consumers. 
In parallel, the promotion of financial education has been recognised as an essential component
in  conduct  supervision  action,  aiming  to  guarantee  in  the  medium  term,  a  public  more
empowered to make financial decisions. It is not enough to act from the product supply side. It is
also necessary to act from the demand side. 
Accompanying this evolution, the conduct supervision strategy adopted by Banco de Portugal is
based on three vectors, which constitute the themes of this Conference’s panels: 
(i) The regulatory framework that covers and regulates the conditions to sell the products
and services of retail banks; 
(ii) The  requirement  for  institutions  to  comply  with  this  regulatory  framework,  through
oversight and the promotion of best practices; and 
(iii) The financial education of bank customers. 
 Ten  years  on  from  the  financial  crisis,  it  is  evident  that  the  conditions  under  which  banking
conduct supervision is carried out are profoundly different. 
The regulatory framework has been greatly reinforced, requiring a more intrusive and complex
supervision.  There  is  a  new  regulatory  approach  that  grants  supervisors  a  greater  margin  of
discretion in their activity, contrasting with even greater responsibility and level of demand. Public
scrutiny is also more intense. 
However, even more important is the fact that all this has taken place in a context of profound
and accelerated transformation of the retail banking markets thanks to technological innovation
and a multiplication of marketing channels. 
The progressive digitalisation of the commercialisation channels of retail banking products and
services has brought about new products and services, frequently through new entities, and new
business models.  
The growing supply of financial products and services online or through mobile applications, the
entry of new actors in the market (such as fintechs or social media companies), as well as the
use  of  new  technologies  (blockchains  and  big  data)  are  not  only  changing  the  relationship
companies have with their customers as creating new challenges for supervisors. 
It is important to highlight that the new technological tools can and should also be used as a
facilitator of regulatory compliance, thus reducing their cost to the institutions. 
In  reality,  supervisors  have  to  give  themselves  the  human  and  technological  resources
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
necessary to undertake effective supervision in a digital environment. Only then are they able to
promote trust in the use of digital channels and contribute to a responsible supply by institutions.
It is fundamental that either the marketing of innovative banking products and services, or that
carried on in an innovative mould, does not jeopardise compliance with the regulatory framework
or leave the bank customer unprotected. Guaranteeing security is perhaps the greatest challenge
because of the difficulties it creates and for being a decisive factor in creating confidence. 
 It  is  not  difficult  to  recognise  that  the  current  stage  of  the  financial  sector’s  development  is
extraordinarily demanding for banking institutions; so many are the challenges to be overcome:
some the result of a past we all want to leave behind, others the result of a future that arrives
every  day.  Knowing  whether  current  regulatory  measures  are  right  or  whether  they  are
overzealous is a legitimate discussion and will always result in contradictory conclusions. 
According to a famous aphorism, “If you think that education is expensive, consider the cost of
ignorance!” I believe that the same logic can be applied to regulation: it is true that it has costs
that  are  sometimes  very  high,  but  an  absence  of  or  insufficient  regulation  can  have  a  much
higher  cost,  as  the  2008  crisis  demonstrated,  in  the  first  place  to  the  banking  institutions
themselves. 
Is it better to pay the costs necessary to comply with more demanding regulation or carry the
costs – no less elevated – with sanctions, litigation, loss of reputation and business?
The strongest argument that the banking sector can provide in favour of reducing the intensity of
regulation is that the sector itself takes on an unequivocal commitment, perceived as such by the
customer, to adopt a culture oriented towards regulatory compliance and customer satisfaction.
The culture of an institution must be rooted in exemplary management, valuing and rewarding
suitable behaviours and penalising incorrect ones. Simple things that are in reality sometimes
difficult to achieve. 
Institutional culture is an immaterial concept which cannot be regulated. It must be understood as
a central priority and not as an impressive adornment. It must be absorbed and seen as natural.
It must be carried out systematically and coherently. It must be implicit in the business plan. And
it must be extended, without exception, to every area of the institutions, as we all know examples
of  inadequate  sectorial  conduct  that  in  itself  led  to  collapse.  It  must  be  considered  for  the
specificities  of  the  institution.  Therefore,  despite  the  similarity  between  these  proposals,
institutional cultures do not have to be identical.
A  strong  institutional  culture,  based  on  solid  values,  protects  banks,  including  from  failures  in
governance. It can even be considered a risk reduction mechanism. 
The creation of an institutional culture is a task for the boards of banks and not for regulators and
supervisors, although they can have a supporting role in creating a suitable culture. 
Changing the culture of an institution is a difficult, long-term task. An old Dutch adage says that
trust arrives on foot but leaves on horseback. It is even worse these days: trust can be lost at
digital speed, but for it to return, it continues to take a long time.
Conduct  failings  are  obviously  not  exclusive  to  the  financial  sector.  The  problem  is  that  the
consequences are more damaging.
Ten years after the financial crisis, the most enlightened protagonists from the financial sector
have understood well how conduct failings can be costly at various levels. This is why it is in their
interest and that of the institutions they manage to travel unambiguously towards recovering trust
and rejecting the culture that was the basis for the 2008 crisis.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
We all hope that this happens as we will all benefit. There cannot be economic development
without a strong banking sector. The proof of this is precisely what happens when it fails.
We are therefore following a common path from different positions. To be successful each of us
has to complete their mission. On behalf of Banco de Portugal, I reaffirm our total commitment to
fulfilling the public mission entrusted to us.
Thank you very much.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
