Benoît Cœuré: Waiting for ESTER - the road ahead for interest rate
benchmark reform
Speech Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
ECB’s Money Market Contact Group meeting, Frankfurt am Main, 25 September 2018.
 Benchmark interest rates play an integral role in financial markets. Their widespread use across
a  range  of  financial  market  instruments,  including  deposits,  fixed  income  and  credit  market
products,  as  well  as  derivatives,  permits  standardisation  and  generates  liquidity.  There  is
currently  an  estimated  €22  trillion  of  EONIA-linked  derivatives  contracts  outstanding  and  €109
trillion linked to EURIBOR.  A further €1.6 trillion of debt securities are linked to EURIBOR.
1
Benchmark  rates  are  also  important  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  In  normal  times,  the
ECB implements policy by steering very short-term interest rates. We evaluate the success of
those operations by monitoring the evolution of a number of short-term interest rates, including
various deposit, repo and swap interest rates in markets. But benchmark interest rates clearly
carry a large weight in our operational assessments, given their interconnectedness with the rest
of the financial system.
What ultimately matters for monetary policy, however, is the constellation of interest rates faced
by  households  and  businesses  when  making  their  decisions.  While  monetary  policy  can
indirectly  influence  their  financing  conditions  by  affecting  long-term  interest  rates,  benchmark
interest rates currently form the basis for a substantial share of retail borrowing in the euro area.
 1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
As  my  first  slide  shows,  in  a  number  of  euro  area  Member  States  variable  rate  mortgages
account for almost all new borrowing. In the euro area as a whole, they account for nearly a fifth
of  all  new  mortgages.  EURIBOR  is  the  reference  rate  generally  used  in  these  contracts.
Similarly, around four-fifths of lending to non-financial corporations is based on variable rates,
and is principally priced off EURIBOR.
The need for new benchmarks
As  you  will  be  aware,  the  current  benchmarks  have  encountered  difficulties  from  two  main
sources.  The  first  is  the  scandal  surrounding  fixing  during  the  crisis.  Given  the  potential  for
litigation  and  compliance  risks,  banks  have  become  reluctant  to  remain  on  panels.  A  more
concentrated panel in terms of membership threatens the representativeness of the benchmark.
The  second  problem  encountered  by  current  benchmarks  is  the  significant  drop  in  underlying
transaction volumes. In part, this reflects the side effects of the unconventional policy measures
that  we  took  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  As  you  can  see  on  my  next  slide,
declining transaction volumes in EONIA over the past three years coincide with the start of our
large-scale asset purchases and the associated mounting excess liquidity in the system.
2
 2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
But part of the decline also reflects a stronger role of non-banks in managing liquidity. I will come
back  to  this  in  a  minute.  These  two  factors  together  have  lowered  the  ability  of  EONIA  to
accurately reflect banks’ borrowing costs.
On my next slide you can see how exposed EONIA has become to sudden fluctuations in this
environment:  in  November  last  year  we  observed  that,  amid  thin  liquidity  conditions,
comparatively small changes in transaction amounts can cause pronounced volatility in the level
of EONIA.
  3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  problems  faced  by  benchmarks  have  resulted  in  a  notable  regulatory  effort  to  establish
improved benchmark rates. At a global level, this has resulted in the adoption in 2013 of IOSCO’s
Principles for Financial Benchmarks, which have been endorsed by the Financial Stability Board
(FSB).  The  FSB  coordinates  international  work  to  review  and  reform  benchmarks  and  has
encouraged  public  authorities  and  the  private  sector  to  identify  robust  overnight  risk-free
rates.  In the EU, these efforts have resulted in the adoption of the EU Benchmarks Regulation,
4
which lays down requirements to ensure accuracy and integrity.
3
The Regulation requires benchmarks to be reliable and robust, and underpinned by observable
transactions in an active market determined by competitive supply and demand forces. EONIA
and EURIBOR in their current form do not comply with these requirements, and may therefore
be prohibited for use, at least in new contracts, from January 2020, unless reformed in the case
of EURIBOR.
It is also uncertain whether their use in legacy contracts will be permissible. The volume of such
legacy contracts with maturities beyond 2019 is substantial. A quarter of outstanding interest rate
derivatives using EONIA and more than half using EURIBOR have maturities in 2020 or later.
80% of floating-rate debt securities using EURIBOR – worth almost €1.5 trillion – also extend
beyond  2019. And  as  mentioned  above,  a  substantial  share  of  mortgages  are  referenced  to
EURIBOR. Inadequate preparation by the private sector could result in market dislocation once
current benchmarks become obsolete.
Progress in creating a new euro area benchmark
New benchmarks are therefore needed.
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  September  2017,  the  ECB,  the  Belgian  Financial  Services  and  Markets Authority  (as  lead
supervisor of both EONIA and EURIBOR), the European Securities and Markets Authority and
the European Commission launched a new private sector working group. The group was tasked
with the identification and adoption of risk-free rates to serve as a basis for an alternative to the
5
current benchmarks.
The  progress  made  in  a  very  short  period  of  time  has  been  impressive.  The  working  group
developed key criteria, consistent with the IOSCO principles for financial benchmarks and the
requirements  of  the  EU  Benchmarks  Regulation,  to  shortlist  potential  candidates  for  an
alternative euro risk-free rate.
The  main  criteria  included  the  need  for  broad-based  and  reliable  market  data,  an  easily
understandable concept that the index seeks to measure, and a trustworthy administrator.
The  working  group  shortlisted  three  candidates:  (i)  the  euro  short-term  rate,  ESTER,  to  be
produced by the ECB, reflecting euro area banks’ borrowing costs in the wholesale unsecured
overnight  market;  (ii)  GC  Pooling  Deferred,  a  one-day  secured,  centrally  cleared,  general
collateral  repo  rate  produced  by  STOXX;  and  (iii)  the  RepoFunds  Rate,  a  one-day  repo  rate
secured by general and specific collateral and centrally cleared, produced by NEX Data Services
Limited.
Only two weeks ago, on 13 September, the working group recommended ESTER as the euro
risk-free  rate  to  replace  EONIA.  A  public  consultation  was  launched  ahead  of  the  vote,  the
outcome of which provided valuable input for decision-making. 88% of responses viewed ESTER
as the most appropriate future euro risk-free rate.
Overall, the ECB welcomes the recommendation of the working group. ESTER is a reliable and
robust rate and it reflects financing conditions in money markets better than secured rates, which
could be influenced by regulatory and collateral factors unrelated to bank borrowing.
While  ESTER  represents  an  alternative  benchmark  for  the  short-term  segment  of  the  money
market, progress towards the development of alternatives for longer tenors is yet to be seen.
Although longer-tenor instruments are not turned over as frequently as overnight ones, they are
economically relevant as they represent a significant share of outstanding amounts. You can see
this on my next slide.
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
For EURIBOR, work is currently ongoing under the auspices of the European Money Markets
Institute (EMMI) which will hopefully result in a new, compliant benchmark, based on a hybrid
methodology using actual transactions whenever available, and relying on other related market
prices when required. In other words, current proposed solutions are likely to continue to require
expert judgement in order to sustain daily benchmark publications on longer tenors.
I draw two implications from this.
First, under this approach the ECB would not be well placed to produce term rates (as opposed
to overnight rates), as the central bank may not have the same overview of the prevailing market
conditions and funding costs as banks. Moreover, expert judgement provided by the central bank
may create, or be perceived as creating, a conflict of interest.
And  second,  even  if  a  satisfactory  solution  can  be  found  by  the  industry,  there  is  a  need  for
market participants to reflect on whether a solution based on EURIBOR is sustainable also in the
long run, in particular should other jurisdictions decide to abandon similar rates. For that reason it
is important that the working group continues its work on the construction of credible term rates
as fallback rates for EURIBOR.
ESTER as a new benchmark
This notwithstanding, the ECB looks forward to taking on its new role as administrator of ESTER.
 6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Given  the  critical  role  of  risk-free  rates  for  market  functioning  and  monetary  policy,  the  ECB
attaches high importance to the smooth production of ESTER, which must be guaranteed even
in  times  of  unforeseen  stress  or  disruption.  This  includes  building  the  infrastructure,  defining
processes and governance, and testing operations. Staff are working intensively to complete all
these steps.
Developing ESTER within a tight time frame means that there is a trade-off involved: the better
market  participants  are  prepared  for  and  understand  the  properties  of  ESTER,  the  faster  the
transition to a liquid market is likely to be. I can therefore understand the arguments of those
pushing for a speedy release of the new rate.
But too fast a publication might entail operational risks. A sufficient period of testing is required to
make sure that the technical set-up achieves the highest degree of reliability to guarantee the
smooth  production  of  ESTER.  Robust  business  continuity  and  contingency  plans  must  be
developed.
We have therefore communicated that we will publish ESTER by October 2019 at the latest. In
other words, we aim at releasing ESTER as early as possible, but only once we are confident
that it meets our requirements regarding reliability and robustness.
We have tried to partly resolve this trade-off by providing market participants with a series called
pre-ESTER, using existing MMSR data.  Pre-ESTER is calculated using the same methods as
defined for ESTER but it differs in that it is based on final data and includes all revisions in terms
of  cancellations,  corrections  and  amendments  submitted  by  reporting  agents  in  the  10  days
following the reference date used for calculating the rate.
6
ESTER,  by  contrast,  will  be  published  every  morning  and  take  into  account  only  the  data
received by the submission deadline of 07:00 CET the same morning. Internal analyses have
shown that over the review period since mid-March 2017 an ESTER rate calculated on the basis
of data as submitted by reporting banks by 7:00 CET would not have been significantly different
from a rate based on final (i.e. pre-ESTER) data. In other words, while the republication risks for
mistakes larger than 2 basis points always remain possible and is catered for, the likelihood of
this happening is currently assessed to be very low.
This result is reassuring from a methodology viewpoint. But to achieve a constant high accuracy
also during the actual production phase requires reporting agents to consistently deliver, on a
daily  basis,  timely  data  submissions  and  to  comply  with  the  high  data  quality  standards  that
ESTER  demands.  The  overall  quality  of  ESTER  is  therefore  a  collective  endeavour  highly
depending on the commitment of reporting agents that the ECB as administrator will support and
monitor on a daily basis.
On my next slide you can see some of the key properties of pre-ESTER that have ultimately led
the working group to choose ESTER.
 7 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Despite  growing  excess  liquidity  levels,  pre-ESTER  displays  significant  and  steady  volumes,
markedly  above  EONIA  volumes.  Daily  volumes,  based  on  actual  transactions,  average  €30
billion and range from €6.8 billion to €41 billion. On average, around 30 banks report data each
day out of a pool of 52 MMSR reporting banks, which ensures that there is sufficient underlying
7
data to calculate a reliable rate.
MMSR data show that even on days with reduced activity on account of major holidays, including
the  year-end  period,  volumes  remain  sufficiently  high  and  concentration  sufficiently  low  to
calculate an unbiased rate.  It will therefore not be necessary for the calculation methodology to
be enriched with historical data, or to rely on other market segments or even expert judgement.
8
The next slide compares ESTER’s performance with that of EONIA over the period mid-March
2017 to end-July 2018. You can see two things. First, pre-ESTER is very stable with an average
daily volatility of just 0.4 basis point. Low volatility in part reflects the way ESTER is computed.
Specifically,  the  methodology  relies  on  a  volume-weighted  mean  with  trimming  applied  at  the
25% level, which ensures the best compromise between allowing the rate to sufficiently react to
market factors and filtering out transactions conducted at outlying rates.
 8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
At the same time, ESTER is based purely on deposit transactions, which are the most frequent
means of conducting arm’s length transactions on the basis of a competitive quote procedure.
This ensures that the rate reflects actual market moves, rather than idiosyncratic factors.
The second thing you can see is that over this period, pre-ESTER was trading at a stable spread
of around 9 basis points below EONIA. The spread itself is a reflection of the fact that ESTER is
a  borrowing  rate,  and  not  a  lending  rate  as  is  the  case  for  EONIA,  and  that  it  includes
transactions with a broad range of financial corporations, not just banks.
And as a large share of these institutions do not have access to the ECB’s deposit facility, they
might  have  different  opportunity  costs.  In  the  current  environment  of  excess  liquidity  and  high
demand for high quality liquid assets, this means they might be willing to extend credit in the
9
money market at rates below our deposit facility rate.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
New benchmark measures need to be in place by 1 January 2020. Given the importance of these
benchmarks for monetary policy, the ECB on its part is working diligently on publishing a new,
robust and reliable euro short-term rate by October 2019 at the latest.
Financial  market  participants,  on  their  part,  should  redouble  their  efforts  to  ensure  a  smooth
transition. They should examine and propose credible paths for the transition away from EONIA
and towards ESTER. Contracts should be checked for consistency with the new regulations and
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
robust  fallback  rates  should  be  specified  to  ensure  continuity  in  the  event  of  disruption.  For
EURIBOR, while the private sector is currently reforming the benchmark, sufficient safeguards
should be established in all contracts to mitigate the risk of potential adverse scenarios.
Last but not least, market participants should spread the word to ensure that in particular smaller
and  less  sophisticated  market  participants  are  aware  of  the  need  to  prepare  for  the  new
benchmarks  and  to  take  active  steps  to  adjust  systems,  processes  and  contracts.  Time  is
running short.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
See the presentation entitled Update on quantitative mapping exercise on the ECB’s website.
See  Cœuré,  B.  (2017), Asset purchases, financial regulation and repo market activity,  speech  at  the  ERCC
General Meeting on “The repo market: market conditions and operational challenges”, Brussels, 14 November.
See Financial Stability Board (2018), Interest rate benchmark reform – overnight risk-free rates and term rates,
12 July.
See Regulation (EU) 2016/1011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2016 on indices used
as benchmarks in financial instruments and financial contracts or to measure the performance of investment
funds and amending Directives 2008/48/EC and 2014/17/EU and Regulation (EU) No 596/2014 (OJ L 171,
29.6.2016, p. 1).
See Cœuré, B. (2018), The importance of euro interest rate benchmark reforms, welcome address at the first
meeting of the Working Group on Euro Risk-Free Rates, at the ECB, Frankfurt am Main, 26 February.
The  published  daily  figures  are  based  on  time-lagged  historical  time  series  for  the  reserve  maintenance
periods starting 15 March 2017 and cover the period until 31 July 2018. The update of the pre-ESTER series is
done every maintenance period.
See also Cœuré, B. (2017), Policy analysis with big data, speech given at the conference on “Economic and
Financial Regulation in the Era of Big Data”, organised by the Banque de France, Paris, 24 November.
Testing  pre-ESTER  data  between  March  2017  and  May  2018  against  contingency  thresholds  shows  that
concentration rates were sufficiently low to ensure rate robustness.
See Cœuré, B. (2018), The future of central bank money, speech at the International Centre for Monetary and
Banking Studies, Geneva, 14 May.
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
