Richard Dzina: Four questions on the state of cyber resilience and
endpoint security
Remarks by Mr Richard Dzina, Executive Vice President of the Financial Services Group of the
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Clearing  House  and  Bank  Policy  Institute's  2018
Annual Conference, New York City, 26 November 2018.
As prepared for delivery
 I want to thank The Clearing House for this generous invitation and, especially, for assembling
such a compelling and topical program.
The relationship between The Clearing House and the Federal Reserve is multi-faceted: across
one plane competitor, as CHIPS and the Fedwire Funds Service, and EPN and FedACH, vie for
volume across common service lines; across another plane collaborator, as peer infrastructures
seeking to maximize the value and minimize the disruption to customers in response to common
industry  initiatives,  with  our  coordinated  plans  for  adoption  of  ISO  20022  standard  message
formats representing a cardinal example; and across a final plane as overseer and overseen.
When  it  comes  to  the  resiliency  and  security  of  our  infrastructures,  however,  there  is  no
ambiguity in role or relationship: we rise, or fall, as one.
Standing before an audience like this never fails to elicit a visceral sense of accountability. When
the subject is the resiliency and security of the foundational elements of our nation’s financial
system,  on  which  market  function  and  economic  vitality  ultimately  depend,  that  sense  of
accountability resonates even more keenly. 
I had the privilege of hearing General Michael Hayden, former head of the NSA and CIA, address
a payments symposium hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago a few years ago. In that
venue,  General  Hayden  spoke  of  the  tectonic  shifts  affecting  the  global  landscape,  and  their
prospective impact on cyber, terror, and geopolitical threats.
His basic message, in two parts: keep your seat belts on, it promises to be a volatile century
(yes, century); and when it comes to our critical financial market infrastructure being subject to
attack,  it  is  not  a  matter  of  “if”  but  “when".  Responding  to  the  current  threat  environment
represents the challenge of our generation; these are days of preparation.
I will posit that a fundamental distinction exists between cyber resiliency and traditional resiliency:
what works for us in conventional resiliency scenarios, namely the automatic and instantaneous
replication  of  data,  works  against  us  in  cyber  scenarios,  reflecting  risks  that  a  pernicious
malware,  or  a  severe  data  corruption,  or  even  an  application  failure  propagates  itself  across
primary, secondary, and tertiary operating sites, rendering a systemic infrastructure functionally
inoperable. In other venues we have therefore elaborated upon the need for a new paradigm for
resiliency,  one  that  endeavors  to  mate  traditional  precepts  of  geographic  dispersion  of
infrastructure  and  human  capital  with  new  realities  compelling  technological  diversity,  and  a
platform for recovery, should the core of a financial market infrastructure become corrupted.
We have also expounded upon new realities in endpoint security, borne of painful experience, in
which endpoint breaches can have serious implications for public confidence in the integrity of a
network as a whole, even in circumstances when an operator’s infrastructure, applications, and
security  perimeter  have  not  been  compromised.  Historically,  market  infrastructures  have
operated on the presumption that endpoint security is principally the responsibility of the endpoint,
and infrastructure security is principally the responsibility of the operator. In the present threat
environment,  that  bifurcation  in  responsibility  is  no  longer  so  clear:  the  fates  of  operator  and
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
endpoint are inextricably linked.
The Wholesale Product Office’s efforts to strengthen resiliency and enhance endpoint security
remain  a  consuming  preoccupation,  inspired  meaningfully  by  international  policy  guidance
promulgated by the Committee on Payment and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) and the Board of
the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO).  I  want  to  commend  our
colleagues in the policy realm for their clarion call and practical guidance which have goaded the
industry  to  action  across  both  of  these  critical  fronts  and  resulted  in  demonstrable  progress.
Rather than provide mere updates on the status of our local resiliency and security initiatives in
response  to  this  charge,  which  have  been  the  focal  point  of  prior  remarks,  I  hope  instead  to
frame a few forward oriented, even provocative, questions to advance the industry discourse and
to consider measures to meet the present challenge.
My  perspective  in  pursuing  these  questions  is  not  as  overseer,  or  as  policy  maker,  but  as
practitioner.  Recall  that  following  the  designation  by  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council
(FSOC) of eight private  sector  financial  market  utilities  as  systemically  important  in  2012,  the
Board  of  Governors,  acting  in  its  oversight  capacity  (and  inestimable  wisdom!),  committed  to
hold the wholesale services operated by the Reserve Banks to “as high or higher a standard” as
it holds these private sector utilities; I assure you, we are experiencing, appropriately, that “or
higher” side of the spectrum.
Like our infrastructure peers we are challenged to maintain the integrity of existing operations
while  contending  with  a  brave  new  world;  constrained  by  the  demands  of  cost  recovery  and
limited resources; challenged by the multiplicity of risk and compliance frameworks with which to
comply  and  governance  and  stakeholder  bodies  to  satisfy;  conscious  that  we  have  to  defend
across an extended front while our adversary need only find a single point of entry; and keenly
aware  that  we  must  be  perfect  every  day,  our  foe  successful  but  once.  These  are  heavy
burdens; I speak not to you, but of you.
With  that  context  these  remarks  (I  assure)  reflect  my  own  views  and  do  not  necessarily
represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. (The
best aside I ever heard in such a disclaimer came from former Supreme Court Justice Scalia,
who  was  speaking  to  the  Economic  Club  of  New  York,  coincidentally  the  same  week  of  his
untimely passing. Upon noting that the views expressed do not necessarily represent those of
the Supreme Court or the Government of the United States he added, slyly, “they rarely do!” This
may be one of those occasions.)
Provocative  Question  Number  1:  To  what  extent  might  the  2-Hour  recovery  time
objective (known in industry parlance as the “2-Hour RTO”) alter the incentive structure
and  reaction  function  of  an  FMI  operator  responding  to  an  “extreme  but  plausible”
event, precipitating sub-optimal outcomes?
Encouraging timely recovery following a severe disruption is a difficult thesis with which to argue,
and our policy brethren are to be commended for urging financial market infrastructures (FMI) to
examine  critically  their  recovery  capacities.  This  supervisory  impulse  has  already  yielded  rich
dividends  in  encouraging  the  wholesale  services  operated  by  the  Reserve  Banks  to  question
assumptions, to consider out-of-the-box solutions, and to prioritize the achievement of technical
diversity and the assurance of data integrity as anchor elements of our resiliency regime. At the
same time, I wonder if specifying a two-hour threshold, notwithstanding its noble intent, may alter
the incentives and the reaction function for a financial market infrastructure when responding to
an extreme event. Could it, for example, encourage an FMI under duress to invoke prematurely
contingency  and  failover  procedures  before  an  accurate  diagnosis  has  been  rendered?
Alternatively,  could  it  encourage  an  FMI  to  endeavor  to  return  to  normal  operations  prior  to
assurance  of  complete  confidence  in  and  sanitization  of  a  production  environment?  To  put  it
plainly: could the 2-Hour RTO unwittingly exacerbate rather than assuage the impact of a severe
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
disruption and/or impede prospects for recovery?
Reflecting  upon  these  important  questions,  allow  me  to  offer  the  following  practitioner’s
interpretation, which I hope maximizes the value of the intent of the 2-Hour RTO while minimizing
the  downside  risks  of  its  mis-application.  Rather  than  spending  valuable  time  and  industry
resources re-litigating established supervisory guidance, we should consider the 2-Hour RTO as
a vital organizing objective for planning purposes in peacetime, an aspiration to mobilize our best
critical  thinking  to  achieve,  rather  than  an  inviolable  requirement  that  must  be  met  in  all
circumstances  recognizing  the  fog  of  war.  A  common  understanding  of  this  nuance  across
policy makers, supervisors, and operators strikes me as an important step forward both to focus
our  resiliency  preparations  in  advance  of  an  extreme  event  and  to  promote  sound  decision
making in its remediation.
Provocative  Question  Number  2:  To  what  extent  does  the  proliferation  of  risk
management  and  information  security  frameworks  to  which  FMIs  must  comply  risk
creating a “check the box” mentality to security and resilience that diverts resources
and management attention from other critical initiatives?
In  framing  this  question,  I  asked  my  team  to  identify  the  cascading  elements  of  supervisory
guidance, oversight requirements, compliance regimes, and maturity frameworks with which we
must contend related to risk management and information security. Their list in reply included 17
elements,  admittedly  some  of  which  are  self-induced  and  at  different  states  of  maturity  and
implementation. All are well intended, all are well designed, and all seek to address different and
meaningful  dimensions  of  the  control  environment. At  the  same  time,  compliance  across  this
waterfront has become a consuming pre-occupation, and arguably one that if we are not careful
can intrude upon the more tangible actions, and commitments, to increase the resiliency of our
infrastructures and enhance the security of our networks.
Make  no  mistake:  some  form  of  risk  management  and  control  framework  and  corresponding
policy  and  oversight  guidance  is  absolutely  essential  to  ensure  a  necessary  discipline  and
accountability.  This  is  not  a  call  for  a  collective  policy/supervisory/industry  confab  to  craft  a
consolidated and harmonized uber-framework applicable to all parties in every circumstance—
that would be as naïve as it is impractical. Indeed, the proliferation of frameworks can serve as a
useful prism to ensure that no stone is left unturned in the development of an FMI’s resiliency and
security regime.
It  is  an  appeal  for  awareness  among  standards  bodies,  supervisors,  directors,  and  other
organizational hierarchies that their individual actions, as rational and defensible as they may be,
can  have  a  suffocating  effect  in  the  aggregate.  It  is  also  an  appeal  for  application  of  a  time-
honored managerial principle: greater autonomy and discretion of local management to develop a
tailored approach that balances risk, complexity, and effectiveness appropriate for the needs of a
particular institution, and a corresponding accountability upon local management for the results.
Absent this sensibility I will state my fear plainly: beware the risk management industrial complex.
Provocative  Question  Number  3:  To  what  extent  might  the  invocation  of  manual
procedures  in  “protracted  outage”  scenarios  exacerbate  rather  than  assuage  from  a
financial stability perspective?
As  you  know,  the  CPMI-IOSCO  cyber  guidance  exhorts  financial  market  infrastructures  to
consider  alternatives  for  processing  critical  transactions  in  the  event  automated  means  of
recovery  are  not  successful.  We  are  therefore  compelled  to  consider  not  merely  “star  wars”
resiliency but also “stone age” contingency.
Locally,  this  work  proceeds  across  multiple  fronts,  including  analyzing  and  parsing  our
transaction  flow  to  identify  systemic  activity,  developing  procedures  and  tools  to  facilitate
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
operations in a manual mode, and conducting simulation exercises with systemically important
customers  and  interfacing  financial  market  infrastructures  to  test  our  hypotheses  and
procedures.
I  would  be  remiss,  especially  in  recognition  of  our  Clearing  House  venue,  not  to  herald  our
partnership  to  support  each  other  in  the  event  either  the  Fedwire  Funds  Service  or  CHIPS
experiences an operational disruption from which it cannot recover on a same day basis. While
the two services are not perfect substitutes, these preparations include, for example, ensuring
that the Fedwire Funds Service has sufficient capacity to accommodate the full complement of
Chips activity, even on peak volume days, and that CHIPS can support all CHIPS-eligible Fedwire
Funds traffic.
Arguably we have made greater progress advancing this body of work than in prior iterations, for
which  policy  makers  and  supervisors  deserve  great  credit.  The  application  of  critical  thinking
related to protracted outage has also yielded rich dividends in greater understanding of the end-
to-end transaction flow and identification of potential points of vulnerability. These benefits are not
to be dismissed.
But  let  us  not  delude  ourselves:  no  matter  how  mature  our  framework  for  responding  to
protracted outage scenarios, no matter how sound our procedures, no matter how tested our
protocol, we never want to rely on these measures from a contingency perspective. The ultimate
lesson for any market infrastructure (and for their directors, governing bodies, and supervisors),
is to so invest in resiliency and security in the core of its operation that it never finds itself in such
a state.
The  unintended  consequences  of  a  systemic  infrastructure  invoking  protracted  outage
procedures in the event of a severe disruption are unknowable, and potentially raise reasonable
questions  as  to  whether  the  remedy  may  prove  more  toxic  than  the  disease.  Might  it  be
preferable  in  select  cases  for  a  systemic  infrastructure  to  declare  a  settlement  holiday,
unpalatable as that may be, or to work with relevant industry associations to declare that select
markets  are  closed?  Are  the  operational  challenges  of  conducting  manually  activity  that  is
fundamentally  dependent  upon  automation  a  bridge  too  far?  Do  reconciliation  challenges  that
become exponentially more complex as a disruption event extends in duration risk prospects for
an orderly return home? Might industry dialogue to agree on the accepted circumstances and
corresponding practices for dealing with a settlement holiday in a pre-meditated manner prove to
be a superior course? These questions are not easy to answer, but it is very important in the
present evolution of industry discourse that they are asked.
Provocative  Question  Number  4:  To  what  extent  do  measures  to  address  endpoint
security  risks,  such  as  anomaly  detection  and  assurance  regimes,  compel  a  new
paradigm for the attribution of liability in the end-to-end payment transaction flow?
The reality that endpoint security breaches can undermine confidence in a network even when an
operator’s  infrastructure  has  not  been  violated  has  spawned  a  novel  body  of  work,  including
initiatives  to  enhance  assurance  that  external  endpoints  are  operating  in  adherence  with  an
operator’s  strict  security  requirements,  and  the  development  of  application  tools  such  as
anomaly  detection  to  enhance  a  participant’s  management  of  fraud  risk.  As  this  work  has
progressed, it has been hard to ignore the concern that these initiatives and tools might shift the
attribution  of  liability  between  participant  and  operator  in  a  manner  that  could  challenge  an
operator’s ability to take appropriate precautionary measures to protect the network.
For example, if an operator becomes aware of security deficiencies at a participant as part of an
assurance program, and the participant subsequently experiences a breach, does the operator
incur some measure of liability for any loss? In such a circumstance, what degree of latitude
does an operator realistically possess to deny a participant access to services that are essential
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
to  the  participant’s  ongoing  viability?  Moreover,  if  an  operator  detects  potentially  anomalous
transactions coming from a participant, and does not intervene to prevent a transfer that is in fact
fraudulent, does the operator assume a measure of liability for the resulting loss?
One  way  in  which  we  have  endeavored  to  manage  these  concerns  is  to  provide  tools  and
services to participants to manage their endpoint security risks locally, and in a manner that does
not  inappropriately  shift  liability  from  participant  to  operator,  but  admittedly  these  are  difficult
questions that compel novel thinking to ensure that the legal framework supporting the payment
system is sufficiently robust and responsive to the escalating threat environment.
An additional, but not incidental, point on endpoint security: I observe a reluctance across the
industry to share information about endpoint security experiences for fear that such transparency
may  expose  an  individual  institution  to  concerns  about  its  internal  information  security  control
environment.  This  is  an  understandable  but  parochial  response  which,  collectively,  has  the
potential to expose a network to considerable risk, especially if it inhibits socialization of known
threat vectors and techniques. A solution to this vexing dynamic could be industry-led, operator-
led,  or  supervisory-led.  The  impulse  does  not  particularly  matter;  developing  a  venue  for  the
coordinated  sharing  of  endpoint  intelligence  and  experience  across  the  industry  matters
profoundly,  and  represents  a  fundamental  mutual  interest,  compelling  both  leadership  and
collaboration.
Conclusion
I do not presume answers to these questions, and merely observe that they are important ones
to inspire reflection in the collective pursuit of resilience and security for the anchor elements of
our  nation’s  financial  system.  What  better  venue  than  The  Clearing  House’s  payments
symposium and annual conference to continue this discussion?
In response to this generational challenge, let us be sure not to construct an inflexible Maginot
line  whose  rigidities  are  easily  subverted  by  a  creative  and  nimble  adversary.  Let  us  instead
develop a coherent and integrated system that relies upon the classical elements of defense, but
none of them exclusively: perimeter security to keep the adversary outside of the environment;
defense in depth to safeguard our most critical assets; sophisticated intelligence to understand
the  adversary’s  tactics;  robust  surveillance  to  monitor  for  intrusion  and  ensure  environmental
integrity;  rapid  response  to  fend  off  attack;  effective  collaboration  with  allies  to  enhance
information sharing and collective security; and a strategic reserve to respond deftly in the event
of loss.
Make  no  mistake:  as  it  relates  to  the  wholesale  services  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Banks,  we
aspire not merely to a commercial standard of resiliency, or even a supervisory standard, but
something approaching national security grade. We proceed on this trajectory from a position of
strength, reflecting a record of experience that has endured the most severe terror attack in our
nation’s history, a financial crisis of historic proportion, and an array of extreme weather events.
But in this sphere, either intentionally we are progressing, or inevitably we are regressing: there is
no idleness.
Thank you for your generous attention today. I’d be pleased to respond to a few questions.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
