Honoured, 
It is my pleasure to be here today to discuss and take notes of this very important 
topic  to  our  country’s  economy,  and  would  like  to  express  my  highest 
consideration  to  the  Kosovo  Banking  Association,  who  on  a  daily  basis  is 
advancing Kosovo’s banking sector representation in all aspects. 
I consider that the topic of this conference is fitting as it has been raised at a time 
when  the  banking  sector  has  made  some  quite  significant  progress  in  improving 
conditions for a sustainable financing of the economy.  
 In the last few years, the Kosovo banking sector has significantly increased its role 
in  terms  of  funding  the  country’s  economic  growth  by  accelerating  the  pace  of 
credit growth and considerably reducing credit interest rates.  The easing of credit 
standard,  followed  by  a  reduction  of  credit  interest  rates,  served  as  important 
incentives  for  increasing  credit  demand,  thus  resulting  with  an  annual  credit 
increase  of  11.6  percent  in  October  this  year. This  shows  that access  to  finances, 
which has been long reported by businesses as a key barrier to the development of 
businesses,  is  now  constantly  improving.  The  same  can  be  observed  from  the 
increased  crediting  of  economy  sectors  that  during  previous  periods  had  limited 
access  to  bank  financing.  The  concrete  examples  of  this  are  considered  to  be  the 
sectors  of  agriculture  and production, which  have  lastly  been  among  sectors  with 
highest increase of accepted credits. However, the total amount of credits issued to 
these  sectors  still  remains  low.  In  October  2018,  the  credits  issued  to  the 
agriculture  sector  represented 3.8% of  total  credits  to  enterprises, whereas  credits 
to the production sector represented 12.7% of total credits. Taking due account of 
the fact that today’s  topic is related to the banking sector’s role in the funding of 
 Faqe 1 nga 5 
development,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  a  greater  support  to  these  economic 
sectors,  and  other  sectors  with  high  potentials  of  generating  economic  growth,  is 
fundamental for achieving a more viable economic growth.  
Nonetheless,  we  are  aware  that  the  diversification  of  the  banking  sector  credit 
portfolio  does  not  strictly  rest  on  on  the  supply  part,  but  rather  and  to  a  great 
extent, also depends  from  the  credit  demand part. In  this  context, I  would  like  to 
emphasize  that  banks  have  a  high  financial  potential  for  further  increasing 
crediting, they have eased credit standards, and have significantly reduced the cost 
of access to bank financing. In October 2018, the average credit interest rate was 
6.6%,  which  represents  a  significant  improvement  compared  to  a  period  not  so 
long  ago.  These  indicators  show  that  credit  supply  has  significantly  improved. 
However, in order to ensure better crediting for sectors with currently lower access 
to  bank  financing,  it  is  not  enough  to  only  improve  credit  supply,  it  is  also 
necessary  to  ensure  that  these  sectors’  credit  demand  is  higher  and  of  a  better 
quality. With that I wanted to say that a more comprehensive approach is needed in 
terms  of  identifying  and  supporting  the  development  of  sectors  that  are  of  great 
importance to the country’s economic growth.  
We  consider  that  the  establishment  of  the  Kosovo  Credit  Guarantee  Fund 
represents  an  important  step  forward  in  terms  of  increasing  support  to  these 
sectors.  So  far,  the  amount  of  credits  guaranteed  by  this  Fund  has  reached  EUR 
71.3 million and is distributed to some 1,836 micro, small and medium enterprises. 
However,  it  is  noted  that  the  structure  of  credits,  by  economy  sectors,  which  are 
guaranteed under this Fund is quite similar to the structure of unguaranteed credits, 
whereby credits for the trade sector prevail considerably. Therefore, we expect the 
Kosovo  Credit  Guarantee  Fund,  with  the  purpose  of  better  serving  its  purpose  of 
 Faqe 2 nga 5 
establishment, to play an even greater role in increasing credit financing for sectors 
with less access to bank financing but with great importance to a higher economic 
development.      
 In  order  to  have  a  banking  sector  that  ensures  sustainable  financing  for  the 
country’s economic development, the vital precondition is for the banking sector to 
be  sustainable.  Having  said  this,  I  would  like  to  reconfirm  that,  based  on  all 
financial  soundness  indicators,  Kosovo’s  banking  sector  remain  stable.  I  would 
like  to  attach  particular  importance  to  the  good  quality  of  the  credit  portfolio, 
which shows the bank’s good credit risk management, and could just as well serve 
as  an  important  indicator  of  the  favourable  economic  environment  for  banks 
operation  in  Kosovo.  During  September  of  this  year,  the  rate  of  non-performing 
credits  was  2.8%,  which  reflects  a  very  good  situation  in  terms  of  the  quality  of 
credit portfolio. The satisfactory stability of the banking sector is also reflected by 
other  indicators,  such  as  capital  adequacy  and  liquidity  indicators,  which  have 
consistently  exceeded  regulatory  requirements  and  represent  the high  solvency  of 
the banking sector.  
 The  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Kosovo,  with  all  of  its  capacities,  is  in  the 
function of supporting sustainable development of the financial system, providing 
all  necessary  infrastructures  to  support  the  development  of  financial  institutions 
and at the same time ensuring that their activity provides financial stability. In this 
regard,  we  are  providing  the  banking  sector  with  utmost  modern  standards  of 
financial  regulation  and  oversights,  thus  making  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions in Kosovo operate pursuant to rules that are applicable in all developed 
 Faqe 3 nga 5 
countries.    Also,  the  CBK  provides  the  banking  sector  with  a  modern  financial 
infrastructure.  The  interbank  payment  system,  a  modern,  efficient  and  secure 
system, and the credit registry, which offer banks the most modern services in this 
field,  are  good  examples  to  illustrate  the  financial  infrastructure  development  in 
Kosovo. 
 In recent years, the CBK has increased its engagement in the function of protecting 
the rights of financial service consumers, thus directly serving to the protection of 
public interest. Financial education activities represent a very important part of this 
intervention  aimed  at  providing  the  public  with  clear  information  regarding 
opportunities offered by the financial system and their rights in the use of financial 
services. For the purpose of protecting citizens and businesses more effectively, we 
have  drafted  a  Regulation  on  the  disclosure  of  information  by  banks,  and  have 
established the Division for dealing with complaints by users of financial services, 
which addresses all complaints against financial institutions.  
The  CBK, from  the moment  it became  functional, has  and  still  fully  supports  the 
development  of  the  financial  system;  however  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  we 
are committed to ensuring that the  financial institutions’ development takes place 
in full compliance with the principles of protecting consumer rights In this regard, 
we are determined to further increase our commitment for protecting the rights of 
financial  services  users  and  requests  from  banks  to  carefully  consider  their  legal 
requirements  and policies  in order  to avoid  any  unreasonable  obstacle that  would 
impede normal interaction between citizens and the banking sector. 
We  are  committed  and  expect  that  the  continuous  development  of  the  banking 
sector  will  create conditions  for  easier  access  and  more  favourable  conditions  for 
 Faqe 4 nga 5 
citizens and businesses in the banking services. This is in line with the Sustainable 
Development  Objectives,  prepared  by  the  United  Nations,  whereby  under  the 
objective of economic growth at global level, the requirement of improving access 
to  financial  services  for  ensuring  sustainable  and  inclusive  economic  growth  is 
clearly emphasized. 
 At the end of my speech, I would like to reiterate that Kosovo’s banking sector is 
in a sound financial situation and with a constant increase of funding  to Kosovo’s 
sustainable  economic  development;  however,  it  requires  an  even  greater  inter-
institutional commitment for creating the necessary conditions so that this sector’s 
contribution to the country's economy is even greater. 
The  CBK  will  continue  to  support  all  aspects  of  banking  sector  development,  by 
providing  the  entire  necessary  both  financial  and  regulatory  infrastructure.    The 
close  cooperation  between  the  CBK  and  the  banking  sector,  facilitated  to  a  great 
extent  by  the  Kosovo  Banking  Association, has  allowed  us  to  effectively  address 
the needs for developing and maintaining the sector’s stability and we are therefore 
committed to further advance our constructive cooperation.  
 Faqe 5 nga 5 
