     Closing Remarks by Ms Caroline Abel 
Governor of the Central Bank of Seychelles 
Official Launching of 4th ESAAMLG AML/CFT Public-Private Sector 
Dialogue  
Friday 7 September 2018 
Venue: Savoy Resort and Spa 
   Vice President Vincent Meriton, 
Minister  for  Finance,  Trade,  Investment  &  Economic  Planning,  Mr. 
Maurice Loustau-Lalanne, 
Visiting  Ministers  and  Members  of  the  ESAAMLG  Council  of 
Ministers, 
Permanent Secretaries, 
Chairman & members of the Task Force of Senior Officials, 
Executive Secretary of the ESAAMLG, 
Private Sector Participants, 
Invited Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good afternoon 
  1 
Firstly, I would like to reiterate the warm welcome already extended by the 
Minister  for  Finance,  Trade,  Investment  &  Economic  Planning,  to  all 
delegates and guests, from the region and beyond, who have crossed the 
ocean to be here in the Seychelles islands.  
 The Central Bank of Seychelles is indeed honoured to have been given 
this  opportunity,  to  organise  the  4th  ESAAMLG  Public-Private  Sector 
Dialogue,  on  Anti-Money  Laundering  and  Combating  the  Financing  of 
Terrorism. 
 I would like to thank all of you present, for accepting the invitation to take 
part  in  this  gathering,  which  is  expected  to  lead  to  meaningful  and 
productive  deliberations,  on  a  range  of  issues  that  are  critical  to 
developing AML/CFT regimes in our region.  Our four keynote speakers 
this  afternoon,  have  done  an  excellent  job  at  setting  the  stage  for 
tomorrow’s  deliberations  on  the  three  chosen  topics.    Their  in-depth 
presentations  have  surely  given  us  a  broad  overview  of  the  challenges 
that  exist,  not  only  in  their  respective  countries,  but  which  is  shared  by 
each and every single one of our member countries – although to different 
extent. 
 Now  that  the  groundwork  has  been  done,  it  is  up  to  us  as  government 
officials, policy makers and private sector representatives gathered here 
today, to come together to address our specific situations, learn from each 
other’s  experiences,  exchange  ideas  on  best  practices,  and  propose 
possible  solutions,  as  we  seek  to  develop  more  robust  and  effective 
AML/CFT  regimes  in  our  individual  countries,  and  as  a  region.  
Seychelles, though small in size, will continue to do its part with greater 
vigour in that endeavour. 
 2 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  cannot  overemphasize  the  importance  of  the  chosen  topics  for  this 
Public-Private Sector Dialogue.  When we talk about de-risking, which is 
having adverse effects on many of our member countries, it is only fitting 
that the existence, causes and impact of this complex phenomenon within 
the ESAAMLG region, is among topics to be discussed at length.  Given 
its  threat  to  financial  stability  and  financial  inclusion,  discussing  on 
possible solutions to overcome this risk is critical, especially for those of 
us who are very dependent on the international payment system to effect 
trade. 
 Seychelles has not been spared, as some of our banks have experienced 
this phenomenon and one of them will be sharing its experience on the 
issue tomorrow.  Despite this reality, we have been proactive.  In line with 
its mandate to ensure financial soundness and financial stability, the Bank 
has been engaging in several initiatives, as part of efforts to mitigate the 
threat and impact on the economy.   
 One of the initiatives was a roadshow conducted during the last quarter of 
2017,  when  a  team  from  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial  Services 
Authority visited several Financial centres in Europe and the United States 
-  particularly  in  London,  Frankfurt,  Zurich,  Madrid, Paris  and  New  York.  
While  the  main  aim  was  to  better  understand  the  de-risking  issue,  and 
inform  the  international  community  about  efforts  being  undertaken  to 
strengthen the effectiveness of the AML/CFT regimes in the jurisdiction, 
the  visits  also  provided  the  opportunity  for  us  to  better  appreciate  the 
concerns  that  correspondent  banks  and  regulators  have  regarding  the 
jurisdiction.  
  3 
As  we  uncovered  the  challenges,  ranging  from  issues  specific  to  the 
offshore sector, as well as jurisdictional issues, it became clearer that the 
country  has  to  overcome  several  issues  to  reduce  the  risk  of  losing 
correspondent banking relationships.  Since then, we have embarked on 
an action plan to step up efforts to address a series of recommendations, 
some  of  which  had  already  been 
identified.  This 
includes 
the 
enhancement  of  our  AML/CFT  legal  framework,  reforming  the  offshore 
sector,  closer  engagement  with  correspondent  banks  showing  greater 
interest  in  dealing  with  the  jurisdiction,  and  the  need  to  embark  on  a 
comprehensive, co-ordinated and sustained communications campaign to 
restore the reputation of the jurisdiction. 
 While we continue to highlight the issue of de-risking as a threat, we are 
conscious that we have to play our part to beef up our AML/CFT regime, 
and ensure that we are in compliance, as non-compliance is not an option.  
It is for this very reason that Seychelles sought the assistance of the World 
Bank  to  conduct  its  first  National  Risk  Assessment.    The  Mutual 
Evaluation  came  in  timely  such  that  all  recommendations  can  be 
consolidated  and  acted  upon.    Work  is  already  underway  as  we 
endeavour  to  close  the  gaps  that  have  been  identified,  with  the  aim  of 
strengthening Seychelles’ reputation and adherence to international best 
practices.  With this dialogue, we look forward to enhancing our repertoire 
of sustainable solutions. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thinking  of  the  continent,  we  cannot  run  away  from  the  fact  that  illegal 
wildlife trade is one of today’s most lucrative forms of organised crime that 
has not spared the ESAAMLG region. 
  4 
And similar to many countries in the region, Seychelles, which boasts a 
unique  biodiversity  ranging  from  the  legendary  coco-de-mer,  the  giant 
Aldabra tortoise, the sea turtles, a variety of insects, bird and fish species, 
among  others,  has  also  been  witnessing  an  increase  in  poaching  and 
crimes  related  to  the  illegal  trade  of  endemic  flora  and  fauna,  including 
some of the endangered species. 
 The  Seychelles’  Ministry  of  Environment,  Energy  and  Climate  Change 
notes  that  as  recently  as  2017  and  earlier  this  year,  several  reports  of 
people smuggling giant land tortoises and even reptiles out of the country, 
have been recorded. This includes the Seychelles' giant bronze gecko, as 
rightly mentioned by the Minister in his opening address, which is believed 
to be sold for thousands of USD on the international market. 
 It  is  evident  that  if  left  unchecked,  such  practices  pose  the  risk  of 
establishing very perverse activities locally just to feed such markets. And 
although  complex  we  need  to  combat  illegal  wildlife  trade  because 
besides  generating  significant  losses  in  assets  and  revenues,  illegal 
wildlife  trade  is  also  a  threat  to  the  livelihood  of  our  communities,  our 
ecosystems, and even food security. 
 As we speak the value of illegal funds being derived from illegal trade in 
wildlife in Seychelles is not specifically known, although we are well aware 
of existence of such trade. Nevertheless, the fact that this phenomenon 
has emerged and is affecting our jurisdiction and wider region, is reason 
enough  for  us  to  try  and  find  mechanisms  that  will  allow  us  to  better 
understand the financial aspect of this illicit activity, and have a concrete 
understanding of the money flows linked to this lucrative trade.   
 I cannot end, without addressing what is a well-known fact - that we are 
experiencing  a  constantly  evolving  financial  sector,  among  which  is  the 
 5 
growing  use  of  innovative  financial  products  and  services  that  have 
undoubtedly changed our financial landscape. 
 However,  while  the  use  of  financial  technology  has  helped  to  enhance 
efficiency, allowing access to finance for the broader community, this has 
also brought about its fair share of risks and challenges. Aside of the well-
known  cyber-security  risks,  we  also  have  challenges  relating  to  the 
implementation of AML/CFT requirements, relating to new technological 
innovations in payments and regulation. 
 Innovative financial services have given rise to an increasing number of 
financial  players, easing cross-border transactions,  as  well  as  providing 
consumers  greater  flexibility  and  choice,  causing  the  monitoring  of 
transactions  to  be  more  complex  for  financial  institutions  and  public 
authorities. There are also instances whereby regulatory authorities are 
bypassed  due  to  a  lack  of  capacity  and  resources  to  monitor  these 
innovative payment channels. 
 It is therefore vital that work is undertaken to better understand the risks 
and vulnerabilities of innovative financial services and ensure that while 
we embrace innovation for economic growth, we also pursue responsible 
innovation,  and  manage  the  risks  of  money  laundering  and  terrorist 
financing. 
 The local financial sector has not been left behind and has to some extent 
experienced  the  ‘Fintech’  phenomenon,  ranging  from  increased  use  of 
electronic payment methods such as mobile and internet banking, as well 
as  growing  interest  in  cryptocurrencies.    Given  this  growing  interest  in 
Fintech in Seychelles, by consumers, the business community, as well as 
financial  institutions,  the  Central  Bank  is  currently  in  the  process  of 
engaging  with  relevant  stakeholders  to  draft  a  national  strategy  on  the 
adoption of Fintech in the country. The strategy will be focussing on how 
 6 
Fintech can effectively assist in the development of the financial sector, 
while taking the associated risks into consideration. 
 It is imperative that we have close collaboration between key stakeholders 
working  to  regulate  the  domestic  financial  sector,  so  that  there  is  a 
comprehensive understanding of the opportunities and challenges of such 
developments,  as  such  collaboration  and  synergies  are  crucial  to 
addressing any concerns or challenges, as soon as they arise. 
 As we further our discussions on the issue, let us explore the opportunities 
that  new  financial  and  regulatory  technologies  may  present  for  us  to 
improve  the  effective  implementation  of  AML/CFT  measures,  in  our 
respective jurisdictions and in the region. 
 Seychelles  is  already  embracing  the  potential  of  financial  technologies, 
and  we  are  delighted  that  Council  of  Ministers  has  accepted  our 
nomination to host the ESAAMLG Workshop on Digital financial services, 
Bureau de Change and Money remittances, which will be held next year. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The reason we are gathered here is to engage in serious discussions and 
come up with plausible solutions to the challenges we face in relation to 
all three  topics.  There  are surely  success stories that  exist  in this  room 
which  will  go  a  long  way  in  helping  others  to  address  their  respective 
situations. 
 Concerns  about  the  risks  that  AML/CFT  present  to  the  stability  of  our 
financial  systems  should  be  addressed  collectively.  Events  like  this  are 
therefore  of  utmost  importance  as  it  helps  to  bring  all  stakeholders 
together  under  one  roof,  because  as  we  are  already  aware  the  fight 
against  money  laundering  and terrorist financing  cannot  be  achieved  in 
isolation. 
 7 
 Both the public and private sector need to become equal partners, as we 
endeavour to make better use of our resources and expertise  related to 
this matter.  This is not only true for our respective jurisdictions, but as a 
regional  grouping,  it  is  also  imperative  that  public  and  private  sector 
organisations  throughout  the  ESAAMLG  region  work  in  partnership  to 
develop strategies for the exchange of expertise, and intelligence, to really 
make  an  impact  on  addressing  cross  border  money  laundering  and 
terrorist financing concerns. 
 As I conclude, it is my sincere hope that we will leave no stones unturned 
to achieve the objectives set at the inception of this very important event. 
Yes, it is a very imperative for us as a country, as Seychelles is committed 
to see the establishment of robust AML/CFT framework in our jurisdiction 
and beyond. The development of our financial sectors and our reputation 
depend on it. 
 I  thank  you  for  your  undivided  attention  and  look  forward  to  the  fruitful 
deliberations tomorrow. 
   8 
