Sabine  Lautenschläger:  Guardians  of  stability  -  central  banks,
supervisors and the quest for financial stability
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank, at the Central Bank
of Malta, Valletta, 12 October 2018.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 It is an honour to be here and to join in celebrating a birthday! This year, the Central Bank of Malta
turns fifty. And throughout these past fifty years, it has helped Malta to navigate the sometimes
rough waters of the international monetary system.
From the early days when it focused on exchange rate policy, to its efforts in bringing the country
into the euro area in 2008, and since then, as part of the Eurosystem, the Central Bank of Malta
has shown resilience and adaptability. So, I wish the central bank a very happy birthday!
But there is another birthday this year – a less happy one. It’s a birthday that no central banker or
banking supervisor can shy away from. Ten years ago, Lehman Brothers collapsed, setting off
the financial crisis. Since then, financial stability has become a buzzword, and for many good
reasons.
The instability in the financial system of 2008 had devastating consequences across the globe. In
the end, it was not only costly for banks, investors and taxpayers. Many people also lost their
jobs, their businesses and their homes. Events of such a magnitude not only alter the course of
people’s  lives;  they  may  alter  the  course  of  entire  societies.  The  urgency  for  reforms  was
immediately clear. Something had gone badly wrong, and policymakers had a duty to find the
causes and prevent this from ever happening again. To do so, they had to ask what, how and
why.
But, I did not come all the way to Malta to give you yet another “lessons learned” speech. Instead,
I  would  like  to  share  some  more  thoughts  on  financial  stability.  Financial  stability  may  have
become a buzzword, but it is not a new concept. People have wondered in particular about the
central banks’ role in financial stability for as long as central banks have existed.
For the ECB today, the issue is still complex, but the answers are clear. The primary objective of
the ECB is to maintain price stability. At the same time, it also has a contributory role in financial
stability, as indicated by the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. The ECB monitors
and assesses risks to financial stability, because turbulence in the financial system may weaken
the ECB’s ability to maintain price stability—the two are functionally connected. And since the
crisis,  the  ECB  also  plays  a  role  in  maintaining  financial  stability  through  its  competences  in
banking supervision and in macroprudential policy.
But  going  back  in  time,  the  relationship  between  the  different  functions  of  central  banks  have
generated quasi-existential questions.
What  a  central  bank  is,  can  be  defined  by  what  it  does.  And  the  “what  it  does”  part  mostly
revolves around the question of whether a central bank cares about two types of stability.
1
The first is monetary stability: the creation of a monetary regime that can ensure price stability.
The second is financial stability which, when central banking was born, was essentially the same
as  “bank  stability”.  So,  throughout  history,  the  most  popular  definitions  of  “central  bank”  have
revolved around their role in ensuring monetary stability, financial stability or both.
 1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
One  of  the  founding  ECB  board  members,  Tommaso  Padoa  Schioppa,  believed  that  both
aspects  mattered.  To  him,  a  central  bank  was  defined  by  its  role  in  safeguarding  both  price
stability and financial stability.
As for financial stability, he argued that historically, a central bank’s role in this realm was rooted
in its DNA. First, the central bank was a bank. It was also monopolist in the provision of ultimate
liquidity. And  last  but  not  least,  it  was  a  bankers’  bank.  It  played  a  role  in  settling  payments
between banks.  And  a  well-functioning  interbank  market  plays  an  important  role  for  financial
stability.
2
And  he  was  of  course  not  the  only  one  to  see  the  role  that  central  banks  played  in  financial
stability as essential. From Walter Bagehot’s book “Lombard Street” all the way to the work of
Charles  Goodhart,  one  function  has  been  singled  out  to  identify  central  banks:  their  role  as
lenders of last resort.
Take the Bank of England as an example. Even after becoming a monopolistic issuer of notes, it
still operated as a profit-maximizing bank. Charles Goodhart argues that it did not become a true
central bank until the second half of the 19th century, once it let go of profit-maximizing and took
3
on the role of lender of last resort.
And  there  is  a  similar  story  about  the  emergence  of  central  banks  on  the  other  side  of  the
Atlantic. This story roughly starts with the Panic of 1907: a series of bank runs and bank failures
that devastated the US economy. In the absence of a public lender of last resort, a private citizen
stepped in: JP Morgan. He called on a group of fellow bankers, and together they stopped the
panic  by  providing  loans  to  troubled  banks.  This  episode  eventually  led  to  the  creation  of  the
Federal Reserve System as a public lender of last resort.
So, there it is: historically, some scholars saw financial stability as a central aspect of central
banks’ work. But of course, history can be seen from different angles. And that is also true for the
history of central banks.
In  fact,  in  explaining  how  modern  central  banks  emerged,  others  have  focused  on  monetary
stability  rather  than  financial  stability.  Their  story  starts  with  the  introduction  of  paper  money.
Unlike commodity money, paper money does not have an intrinsic value; after all, it’s just a piece
of paper. So when commodity money gave way to paper money, a need arose for institutions
that could guarantee a stable value of money.
It  was  central  banks,  of  course,  that  could  do  so.  They  could  issue  a  national  currency  and
ensure its stability.  And here again, the Bank of England is seen as the first modern central
5
bank.
4
So what is it now that makes a central bank so special? What is it that sets it apart from other
banks? Is it the ability to maintain monetary stability, the ability to maintain financial stability, or
both?
Well, the truth is that they are sometimes hard to separate. It is hard to delineate when financial
stability gets so important that it affects monetary policy and vice versa. And what’s more, things
are not as simple as they used to be. Today, innovations like online shopping, or global value
chains, add to the complexity of maintaining price stability. And these days financial stability is
about much more than just banks.
And  yet,  the  central  question  remains.  What  should  central  banks  do?  What  should  their
functions be? And what their objectives? Should they focus on both price stability and financial
stability? Or just concentrate on price stability and leave financial stability to others?
These are the questions I will discuss in my lecture today. In doing so, I will focus on the role of
 2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  European  Central  Bank.  And  to  be  clear  from  the  start:  the  ECB  has  a  price  stability-
mandate. Still, both branches of the ECB have a role to play in financial stability –monetary policy
as well as banking supervision.
I will break down my speech into three parts.
In the first part, I will put on my central banker’s hat. As a central bank, the ECB works towards
price stability. However, the ECB has also been dealing with issues of financial stability since it
was created, working to identify and assess risks to financial stability. And it will continue to do
so. Since 2014, the ECB also has the power to take macroprudential policy measures enabling it
to top-up national tools aimed at addressing specific stability risks. So, it can go from analysis to
policy.
I will next look deeper into macroprudential policy. Can it help to maintain financial stability? And
what roles do the ECB, national central banks and other institutions play?
In the third part of this lecture, I will then put on my supervisor’s hat. As a banking supervisor, the
ECB  helps  to  make  banks  safer,  sounder  and  more  resilient.  But  as  I  have  said  elsewhere,
financial stability is more than the sum of its parts.   Even if all banks were stable, the financial
system could still be a bit shaky. Microprudential supervision can only be part of the answer.
6
But  it  is  still  important.  So  I  will  conclude  by  focusing  on  how  banking  supervisors  should
contribute to financial stability. What tools are needed, what prerequisites have to be in place?
A central banking perspective
As I already said, the ECB’s mandate is quite clear. Article 127 of the Treaty on the Functioning
of the European Union leaves not a trace of doubt.
It clearly states that the “primary objective of the European System of Central Banks shall be to
maintain  price  stability”.  But  it  also  says  that  the  “European  System  of  Central  Banks  shall
contribute to the smooth conduct of policies pursued by the competent authorities relating to […]
the stability of the financial system.”
Further, the ECB needs to identify and assess risks to financial stability in order to comply with
its  advisory  tasks  on  legislation,  in  accordance  with Articles  4  and  25.1  of  the  Statute  of  the
ESCB.
Hence, the ECB cannot and should not turn a blind eye to risks to financial stability. The Treaty
clearly outlines a contributory role for the ECB in maintaining financial stability. After all, financial
stability and price stability are functionally connected.  They are linked in good times – and they
are  linked  in  bad  times.  As  we  saw  during  the  last  crisis,  financial  instability  can  block  the
channels through which monetary policy influences prices. Thus, it can limit the ability of central
banks to do their job. Without financial stability, it becomes quite hard to ensure price stability.
7
Edward  George,  who  was  at  the  helm  of  the  Bank  of  England  during  crises  such  as  Black
Wednesday and the collapse of Barings Bank  made this point graphically when he said: “it is
inconceivable that the monetary authorities could quietly pursue their stability-oriented monetary
policy objectives if the financial system through which policy is carried on (…) were collapsing
9
around their ears”.
8
And in its own monetary policy strategy, the ECB recognizes how important financial stability is
for price stability - within the mandate it has been given. In order to best pursue its price stability
mandate, the ECB adopts a two-pillar approach to assess risks to price stability. The two-pillar
approach,  with  economic  analysis  and  monetary  analysis,  includes  assessments  of  financial
market developments.
 3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
So, financial stability, or rather the lack of it, can affect monetary policy. But it is not a one-way
street. We should also be aware that monetary policy can affect financial stability.
Let us take a quick look at the potential side-effects of monetary policy. In the aftermath of the
crisis, the ECB has pursued an extraordinarily accommodative monetary policy and deployed a
number  of  unconventional  tools.  It  began,  for  instance,  to  buy  bonds  on  a  large  scale.  These
tools  had  the  desired  effects  on  the  real  economy,  and  thus  on  prices.  They  have  brought
benefits. But we must remain vigilant about their potential costs, too.
For  one,  the  tools  may  have  changed  the  incentives  of  banks,  businesses  and  even
governments. In fact, low interest rates and abundant liquidity may encourage investors to take
excessive risks. Among other things, we keep a close eye on how much risk banks take.
Another  issue  is  that  bond  purchases  by  the  central  bank  can  reduce  liquidity  in  the  relevant
markets or distort prices. The more bonds we buy, and the longer we go on buying, the greater
the risk that prices will be distorted.
That  is  why  we  took  steps  to  limit  some  of  the  side-effects  of  the  ECB’s  bond  purchases.
Furthermore, our actions had to be guided by careful monitoring of the markets that were likely to
be  most  affected.  The  ECB  takes  this  duty  to  carefully  monitor  markets  seriously. And  it  will
continue to do so.
Does this mean that no financial stability issues will follow from the extraordinary accommodative
monetary policy? Well, despite all the monitoring and the careful design of the asset purchase
programme, there are still issues to consider. Interest rates have been low for a long time now,
and liquidity has been abundant.
Prices of several asset classes are influenced by the central bank’s policies. So there are some
risks. There are risks that bubbles might be building up, and there are risks that assets might be
mispriced.  Market  participants  might  become  too  lenient  when  assessing  the  real  value  of
assets; and they might overly rely on readily available liquidity and become too lazy to prepare for
different, less convenient times.
So, this is a case where monetary policy might affect financial stability. But more often than not, it
is the other way round. Mostly, it is the stability of the financial system which affects the tools and
the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  That’s  why  the  ECB  has  kept  a  close  eye  on  risks  to
financial stability since long before the crisis.
But how does that work in practice? How do we define financial stability in the first place? And
how do we monitor relevant risks?
When it comes to definitions, financial stability is akin to the famous giraffe. It’s hard to describe,
but you know it when you see it. Or rather: you know it when you no longer see it. Our experts
think  of  financial  stability  as  a  condition  in  which  the  financial  system,  including  financial
intermediaries, markets and market infrastructures, is capable of withstanding shocks and the
unravelling of financial imbalances. Only a resilient financial system is able to support the real
economy during a potential shock.
The definition of financial stability is quite broad, I have to admit. But I think we need to take a
broad perspective when we assess risks to financial stability.
The  first  step  is  to  routinely  look  at  incoming  data  from  all  relevant  sectors.  We  look  at  both
macro  developments  and  micro  developments,  and  we  look  at  both  the  bank  and  non-bank
sectors. While we focus on the euro area, we are aware that problems can easily spread across
borders and so keep an eye on global developments too.
The second step is to analyse the data by applying a wide range of tools. Among other things, we
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
analyse asset prices, and we use early-warning and financial cycle models as well as models to
predict outcomes such as changes in banks’ profitability.
The  third  step  is  to  collect  market  intelligence. After  all,  it  is  hard  to  understand  the  markets
without talking to those who shape them. We regularly talk to analysts, managers and strategists
in  different  financial  institutions.  We  try  to  find  out  what  they  see  as  potential  risks,  or  what
changes they see on the horizon.
And  of  course,  in  all  this  we  use  expert  judgment.  We  gather  data  and  information  and  use
sophisticated models. But data and models need to be interpreted and assessed. This is where
the experience and the knowledge of our experts come into play.
Once we have identified the key risks, we communicate our findings to the public. And we do this
twice a year through our Financial Stability Review.
Although the latest edition of the report finds the situation to be quite favourable overall, there are
risks which might spoil the good mood at some point. Altogether, we identified four key risks.
The first risk is that market sentiment might suddenly change. This in turn could force prices in
asset markets to adjust and set off a downturn in the real economy. Such a repricing could be
triggered by many things, both from inside the euro area and from outside.
The second risk has to do with banks. The cyclical outlook for euro area banks is improving, but
there  are  still  structural  challenges.  If  financial  or  economic  conditions  deteriorate  before  the
structural challenges are addressed, banks may lose their ability to finance the economy.
The  third  risk  is  that  public  and  private  debt  may  not  be  sustainable.  Households,  firms  and
governments are highly indebted in a number of countries, with euro area firms, in particular,
carrying high levels of debt. And also the sustainability of government debt is a concern.
The fourth risk is about liquidity in the non-bank sector. This sector has been growing for some
time now, and no end is in sight. Not only are non-banks highly interconnected with the banking
sector,  they  are  also  becoming  more  and  more  interconnected  among  themselves:  their
portfolios tend to be similar, making them more vulnerable.
10
So, the ECB communicates the risks it sees, and it is always a challenge to do so. We know that
the words of a central bank can be powerful. They can affect markets in either direction. Such
communication is a challenge we cannot shy away from as it can encourage market participants
to behave more prudently. And it might also improve market discipline: by sharing our views on
relevant risks, we create greater transparency about vulnerabilities in the financial sector.
What I would like to make clear, though, before closing this chapter is that, while the ECB can
contribute to the stability of the financial system, it cannot by itself ensure financial stability. Its
mandate determines what it can and cannot do. For instance, the ECB cannot provide liquidity to
insolvent  credit  institutions;  and  it  must  comply  with  the  monetary  financing  prohibition.  It  is
therefore important that all relevant actors are fully aware of their respective responsibilities for
financial stability and act in a manner to live up to those responsibilities.
The macroprudential perspective
What the ECB can do however is more than just identify, assess and communicate risks. As I
said before, the ECB was given some relevant competences after the crisis.
These  competences  cover  both  the  macroprudential  and  the  microprudential  level.  In  other
words, they cover both individual banks and the banking system.
Let’s start with the system-wide approach and macroprudential policy. This policy area is still
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
very young. It was born out of the financial crisis, but it has grown rapidly since then. Here in
Europe, we now have a common framework for macroprudential policy.
Macroprudential policy has two goals, broadly speaking. First, it aims to make the system more
resilient to shocks. And second it aims to dampen the financial cycle, the booms and busts.
What  role  does  the  central  bank  play  in  all  this?  Well,  the  ECB  can  only  address  its
macroprudential measures at banks and it’s not alone on the stage. The ECB works together
with many others – with other European and national authorities.
At the European level, the ECB has a strong ally in the European Systemic Risk Board, or ESRB
for  short.  The  ESRB  takes  a  broad  view  of  the  financial  system.  It  keeps  an  eye  on  banks,
insurers,  asset  managers,  shadow  banks,  financial  market  infrastructures  and  other  financial
institutions.  It  assesses  systemic  risk  in  all  these  areas  of  the  financial  system. And  where
appropriate, it issues warnings and recommends action. Other European authorities, such as
the  European  Banking  Authority,  European  Securities  and  Markets  Authority,  and  European
Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority, also contribute to the ESBR’s work.
National  authorities  play  a  crucial  role  in  macroprudential  policy.  Under  the  EU’s  legislative
concept,  macroprudential  policy 
is  also  a  national  policy.  The  European  perspective
complements the national one. And this makes sense, given that financial cycles vary across
countries and across sectors. At any point in time, each country or sector might be in a different
stage of the cycle and thus face different risks.
Research shows that in a monetary union, macroprudential policy can play a very important role.
Unlike monetary policy, it can target specific sectors or countries. This in turn allows monetary
policy to focus on price stability. In other words: macroprudential policy can “unburden” monetary
policy.
11
So  how  does  it  work  in  practice?  National  authorities  can  choose  to  take  macroprudential
measures. The ECB then has the power to top-up some of these measures. And while national
authorities are the key players, it also makes sense to involve the ECB. This helps to keep an
eye  on  any  cross-border  spill-overs  and  to  alleviate  any  inaction  bias  that  may  still  exist  at
national level.
A  good  example  of  the  important  role  that  the  ECB  plays  in  macroprudential  policies  is  the
methodology  it  has  developed  for  minimum  additional  capital  to  be  held  by  regional  systemic
relevant banks. The methodology has reduced heterogeneity in the buffer calibration across the
euro area. The current review of this methodology aims to create a level playing field, taking into
account national specificities when justified.
All in all, much has been achieved since the crisis. Individual structural buffers have been applied
to altogether 116 banks. Six countries have activated the full capital conservation buffer and one
country has activated the counter-cyclical capital buffer.
  Overview  of  macroprudential  policy
measures that were being applied in the euro area as of 1 August 2018. But the macroprudential
framework is still young, and we can do more to improve it.
12
We  could,  for  instance,  design  a  single  macroprudential  toolkit.  To  do  so,  we  would  need  to
consolidate all the tools and procedures which are scattered in different places within and across
different rulebooks.
We should also improve the rules on how authorities should choose and activate the tools they
would like to use. There may be ways to simplify and speed up the current multi-step process.
And that’s not all. The national authority is not free to use any tool it wishes at whatever time.
Rather there is a pre-defined and mandatory sequence of tools – a “pecking order”. Wouldn’t it
 6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
be more sensible for the national authority to have the power to simply choose the tool that it
deems most appropriate for the risk at hand?
And  finally,  we  need  to  make  the  EU  framework  more  comprehensive.  We  should  add  some
tools, particularly borrower-based ones, such as loan-to-value ratios which come in handy in the
upturn of the cycle. Research has shown that such tools can help fight bubbles in real estate
markets and limit household leverage.
13
From  a  more  general  point  of  view,  a  flexible  macroprudential  framework  is  needed;  one  that
allows  to  quickly  respond  to  market  developments.  This  will  be  all  the  more  important  in  the
future as macroprudential authorities should be ready to tackle new risks that may arise from the
shift  towards  market-based  finance.  Key  to  this  will  be  looking  beyond  the  banking  sector;
keeping an eye on banks is no longer enough. Many non-banks are now operating in the financial
system, and they too can pose a risk to financial stability.
Next to the banking sector is the shadow banking sector, defined by the ESRB as the sector
comprising  all  assets  which  are  not  held  by  banks,  insurance  companies  or  central  counter
parties. And it is big. In terms of assets, it accounts for 40% of the EU financial system. I guess
we can all agree that it would be irresponsible not to monitor such a large part of our financial
system.
The ESRB’s Shadow Banking Monitor was created to do just that. In the recently published third
issue of the monitor, the ESRB identified several key risks.
First,  some  investment  funds  might  continue  to  face  liquidity  risks  and  risks  associated  with
leverage.
Second, the structure of the shadow banking sector itself can be a risk. As I said, it is not just big,
it is also closely interconnected with the banking sector. Banks provide funding to shadow banks
and vice versa. So there is considerable mutual exposure.
And these links are growing. In 2017, wholesale funding to euro area banks from entities in the
shadow banking sector reached the staggering amount of €2.2 trillion.
But apart from that, our picture of the shadow banking sector is not yet very clear. In the EU,
almost half of all assets in the shadow banking sector are held by institutions for which we lack a
detailed statistical breakdown.
Such  data  gaps  are  a  cause  of  concern  to  economists  in  particular,  but  they  should  raise
concerns among all policymakers. We need more data to bring this sector out of the shadows.
We  need  more  data  to  examine  and  understand  it  more  thoroughly.  Otherwise,  we  might
overlook risks that could threaten the financial system.
A banking supervisor’s perspective
But  let’s  now  turn  away  from  shadow  banks  and  towards  regular  banks.  As  I  just  said,
maintaining  financial  stability  is  about  two  things.  First,  it  is  about  preventing  the  build-up  of
bubbles; second, it is about making the system more resilient. Supervising individual banks helps
boost resilience.
Indeed,  for  a  long  time,  microprudential  supervision  was  the  only  policy  field  with  a  specific
financial stability goal. But this has changed a lot. So, let’s take a closer look at how banking
supervision today helps to ensure financial stability.
ECB Banking Supervision directly supervises the 118 biggest banking groups in the euro area –
with over €20 trillion euros in total assets. Clearly, these banks – some in their own right, some
 7 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
as part of a group – are systemically relevant. Given their huge role in financing the euro area
economy, their resilience is key to financial stability.
The  first  step  is  for  the  supervisor  to  obtain  a  holistic  view  of  each  of  these  banks,  not  only
assessing capital and liquidity risks, but also their internal controls and governance. And then the
supervisor needs to act and push for improvements in all these elements if needed.
But it is not enough to look at each bank in isolation. To identify and understand new risks and
vulnerabilities, the second step is to take a broader view.
As  supervisors  we  have  to  stay  closely  attuned  to  the  macroeconomic  environment  in  which
banks operate. On the one hand, we take into account macroeconomic assessments drawn up
by  other  European  authorities  and  national  supervisors.  On  the  other  hand,  we  also  take  into
account  how  each  bank  performs  compared  to  its  peers.  And  thanks  to  our  European
perspective, we can compare banks across the entire euro area.
This broad view is indeed one of the great advantages of European banking supervision. Among
other things, we have benefitted from it when looking at non-performing loans, interest rates risk
in  the  banking  book,  leverage  finance  and  business  models  in  general.  All  this  shapes  our
thinking and helps us to focus on the risks that count.
European banking supervision has helped to maintain financial stability. It has done so by making
banks safer and sounder. Euro area banks now hold more capital than ever before: their fully
loaded CET1 ratio has increased by about 2.5 percentage points since 2014. Back then, it stood
at 11.2%, now it stands at 13.8%.
 There is no doubt that banks are more resilient today than
they  were  in  the  past;  they  are  better  able  to  withstand  financial  shocks  and  economic
downturns.
14
But, of course, capital is not the full story. Liquidity is also key, as a liquidity crisis in one bank can
turn into a risk to the entire system. Banks must therefore manage relevant risks very carefully.
And  we  are  not  satisfied  with  each  and  every  bank’s  self-assessments  of  its  liquidity  risk
management. Not all banks meet our expectations. That is why we will look closer at liquidity
issues through a dedicated stress test in 2019. By improving each bank’s liquidity management,
we make sure that the system is safer.
The key ingredients of good supervision
So far, I have mostly talked about how things are. Let me now focus on a few key ingredients that
I believe are central to a supervisor’s contribution to financial stability.
First, supervisors need to be independent. They must be able to take their own decisions. They
must  be  free  from  pressure  from  banks  or  other  stakeholders  –  and  they  must  be  free  from
political trends. But independence is not the same as omnipotence. Independent institutions need
to be accountable. The ECB as a banking supervisor is no exception.
But independence goes beyond the institutional setting. It also encompasses the independence
of mind. We supervisors must avoid group think and national bias. We should take into account
as many views as possible when assessing risks and taking decisions. Looking ahead, I would
encourage  even  more  exchanges  between  the  national  supervisors  and  the  ECB.  This  could
mean more secondments of staff to the ECB or more cross-border on-site inspections with ECB
and national authorities’ staff.
Second, for a resilient banking system the regulatory framework needs to be strong. Supervisors
can  only  identify  risks  in  banks,  and  act  to  mitigate  them,  if  the  legislator  gives  them  the
competence to do so.
 8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Supervisors need the right tools and powers. For example, they need the power to request data
and  information  from  banks  whenever  they  need  to.  In  making  such  a  request,  they  should,
however, be mindful of the reporting burden on banks. They need to strike a balance and weigh
up the burden on banks against the risks that may arise. Last but not least, harmonised rules are
essential tools for European supervisors. If we are to ensure equal treatment for all banks within
the banking union, we must be able to apply the same rules.
And to do their jobs well, even the most competent supervisors need appropriate budgets. This is
at times forgotten, but it is crucial. And I would like to add that money spent on good supervision
is money well spent. The budget of European banking supervision pales in comparison to the
costs of a fully-fledged banking crisis.
Conclusion
I am deeply invested in all the topics I have talked about today, so I could go on speaking about
them for hours. But let me conclude.
I hope to leave you with a simple message. Central banking is a complex business. The ECB’s
objective  of  price  stability  is  clear.  But  delivering  on  our  mandate  requires  us  to  deal  with  a
constantly  evolving  world,  and  I  would  be  remiss  if  I  told  you  it’s  a  simple  task.  Our  new
competences for macroprudential and microprudential policy have made it even more complex.
But I believe we have shown the ECB is up for the challenge.
It  is  telling  that  although  scholars  have  tried  to  define  what  central  banks  are,  and  what  they
should do, for such a long time, we are still debating these questions today.
And  indeed,  the  answer  is  not  clear-cut.  History  has  shown  that  price  stability  and  financial
stability  are  deeply  connected.  You  can’t  have  one  without  the  other.  So  to  deliver  on  our
mandate of price stability, we cannot turn a blind eye to financial stability.
As regards monetary policy, we will work to maintain price stability. As regards financial stability,
we will continue to cooperate with European and national institutions to work towards a stable
financial  system. And  as  regards  banking  supervision,  we  will  work  to  make  banks  safer  and
sounder.
I  wish  I  could  tell  you  it  is  always  easy  to  neatly  separate  these  worlds.  It  is  not.  But  I  am
confident that all the bright, competent, and committed Europeans working for EU and national
institutions can make it happen.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Ugolini, S., The Evolution of Central Banking: Theory and History, Palgrave Macmillan, London, 2017.
Padoa-Schioppa, T., Central Banks and Financial Stability: Exploring a land in between, Second ECB Central
Banking Conference Policy Panel Introductory Paper, 2002.
Goodhart, C., The Evolution of Central Banks, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA and London, 1988.
Giannini, C., The Age of Central Banks, Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, 2011.
Ugolini (2017).
See speech by Sabine Lautenschläger from 15 February 2018: A stable financial system – more than the sum
of its parts, 15 February 2018.
See for example Psaroudakis, G., The scope for financial stability considerations in the fulfilment of the mandate
of the ECB/Eurosystem, Journal of Financial Regulation, Vol. 4, Issue 1, March 2018; Speech by Mario Draghi,
The interaction between monetary policy and financial stability in the euro area, 24 May 2017.
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
He was deputy governor during Black Wednesday, and later served as Governor later on from or ten years (1993
to –2003).
Quote as reported in Psaroudakis (2018)
Financial Stability Review, European Central Bank, May 2018.
See for example Brzoza-Brzezina, M. , Kolasa, M., Makarski, K., Macroprudential policy and imbalances in the
euro area, Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 41, Issue C, 2015 and Quint, D. and Rabanal, P.,
Monetary  and  Macroprudential  Policy  in  an  Estimated  DSGE  Model  of  the  Euro  Area,  IMF  Working  Paper,
October 2013.
Overview of macroprudential policy measures that were being applied in the euro area as of 1 August 2018.
See for example amongst others: Igan, D. and Kang, H., Do Loan-to-Value and Debt-to-Income Limits Work?
Evidence from Korea, IMF Working paper, December 2011
Source:  COREP,  ECB  staff  calculations  using  a  constant  sample  of  95  significant  institutions  which  have
reported RWA, Capital and Total assets for all time periods.
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
