 November 19, 2018 
Bank  of 
Japan 
 
 Demographic Changes and Challenges for Financial Sector 
Remarks at the Paris EUROPLACE Financial Forum in Tokyo 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
Introduction 
It is a great honor for me to have the opportunity  once again to give a speech at the Paris 
Europlace Financial Forum.  
 Among the many occasions I was invited to this Forum in the past, I talked about financial 
innovation in the last two years. This year, I would like to talk about another long-term issue 
faced by many advanced economies; namely, demographic changes. 
 Among advanced economies, France has led the way in tackling the issues brought about by 
declining  population.  The  total  fertility  rate  has  been  gradually  increasing;  however,  it 
continues  to  face  the  challenges  of  an  aging  population.  Meanwhile,  Japan  faces  the 
headwinds of both a declining and an aging population, with a total fertility rate far below 
two.1 Today,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  how  such  demographic  changes  are  affecting  the 
financial sector. 
 I. Demographic Changes, Economic Growth, and Interest Rates 
First, let us consider the impact of a declining and aging population on economic growth. If 
the population is declining and aging at the same time, the working-age population decreases. 
Since a reduction in the working-age population means a decrease in labor input, this leads to 
a slowdown in economic growth. Even when the total population is increasing, a decrease in 
the proportion of the working-age population will reduce the growth rate of GDP per capita. 
 Of course, it is possible to mitigate the headwinds of a declining and aging  population by 
using machines as a substitute for human labor or by promoting innovation. In fact, recent 
labor shortages in Japan have boosted investment, such as in the automation of production 
lines and streamlining of operations with the introduction of new information technology. 
 Next, let us consider the impact of a declining and aging population on interest rates. To do 
so, we need to examine the balance between savings and investment. A declining and aging 
population would have both positive and negative effects on savings. The negative effect on 
                                                        
1 Japan's total fertility rate in 2016 was 1.44, far below the equilibrium level of about 2.1, under which 
the population neither increases nor decreases. Meanwhile, France's total fertility rate in 2016 was 1.9. 
 1 
savings is an increase in the number of elderly people. This is because many of them live on 
running down the assets they had accumulated before retirement, and therefore an increase in 
their population reduces total national savings and pushes interest rates up. On the other hand, 
if  population  aging  is  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  longevity,  this  will  positively  affect 
savings. Since World War II, longevity has been increasing in developed countries through 
advances in medical technology, and we are now likely to live longer than our parents and 
grandparents. Therefore, even if the proportion of elderly people increases, they may spend 
less  than  before  or  work  longer  to  earn  income,  both  of  which  will  contribute  to  pushing 
interest rates down by reducing spending or by increasing savings. 
 How  about  the  impact  on  investment?  A  declining  and  aging  population  can  again  either 
increase or decrease investment, although this also depends on the prospects for the economy 
and  technological  progress.  A  decrease  in  working-age  population  and  thus  in  labor  input 
raises the level of capital stock per labor input, and makes capital input relatively abundant.2 
This  reduces  the  need  for  additional  investment.  Investment  is  also  reduced  when  firms 
expect  that  the  population,  and  therefore  the  future  demand  for  production,  will  decline. 
These are the factors that push interest rates down. Meanwhile, when technological progress 
or labor-saving investment is prompted to compensate for decreased labor input, this pushes 
interest rates upward. 
 In this way, a declining and aging population can either push up or push down interest rates. 
Recent studies suggest that the equilibrium real interest rate in the medium to long run is on a 
decreasing  trend  in  advanced  economies,  and  a  declining  and  aging  population  has 
contributed to this trend to some extent.3 Based on the discussion so far, we can assume that a 
declining and aging population is likely to increase savings, or decrease investment, or both, 
at least for the time being.  
                                                        
2 The  situation  where  the  level  of  capital  stock  per  labor  input  increases  is  referred  to  as  "capital 
deepening." 
3 Sudo and Takizuka (2018) suggest that about 270 out of the 640 basis points decline in real interest 
rates over the past 50 years in Japan can be attributed to demographic changes. 
Sudo, N. and Y. Takizuka "Population Aging and the Real Interest Rate in the Last and Next 50 Years," 
Bank of Japan Working Paper Series 18-E-1, 2018. 
 2 
II. Impact on Banking Business 
Since  inflation  expectations  in  advanced  economies  have  moved  around  a  small  positive 
value with some variations across countries, a decreasing trend in the equilibrium real interest 
rate is translated into a decreasing trend in nominal interest rates. Let me now turn to how the 
demographic  changes  accompanied  by  a  decreasing  trend  in  nominal  interest  rates  has 
affected the financial sector. First, I will consider the impact on banking business. 
 In a situation where nominal interest rates on lending are on a decreasing trend, but deposit 
rates cannot fall below zero, banks' profits are squeezed through a reduction in net interest 
income. Moreover, if the trend in credit demand weakens due to a declining population and 
associated weak growth, this puts additional downward pressure on banks' profits in terms of 
loan volume. In particular, in regions where there is significant decline in population, there 
will be large downward pressure on credit demand reflecting the rapid decrease in the number 
of firms and households. If banks' competition intensifies on the back of shrinking demand 
for credit, this will put further downward pressure on their profits, leading to a reduction in 
net interest income. 
 Of course, demand for financial services is not necessarily reduced by a decline in population 
and  the  number  of  firms.  For  example,  households  are  in  need  of  more  financial  services 
related  to  asset  management  and  inheritance  on  the  back  of  aging  and  longevity.  As  the 
number of elderly households increase, there is greater need for financial services tailored to 
individual situations such as working conditions, family circumstances, health statuses, and 
asset  holdings.  Firms  facing  a  declining  population  need  new  business  opportunities, 
technological  developments,  expanding  service  territory,  and  increasing  overseas  sales.  To 
enable these developments, demands will increase for such financial services as consulting 
and support for mergers and acquisitions. In addition, the digitalization of financial services 
has the potential to expand the frontiers of banking business in many ways.  
 On the other hand, if banks are no longer able to keep up with technological innovations and 
the  changing  demands  of  households  and  firms,  a  declining  population  could  lead  to  a 
reduction in banks' profit opportunities. Banking business requires large fixed costs for the 
maintenance  of  branch  networks  and  information  technology  systems.  Therefore,  if  profit 
 3 
opportunities shrink as the population declines, the over-head ratio (OHR) increases and cost 
reduction and further consolidation may become necessary to survive.  
 In any case, adaptation to the new environment will proceed gradually across the  financial 
industry as a whole, since population decline and the aging of society occurs over a period of 
twenty  to  thirty  years.  We  need  to  evaluate  the  impact  of  demographic  changes  on  the 
financial  system  from  a  variety  of  perspectives,  such  as  the  provision  of  new  financial 
services, utilization of technological innovation, and progress in consolidation. 
 Regarding financial stability, possible changes in the risk appetite and risk profile of banks, 
amid a persistent low interest rate environment, is an issue that we central banks are highly 
attentive  to.  In  the long  term,  even  under  a  low interest  rate  environment,  securing  banks' 
profitability will depend on whether banks can provide new financial services and expand 
sources  of  profits,  how  technological  progress  affects  the  financial  industry,  and  how 
consolidation of the industry proceeds, including cooperation with non-banking financial or 
non-financial sectors.  
 In the short term, as downward pressure on banks' profits continues, we need to be mindful of 
the  possible  consequences  of  banks'  engagement  in  excessive  risk  taking.  Generally 
speaking, risk taking by banks that have abundant capital bases provides financial support to 
firms'  production  activities,  thereby  contributing  to  economic  expansion.  Nevertheless,  if 
appropriate  risk  management  measures  are  not  taken  and  the  continued  decline  in  profits 
leads  to  insufficient  capital  bases,  credit  costs  could  rise  sharply,  and  the  stability  of  the 
financial system could be threatened in the event of a large exogenous shock that leads to an 
economic downturn. 
 The Bank of Japan publishes the Financial System Report semiannually, in which it assesses 
the  stability  of  financial  system  and  makes  various  analyses  from  a  macroprudential 
perspective. In the latest Report published in October, the Bank assessed that Japan's financial 
system has been maintaining stability on the whole, as financial institutions generally have 
strong resilience, in terms of both capital and liquidity, during potential tail events such as the 
Lehman shock. However, regional banks' core profitability has continued to decrease amid 
 4 
both the prolonged low interest rate environment and the persistent decline in the population 
and the number of firms, and their capital adequacy ratios have also gradually decreased. We 
should be mindful of the possible consequences, including any downward pressure on the real 
economy from the financial system, since financial institutions tend to become more cautious 
in their risk taking if their capital adequacy ratios fall substantially or they continue to register 
net losses in the event of stress. 
 III. Impact on the Non-Banking Sector 
Next,  let  me  turn  to  the  non-banking  financial  sector.  Although  the  activities  of  the 
non-banking sector and the associated risks vary across countries and industries, such sector 
tends  to  play  greater  role  in  financial  intermediation  in  many  advanced  economies.  This 
comes against the backdrop of a tightening of regulations on the banking sector, a prolonged 
low interest rate environment, and diversified demand for financial services. For example, in 
some  countries,  demand  for  health  and  long-term  care  insurance  is  expected  to  increase 
significantly as the population ages. 
 As the activity of the non-banking sector expands, the risks they carry may also change. We 
should  be  particularly  mindful  of  the  risks  in  this sector,  posed  by  the  decreasing  trend  of 
interest  rates  amid  a  declining  and  aging  population.  If  a  low  interest  rate  environment 
persists, investors tend to become more active in searching for higher yields on assets. This 
leads non-banking investors to make riskier loans and invest in riskier financial products. If 
such  behavior  becomes  widespread,  they  could  lead  to  threatening  the  stability  of  the 
financial system. 
 Amid the increase in demand for insurance and pension products, financial intermediation by 
asset  management  companies  has  expanded  in  recent  years.  This  basically  diversifies  the 
channels of financial intermediation and facilitates efficient allocation of funds. However, it 
could also lead to complex changes in the risk propagation process under a stressed financial 
environment  and  in  responses  to  emergency  situations.  For  instance,  asset  management 
companies tend to adopt similar investment strategies. Therefore, their investments may carry 
the  risk  of  fire  sales  that  could  cause  asset  prices  to  collapse  to  levels  far  below  their 
 5 
fundamentals when a negative shock occurs.  For the same reason, there is also the risk of 
drying up of liquidity in the markets.  
 As a result of the financial regulation reforms after the Lehman shock, the banking sector has 
indeed become more resilient in terms of both capital and liquidity. Nevertheless, there are 
several  issues that  still  need  to  be addressed  in order  to  make the  global  financial  system, 
including the non-banking sector, more resilient. 
 IV. Households' Needs for Financial Services 
In a low interest rate environment, households also tend to become more active in searching 
for  higher  yields  on  assets,  and  their  engagement  in  risk  taking  may  affect  the  financial 
system  in  multifaceted  ways  through  diversified  financial  services.  Compared  with  other 
countries,  households  in  Japan  have  a  strong  tendency  to  favor  safe  assets,  and  even  in  a 
prolonged  low  interest  rate  environment,  a  large  proportion  of  household  financial  assets 
continue  to  be  deposits.  In  Japan,  however,  the  elderly  hold  more  stocks  than  younger 
people.4 Also,  some  people  seem  to  begin  investing  in  stocks  after  retirement.  Attention 
needs to be paid to possible changes in household asset allocation as aging continues. 
 Another important issue in providing financial services to the elderly is the issue of physical 
weakening and cognitive decline. In general, the elderly are prone to become more vulnerable 
to financial fraud, and the number of elderly people having difficulty in accessing financial 
services and making financial decisions is on an increasing trend. All financial institutions, 
whether  in  the  banking  or  non-banking  sector,  as  well  as  the  authorities,  are  facing  this 
challenge and trying to address it. 
                                                         
4 Fujiki et al. (2012) suggest that elderly households in Japan tend to have more stocks than younger 
households  mainly  because  elderly  households  have  on  average  more  financial  assets,  while  the 
effects of age per se play a relatively minor role. 
Fujiki, H., N. Hirakata, and E. Shioji "Aging and Household Stockholdings: Evidence from Japanese 
Household  Survey  Data,"  IMES  Discussion  Paper  No.  2012-E-17,  Institute  for  Monetary  and 
Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, 2012. 
 6 
Concluding Remarks 
I  have  talked about  the impact  of  a  declining  and aging  population  on  the  financial  sector 
today. The wave of population aging is already sweeping through many advanced and some 
emerging  market  economies.  Even  in  other  emerging  and  developing  economies  with  an 
increasing young working-age population, they will likely be faced with the problem of aging 
in  the  future.  It  will  be  increasingly  important  for  financial  authorities  and  financial 
institutions  in  many  countries  to  share  their  knowledge  and  cooperate  in  tackling  these 
challenges.  
 Let's take an example of the search-for-yield behaviors mentioned earlier. In countries with 
low interest rates amid population aging, financial institutions increase loans to and securities 
investment in emerging economies that offer relatively higher yields. While these kinds of 
capital  flows  could  mitigate  the  negative  impact  of  population  aging,  they  may  carry  new 
risks  to  global  financial  stability.  To  address  these risks,  stepping  up  dialogues  among  the 
financial authorities of the countries concerned will be of great benefit. 
 Concerning the financial sector, financial services and business models need to accommodate 
various  changes,  including  declining  and  aging  population.  At  the  same  time,  subsequent 
changes in the risk profiles of financial institutions also need to be considered. The Bank of 
Japan,  while  keeping  up  with  these  changes,  will  contribute  to  ensuring  the  soundness  of 
financial institutions so that better financial services are provided to firms and households in a 
stable manner, in cooperation with the various authorities and parties concerned making use 
of opportunities such as international meetings. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
  7 
