Øystein  Olsen:  Launch  of  the  new  50-krone  and  500-krone
banknotes
Speech by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at RS Noatun,
Horten, 18 October 2018.
 More information on the banknotes are available on Norges Bank's website.
Good  morning.  It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  in  Horten  and  Noatun  to  mark  this  important
occasion for Norges Bank. On 30 May 2017, we went to Lofoten to launch the new 100-krone
and 200-krone banknotes – the first two denominations in Norway’s new banknote series. Today,
we are in Horten to celebrate the launch of the new 50-krone and 500-krone banknotes.
So why did we choose Horten? This is an easy question to answer. The primary motif of the new
500-krone banknote is a rescue lifeboat. Since its foundation in 1891, the Norwegian Society for
Sea Rescue has saved more than 6 000 lives at sea. Through their tremendous efforts, largely
based  on  volunteer  work,  the  Norwegian  Society  for  Sea  Rescue  has  contributed  to  making
Norway’s coastline safer and more prosperous. Many of the lifeboat crews are trained where we
are today, here at RS Noatun. These crews are on stand-by around the clock to assist people
and vessels along the entire Norwegian coast.
The boat you can see on the front of the 500-krone banknote is the lifeboat RS 14 Stavanger,
launched in 1901. The Stavanger was built not far from here, at Tollerodden in Larvik, and is an
excellent example of the many wooden boats designed by shipbuilder legend Colin Archer. It was
recently  decided  to  return  the Stavanger  to  Tollerodden,  where  it  will  be  one  of  the  main
attractions at a planned Colin Archer Centre.
The sailing performance of Colin Archer’s lifeboats was superior to that of the boats constructed
by his competitors at that time, and they are beautifully designed. If you would like to see what a
real Colin Archer lifeboat looks like, I recommend a trip down to the jetty once the official part of
the  programme  here  at  Noatun  is  over  to  see  the  RS  1 Colin Archer,  which,  thanks  to  the
dedicated efforts of enthusiasts, is still in magnificent condition. Moored next to it is the RS 135
Kaptein E. Nygård, which is stationed here in Horten on a daily basis and which is also open to
visitors.
Personally,  I  am  no  stranger  to  the  sea.  I  have  spent  my  summer  holidays  in  Hvaler  every
summer  since  the  mid-1960s,  and  I  have  thoroughly  enjoyed  sailing  through  the  archipelago,
admittedly at low speed. I always have sea charts and a GPS chart plotter on board and I am
quite  sure  this  is  why  I  have  not  needed  any  assistance  from  the  Norwegian  Society  for  Sea
Rescue so far. However, I greatly respect the Society’s work and what it means for the many
people who sail along our magnificent coast. The fact that you exist makes our lives safer, both
for those of us who are at sea and for those who wait on land for our return.
Bad weather and dark conditions can sometimes make it challenging to navigate at sea, even
with good equipment. From my part of Hvaler, I have a good view of several lighthouses.Even
though  navigation  systems  are  becoming  increasingly  automated,  many  of  the  lighthouses  in
Norway serve an important function, both as a landmark and as a symbol of a coastal culture
that a great many Norwegians hold dear.
Norges  Bank  has  chosen  one  of  these  lighthouses  as  the  primary  motif  on  the  50-krone
banknote. Utvær lighthouse is located west of the mouth of Sognefjord, at what is considered to
be Norway’s westernmost point. It was built in 1900, towers 45 metres high, and the beacon,
whose light you can perhaps make out on the reverse side of the 50-krone note, has a range of
1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
19 nautical miles. Utvær lighthouse is considered to be one of the main lighthouses in western
Norway and was manned until as recently as 2004. It is now fully automated, but the lighthouse
and its keeper’s quarters have become a popular destination to visit.
for  maritime
The  Norwegian  Coastal  Administration  (NCA)  has  primary  responsibility 
infrastructure in Norway, ranging from lighthouses, seamarks and fairways, to pilot services and
fishing  ports.  The  NCA  also  has  a  very  important  role  in  the  prevention  of  pollution  and
emergency  response  in  the  event  of  spillages.  The  NCA  head  office’s  Department  for
Emergency Response is located here in Horten.
We at Norges Bank are very proud of the new banknote series – primarily because they are the
most secure banknotes we have ever issued, but also because we are very pleased with the
choice  of  motifs  and  theme.  The  new  banknotes  represent  quite  a  significant  break  with
Norwegian  banknote  tradition.  For  the  first  time  since  the  Norwegian  krone  was  introduced  in
1875, Norwegian banknotes do not feature the portraits of well-known people. This time we have
chosen a different type of motif, but a motif that has one thing in common with portraits: binding
Norway together as a nation.
The sea, which is the theme of the new banknote series, influences our country in many different
ways. The Norwegian people live by the sea and use the sea both as a transport artery and for
recreation. The sea is a source of well-being, welfare and prosperity. On the reverse side of the
500-krone banknote, the faint outline of an oil platform can be seen, symbolising an industry that
has helped to raise the level of prosperity in Norway in recent decades. But the sea was also
important before the oil age. Cod, shown on the new 200-krone banknote, has been one of our
most important export products for centuries and still is today. The sea and what the sea gives
us has been part of the economic base for everyone who has settled along the Norwegian coast.
Lighthouses, seamarks and lifeboats have made the lives of seafarers safer, but they have also
helped to improve the prosperity of those who live near the coast. The first lifeboats, such as the
RS 14 Stavanger, did not stay in port and wait for the alarm to sound. The lifeboats accompanied
the fishing fleet out to sea, ready to respond in the event of a storm. Sometimes it was a question
of  life  or  death  and  lifeboat  crews  rescued  people  in  danger  of  drowning,  while  at  others  the
lifeboats were just needed to tow in a group of boats to calmer waters where they could be safe
until the storm blew over. Because of the lifeboats, fishermen were able to stay out at sea longer,
boosting their earnings and their ability to provide for their families.
It is almost a year and a half since we launched the first two denominations in the new banknote
series. The new 100-krone and 200-krone banknotes seem to have been well-received, and their
production  and  distribution  and  the  exchange  of  old  banknotes  have  been  on  schedule.  I  am
confident that the launch of the next two denominations will proceed just as smoothly. As I have
touched upon, the main purpose of the banknote project is to have banknotes that are even more
secure  than  previous  banknote  series.  Leif  Veggum,  director  of  Norges  Bank’s  Cashier’s
Department, is soon going to tell us about the security features that make the banknotes almost
impossible to counterfeit. However, if these features are to work as intended, it is important that,
as users, we should familiarise ourselves with them. If you feel that you need to brush up your
knowledge, I would encourage you to visit Norge  Bank’s  webpage newnotes.no,  Norge  Bank’s
Facebook page or order the banknote brochure from Norges Bank.
You  will  still  be  able  to  use  the  old  50-krone  and  500-krone  banknotes  for  one  year  after  the
launch of the new banknotes, ie until 18 October 2019. So use your old banknotes when you are
out shopping or take them to your bank well before the deadline to help make the withdrawal of
the old banknotes as smooth and efficient as possible.
Good luck with the new banknotes!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
