Gent Sejko: Commencement address for economics graduates at
University of Tirana
Commencement address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the graduation
ceremony of the students of economics, University of Tirana, Tirana, 7 October 2018.
 Honourable Prof. Kule,
Distinguished members of the faculty,
Dear family and friends,
Most importantly dear students,
It is a privilege for me to be present today in this youthful and meaningful graduation ceremony.
Today, you, your families and your professors at the Faculty of Economics have earned the right
to  proud  for  this  milestone  achievement.  I  take  this  opportunity  to  extend  my  most  sincere
congratulations to all of you for the successful completion of your university studies. 
This moment marks an important transition in your life. You leave the university auditoriums to
enter another reality, far different from the one you have experienced till now. From tomorrow,
you will face a new dimension of the human reality, a rather dynamic and complex one. As you
embark on a new journey, remember that life has many stations. Every time you reach one of
them, the next one might be even more challenging. It is part of the journey. 
Remember, building a successful career takes time, hard work and perseverance. My advice is
to  make  the  first  steps  with  the  energy  and  enthusiasm  that  characterise  your  age.    Be
courageously  free  of  any  complexity  and  non-based  hesitation!  Pass  through  your  positive
energy whenever you are: in family, work, friends and daily relations with your colleagues. Show
consistent and cultured behaviour, as well as respect for the law, codes and traditions! Embrace
innovation and fight to make a reality any dream that inspires human love, prosperity, integrity
and understanding. Be loyal and collaborative, and never ever give up on learning and education,
for whatsoever reason. 
Nowadays, the society is facing many social, cultural, scientific, technological, demographic and
geographical changes. The ability to adapt continuously and anticipate these developments is not
simply a challenge of today. It shows the need to be constantly in touch with knowledge, new
scientific novelties, innovation, and various theoretical trends and their application. Therefore, I
strongly encourage you to never break up with knowledge and education. 
Be assured that, wherever you may be, in Albania or abroad, education will always pay you back
the energy and time you have spent. Personally, I consider it as an important pillar, which helps
over time to shape a reputable, respected and broadly accepted figure by the public opinion. 
Dear students,
Today is the day to celebrate for this achievement. Today is the day to feel proud. Your dream to
successfully complete your studies has come true.  Now, many opportunities and alternatives
await you.  Be courageous and wise to make your choice.  Wherever you are, whether in the
public  or  the  private  sector,  in Albania  or  abroad,  I  urge  you  to  show  integrity,  optimism  and
determination. 
I have only one piece of advice to everyone:
Never give up! Live your life with courage and self-confidence! Time rewards those who dream
big and dare to see beyond tomorrow.  This is the right way to build a better society, capable to
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
generate prosperity for the future generations.   Renounce the ambitions for a fast track to an
undeserved career.  It is a path that leads to a dead end. Life is a journey of many unknown
things and I assure you that in the long run, those that stand out for their professional ability,
devotion and respect of human values, shine bright on the life’s journey.
Concluding, I wish you once again every success and all the best in future endeavours.
Congratulations!
  2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
