  Keynote address by Daniel Mminele, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the Bloomberg FX’18 Johannesburg: South Africa Economy in Focus event   
 Johannesburg 
28 November 2018 
 Recent developments in emerging economies’ foreign exchange markets  
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. 
 This year has certainly been another challenging one for the foreign exchange (FX) 
market.  
 The  emerging  market  (EM)  currency  complex  has  just  emerged  from  one  of  the 
steepest corrections since the taper tantrum of 2013. Some of the worst-hit currencies 
have  recovered  from  their  year-to-date  lows,  including  the  Argentine  peso,  the 
Brazilian real, the Turkish lira, and the South African rand. But the broader EM basket, 
as measured by the JP Morgan Emerging Market Currency Index, remains close to its 
lowest levels on record.  
 As we enter the final weeks of this year,  it seems apt to reflect, and to share some 
perspectives on recent developments in EM FX markets, including developments in 
the local foreign exchange market. I will also touch briefly on some of the initiatives 
that  have  been  undertaken  to  improve  governance  in  the  domestic  FX  market.  But 
before I share my  pearls of wisdom with you, let me remind you what  one Winston 
Churchhill said in the House of Commons, on 29 September 1949: 
 “There is no sphere of human thought in which it is easier to show superficial 
cleverness  and  the  appearance  of  superior  wisdom  than  in  discussing 
questions of currency and exchange.” 
  Page 1 of 8 
Or the famous words of former Fed Chairman, Alan Greenspan, who in 2004 observed 
that  “Nonetheless,  despite  extensive  efforts  on  the  part  of  analysts,  to  my 
knowledge,  no  model  projecting  directional  movements  in  exchange  rates  is 
significantly superior to tossing  a coin. I am aware that of the thousands who 
try, some are quite successful. So are winners of coin-tossing contests”. 
 Recent developments in EM FX  
 So far this year, the JP Morgan EM Currency Index has declined by more than 10%, 
and losses among the major EM currencies have ranged between a tenth of a per cent 
(Hong Kong dollar) and 49% (Argentine peso). This is the first year since 2015 that 
EM currencies as a group have depreciated by this much on a cumulative basis.  
 A  number  of  factors  contributed  to  the  recent  sell-off.  The  most  important  one  was 
probably  the  tightening  in  global  financial  conditions.  Much  has  already  been  said 
about global policy tightening so I will not add to the debate here. But to paraphrase 
Warren Buffett,  the tightening of global financial conditions  was synonymous  with a 
tide that receded and revealed who was swimming naked. Without pointing fingers, if 
you consider who has weak policy and institutional frameworks, and who has not done 
their  homework  in  the  area  of  structural  reform  implementation,  and  enhancing 
resilience, it will become clear who was found to be swimming naked.  
 The EM FX weakness in 2018 can also be attributed to the strengthening of the dollar 
on improved macroeconomic performance in the United States (US), more signs that 
the  synchronised  recovery  in  the  global  economy  was  fragmenting,  geopolitical 
events, including  sanctions on Iran and Russia, which also contributed to higher oil 
prices. 
 Another factor that contributed to the sell-off was the growing trade tensions between 
the US and its major trading partners, and the subsequent imposition of tariffs, which 
threaten  global  economic  and  financial  integration.  Besides  the  possible  negative 
impact  on  global  trade  and  economic  growth,  this  situation  also  has  negative 
consequences for business and financial market sentiment. This, in turn, could further 
undermine investment and international trade, ultimately lowering global productivity 
 Page 2 of 8 
levels  by  disrupting  global  supply  chains  and  slowing  the  development  of  new 
technology.  
 The fact that growth in China, the world’s second-largest economy, is already slowing 
down on the back of structural reforms makes the possible consequences of the trade 
war  particularly  concerning  for  EMs.  Signs  of  an  adverse  impact  on  the  global 
economy through a further weakening in demand from China for commodities such as 
metals and other raw materials could weigh further on commodity prices and therefore 
on export-oriented countries.  
 Policymakers  need  to  tackle  all  these  developments  through  a  multilateral,  rules-
based and coordinated approach. History has shown time and again that there are no 
winners in trade wars.   
 The depreciation of EM currencies, which  had  started  in April, worsened during the 
third quarter of the year. And as it worsened, much of the market commentary claimed 
that this was a highly correlated sell-off, despite the long-standing realisation that EMs, 
as an asset class, are not homogeneous.  
 In times like these, it becomes harder for some investors to ignore the risk of contagion 
in  EMs.  In  fact,  at  the  height  of  the  sell-off,  an  opinion  piece  was  published  on  the 
Bloomberg platform titled ‘We may be facing a textbook emerging market crisis’.1 The 
article  expressed  the view  that, given the fundamental problems in EMs  in general, 
EMs as an asset class were likely to come under pressure. Weakening currencies, it 
was feared, would drive foreign investors away, hurting all assets.2 Much to our relief, 
these fears did not materialise.   
 Despite this, our conversations with global and local investors reiterated the view that 
differentiation,  informed  by  a  top-down  assessment  of  the  overall  economic 
environment  in  EMs,  had  increased  over  the  years.  This  appears  to  suggest  that 
investors were increasingly reassessing their investments in EMs on a selective basis. 
We have also found evidence to suggest that the distribution of performance this year 
across the EM FX complex was one of the most differentiated sell-offs since the global 
                                                           
1 Bloomberg, ‘We may be facing textbook emerging crisis’, Satyajit Das, 3 September 2018 
2 Ibid 
 Page 3 of 8 
financial  crisis.3  However,  as  idiosyncratic  and  geopolitical  risks  became  more 
prevalent, market players also started to consider the ‘tail risk’ of a more generalised 
risk asset sell-off.  
 Notably, EMs with higher external debt and current account deficits, coupled with high 
sensitivity to monetary policy normalisation in the US, witnessed severe market losses. 
By contrast, EMs in Asia showed more resilience to the recent market turmoil, which 
is  being  attributed  to  their  relatively  sound  economic  fundamentals  as  well  as  solid 
external balances.  
 In this volatile environment, policy actions by monetary authorities varied, depending 
on  their  mandates,  their  level  of  independence,  and  how  their  economies  were 
affected  by  the  recent  economic  and  financial  developments.  The  central  bank  of 
Argentina increased the benchmark policy rate to 60% and  sold significant amounts 
of FX reserves to stabilise the peso. In addition, the Argentinian government unveiled 
austerity measures and secured a bailout facility with the International Monetary Fund. 
The central bank of Turkey, in turn, increased its policy rate to 24% and implemented 
other measures to stabilise the exchange rate of the lira. 
 Recent developments in the rand exchange rate 
 Similar to other EM currencies, the rand depreciated against the US dollar for most of 
the year. According to Bloomberg, the  local currency depreciated by  28% from late 
February  to  early  September,  ‘peaking’  at  R15.70  to  the  dollar  on  4 September. 
Despite  the  fact  that  there  were  no  events  unique  to  South  Africa  that  could  have 
triggered  weakness  of  such  magnitude,  the  local  unit  ranked  among  the  worst-
performing EM currencies during that period. Many reasons have been put forward for 
why this was the case, such as the fact that the rand is a high-beta currency and is 
used as a proxy hedge for other EM currencies. But attention also needs to be drawn 
to  the  starting  point  of  the  depreciation,  as  the  rand  had  appreciated  significantly 
towards the end of last year, and in early 2018, on the back of improved perceptions 
                                                           
3 This view is informed by our study of EM FX return statistics such as skewness of returns, 
differences between average and median returns, as well as differences in average returns of 
different quartile ranges. 
 Page 4 of 8 
around domestic political risks. This resulted in portfolio inflows which contributed to 
the relative strength of the rand.  
 According to data from the Johannesburg Stock Exchange, non-residents purchased 
R48.4 billion worth of bonds and equities during the first quarter of this year. However, 
in the second quarter, non-residents sold R85 billion worth of bonds and equites as 
expectations for global financial conditions tightening increased and risky assets came 
under pressure. The vast majority of this selling was in government bonds. The selling 
of South African financial assets continued in the third quarter, with R62.5 billion worth 
of bonds and equities being sold. But more recently we have seen some slowdown of 
outflows and some resumption of inflows. This contributed to the rand recovering some 
of its losses, to the current level of R13.9 against the US currency, although this still 
represents an 11.6% depreciation since the beginning of the year.  
 The rand also weakened on a trade-weighted basis, and its real effective exchange 
rate  declined  below  its  long-term  average.  According  to  the  SARB’s  equilibrium 
exchange rate model, the real effective exchange rate of the rand moved from being 
overvalued  at the beginning of the year to currently finding itself at an undervalued 
level. The forecast presented to the MPC at its meeting last week showed the implied 
starting point for the rand against the US Dollar at R14.50. According to the Quarterly 
Projection Model, this undervaluation is expected to persist through 2019, as the local 
currency is expected to only gradually revert to its equilibrium level.  
 2018 has also seen a significant pick up in  volatility with the 3-month option implied 
volatility for the rand rising  from 11.8 per cent in April to peak at a level of 23.6 per 
cent on 5 September before receding to the current level of around 16.7 per cent. This 
has gone along with reduced turnover in the South African FX markets, which saw the 
total average daily turnover in the rand market reducing from an average of US$12.5 
billion in 2017 to an average of US$9.9 billion in the first 10 months of 2018, caused 
mainly  by  lesser  activity  by  non-residents  and  thus  partly  reflecting  risk-aversion 
towards emerging markets. 
 What the future holds remains uncertain. The continued tightening in global financial 
conditions, a change in investor sentiment towards EMs, escalating trade conflicts and 
geo-political  developments,  together  with  some  idiosyncratic  risks,  remain  the  key 
 Page 5 of 8 
risks  to  the  local  currency.  As  such,  it  is  likely  that  the  rand,  along  with  other  EM 
currencies, will remain volatile.  
 As  a  consequence  of  the  recent  volatility,  exchange  rate  forecasts  remain  widely 
dispersed. Between this quarter and the third quarter of 2019, the exchange rate of 
the  rand  is  expected  to  average  R14.50  to  the  US  dollar  –  this  is  according  to 
Bloomberg median forecasts.4 However, the difference between the  most optimistic 
and the most pessimistic survey participants on the exchange rate forecast for the first 
quarter  of  2019  is  almost  R3.00  –  I have  little  doubt  that  one  of  the  participants 
somewhere  within  that  range  will  be  correct!  Such  a  wide  dispersion  around  the 
median forecast over such a short forecast horizon is representative of the uncertainty 
that has become  an  inherent  part  of  our  lives.  And  this  uncertainty  adds  significant 
complexity  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  the  most  recent  outcome  of  our 
monetary policy meeting and the finely balanced decision being a good case in point. 
 As regards the exchange rate and monetary policy, allow me to reiterate that forward-
looking and medium-term oriented monetary policy within a flexible inflation targeting 
framework,  requires  us  to  look  through  volatility  and  to  focus  on  macroeconomic 
fundamentals, as we stated in our most recent Monetary Policy Review.  In this vein, 
we will continue to allow the exchange rate to absorb the initial shocks, and focus our 
policy  actions  on  addressing  second-round  price  effects,  much  as  at  times  it  can 
become difficult to distinguish first and second round effects in the wake of extended 
or multiple supply side shocks. However, it is important that policy decisions should 
not be informed by short-run market developments in either direction.    
 Before I conclude, let me briefly touch on some initiatives to strengthen governance 
issues in the domestic FX market.  
 The South African Foreign Exchange Committee 
 During the past year, we have made further progress in promoting high ethical and 
professional standards in support of fairness, integrity and thus the reputation of our 
foreign exchange market. 
                                                           
4 Bloomberg median forecast as at 12 November 2018 
 Page 6 of 8 
 Following  the  establishment  of the  Global  Foreign  Exchange  Committee  (GFXC)  in 
2017, of which South Africa is a member, the SARB facilitated the establishment of a 
stand-alone local foreign exchange committee, the South African Foreign Exchange 
Committee  (SAFXC).    This  forum  consists  of  a  wide  range  of  key  professionals 
involved  in  the  domestic  wholesale  FX  market  (including  Authorised  dealers,  the 
interdealer  broker  community,  the  Association  of  Savings  and  Investment  South 
Africa, the Banking Association, and others). Its purpose is aligned to that of the GFXC, 
which  is  to  promote  a  robust,  fair,  liquid,  open  and  appropriately  transparent  FX 
market,  in  which  a  set  of  diverse  participants  is  able  to  transact  confidently  and 
effectively at competitive prices that reflect available information, and in a manner that 
conforms to acceptable standards of behaviour.5 The key activity in giving effect to this 
is providing guidance to the local FX market by endorsing and upholding the FX Global 
Code (Global Code), and encouraging adherence to it. 
 The  SAFXC  has  launched  various  outreach  programmes  aimed  at  creating  public 
awareness and promoting the Code to the broader FX market community. Members 
of  the  SAFXC  have  been  reaching  out  to  their  respective  constituencies  in  the  FX 
market (and  hopefully  to all of you here present), encouraging them to endorse the 
Global Code and commit to it by publishing a Statement of Commitment. To date, all 
the  SAFXC  members  have  endorsed  the  Global  Code  and  have  published  their 
respective  Statements  of  Commitment.  By  way  of  leading  by  example,  since  01 
September  2018  in  its  foreign  exchange  operations,  the  SARB  only  deals  with 
counterparties, both local and offshore, that have endorsed the Global Code through 
the issuance of Statements of Commitment.  
 The outreach programmes by the SAFXC should be viewed as a collaborative initiative 
by  the  public  and  the  private  sectors  aimed  at  strengthening  the  integrity  and 
effectiveness of the domestic wholesale FX market, and should be supported by all of 
us. If your institution is an active participant in the FX market but has not endorsed the 
Global Code yet, I would like to encourage you to review your FX market operation 
practices and align them with the principles of the  Global  Code so that you too are 
able to publish a Statement of Commitment. 
                                                           
5 See https://www.globalfxc.org/  for more detail.  
 Page 7 of 8 
 In conclusion, the road ahead for EMs remains fraught with risks despite the recent 
stabilisation  in  market  sentiment.  The  prospects  of  further  US  monetary  policy 
normalisation,  financial  market  volatility  and  less  certain  global  trade  environment 
coupled with weak economic fundamentals suggest that the EM currencies will remain 
volatile. This will require vigilance and prudent decisions by policy makers.  
  Thank you.  
  Page 8 of 8 
