SPEECH 
   DATE: 
SPEAKER: 
VENUE: 
 
 22 November 2018 
Cecilia Skingsley 
SNS finance panel 
 SVERIGES RIKSBANK 
SE-103 37 Stockholm 
(Brunkebergstorg 11) 
 
Tel +46 8 787 00 00 
Fax +46 8 21 05 31 
registratorn@riksbank.se 
www.riksbank.se 
Considerations for a cashless future1 
Two years have passed since I asked the question of whether the Riksbank should 
issue digital money – the e-krona.2 Since then, we at the Riksbank have started an 
investigation and have been given the opportunity to analyse and discuss the mat-
ter from several different angles. Of course, the need to modernise the money is-
sued by the Riksbank is new and is connected to the increased digitalisation of so-
ciety as a whole. But there are also points in common with older issues such as 
that of which role central government should play on the payment market. 
On 28 September 1900, a crowd of bankers gathered in Stockholm to listen to 
Professor Pontus E. Fahlbeck, a member of the Riksdag (the Swedish parliament). 
The subject of this meeting was the decision by the Riksdag to give the Riksbank 
sole right to issue banknotes in Sweden. As from 1904, the commercial banks’ 
right to issue banknotes would thus come to an end. At the meeting, this reform 
was denounced as unnecessary, inappropriate and even dangerous. It was not 
considered possible for the Riksbank, on its own, to be able to provide the ‘means 
of exchange’ to such an extent as to satisfy the needs of the business sector.3 This 
was a period of great change, when responsibility for financial services was being 
reallocated between the private and public sectors. In retrospect, it was a success 
to change the rather undisciplined issuance of banknotes for a standard set by the 
Riksbank, leaving the private banks free to concentrate upon deposits and lend-
ing. Now, 118 years later, we are facing a similar situation: once again, we are dis-
cussing how the issuance of money is to be organised and how responsibility can 
best be allocated to ensure that our payments are secure and effective. 
Now, as then, opinions are divided over the role the Riksbank should play on the 
payment market. There are those who are positive to the suggestion of an e-
krona and those who are doubtful towards such an initiative from the Riksbank. 
What I would like to communicate today is the insight that, regardless of whether 
or not the Riksbank decides to issue an e-krona, the old order will change. We 
                                                           
1 I would like to thank Hanna Armelius, Marianne Sterner and Calum McDonald for all their help with this speech. 
I would also like to thank my colleagues on the Executive Board of the Riksbank for valuable discussions. Stances 
and any remaining lack of clarity is entirely my own responsibility. 
2 Skingsley, S. (2016). “Should the Riksbank issue e-krona?” Speech at Berns, Stockholm, 16 November. 
3 Fahlbeck, P. E. (1900). “Bankreformen” (the bank reform), Statsvetenskaplig tidskrift, (political science journal) 
vol. 3, no. 5. 
  1 [8] 
   need a broad discussion of what it means when central government’s presence on 
the payment market’s supply side risks disappearing along with cash. Introducing 
an e-krona would entail taking a new step and the consequences of this must be 
analysed carefully. But accepting a situation in which the general public no longer 
has access to any form of central bank money would also be a step into the un-
known. Issuing digital Riksbank money, an e-krona, as a complement to cash 
would be one way of avoiding this situation. The alternative to an e-krona would 
be for central government to intervene with more detailed regulation of the mar-
ket to ensure society’s different interests are met. But this too would have its 
problems, as I shall discuss in more detail. 
The largest and smallest payments: the Riksbank’s role today and in the future 
Traditionally, the Riksbank has been responsible for the underlying system in 
which all payments in Swedish kronor are settled, the RIX system. This system was 
created to manage large-value payments in a highly secure manner. In addition, 
the Riksbank’s banknotes and coins have been used for the very smallest pay-
ments. The payment market is currently undergoing a large number of major 
changes that are affecting both of these ‘systems’.  
As cash usage declines, almost all consumer payments in shops are now made by 
card. This market is completely dominated by Visa and Mastercard and much of 
the infrastructure is located outside Sweden’s borders. Unlike Norway and Den-
mark, Sweden has no card network of its own.  
At the same time, new technology is leading to new, convenient ways of paying 
becoming available, such as the mobile application Swish, for example. In Sweden, 
6.5 million of 10 million inhabitants are connected to Swish. As the rest of society 
becomes digitalised, demand is increasing for digital payments and, above all, for 
rapid payments that can be made in real time. For the Riksbank, this means ad-
justing or complementing the RIX system so that it is able to manage instant pay-
ments in a secure and efficient manner. It is important to ensure that all partici-
pants involved in payments act under equal and equitable rules. At the moment, 
we are busy analysing whether we can take advantage of our European coopera-
tion by joining the European Central Bank’s system for instant payments.4 We are 
aware, however, that this would mean that part of our infrastructure for pay-
ments would thereby end up outside Sweden’s borders and are thus mulling over 
whether some kind of domestic back-up would be needed and over how the e-
krona could be paired with this as a complementary means of payment. This is 
particularly important as we expect instant payments to become increasingly im-
portant in the future. 
The trend towards a cashless society has also continued – a trend that risks leav-
ing Sweden without functioning cash in the near future. My speech two years ago 
was part of a proactive strategy to create different alternative courses of action 
from this trend. As the e-krona is something new, it will take time to analyse and 
perhaps develop such an alternative. This work must therefore be initiated in 
                                                           
4 The Riksbank sent out a consultation over joining TIPS on 5 June 2018. See Consultation on instant payments 
and the Riksbank's role in the payment infrastructure. www.riksbank.se. 
  2 [8] 
   good time, before cash usage has declined to such a point that cash is no longer a 
generally accepted means of payment in Sweden.  
The Riksbank's e-krona project: results and the way forward 
In my speech, I introduced the discussion of the e-krona by asking whether the 
Riksbank should adapt the money we issue to the modern, digital economy. I em-
phasised then that the e-krona should be seen as a complement to cash, which 
was in the process of becoming marginalised. I also pointed out the need of work-
ing in parallel in three areas: investigating the technical possibilities, analysing the 
consequences for, among other things, monetary policy, and reviewing the legal 
issues to which a possible e-krona would give rise.  
After two years, I can say that we have come quite far within all of these areas, 
but also that we still have some way to go until we reach our goal. We have dis-
covered that it would be possible to develop an e-krona using existing technology, 
but we will have to start constructing and testing a finished product to learn more 
and to establish different alternatives for the Riksbank in the future. We have also 
discovered that it is possible to design an e-krona that would not have excessive 
consequences for monetary policy or financial stability.5 On the legal side, we in-
terpret this as meaning we have a mandate to issue a simpler, value-based variant 
of the e-krona that we will develop as a pilot version. We also intend to approach 
the Riksdag to propose legal amendments that will clarify our mandate and make 
it possible to issue an account-based e-krona.  
We need to prepare ourselves for a cashless future 
As regards the rapid rate at which cash usage is declining, the Riksbank Commit-
tee has submitted an interim report with a few proposed measures to brake this 
development.6 The decline in cash usage that we are now witnessing is going too 
fast for certain vulnerable groups who are unable to use digital technology or who 
do not even have access to it. The Riksbank therefore welcomes the proposals 
that the Riksbank Committee has submitted. The Riksbank has been requesting 
protection for cash usage since 2016, when the Payment Accounts Directive was 
introduced. I therefore consider it a welcome step that there is a broad political 
will to speak with a clear voice in this matter and that the legislator intends to in-
crease its influence over this structural transformation so that it is not steered by 
the private sector alone. The Riksbank Inquiry’s proposal, supported by represent-
atives of all parties in the Riksdag, would ensure access to cash. However, as the 
acceptance of cash in commerce is not legally required, the Inquiry’s proposal will 
not ensure that cash will remain usable in society.  
Consequently, even if the measures proposed may help slow down this develop-
ment, I do not think that it will come completely to a halt. Streamlining within the 
banking industry, for example via cashless bank branches, may certainly have re-
                                                           
5 See Armelius, H., Boel, P, Claussen, C. A. and Nessén, M. (2018) “The e-krona and the macro economy” Sveriges 
Riksbank Economic Review no. 3, and Juks, R. (2018) “When a central bank digital currency meets private money: 
effects of an e-krona on banks”. Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review, No. 3. Sveriges Riksbank. 
 
6 See “Secure access to cash”. Interim report from the Riksbank Committee. SOU 2018:42. 
  3 [8] 
   stricted the general public’s ability to use cash, but other factors such as techno-
logical progress, changed consumption patterns and the lack of legal require-
ments forcing traders to accept cash are probably more important.  
For example, in its report “Grundläggande betaltjänster i en digitaliserad framtid 
(Essential payment services in a digitalised future)”7, the Swedish Post and Tele-
com Authority (PTS) writes that “even if the cash infrastructure is maintained and 
cash is available, cash will not necessarily be fully usable in the future”. The most 
recent results of the Riksbank’s survey of payment patterns in Sweden also show 
that the proportion paying in cash is continuing to decrease, while Swish pay-
ments are increasing. So, even if the proposals of the Riksbank Inquiry were to be 
realised, there would be nothing to prevent shops and other establishments from 
refusing to accept cash. Neither is there any way to induce consumers to use cash. 
This development seems to be steered at least as much by demand as by supply.8  
In other words, the tendencies that led us to start our analysis of the e-krona are 
continuing. And neither is the Riksbank alone in analysing this issue. Many other 
central banks are expending resources in investigating digital central bank money 
and a number have already conducted experiments or developed pilot versions.9 
The Riksbank has met with many other central banks, politicians with responsibil-
ity in Sweden and representatives of the private sector. Reactions have varied 
from great enthusiasm to great scepticism. The banking sector in particular often 
argues that an e-krona is not needed and that launching one would be an intru-
sion into the private sector. But the Riksbank’s presence on the market and com-
petition with the private sector’s payment services are actually nothing new.  
When private banknotes were first issued in the 1830s, the Riksbank had already 
been active in the issuance of banknotes for over 100 years.10 The state started 
Postgirot in the mid-1920s to secure a national payment system, over 30 years be-
fore the private banks got started with Bankgirot. History shows that innovative 
capacity in the private sector functions best when it can use state infrastructure 
and clear regulations that develop apace with the possibilities offered by technol-
ogy as a launching pad.11 And, if the payment market is to be privatised com-
pletely, an active decision should be required in this case from the legislator re-
garding choosing such a new direction. It cannot be allowed to just happen.  
Confidence in money is a socio-economic asset 
Since confidence in money among the general public is a public good, there is a 
social benefit in monitoring the development of the payment market. The confi-
dence that has been built up is a kind of social capital and there are many exam-
ples from other countries of how badly it can go when confidence in money is 
lost.  
                                                           
7 PTS-ER-2017:20. 
8 See Erlandsson, F. and Guibourg, G. (2018), “Times are changing and so are payment patterns”, Economic Com-
mentary No. 6, Sveriges Riksbank. 
9 See the Riksbank’s e-krona project report 2 for more information. 
10 See Söderberg, G. (2018), “Why did the Riksbank receive a banknote monopoly?” Sveriges Riksbank Economic 
Review, No. 3. 
11 This relationship is also pointed out in Carney, M. (2018) “New economy, new finance, new bank”. Speech pub-
lished 21 June. Bank of England. 
  4 [8] 
   Theoretically, it is often assumed that the possibility of converting private bank 
money into secure central bank money is a basic precondition for maintaining 
confidence in privately issued money.12 Above all in times of financial unease, 
problems can arise when confidence in the private banks’ money can rapidly col-
lapse. The question is what happens in a financial crisis if confidence in the entire 
banking sector sinks. Would there be problems if, in the future, it became impos-
sible to switch from commercial bank money to central bank money?  
Issuing an e-krona is sometimes described as something revolutionary and, in 
principle, I share this opinion. However, how revolutionary it will be depends, to a 
great extent, on how the e-krona is designed. If it were to be approximately the 
same as cash but stored in a card or another physical unit, the consequences for 
the payment market, monetary policy and the financial system would generally be 
minor. The more popular the e-krona were to become, the greater the conse-
quences would be, of course: greater competition with depositing in banks and 
greater risks for the Riksbank’s balance sheet, for example. Careful analysis and 
calibration is therefore required here. It is also therefore wise to proceed with 
caution.  
At the same time, we must stand prepared with a state solution if cash becomes 
completely marginalised, which could happen quickly.13 Judicious government in-
tervention in the payment market cannot be consigned to history. In my opinion, 
the presence of the state will also be needed in the future to allow us to manage 
the different problems that could arise if state-issued means of payment (bank-
notes and coins) were to vanish entirely from the payment market. 
The alternative to the e-krona, increased regulation, could be difficult and ex-
pensive 
One conceivable alternative to the introduction of an e-krona would be for central 
government to intervene with increased regulation of the payment market to en-
sure safeguard objectives that private agents may not see as important but which 
are important for society. These include objectives such as general accessibility, 
resilience and innovative capacity. However, achieving both efficiency and secu-
rity via regulation on a market like the payment market may be complicated. Al-
low me to explain why. In general, we usually consider competition to be good for 
achieving cost-effectiveness and innovation on a market. However, this does not 
apply to all types of market. In economics, we talk about ‘natural monopolies’. 
These arise on markets where major investments in infrastructure are needed and 
where the cost of serving an additional customer is low. A common example of 
such a market is the water system, where large investments are needed to lay wa-
ter pipes and extend sewage systems. It would not be efficient to have two differ-
ent companies digging up the streets and competing to supply water. In addition, 
once a system is in place, it is difficult for a competitor to enter the market and 
thus a monopoly arises. 
                                                           
12 See, for example, Tobin, J. (1985). ”Financial innovation and deregulation in perspective”. Keynote paper pre-
sented at Bank of Japan and BIS, CPSS (2003) “The role of central bank money in payment systems”.  
13 Arvidsson, N., Hedman, J. and Segendorf, B. (2018) ”När slutar svenska handlare acceptera kontanter?” (When 
will Swedish retailers stop accepting cash?) Swedish Retail and Wholesale Council research report, 2018:1. 
  5 [8] 
   On the payment market, we have what is basically a similar situation, requiring 
major investments in IT infrastructure, which easily leads to a monopoly situation 
with one dominant company. So far, however, cash has always been available as 
an alternative that restricts the monopoly’s chances of exploiting its power.14  
Often it is central government that is responsible for production on markets with 
natural monopolies, but a private company can also have a monopoly at the same 
time as the state intervenes and regulates prices.15 If the company were allowed 
to set the price itself, excess profits would arise, in addition to which quantities of 
the product would be too small and/or the quality too poor, as in all monopoly sit-
uations. 
On the payment market, there are also economic advantages in the participants 
using the same infrastructure. For the consumer, it is convenient if the same solu-
tion works everywhere the consumer makes a payment. We would prefer not to 
need one card for each shop, another for parking, using public transport and so 
on. This means that so-called network effects arise, as the more people who join 
the same system, the better it is for everybody in the system. However, this also 
means that it is difficult to set up normal competition on the market.  
In addition to problems in achieving the right pricing and quantity, there are also 
other aspects that must be considered in the event that the state-issued means of 
payment disappears from the payment market in the future. Social welfare maxi-
misation is a broader goal than private actors’ interest in maximising their profits. 
For example, it is important for central government to achieve a good balance be-
tween socio-economic risks and costs. Central government also takes account of 
factors connected with ensuring accessibility for all groups in society, resilience to 
shocks, preparedness and equal conditions regardless of where in the country us-
ers may live, for example. What I want to say is that it would probably require in-
creased state governance and quite extensive resources to ensure that the private 
market delivered on all these points. What would be required is something that 
needs to be analysed further in parallel with the analysis of the e-krona.  
The alternative to regulation is for the Riksbank to continue to supply a means of 
payment that sets the standard for the country’s means of payment and that also 
exposes the private sector to a certain amount of competitive pressure, just as we 
have done for 350 years.  
Several measures are needed for resilience on the payment market 
The Riksbank also carries out other work than the analysis of the e-krona to safe-
guard the resilience of the payment market. For example, we are working within 
the framework of the Swedish Retail Payments Council to survey the possibilities 
of making card payments and withdrawing cash in an offline situation, which is to 
                                                           
14 See Mancini Griffoli, T., Martinez Peria, M. S., Agur, I., Ari, A., Kiff, J., Popescu, A., and Rochon, C. (2018) “Cast-
ing Light on Central Bank Digital Currency”. IMF Staff Discussion Note. SDN/18/08. 
15 It may, however, be difficult to know what the right price is in such a market. Theoretically, an efficient market 
is considered to be one in which no company makes excess profits. The price of one product should approxi-
mately reflect the cost of producing one more product, known as the marginal cost. But if the price were to re-
flect the marginal cost, the company would make a loss in these special markets. In normal industries, the mar-
ginal cost normally rises when production encounters bottlenecks. For natural monopolies, fixed costs dominate 
instead, so that a price corresponding to the marginal cost will be too low. 
  6 [8] 
   say when disruptions have made it impossible to check the balance of the account 
or credit to which a card is linked.16 At present, certain cards do not function at all 
in an offline situation, while others do.  
If we were to be impacted by a complete breakdown of both the Internet and tel-
ecommunications, it would not be possible to withdraw cash. Consequently, we 
cannot, at present, rely upon cash being available in a crisis situation. It is possible 
that the e-krona could play a role for Sweden's crisis preparedness. But in any 
case, the Riksbank needs to clarify its role as provider of money in appropriate 
forms in a crisis situation. In the same way as the Riksbank is ‘lender of last resort’ 
for the banking system, we have a responsibility to enable payments in a crisis, to 
be a ‘money provider of last resort’.  
Personal reflections 
Two years of intensive work on the e-krona have now passed and I will be leaving 
the chairmanship of the steering group as the project enters the next phase. It has 
been two incredibly educational years, but I think it is still too early for me to de-
cide whether or not I shall support an e-krona for the general public in the future. 
As has hopefully been clear from my earlier reasoning, this depends on whether it 
emerges that there are better alternatives to guarantee both the security and effi-
ciency of the payment market. And to answer this, the analysis needs to continue. 
At the Riksbank, we will work in two parallel tracks: partly, we will develop the pi-
lot version of a simpler form of the e-krona and learn the lessons that may be 
needed if it turns out that an e-krona is to be issued. And partly we will deepen 
our analysis of the consequences for Sweden if the payment market should be-
come entirely privatised. In collaboration with other parties in society, we need to 
discuss which characteristics should be prioritised for an e-krona and make cost-
benefit analyses of various alternative solutions to the problems we see that the 
e-krona could solve. For example, if we conclude that the e-krona is needed for 
contingency purposes, this may lead to characteristics such as offline functions 
being prioritised, while other characteristics may be prioritised if other aspects 
turn out to be more important.  
As the payment market is an infrastructure that is fundamental for Sweden’s 
economy to function, questions of this type must ultimately be determined by our 
legislators in the Riksdag. In our talks with agencies that make state disburse-
ments, we have noticed that these could be rationalised with the help of an e-
krona. It is possible that the best route would be to build the e-krona together 
with others. The Riksbank also intends to review the legislative amendments that 
may need to be implemented to provide us with a clear mandate in the issue.  
If the e-krona is to be realised, I believe that the best solution would be for the 
Riksbank to provide the e-krona via our balance sheet but that the private sector 
then be involved in its distribution. Private companies are better at handling cus-
tomer contacts and finding the tailor-made solutions that the general public de-
mands.  
                                                           
16 See Report from the Swedish Retail Payments Council (2018) “A scenario analysis of payments at points of sale 
and withdrawals from ATMs in the event of disruptions to the card systems” Sveriges Riksbank. 
  7 [8] 
   Equipping ourselves for the future 
My speech in 2016 had the heading “Should the Riksbank issue e-krona?” After 
two years of analysis, we now know that the technological possibility exists and 
we know a bit more about how the design of the e-krona can affect the conse-
quences for financial stability and monetary policy. We are also working to ensure 
that the means of payment issued by the Riksbank will have legal support, even in 
a digital future. But it is too early to be able to answer fully the question of 
whether the Riksbank should issue a broader variant of the e-krona to the general 
public. Ultimately, this is a political decision, for which the Riksbank, as an expert 
authority, needs to be prepared to provide advice and suggest solutions. 
By starting the analysis and creating alternative courses of action, we have made 
sure we stand better equipped should cash be marginalised further in the future. 
As Benjamin Franklin famously said: “by failing to prepare, you are preparing to 
fail”.  
  8 [8] 
