Jiří Rusnok: Currency, taxes and other institutes of financial law
Welcome  speech  by  Mr  Jiří  Rusnok,  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the  Currency,
taxes and other institutes of financial law conference, Faculty of Law, Charles University, Prague,
20 September 2018.
Good morning, everyone.
 It is an honour and a pleasure for me to welcome you to today’s conference on the currency,
taxes  and  other  institutes  of  financial  law.  The  100th  anniversary  of  the  foundation  of  the
independent Czechoslovakia is a good opportunity to look back and identify the main features of
our national economic history. As you know, we have been through four periods since 1918 – the
period of political and economic emancipation from Austria-Hungary, the wartime economy, the
era  of  central-planning-based  totalitarian  communism,  and  finally  almost  three  decades  of
democracy and a market economy. So, more than enough has happened in our country over the
last 100 years.
Although these periods could not have been more different, two common features have appeared
in various guises. I would characterise them on the one hand as economic moderation, prudence
and discipline, and on the other as a struggle for economic independence and a willingness and
ability to bear the consequences. Let me give some examples of both.
Czechoslovakia’s founding fathers Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk, Karel Kramář and Alois Rašín were
well aware that nurturing a sound financial environment was crucial to the prosperity of the young
nation. The Czech Lands had been a key industrial and economic part of the former Austria-
Hungary and hence had a relatively well-developed banking sector. An awareness of the close
links  between  government  finances,  the  banking  sector,  firms  and  households  shaped  the
economic policy of the First Czechoslovak Republic.
Karel Engliš worked systematically to balance the budget and deserves most of the credit for
sorting  out  public  finances  in  the  early  1920s.  In  1927  he  submitted  three  tax  laws  that
substantially lowered corporate taxation and supported the creation of capital. At the same time,
though, he tied the tax reform, which led to lower revenues, to cuts in government expenditure
and a streamlining of the civil service. So, Rašín and Engliš established a trinity of traditions in
our country: a stable currency, sound government finances and non-inflationary economic policy.
These traditions became a theoretical, practical and moral legacy for subsequent generations of
economic policymakers.
It  is  unusual  these  days  to  look  back  to  the  communist  period  for  economic  inspiration.  The
socialist  system  was  inefficient  and  cumbersome  and  discouraged  initiative  and  innovation.
Central  planning  by  definition  made  the  system  less  adaptable  to  change  and  created  an
economy of shortage. Despite this, the Czechoslovak version of socialism tried to eliminate the
most  glaring  imbalances  and  preserve  basic  macroeconomic  equilibrium.  Fortunately,  our
central planners didn’t cause any major imbalances in the consumer market in the 1980s, so the
savings surplus wasn’t as large as in other communist countries. Not that I want to defend the
past economic regime in any way, of course, but let’s not forget that it had elements which can
be traced back at least implicitly to the pre-war period.
An  explicit  return  to  the  three  traditions  I  mentioned  is  the  central  feature  of  our  post-1989
economic history. Many of us clearly remember that the liberalisation of prices and foreign trade
in  1991  was  accompanied  by  effective  stabilisation  measures.  These  included  an  appropriate
devaluation  of  the  koruna  against  a  basket  of  currencies  and  the  maintenance  of  balanced
budgets or even slight surpluses. It is therefore no accident that in 1991 inflation was “only” 56%
here, as compared to triple figures in Poland and often quadruple figures in other transforming
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
economies.
The Czech National Bank embraced the legacy of price stability right from its establishment in
1993. The maintenance of a fixed exchange rate until 1997 was a condition for attaining single-
digit inflation and provided a fixed point in the unstable transformation environment. The switch to
inflation  targeting  in  1998  marked  the  start  of  a  roughly  ten-year  transition  to  price  stability
according to the definition long applied in advanced market economies. Maintaining price stability
is not just our constitutional duty, but a long-standing legacy that we proudly embrace.
The second feature of our economic history that I mentioned at the start is an ability to cope with
the  consequences  of  the  struggle  for  economic  independence.  The  currency  separation  –  a
reform implemented by Alois Rašín in 1919 – entered the annals of Czech economic history long
ago. It was aimed at nothing less than separating currency circulation in Czechoslovakia from
that in the other parts of the former Austria-Hungary. I won’t expand on all the ways this bold step
could have gone wrong. I will point out, though, that the way it was done and the way it turned out
are seen as impressive to this day, as the Czechoslovak koruna went on to become one of the
most  stable  currencies  in  Europe.  However,  this  was  due  to  many  other  accompanying
measures,  not  just  the  separation  of  the  currency.  In  other  words,  the  currency  was  only  as
strong as the foundations of the set of economic policies in place at the time.
As you all know, we tried a currency separation again in February 1993. Again we had nothing to
be ashamed of, as not a single drop of blood was shed in the process. Savings started to spill
over from Slovakia into banks in the Czech Republic as soon as the former federation broke up.
The  general  level  of  uncertainty  also  increased,  affecting  the  foreign  exchange  market.  But
despite  all  that,  the  excellent  organisational  preparations  for  this  step,  stared  secretly  in  the
middle of the previous year, allowed the operation to be conducted quickly and efficiently. The
architects of this currency separation deserve great recognition, because everything began to
return to normal soon afterwards and the previous uncertainty quickly faded away. It is no secret
that they were inspired primarily by Rašín’s separation and its success, and they themselves
later  became  a  source  of  inspiration  for  currency  separations  in  other  economies  gaining
independence.
All  this  tells  us  that  the  Czech  nation  is  reasonably  good  at  running  its  own  macroeconomic,
monetary and financial affairs. It has never had to resort to an exchange rate arrangement such
as  a  currency  board,  and  it  has  enjoyed  the  benefits  of  relative  economic  and  monetary
independence. Although at times the exchange rate of the koruna has been a source of domestic
economic volatility, at other times it has done a great job of absorbing external shocks. Until quite
recently, we were also using the koruna exchange rate as an unconventional monetary policy
instrument to help us achieve the inflation target. Our ability to conduct our own monetary policy
successfully is one reason why the Czech Republic is not currently seeking to adopt the euro
any time soon.
To sum up, the past 100 years have not been a series of random economic events. Despite all
the  discontinuities,  there  has  been  some  continuity.  In  the  same  way  that  we  inherit  various
physical and personality traits from our forebears, economists learn their craft from those that
came before them and pave the way for those that come after. I am sure this conference will
bear me out on that.
I wish you an interesting debate. Thank you for listening.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
