Gent  Sejko:  The  need  to  reinforce  understanding  of  economic
developments and their relation to policy
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  12th  SEE
Economic Research Workshop, Tirana, 6 December 2018.
Ladies and Gentlemen!
 It is a great pleasure for me to welcome all of you today to our 12th research workshop. I would
like to express my sincere gratitude to our guests from academia and central banks who for 12
years  have  made  this  workshop  one  of  the  best  and  well-recognized  economic  and  financial
research events in Albania and in the region. Let me also thank all of our distinguished chairs,
speakers and discussants for their engagement here today.
The papers that will be presented and discussed during these 2 days will cover a wide range of
economic  and  financial  issues  that  concern  central  banks.  The  topics  on  monetary  policy,
financial stability, risk and novel methodologies are all very relevant to the daily activity of central
banks and as such are very important to us. The Bank of Albania is involved in decision- making
on all these issues and we provide our active support to it through our research. Along with the
papers that are going to be presented today in the panels, we have also decided to include and
present  in  the  poster  presentations,  tomorrow,  some  of  our  ongoing  projects.  Following  this
workshop, the results of these research works will feed into the decision making process and
help  the  Bank  of Albania  to  make  more  informed  decisions  and  improve  its  models  and  the
efficiency of policy-making. For this reason, I encourage and invite you all to ask questions, to
comment and to assess our work with your opinions and academic proficiency, to challenge our
findings and methodologies.
The  nature  of  our  research  is  undoubtedly  influenced  by  our  main  mission  and  prevailing
concerns. It is for that reason that the majority of our research focuses on monetary policy, price
and  financial  stability,  models  related  to  them  and  the  economic  events  that  affect  them  the
most. Some of the trends that we will discuss today are global and fundamental in nature. They
may not have reached our economies, yet, but they will definitely have a significant impact on our
real economy and financial system in the future. For example, new technologies, such as crypto
currencies, Artificial Intelligence and machine learning, which represent a major challenge, not
only  for  central  banks,  will  have  various  implications  for  monetary  and  financial  stability.
Research related to these new technologies will be beneficial for both advanced and developing
countries.
Unexpected, sometimes new, global or regional events can shock a domestic economy such
that  authorities  need  to  intervene  with  what  they  already  know  and  have  experienced.  It  is
important to understand the short and long-term implications of the adopted policies in these new
environments. The crisis, for  example,  had  a  different  impact  on  the Albanian  economy,  from
what  we  had  historically  experienced. At  the  time,  the Albanian  economy  did  not  seem  to  be
vulnerable  to  the  foreign  sector.  Subsequent  analysis,  however,  showed  that  domestic
imbalances had built and, indeed, made the economy vulnerable to a foreign credibility shock. It
is crucial that research in central banks focus on available information and methodologies, which
scrutinize existing paradigms, making this information useful to policymaking, before it becomes
or leads to vulnerabilities. In light of the financial and human capital constraints faced by central
banks in small, open economies, such as Albania, we believe that it is important for these topics
to  be  discussed,  in  this  workshop,  with  fellow  researchers  from  academia  and  other  central
banks.
I  would  like  to  encourage  our  researchers  to  publish  their  papers  in  relevant,  peer-reviewed
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
journals as the most important certification of their work. This will make your research projects
more useful and facilitate speedy implementation in mainstream policy making. Despite recent
success in publications, one of the things that I hear the most is that there is not much research
interest in the scientific study of small, developing or emerging market economies like Albania.
From my prospective, I think that there is interest in the scientific study of small, developing or
emerging  market  economies  such  as  Albania,  because  of  the  particular  and  distinguishing
characteristics of our economy, which can be different from those represented in mainstream
research findings. Distinguishing features such as shallow and narrow financial markets, limited
number of financial instruments, particular behavioural traits of economic agents and distinctive
economic  and  financial  memories,  can  reveal  non-traditional  behaviour  and  interesting
phenomena  that  do  not  appear  and,  are,  therefore,  not  addressed  in  research  findings  from
developed markets. The identification of these particular characteristics and their implications for
research  findings  might  be  good  enough  to  spark  the  interest  of  economic  journals  and
economic conferences to bring these characteristics to the attention of the research community
and enrich mainstream economic theory.
Just  to  illustrate  a  few  interesting  cases,  I  would  like  to  remind  you  that  the  development  of
economic  and  financial  markets  in  response  to  Bank  of Albania  policies  has  been  weak  and
sometimes  puzzling,  making  it  difficult  to  interpret  using  mainstream  economic  models.  The
desire  for  unhedged  borrowers  to  borrow  in  foreign  currency,  the  reduced  efficiency  of
transmission mechanisms in the presence of central bank credibility, the potential role of informal
and parallel markets and informal economic activity, are some examples of interesting traits of
economic behaviour. Several authors have been intrigued by such developments. Hence, they
have conducted extensive research on these phenomenon in similar emerging and developing
economies, which have later seen the light of publication.
Good examples are found in the research work done by the national bank of Austria (OeNB) on
the level of euroization in the region, with interesting results that have helped authorities but have
also increased the interest of other institutions and academics in euroization issues. In addition,
there are increased concerns about financial and foreign exchange market stability in the event of
a sudden reversal of capital inflows to the regional banking system. Recently dramatic changes
are  occurring  in  the  global  economic  environment,  including  continuing  monetary  policy
normalization by the U.S. Federal Reserve. These changes can potentially impact small, open
economies and must be understood. Research conducted by the central Bank of Italy (BdI) is
another  example  of  research  work,  focused  on  the  region,  providing  an  interesting  regional
perspective  for  euro  area  policymakers  regarding  their  policy  decisions  and  actions.  This
research  has  formally  provided  researched-based  evidence  on  the  implications  of  their  policy
making on the large group of countries in the periphery of the euro area. These are just a few
examples of interesting, useful and publishable research.
This year we have a couple of projects that involve cooperation and joint works between Bank of
Albania researchers and those from other central banks or academia. This is another way to
increase  the  potential  for  publication  and  I  would  encourage  you  to  increase  the  amount  and
scope of cooperation in research with foreign researchers.
To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  reemphasize  that  we  must  enhance  the  overall  efficiency  of  the
transmission  mechanism,  and  the  resilience  of  the  banking  and  financial  systems  so  that
potential and unexpected shocks do not advance to economic or systemic risk. To this end, we
must reinforce our capacities and our understanding of economic and financial developments
and their relation to policy tools, in order to properly respond to potential risks. This may be done
by  improving  our  current  knowledge  of  past  shocks,  development,  and  the  implications  of
potential shocks. Experience has shown that this knowledge is comprehensive only when it is
the result of a rigorous and competent research process. Last but not least, we have to continue
our policy efforts to strengthen the relationship between researchers and policy makers. I believe
that  these  efforts  can  increase  both  from  research  and  from  the  end  users  of  the  research
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
product.
Ladies and Gentlemen!
The  research  papers  to  be  presented  in  this  workshop  reflect  the  serious  thoughts  and
discussions of expert researchers on major issues. These include not only the work of the Bank
of Albania, but also the work done in other central banks and academia. The topics cover a wide
range of very useful issues. I hope that the research presented at today’s workshop will spark
vigorous debate and allow the sharing of diverse opinions that will help each other improve and
strengthen  your  work  form  a  different  perspective.  I  invite  you  all  and  the  Bank  of  Albania’s
researchers  to  use  this  activity  to  learn  something  new,  and  as  a  platform  to  strengthen  the
cooperation for your own and your institutions’ benefit.
I would like to end my speech by wishing you a productive and successful workshop!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
