BOTSWANA STOCK EXCHANGE OPENING BELL CEREMONY 
 Official Remarks 
 by  
 Moses D Pelaelo 
Governor, Bank of Botswana 
 November 1, 2018 
 Distinguished  Guests,  it  is  my  great  pleasure  and  honour  to 
have  been  able  to  accept  the  invitation  from  the  Chief 
Executive  Officer  of  Botswana  Stock  Exchange  Limited 
(BSEL),  Mr  Thapelo  Tsheole,  to  make  a  few  remarks  on  the 
occasion  of  today’s  event,  marking  the  sixth  “Opening  Bell” 
ceremony.  
 Let  me  start  by  acknowledging  the  important  symbolism 
surrounding  the  “opening  bell”  ceremony.  This  refers  to  the 
signal that a stock exchange is open for business. A bell itself 
is  only  used  in  a  few  instances,  notably  in  New  York,  where 
the current practice of ringing the bell at the start and close of 
each  day’s  trading  dates  back  to  1895,  initially  using  a 
Chinese gong.  But the phrase is used more generically across 
exchanges  and,  needless  to  say,  among  financial  journalists. 
The  use  of  a  bell  is,  of  course,  most  appropriate  in  the 
environment, typically hectic, of “open outcry” trading where 
 1 
the  volume  of  the  bell  is  an  effective  means  of  directing 
proceedings.    In  other  words,  the  bell  was  necessary  as  a 
form of regulation, albeit self-regulation. 
 This  traditional  system  of  trading  has  been  largely  overtaken 
by  more  efficient  technologies,  first  by  telephonic  and  then 
electronic  trading  systems.    The  New  York  Stock  Exchange 
still  conducts  a  small  proportion  of  trades  (although  typically 
high-value) through floor traders. In Europe, the famous “ring” 
London  Metal  Exchange  (LME)  remains  a  bastion  of  the 
tradition; although it too has recently been experimenting with 
the use of more modern systems.  
 Director  of  Ceremonies,  the  rapid  advances  in  technology, 
more so in financial services, appears inexorable; indeed, this 
has  long  been  the  case.    Today,  the  power  of  the  internet; 
super computers, social media  and “big data”;  as well as the 
potential  opportunities  offered  by  new  technologies,  such  as 
block  chain,  dominate  financial  news  and  public  discourse. 
But  innovation  and  disruptive  technologies  have  been  a 
recurring  feature  of  progress  and  development  for  centuries. 
For  financial  services,  it  is  progress  in  communications 
technology,  including  the  collation,  storage  and  transfer  of 
information,  that  has  often  been  the  key.    There  are  many 
examples in this regard, including: 
2 
   The  origins  of  iconic  City  of  London  institutions  such  as 
Lloyds  and  the  London  Metal  Exchange  coffee  houses 
where like-minded patrons gathered to share news; 
   “Cable”,  the  colloquial  term  used  by  currency  traders  for 
the  United  States  dollar-sterling  exchange  rate;  it  relates 
to  a  nineteenth  century  undersea  communications  cable 
used  to  transmit  key  financial  information  across  the 
Atlantic Ocean; and 
  American  Express,  the  financial  services  multinational, 
began as an express mail business. 
 Recognising  the  historical  context,  it  should  be  little  surprise 
that  financial  and  communications  regulators  must  in  many 
cases  operate  in  tandem,  while  adopting  smart  and  cost-
effective  ways  to  deal  with  risks.    Today,  given  the  current, 
dizzying, pace of ICT development, it is more crucial than ever 
that  central  banks  and  financial  sector  regulators  are  alive  to 
these trends.  This adds a further dimension to the challenge, 
in  both  developing  and  developed  economies,  of  finding  the 
right  balance  between  being,  on  the  one  hand,  a  prudential 
regulator  and,  on  the  other,  a  facilitator  for  market 
development.  
  3 
The latter goal is something to which the Bank of Botswana is 
unreservedly  committed.    As  I  have  observed  elsewhere, 
informed 
research  has 
repeatedly 
indicated  a  causal 
connection  between  financial  sector  development,  economic 
growth  and  poverty  reduction.    However,  in  many  Sub-
Saharan  African  countries,  Botswana  included,  financial 
systems  remain  mostly  small,  fragmented  and  un-diversified, 
providing  only  limited  services  to  an  exclusive  section  of  the 
population at a relatively high cost. Equally, while Botswana’s 
financial sector is comparable in size to other countries in the 
region;  it  remains  relatively  smaller  and  less  developed 
compared to that of its middle-income peers. 
 Notwithstanding,  during  the  past  ten  years,  Botswana 
financial  sector  has  expanded  rapidly,  both  in  size  and  the 
range  of  services  covered.  In  this  period,  cumulative  growth 
of the financial sector, in real terms, has been almost exactly 
100  percent,  compared  to  52  percent  for  the  economy  as  a 
whole.    A  major  driving  force  in  this  development  has  been 
the  rapid  growth  of  the  domestic  pension  fund  industry. 
Indeed  the  role  played  by  the  financial  sector  in  supporting 
inclusive  and  sustainable  economic  growth  was  the  central 
theme of the 2017 Bank of Botswana Annual Report. 
  4 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  broad  terms,  how 
should  we  go  about  addressing  this  challenge?    Here,  I  start 
by  making  an  obvious,  but  nonetheless  important,  point.    A 
well-functioning,  liquid  and  regulated  market  is  good  for 
development.    It  gives  both  investors  and  consumers 
confidence  that  their  interests  are  protected  in  an  industry 
where information asymmetries remain a chronic problem.  At 
the  same  time,  regulation  can  help  confer  legitimacy  on 
regulated service providers.  
 As  central  bank  Governor,  I  should  also  extend  this  point 
further.    The  sustainable  development  of  financial  markets  is 
supported  by  macroeconomic  and 
financial  stability. 
Botswana  has  been  lauded  for  its  strong  macroeconomic 
environment, a position which was recently reaffirmed by the 
2018  Global  Competitiveness  Index.    The  macroeconomic 
environment  was  the  best  performing  pillar  for  Botswana, 
with  the  country  ranked  first,  globally,  supported  by  a  public 
debt to GDP ratio of 15.6 percent and inflation of just about 3 
percent.    To  further  support  financial  markets  development, 
the  Bank  has  recently  initiated  important  changes  in  the 
communication  of  monetary  policy,  including  the  launch  of 
the inaugural Monetary  Policy  Report  (MPR) on September  9, 
2018  at  National  Business  Conference  in  Francistown.    And 
on  Monday,  this  week,  the  Bank  published  the  second  MPR 
 5 
following the Monetary Policy Committee meeting of October 
22, 2018.   
 But, 
important  as 
these  developments  are,  neither 
observations address the key issue.  That is, how can central 
banks  deal  with 
the  problem 
that,  at  some  point, 
developments 
in 
financial  services 
that  are  otherwise 
legitimate  and  desirable  may  be  held  back,  discouraged,  or 
even  halted  by  over-,  or  outdated,  regulation?    Here,  I  would 
highlight two distinct risks that must be addressed: 
   First,  the  nexus  between  prudence  and  innovation  may 
prove  to  be  a  challenge  and  too  often  financial  sector 
regulators  favour  the  status  quo  which,  in  turn,  almost 
inevitably  works  to  frustrate  radical,  but  beneficial 
innovation. Moreover, this risk may be amplified by lack of 
appreciation for trends in modern technologies; 
   Second,  there  is  also  a  danger  that  the  regulators 
overcompensate  against  this  risk,  by  adopting  too  lax  an 
approach,  and  welcoming  all  kinds  of  start-up  entities  so 
as  not  to  stifle  innovation.    This  may  be  aggravated  in 
cases  where  more  than  one  regulator  has  an  interest,  a 
situation  which  calls  for  greater  collaboration,  proper 
coordination and effective communication. 
6 
 Navigating these risks remains  work in  progress, with central 
banks  across  the  world  adopting  a  wide  variety  of 
approaches.    From  my  perspective  key  elements  of  a  robust 
approach  by  central  banks  should  include  the  following  six 
elements: 
 First:  clear  leadership,  guidance  and  consultation  on  the 
desirable direction for the development of the financial sector, 
including  reforms  to  the  regulatory  environment.    For  this 
reason,  the  Bank  of  Botswana  strongly  advocates  the 
updating of the Financial Sector Development Strategy, which 
is  now  two  years  past  its  end  date  of  2016.    In  terms  of 
consultation,  the  Banking  Committee,  Botswana  Financial 
Markets  Committee  and  the  recently  established  Financial 
Stability Council, provide important channels for consultation. 
 Second:  leadership  through  advocacy  and  by  example.    The 
Bank  is  keenly  aware  that  key  legislation  is  out  of  date  or 
missing.  Regulations  to  support  the  growth  of  electronic 
payments  have  been  finalised,  while  both  the  Bank  of 
Botswana Act and Banking Act are in the process of revision.  
The  Bank 
is  also  providing  strong  support 
for  key 
developmental  initiatives,  including  the  development  of  the 
government  bond  market,  within  the  established  parameters 
of fiscal discipline, both through more active primary issuance 
 7 
and  supporting  the  secondary  market  through  establishment 
of a Central Securities Depository. 
 Third: as I have already indicated, central banks should invest 
time  and 
resources  to  have  necessary  awareness 
in 
developments  in  ICT.    Here,  the  subject  of  distributed  ledger 
technologies  (DLT),  fintechs  and  crypto-assets  comes  to 
mind.   
 Fourth:  where  practicable,  there  should  be  some  scope  for 
easing  the  burden  of  regulations  to  allow  innovations  to  be 
tested.    Here,  a  particularly  promising  approach  is  the  use  of 
so-called  regulatory  “sandboxes”  and  other  proof  of  concept 
frameworks,  adopted  by  many 
jurisdictions 
including 
Singapore,  Indonesia,  Canada  and,  nearer  home,  in  South 
Africa,  where  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  working 
alongside  commercial  banks,  recently  successfully  led  the 
"Khokha"  project  to  test  the  viability  of  DLT  for  processing 
wholesale  interbank  payments.    Such  sandboxes  allow  small-
scale  experiments  under  live  conditions  while  being  exempt 
from  some  legal  requirements  to  keep  down  start-up  costs 
and remove constraints on innovation. 
 Fifth: in scrutinising innovations in financial services, a simple 
five-fold  test  should  be  applied:  is  it  a  solution  to  a  real 
 8 
economic  problem,  in  a  cost-effective  way;  does  it  offer  a 
better  service;  is  it  faster;  does  it  democratise  access 
(improves  financial  inclusion);  and,  are  there  serious  negative 
side  effects?    Many  recent  developments,  notably  the  use  of 
mobile payments systems, would pass these tests with flying 
colours.  In contrast, despite the headlines and the hype they 
generate, the so-called crypto-currencies, such as bitcoin and 
ethereum,  at  least  at  their  present  state  of  development, 
would  fail  on  all  counts.    For  example,  these  crypto  assets 
cannot  serve  as  a  reliable  unit  of  account,  trusted  store  of 
value or universally accepted means of payment. By the way, 
Bitcoin turns 10 today. 
 In  conclusion,  Paul  Volcker,  the  former  Chairman  of  the 
United  States  Federal  Reserve,  once  famously  said  that  the 
ATM  was  the  only  really  useful  financial  innovation  in 
banking.    This  was  undoubtedly  going  too  far:  as  I  have 
already  made  clear,  many  Fintech 
innovations  hold 
tremendous  promise  for  improved  security  and  speed  of 
transactions and, importantly, financial inclusion. But it makes 
the point that central bankers have conservatism, and with it 
scepticism,  ingrained  in  our  DNA.  This  is  how  it  should  be.  
Not least, together with our co-regulators, Non-Bank Financial 
Institutions  Regulatory  Authority,  the  Financial  Intelligence 
Agency and Botswana Communications Regulatory Authority, 
 9 
we  act  and  serve  public  interest;  collectively  and  in  our 
respective  statutory  roles,  are  responsible  for  alleviating 
system-wide  risks  that  are  not  always  so  readily  appreciated 
by  individual  operators.  As  a  case  in  point,  measures  to 
combat money laundering and other forms of financial crimes 
are  undoubtedly  inconvenient  at  the  individual  level.  But  this 
would be nothing compared to the inconveniences that would 
be  experienced  if  international  sanctions  were  imposed 
against  Botswana  for  falling  short  of  the  required  minimum 
standards on anti-money laundering and the combatting of the 
financing of terrorism. 
 That said, central bankers must also do their part to avoid the 
risk  of  what  might  be  termed  “reckless  conservatism”,  and 
embrace opportunities that not only meet customer needs but 
also, in many instances, reduce systemic risks. 
 Chairman  of  BSEL,  Director  of  Ceremonies  and  Distinguished 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you for your kind attention. 
 10 
