Gent  Sejko:  Analysis  of  Albania's  draft  budget  2019  and  public
finances; recommendations
Presentation by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, of Bank of Albania’s opinion on
the  Draft  Budget  2019  to  the  Parliamentary  Committee  on  Economy  and  Finance,  Tirana,  19
November 2018.
Honourable Chair,
Honourable Members of the Committee,
 First of all, thank you for the invitation and the opportunity to present the opinion of the Bank of
Albania on the Draft Budget 2019.
I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  the  drafting  and  approval  of  this  Draft  are  among  the  most
important moments in the economic life of the country. Therefore, we have always welcomed the
constructive and professional discussion on the objectives, policies, instruments and projections,
which, overall combined, determine a Draft Budget.
In compliance with the institutional mandate of the Bank of Albania, our opinion will focus on the
correlation between the performance of the economy and the fiscal policy, as elaborated in the
Draft. Next, I will present our judgement on the impact of the borrowing strategy and public debt
management on the Albanian financial market. Then I will provide an overall analysis of Albania’s
public finances stability indicators. Lastly, I will present some suggestions of the Bank of Albania
for the period ahead.
Honourable Members of the Committee,
Detailing the governing policies in financial terms, the state budget should not be based simply
and solely on the economic and financial reality of a country, but be viewed as an instrument for
improving  it.  Let  me  start  the  presentation  of  Bank  of Albania’s  assessment  on  the  domestic
economic and financial developments and the relevant policies to support them.
1. Fiscal policy and Draft Budget 2019
As we have also emphasized in our public communications, the Bank of Albania judges that the
Albanian economy is set on a positive development trend.    
The  growth  pace  accelerated  in  the  first  three  quarters  of  the  current  year.  In  part,  the  pace
accelerated also as a result of the favourable hydric situation. In addition, employment increased
and the unemployment rate fell, whereas the financial balance sheets of households, enterprises
and the banking sector continue to improve. Likewise, the main indicators of the macroeconomic
balances have improved:
Average inflation approached closer to the target in 2018, despite the negative impact from
the rapid appreciation of the exchange rate;
Current  account  deficit  has  trended  downward,  mainly  as  a  result  of  growth  in Albanian
exports;
Non-performing loans ratio dropped to 12.9%, reflecting the improvement of balance sheets
in the real sector, as well as the measures taken to address it; and,
Fiscal  reporting  shows  that  the  budget  deficit  remains  at  historically  low  levels,  and  the
public debt has been decreasing.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
All these indicators suggest that the cyclical position of the Albanian economy is improving. In
other words, the economy is moving gradually towards equilibrium.
The Bank of Albania deems that the outlook on economic growth remain positive. The sources of
economic  growth  appear  solid  and  diversified,  in  terms  of  both  aggregate  demand  and
production  sectors.  In  parallel,  the  external  environment  remains  overall  favourable,  although
uncertainties and risks surrounding it remain present and are not entirely negligible.
Yet,  the  positive  development  trend  would  not  have  been  possible  without  a  proper  mix  of
economic  policies,  i.e.,  the  combination  of  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  with  the
consolidating fiscal policy. One the one hand, the monetary stimulus has enabled the lowering of
interest rates; the boosting of crediting; and the easing of debt servicing costs. In turn, it triggered
the  expansion  of  aggregate  demand  and  underpinned  economic  growth  and  employment
increase.  On  the  other  hand,  due  to  the  fiscal  consolidation  has  enabled  the  lowering  of  risk
premia and of borrowing costs for both the private and public sectors, and has expanded the
space for withstanding potential shocks in the future.
In our opinion, fiscal consolidation should remain the main anchor in formulating the fiscal policy
and the main guideline for implementing the Budget in the future.
The  Bank  of  Albania  finds  that  the  presented  Draft  Budget  accomplishes  this  mission.  In
concrete terms, the Budget envisages:
Reducing further the budget deficit, to 1.9% of the GDP against 2% expected for 2018;
Maintaining the primary balance surplus, projected to stay at 0.5% of the GDP in 2019, as
well;
Reducing the public debt, to 65.5% of the GDP against 69.1% expected for 2018;
Moreover,  the  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  the  Draft  Budget  2019  is  based  on  acceptable
economic and fiscal projections. In particular, the projected level of revenues is on the up side
our  projections,  driven  also  by  the  projections  for  an  improvement  in  the  revenue  collection
process,  but  the  differences  in  projections  appear  minor  and  have  immaterial  effects  on  the
Budget.
Based  on  the  above,  we  deem  that  the  Draft  Budget  2019  maintains  the  fiscal  consolidation
trend,  remaining  harmonised  with  the  direction  and  intensity  of  the  monetary  stimulus  and
contributing to the reduction of the risk premia and the costs of financing in the economy.
Beyond the stabilising effect of the fiscal policy, and analysing the Draft Budget, along with the
accompanying fiscal package, from the long-term perspective of the country’s development, the
Bank of Albania finds the following:
1.  The Draft Budget 2019, envisages public investments at 5.1% of the GDP. From the long-
term development perspective, as well as taking into account the great need for developing
and  improving  the  country’s  infrastructure,  the  Bank  of Albania  considers  maintaining  the
high level of public investments as an important element of any Draft Budget.
2.  The fiscal package accompanying the Draft Budget does not envisage radical changes in
the tax system. Generally, the stability of the tax system is a welcomed development by both
domestic  and  foreign  investors.  In  particular,  the  Bank  of Albania  finds  that  the  proposed
reduction of the tax on dividend, from 15% to 8%, creates premises for Albanian businesses
to have lower costs of financing with capital sources. The lower costs serve potentially to
boost  domestic  and  foreign  investments,  and  contribute  to  improving  the  structure  and
enhancing the stability of the balance sheet of enterprises, increasing, therefore, the share of
financing with capital sources and decreasing the share of financing with borrowed funds.
3.  The Draft Budget 2019 aims at continuing the fight against informality. The Bank of Albania
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
has  supported  and  supports  any  initiative  that  promotes  fair  competition  in  the  economy.
Such  initiatives  not  only  render  balance  sheets  in  the  public  sector  healthier,  but  also
introduce  the  right  stimuli  to  enhance  efficiency  in  the  private  sector  and  ensure  a  better
allocation of resources in the economy.
I  will  now  focus  on  developments  in  financial  markets  and  their  interaction  with  the  level  and
strategy of public debt financing.
2. Financial markets, budget deficit and public debt
The Draft Budget 2019 envisages the budget deficit level to be ALL 32.9 billion, or 1.9% of the
GDP.  This  level  is  envisaged  to  be  financed ALL  25.7  billion  (or  1.5%  of  the  GDP)  by  funds
ensured  during  2018  and  ALL  22.9  billion  (or  1.3%  of  the  GDP)  by  domestic  financing.
Conversely, the level of foreign debt is envisaged to be lowered ALL 15.7 billion (or 0.9% of the
GDP).
In view of the two-fold objectives that the borrowing and debt administration strategy should have
– to reduce the cost of financing and minimising the liquidity risk and debt volatility – the Bank of
Albania deems that this financing plan is reasonable.
In line with our accommodative monetary policy, as well as supporting the fiscal consolidation
process, the Albanian financial market appears calm, with low interest rates and good liquidity
indicators.  In  particular,  the  banking  sector  appears  liquid,  well  capitalised,  with  improving
profitability indicators.
The borrowing strategy should continue to be oriented toward extending the average term of the
debt, which reduces the risk of refinancing, and reducing the share of variable cost instruments,
which decreases the volatility and increases the ability to project public debt servicing flows. In
parallel, in the medium and long term, the public debt management should focus more on:
Diversifying  the  investors’  base,  increasing  the  attention  toward  expanding  the  domestic
market by means of improving the functioning of the securities secondary market;
Limiting the foreign currency borrowing, which – under a free exchange rate regime, applied
in the case of Albania – is a premise for high fluctuations both in the debt level, and in the
debt servicing costs.
Empowering  structures  and  improving  strategies  on  debt  management,  implying  a  more
integrated analysis of costs and benefits for various management strategies.
The need to improve debt management structures and strategies becomes even more pressing
if we take into account two important trends:
First,  the  trend  of  an  increase  in  the  share  of  debt  financed  at  market  terms  against  the
share of debt at concessionary terms, exposes increasingly the debt level and its structure,
as well as the health/soundness of the Albanian public finances, vis-à-vis the attention of
international financial markets.
Second,  the  debt  financing  over  the  recent  years  has  benefited  from  a  very  favourable
backdrop, in terms of low interest rates, both in the domestic and in the international financial
markets.  The  continuous  improvement  of  both  the  European  and  Albanian  economies
implies that these interest rates will be upward, in line also with the communications of the
respective central banks.
Honourable MPs, the following sections presents a summary of Bank of Albania’s opinion on the
long-term sustainability of public finances.
3. Long-term sustainability of public finances
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  organic  budget  law  sets  out  specific  clauses,  aimed  at  disciplining  the  fiscal  policy  with
regard to efficiency in the use of funds and safeguarding and enhancing the long-term health of
public finances.
The Bank of Albania finds that these clauses have been complied with. The projections for the
gross domestic product are, in nominal terms, within the latest available projections of the IMF.
Also, the trajectory of the public debt is downward, public investments are higher than the value
of the budget deficit and the draft envisages contingencies for withstanding adverse volatilities in
the exchange rate and interest rates.
Also, a table of medium-term projections for public finances is attached to the Draft Budget. The
table suggests fiscal consolidation will continue in the medium term horizon.
From  this  perspective,  the  Bank  of Albania  finds  that  the  deficit  of  social  security  schemes,
health insurance schemes and other social securities is at around 4.6% of the GDP or 2.6 times
higher than the overall budget deficit. Analysed in greater detail, the deficit of the social security
scheme,  also  known  as  the  pension  scheme,  is  expected  to  be  at  around  1.5%  of  the  GDP,
within the projections made in the reform of this system, and set on a downward trend. On the
other  hand,  the  deficit  of  the  other  schemes  is  more  stable.  Beyond  the  counter-cyclicality  of
various  elements  in  these  schemes,  the  Bank  of  Albania  judges  that  spaces  should  be
considered for further reducing their structural deficit.
The Draft Budget 2019 introduces a novelty in terms of explicitly assessing the potential risks to
the realisation of the budget. The Bank of Albania welcomes this novelty and encourages that it
become an integral part of annual and medium-term budget plans.
With regard to these risk scenarios, the Bank of Albania has the following comments:
First, the assessment of the impact from potential negative shocks, on the economy and
public  finance,  should  be  accompanied  by  the  identification  of  measures  that  need  to  be
taken in order to cut expenditures and comply with the budget deficit value.
Second, the assessment of the risk arising from public-private partnership programmes, the
so-called PPPs, suggests that deviations from the requirements of the law for annual PPP
payments to the level of 5% of tax revenues of the previous year will be covered through the
increase in revenues. The Bank of Albania judges that, beyond this regulatory mechanism
for the purpose of complying with the legal ceiling, the potential increase in the budget deficit
should be avoided by reducing budget expenditures. Moreover, this reduction should target –
to the maximum possible extent – budget sectors that generate such deviations.
The sanctioning of this principle serves to maintain budget balances, maintain balances in
the  inter-sectorial  allocation  of  funds  and  discipline  the  contracting  of  such  programmes.
The Bank of Albania also suggests the need for implementing best standards in the aspect
of accounting for their effect on debt indicators.
In the following section, I will present some additional suggestions by the Bank of Albania.
4. Some suggestions on enhancing the effectiveness and stability of public finance:
On the pace of fiscal consolidation in the medium term
Improvement  of  the  cyclical  position  of  the  country,  that  is  the  fuller  utilisation  of  production
capacities  of  the  economy,  eases  the  burden  of  fiscal  consolidation.  The  Bank  of  Albania
suggests that, in accordance with the degree and pace of economic improvement, the possibility
of accelerating the pace of fiscal consolidation in the medium term be taken into account. Such
acceleration would contribute to accommodating the expected rise in the costs of debt servicing
in the medium term, and increase the space for withstanding potential negative shocks in the
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
medium and long term.
On the tax system
The Bank of Albania deems that, beyond the stability of the tax regime, another desired feature of
the tax policies is the simplification of the system, with regard to reducing tax exemptions. Except
for  the  case  of  protecting  the  people  in  need,  a  simple  tax  system  eases  the  burden  on  tax
system administration and tends to improve the efficiency in the allocation of resources in the
economy.
On the further enrichment of the fiscal rule
The inclusion of clauses on fiscal accountability in the Organic Budget Law was a great step
forward as concerns legal sanctioning of the fiscal stability. Meanwhile, taking advantage of the
time and the accumulated experience, the Bank of Albania would suggest enriching the Law with
the following clauses:
Identifying a desired speed of fiscal consolidation over a one-budget-year horizon, in order to
better guide the process in the medium and long term.
Including ceilings on the overall contracted value of the PPPs. The Bank of Albania deems
that the inclusion of ceilings on the overall contracted value of PPPs in the Organic Budget
Law  would  supplement  the  limitation  laid  down  in  this  law  about  on  the  maximum
permissible  limits  for  the  allocation  of  funds  for  PPP  services  over  a  one-budget-year
horizon. In addition, it would anchor, on a more stable basis, the potential budget obligations
arising from PPPs.
On the pace of the realisation of budget expenditure throughout the year
The  realisation  of  budget  expenditures  throughout  the  year  continues  to  show  more
concentration in the fourth quarter. This phenomenon – repeated and dictated to a larger extent
by the uneven realisation of public investments- creates unnecessary fluctuations throughout the
year  in  liquidity  indicators  and  interest  rates  in  the  domestic  financial  market.  It  also  tends  to
render  more  difficult  the  control  of  expenditures  and  compliance  with  budget  limitations,  and
reduce their effectiveness.
On the management of Public – Private Partnership programmes
Further to previous comments on such programmes, I would like to emphasise once again the
need for: constantly improving professional capacities of units responsible for the assessment,
contracting  and  monitoring  of  these  projects,  especially  with  regard  to  the  legal  and  financial
aspects. Also, the contracted PPPs in the field of public investments should be in conformity with
the strategic medium and long-term programme of investments, as identified in the development
programmes of the country.
Thank you for your attention!
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
