           REMARKS AT CHEVENING ALUMNI EVENT 
 Mr Iipumbu Shiimi 
Governor  
   29 August 2018 
 Director of Ceremonies; 
High Commissioner Kate Airey; 
Sir Simon McDonald, Permanent Under-Secretary: Foreign and Commonwealth Office,  
Chevening Alumni; 
2018/2019 Chevening Scholars; 
 1.  It is an honor for me to be here today, bidding farewell to the 2018/2019 Chevening scholars 
and  at  the  same  time,  an  opportunity  to  connect  with  the  growing  network  of  Chevening 
Alumni.  
 2.  My  talk  this  afternoon,  is  centered  on  the  status  of  the  Namibian  economy  with  a  view  to 
inform you esteemed scholars of your contribution to propel Namibia forward.  
 3.  Namibia,  as  some  of  you  are  keenly  aware,  has  been  experiencing  a  difficult 
economic environment. The Namibia Statistics Agency recently released a revision of the 
GDP growth in 2017 from -0,8% to -0,9%. Going forward, the Bank of Namibia forecast the 
economy to grow by 0,6%, slightly better than last year’s contraction.  Namibia’s per capita 
income  (defined  as  the  country’s  Gross  National  Iincome  divided  by  the  total  population) 
also shows that per capita income is on the decline. There are statistics that show that for us 
to  attain  Vision  2030,  the  economy  needs  to  grow  at  an  average  of  more  than  7%.  We 
therefore need to work hard to achieve that growth. 
 4.  The  question  then  is:  what  should  Namibia  do  to  increase  growth  and  create 
employment? Or in other words, what sectors should we focus on to increase growth 
and employment?  
 5.  Agriculture is one of the critical sectors that we have agreed (as a nation) to focus on. 
Despite  the  agricultural  sector  being  a  priority  sector  in  our  National  Development  Plans 
(NDPs),  progress  in  the  sector  has  been  limited.  There  is  a  high  reliance  on  imports  of 
agricultural  products.  Namibia  imports  about  60  percent  of  its  food  requirements,  and  also 
consistently records production deficits in most crop categories. 
  2 
6.  As  indicated  in  NDP5,  we  have  to  focus  on  how  to  attract  private  investment  in  the 
agricultural  sector.  But  for  us  to  do  this,  there  is  a  need  to  improve  land  tenure  and  the 
tradability of land in the rural areas so as to spur investment in commercial activities.    
 7.  The potential of the tourism sector is also well known.  We are often told that out of 
every 13 tourists visiting our shores, 1 job is created. By 2022, Namibia expects to have 
a  diversified  and  competitive  tourism  sector  and  increase  the  number  of  tourists’  arrivals 
from 1.4 million in 2015 to 1.8 million. However, a number of challenges threaten the viability 
of the sector from reaching these targets. These include:  
   Lack  of  product  development:  there  is  a  need  to  innovate  new  products  to  attract 
diverse tourists with unique needs.  
  Lack of infrastructure: development of infrastructure in terms of airports, roads, water 
and information & communication infrastructure which are currently outmoded or are not 
developed in an integrated fashion, needs to be addressed.   
 Incentives for investment: there is need to create incentives to attract investment into 
the tourism sector.  
  Lack of skills: the sector is characterized by a skills mismatch. Also, the need for basic 
and  soft  skills,  including  non-tourism  institutions  engaging  tourists,  should  be  urgently 
addressed.  
  Marketing  and  promotion  of  Brand  Namibia:  the  budget  allocated  to  tourism  sector 
marketing is not sufficient enough to yield adequate returns. 
 8.  I believe these challenges are not insurmountable. As a country we have lofty dreams 
and plans in place, and we have dared to dream big. What matters now is not so much 
the journey we have traversed thus far, but what is it that we should do to turn our fortunes 
around.  The  answer  lies  in  the  depth  and  quality  of  the  human  resource  at  Namibia’s 
disposal to put shoulder to wheel and work towards making these plans a reality.  
 9.  And  that’s  where  you  come  in.  You  will  be  studying  in  fields  that  are  critical  for 
Namibia’s march to prosperity.  One of you will be studying agriculture (Food Science) a 
sector  that  is  pivotal  to  growing  the  manufacturing  capacity  of  the  country  and  reduce  its 
reliance  on  importing  food,  the  importance  of  the  sector  cannot  be  over-emphasized. 
 3 
Another  among  you  will  be  studying the  sustainability  of  the transport  sector,  which  by  the 
way,  is  another  prioritised  field  in  achieving  Namibia’s  aspirations  of  becoming  a  logistics 
hub for the region. Two amongst you are studying health. For us as economists, this is vital 
to  the  wellbeing  of  the  nation,  especially  the  quality  of  the  workforce  that  is  currently 
impacted  by  poor  productivity  levels  owing  to  alcohol  abuse  and  the  like.  One  of  you  is 
studying  Data  Science  and  Analytics,  another  emerging field that  is  increasingly  becoming 
important  for  Namibia  to  leapfrog  the  digital  divide  and  take  advantage  of  the  evolution  of 
technology  (Artificial  Intelligence,  Big  Data).  So,  is  the  one  studying  arts  and  culture.  The 
creative economy is often undervalued and has the ability to help develop and diversify our 
tourism product. Last but not least, the other fields of study including law, environment and 
petroleum geochemistry,  metals  and  energy financing,  are  all  critical  and  important for  our 
country.      
 10. As  you  embark  on this  new  journey  continue  to  reflect  on  your  place  under  the  sun 
and  the  important  role  you  have  to  play  in  taking  Namibia  forward  when  you  come 
back. Be mindful that Namibia’s success is ultimately connected to your individual success.    
 I thank you.  
   4 
