Benoît Cœuré: Welcome remarks
Welcome remarks by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the Foreign Exchange Contact Group meeting, Frankfurt am Main, 28 November 2018.
 I am very pleased to welcome you here today to the Foreign Exchange Contact Group (FXCG)
meeting. Thank you for coming to Frankfurt to share your views and insights with us.
In  my  short  introductory  remarks,  I  would  like  to  address  the  importance  of  strengthening  the
foundations of the foreign exchange (FX) market. I will argue that we all have a role to play here,
and that adopting and adhering to the FX Global Code (“the Code”) is a powerful way to support
change and engage non-signatories in the change process.
Let me start by briefly illustrating a few of the most notable changes to the FX market structure in
recent years.
Since our market contact group was set up in 1999, the FX market landscape has undergone a
deep and broad structural evolution, which has gained significant momentum in recent years.
On the sell side, one of the most notable changes relates to the execution of trades. FX trading
has  become  increasingly  electronic  and  automated,  reflecting  technological  advances.  The
share of spot FX trading that is conducted electronically has almost doubled in the past ten years
and now constitutes a substantial majority of daily turnover.
The process of growing digitalisation coincided with the emergence of new market participants,
trading venues and innovative services. Despite these developments, however, liquidity provision
has  become  more  concentrated.  Today,  fewer  market  participants  account  for  an  increasing
share of FX turnover.
We have observed similar changes in market structure on the buy side. For instance, over the
past few years asset managers have generally increased their activities in FX-related products
and have, over time, collectively emerged as important players in the FX industry.
Together,  these  structural  evolutions  have  had  implications  for  how  the  market  functions  and
how central banks monitor the FX market.
On the monitoring side, one tangible implication was the need to broaden the FXCG’s outreach to
appropriately reflect the new, and more diverse, investor landscape. The ECB’s market contact
groups are open to all interested market participants that apply for membership. It is important for
us to follow a transparent application and governance framework.
This  is  why  the  FXCG  terms  of  reference,  application  forms  and  meeting  material,  such  as
agendas,  the  list  of  participants,  presentations  and  summaries  of  our  and  other  ECB  market
contact groups’ discussions, are available to the public via the ECB’s website.
Only if we reach out to all relevant stakeholders can we hope to improve our understanding of the
functioning of the market and of new or emerging trends in exchange rate developments.
The  proper  functioning  of  the  market  is  particularly  important  for  us,  of  course.  The  Global
Foreign  Exchange  Committee  (GFXC),  which  was  established  last  year,  is  a  forum  that  is
exclusively  dedicated  to  promoting  the  highest  standards  of  conduct  and  a  robust,  fair,  liquid,
open and appropriately transparent FX market.
Integrity, compliance and accountability have become even more important as the set of market
players has grown more diverse. Responsible investment is critical for financial markets to be
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
able to fulfil their important social role of facilitating the flow of capital across the globe and to
support trade, investment and, ultimately, growth and employment.
So I’m pleased that all of you have signed up to the Code. Effective change can only come from
within.  The  industry  has  to  lead  this  process. And  the  Code  provides  the  benchmark  around
which market participants can discuss what is acceptable behaviour, and what is not.
The fact that all of you are signatories to the Code not only promotes the effective functioning of
the FX market, it also sends an important signal about the integrity of euro area financial markets.
I welcome this.
But acceptance is increasing globally, too. The Statement of Commitment, which was developed
as a way for market participants to voluntarily demonstrate their adherence to the Code, now has
more than 500 adherents from all over the world.  Of these adherents, the majority are banks,
while nearly 10% are central banks and a further 10% are buy-side institutions.
1
In order to foster further buy-side adoption of the Code, the GFXC agreed to establish a working
group  on  buy-side  outreach.  This  working  group  is  led  by  the  ECB  and  aims  to  enhance
transparency around the benefits for buy-side institutions of adopting the Code.
This process will be facilitated by the first tangible improvements following the implementation
and adoption of the Code, improvements that are becoming increasingly visible.
We have seen examples of improved execution quality, as evidenced by reduced rejection rates
and  hold  times.  Improved  disclosures  increasingly  allow  market  participants  to  make  more
informed decisions. And we have seen a higher degree of transparency as market participants
are now more comfortable in judging what information to share and how.
The Code also reflects a much broader movement in financial markets towards fair and ethical
trading  practices.  Consider  the  traction  that  sustainable  investment  has  gained  within  the
financial markets industry in recent years. Green finance is no longer a niche market. The ECB is
therefore also supporting work on sustainable finance-related topics in various fora, including at
the level of the G20.
All of this means, and with this I would like to conclude, that adhering to the Code has benefits
that  go  well  beyond  the  FX  market.  As  signatories,  you  are  ambassadors  for  responsible
investment.  We  need  broad  and  active  engagement,  and  the  contribution  of  the  entire  FX
industry, to continue ensuring that the Code’s principles appropriately reflect the structure of the
FX market. In this respect, we rely on you, our Foreign Exchange Contact Group members, to do
your utmost to fulfil this expectation and support us in driving this process forward.
Thank you.
1
According to the data available at the GFXC’s Global Index of Public Registers.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
