John  C  Williams:  Welcoming  remarks  -  Investing  in  America's
Workforce Book Launch Event
Welcoming remarks by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Investing in America's Workforce Book Launch Event, New
York City, 9 November 2018.
 As prepared for delivery
Welcome
Good morning.  I am very pleased to welcome you all to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
for  the  launch  of Investing  in  America’s  Workforce:  Improving  Outcomes  for  Workers  and
Employers.    I  would  like  to  thank  our  colleagues  across  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  the
Heldrich Center for Workforce Development at Rutgers University, the Ray Marshall Center at
the University of Texas at Austin, and the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research for
collaborating with us on this initiative.
My  colleagues  and  I  are  proud  to  co-sponsor  this  event  today  and  appreciate  everyone  who
contributed  their  time  and  effort  to  making  the Investing  in America’s  Workforce  publication  a
reality.
With over 100 contributors, pulling this together was not an easy feat.  I recognize the value of
sharing  knowledge  and  resources  and  am  pleased  that  we  can  help  facilitate  this  effort.    I
congratulate my colleagues and our partners for this accomplishment and believe this is just the
beginning of our work to support the workforce field.  There is a tendency to try to re-invent the
wheel and overlook past experience, but by taking a step back and learning from one another, we
can have a much greater positive impact in our communities.
Roadshow Workforce Experience
Sustainable  economic  growth  and  thus  broad-based  prosperity  is  dependent  on  a  healthy  job
market, one in which employers can find the skills they need and workers find jobs that allow
them to grow and move up the economic ladder.  The challenge is developing a system that
encompasses both and is accessible to all those seeking a job.  Our workforce development
initiative  aims  to  promote  dialogue  and  a  greater  understanding  of  promising  policies  and
programs  that  allow  workers,  especially  those  in  low  and  moderate-income  communities,  to
develop in-demand skills and connect them with employers.  We can achieve this by connecting
with  workforce  stakeholders  through  policy  forums,  roundtable  discussion  sessions,  and
examining areas through our research and outreach.
One of the best aspects of my job is the opportunity to visit communities across our Second
District.    The  skills  gap  and  the  uneven  economic  recovery  among  different  communities  are
consistent themes I hear, not just in the Second District but also in my previous job on the West
Coast.  I also have heard about a variety of policies and programs that seem to be making an
impact and could have broader potential that are worth sharing.
Early in my tenure I visited Brooklyn P-TECH and met with a dedicated and focused group of
young students learning IT skills for middle-skill jobs. This partnership between IBM Corporation,
the  New  York  City  Department  of  Education,  the  City  University  of  New  York,  and  the  NYC
College of Technology, provides an instructive model. It takes kids from high school through an
associate’s degree with corporate support and real-life experiences.  
And it’s working.  Their first class of 91 students entered the program in September 2011 and
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
almost  all  have  since  earned  their  high  school  diplomas  and  about  half  have  earned  an
associate’s  degree  in  a  STEM  field.    IBM  has  hired  23  graduates  and  continues  to  offer  paid
1
summer internships.
In  a  few  weeks,  I  will  be  visiting  Per  Scholas,  a  tuition-free  workforce  training  program  in  the
Bronx and in other parts of the country. It seeks to break the cycle of poverty by providing free
technology  career  education,  training,  placement,  and  advancement  services  to  people  in
underserved communities.  Approximately 90% of Per Scholas trainees are people of color, with
the large majority representing Black/African American and Hispanic/Latino individuals -- groups
with historically low representation in IT and the financial services industry.  
This workforce program is unique in that it seeks to re-train adult workers for successful careers
as technology professionals and works with employers in crafting unique training programs for
their business.  In 2017, Per Scholas NY enrolled 502 students and 406 graduated, of which a
substantial  majority  reported  being  placed  with  an  employer  with  an  average  starting  wage  of
2
more than $20 an hour.
Earlier this year, the New York Fed partnered with Per Scholas NY to support our own Diversity &
Inclusion efforts focused on career paths in IT, cybersecurity, and data science in the financial
services industry. I am proud to say that the New York Fed was recognized by Per Scholas as a
Major Partner in its recent 2018 annual update report.
I  mention  these  two  examples  as  they  reflect  the  theme  of  today’s  event  and  the  book—
workforce  development  is  about  investing  in  work,  workers  and  systems  leading  to  greater
employment opportunities for all.
Employer Engagement by Community Colleges in New York State
Another  important  issue  is  the  role  of  employer  engagement  with  community  colleges.    By
working directly with local employers, community colleges can more effectively prepare students
for available jobs, and at the same time, help employers find and retain workers with the skills
they need.
In  an  effort  to  better  understand  the  level  and  types  of  employer  engagement  activities  taking
place in our region, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York recently conducted a survey of all of
the community colleges in New York State. Next Wednesday, we will be releasing a report that
details our findings.
Our report does show that employer engagement by community colleges in New York State has
become  the  norm.    The  typical  community  college  engages  with  more  than  100  employers,
spanning a broad range of industries, including healthcare, manufacturing, utilities, and tourism,
just to name a few.  It is also quite common for community colleges to actively assess local labor
market needs, often with the help of local employers.  
As part of these engagement efforts, employers provide a wide range of education and training
support  to  community  colleges,  offer  various  forms  of  work  experience,  and  help  students
prepare for the job market. Employer engagement is a promising and important undertaking for
community colleges, local employers, students, and workers.
Investing in America’s Workforce
These are just a few examples of the work being done across the Federal Reserve System and
beyond, which is one of the reasons we have come together under the Investing in America’s
Workforce  umbrella.    This  initiative  started  in  2017  as  a  way  to  identify  new  approaches,
opportunities, and challenges in the various areas of workforce development.  Led by the Federal
Reserve  System  alongside  other  educational  and  nonprofit  institutions,  Investing  in America’s
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Workforce  has  encompassed  52  regional  meetings  held  across  the  country  last  year, a
capstone  conference  held  in  Austin,  TX  last  October,  and  a  three-volume  book  highlighting
workforce development efforts as investments for economic and community growth, which the
Fed and our partners are releasing today.
In 2017 and 2018, the New York Fed held seven regional meetings in our District, and one in
Orlando, FL in partnership with our Atlanta Fed colleagues after the influx of Puerto Ricans to the
mainland post-Hurricane Maria.  We found that all of these communities shared certain needs,
including to: develop training programs that lead more directly to available jobs; make the public
workforce system less complicated; and find a consistent way to document and collect data on
individuals who participate in training to assess the effectiveness of the programs.
I hope this book will help find solutions, recognizing that there is no one-size-fits-all solution or
approach.  
So what’s in the book? Investing in America’s Workforce: Improving Outcomes for Workers and
Employers is a collection of more than 65 essays from national and regional workforce experts
about systemic barriers to employment and how further workforce investments can overcome
those  barriers.  Staff  from  the  New  York  Fed  contributed  two  chapters  in  the  publication.  One
piece—on partnership development as a key workforce strategy— includes a look into how three
employers in New York and Puerto Rico developed partnerships with post-secondary institutions
to  make  progress  in  overcoming  the  skills  gap  issue.  By  detailing  some  of  the  factors  that
contributed  to  employers’  partnering  with  educational  institutions,  this  chapter  aims  to  provide
insight  to  employers  seeking  to  engage  with  educational  partners  to  address  labor  market
concerns and support the development of skilled industry talent. The second piece examines the
high child poverty rate in Puerto Rico and its impact on the long-term economic sustainability of
the island and its ability to recover from Hurricane Maria. The island’s child poverty rate is almost
three  times  higher  than  that  of  mainland,  and  has  remained  stagnant  even  during  times  of
economic  growth,  suggesting  the  issue  is  not  just  rooted  in  labor  demand.  This  chapter
discusses the dual programmatic and policy strategy of the Boys and Girls Club of Puerto Rico
and its sister organization the Youth Development Institute.
Before I conclude my remarks, I would like to provide a quick overview of today’s sessions. First,
my colleague Patrick Harker, President and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
will discuss key shifts in perspective needed to see workforce development as an investment.
Then there will be three panel sessions, each dedicated to the overarching focus of a volume in
the publication – investing in workers, investing in work, and investing in systems. The day will
then end with a luncheon panel discussion where speakers from various sectors will discuss
what needs to happen to realize the goal of seeing workforce development as an investment in
inclusive economic growth that benefits workers, employers, and communities.
I am thrilled that we can bring together national and regional leaders representing the private,
public,  and  nonprofit  sectors  to  engage  in  a  dialogue  that  can  inform  workforce  development
programming across the country and learn from one another about the opportunities for investing
in America’s workforce. We  look  forward  to  a  productive  day  and  continuing  the  conversation
after the event. Thank you.
12
1
2
 From Robin Willner, NYS P-TECH Leaderships Council
 From Sarah Conte, Per Scholas NY
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
