“Evolving landscapes of bank and non-bank finance”
Banca d’Italia-LTI@UniTo Conference
Panel on  
“Institutional investors’ asset allocation  
and the real economy”
Opening remarks by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy 
Fabio Panetta
Carlo Azeglio Ciampi Centre for Monetary and Financial Education
Rome, 7 December 2018
I am very happy to be here today at this joint Banca d’Italia-Long-term 
Investors conference on the evolving structure of bank and non-bank finance. 
As  the  first  session  already  highlighted,  the  conference  provides  useful 
indications on how to stimulate firms’ access to market finance, alongside 
the traditional banking sector.
My  role  today  is  to  chair  the  roundtable  on  “Institutional  investors’ 
asset allocation and the real economy”, which focuses on how institutional 
investors can contribute to expanding the range of services and the volume 
of financial resources available to businesses. The panel will benefit from the 
contributions of distinguished participants, who will share their experience 
in the field with us. But before we start the discussion, let me briefly explain 
why, in my view, it is crucial that institutional investors play a larger role in 
funding the real economy.
The  global  financial  crisis  of  2008  was  triggered  and  amplified  by 
developments  in  the  banking  industry.1  In  the  preceding  years,  banks  had 
increasingly adopted the “Originate-to-Distribute” model, so that instead of 
holding the loans they had originated on their balance sheets, they transferred 
them  to  third  parties.  This  weakened  incentives  to  carefully  screen  and 
monitor debtors. Loans were repackaged and passed on to other entities, but 
in many cases the risks ended up being borne by banks’ off-balance sheet 
vehicles and conduits. The rapid expansion of the banking system   made the 
real economy highly vulnerable to financial shocks.
The risks connected with an overstretched banking sector emerged fully 
during the financial and sovereign debt crises. Since then, regulatory action 
has been taken to rein in the banking sector. Wider and tighter prudential 
requirements  at  the  global  level2  and,  in  Europe,  the  Single  Supervisory 
1  Brunnermeier, M. K., “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007–2008,” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 23 (2009), 77–100.
2  The  main  regulatory  changes  adopted  after  the  crises  include  higher  capital  requirements,  the 
introduction of liquidity requirements and a minimum leverage ratio.
Mechanism, the Single Resolution Mechanism and the Bank Recovery and 
Resolution Directive are acting to discourage excessive risk taking by banks. 
The burden of bank failures has been progressively shifted from taxpayers to 
banks’ stakeholders.
As an intended consequence of these regulatory changes, banks have been 
steadily deleveraging, in particular by reducing the riskiest positions on their 
balance sheets. The contraction of bank intermediation has been accelerated 
by two factors. First, the macroeconomic environment, with its low level of 
interest rates and flat term structure, has put further downward pressure on 
banks’ profitability. Second, banks are facing increasing competition from 
fintech companies, which use technological innovation to offer services such 
as  payments  and  asset  management.  Even  though  core  banking  activities 
have not as yet been significantly affected by these new players, there are 
reasons to believe that fintech will in time become a more serious challenger 
in lending and also retail funding.3
Regulatory changes, combined with competition and the low level of 
interest  rates,  are  paving  the  way  for  a  contraction  of  the  banking  sector. 
As a result, non-bank forms of financing for the real economy need to be 
found.  This  need  is  particularly  acute  in  the  case  of  small  and  medium 
enterprises (SMEs), which are more bank-dependent than larger companies. 
Accordingly, as the deleveraging of the banking sector began, policymakers 
started voicing concerns about SME financing. Unfortunately, those concerns 
proved to be well-founded: during the crisis the deterioration in the economic 
outlook – together with the tightening of credit supply conditions – led to 
severe financial strains for SMEs.4 
Larger  firms,  on  the  contrary,  managed  to  weather  the  crisis  better, 
partly because they enjoyed relatively easier access to capital markets, which 
allowed them to offset, at least in part, the decline in bank credit.
3  Cortina, J. J. and S. L. Schmukler, “The Fintech Revolution: A Threat to Global Banking?,” Research 
& Policy Briefs 14, World Bank, April 2018 and Lumpkin S., J. Mosher, “Framework for digitalization 
in finance,” in OECD, Financial Markets, Insurance and Private Pensions: Digitalisation and Finance, 
2018 and Panetta, F. “Fintech and banking: today and tomorrow,” Speech, 12 May 2018.
ECB,  “Survey  on  the  access  to  finance  of  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  in  the  euro  area,” 
November 2012, and Rodano, G., N. Serrano-Velarde and G. Tarantino, “Lending standards over the 
credit cycle,” The Review of Financial Studies, 31 (2018), 2943–2982.
4 
4
These observations regarding the ability of firms to finance themselves 
in the post-crisis landscape emphasize the importance of facilitating the 
growth  of  market  finance.  Apart  from  filling  the  void  created  by  the 
contraction of the banking system, more developed market-based finance 
and the accompanying financial diversification will enhance the stability 
and  the  efficiency  of  both  the  financial  system  and  the  real  economy. 
Indeed, the complementarity of bank and non-bank finance and the need 
to further develop the latter have long been emphasized by Banca d’Italia 
and  other  European  institutions,  which  have  long  encouraged  efforts 
in  that  direction.  A  large  body  of  literature  supports  this  endeavour, 
arguing that firms’ optimal funding structure is diversified, in the sense 
that it includes both bank and non-bank debt, and that diversification has 
positive effects on firms’ growth.5
A balanced mix of funding sources is also desirable from an aggregate 
point  of  view.  Cross-country  studies  suggest  that  economies  that  overly 
rely  on  bank  funding  may  be  characterized  by  lower  and  more  volatile 
long-run growth than more market-based economies.6 There is no question 
that healthy banks act as shock-absorbers in normal recessions; but when 
recessions coincide with financial crises, as in recent years, bank-dependent 
economies are more severely hit than economies with a diversified financial 
system.
In order to ensure a stable and adequate supply of financial resources 
to the real economy, it is therefore necessary that the deleveraging of the 
banking sector be accompanied by a greater role for the financial markets 
and non-bank intermediaries. Institutional investors play a key role in this 
structural transformation. Indeed, one of the most important drivers of the 
development of financial markets is the growth of the institutional investor 
base. It has also been recently argued, for example, that an increase in pension 
5  Claessens,  S.  and  L.  Laeven,  “Financial  dependence,  banking  sector  competition  and  economic 
growth,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 3 (2005), 179–207.
6  Reinhart,  C.  M.  and  K.  S.  Rogoff,  This  Time  Is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly, 
Princeton University Press, 2009, Cournède, B. and O. Denk, “Finance and Economic Growth in 
OECD  and  G20  Countries,”  OECD  Economics  Department  Working  Papers  1223,  OECD,  June 
2015 and Langfield S. and M. Pagano, “Bank Bias in Europe: Effects on Systemic Risk and Growth,” 
Economic Policy 31 (2016), 51-106.
5
savings favours participation in capital markets7 and there is evidence that 
institutional investors have positive effects on corporate governance.8
A  look  at  the  development  of  institutional  investors  in  advanced 
economies highlights the challenges ahead. Countries in continental Europe 
continue to lag behind the UK and the US. The gap is all the more serious in 
the pension funds sector, reflecting the relative weight of funded retirement 
schemes in national social security systems. The gap is very noticeable in 
Italy. For example, in 2015 the assets managed by pension funds accounted 
for  less  than  10  per  cent  of  GDP  in  Italy,  compared  with  more  than  100 
per cent on average in the UK and the US. We definitely need to attain a 
more comprehensive understanding of the underdevelopment of institutional 
investors in most euro-area countries.
For all of these reasons, policymakers look favourably at the development 
of market-based financing and the growth of institutional investors. It must be 
stressed, however, that banks and market-based finance remain complementary, 
rather than substituting one another, and that a level playing field should be 
ensured for all financial intermediaries. If regulatory changes put banks at a 
disadvantage, firms may end up having difficulties accessing both bank and 
non-bank forms of external finance. Indeed, apart from remaining a vital source 
of  corporate  funding,  especially  for  SMEs,  banks  are  uniquely  equipped  to 
help firms to access the capital market. Moreover, banks offer contracts (such 
as overdrafts or credit lines) and services (such as lending assistance) that are 
often complementary to market-based finance. These contracts and services 
can be helpful to firms, especially in periods of distress.9
 To conclude, the corporate sector would greatly benefit from a more 
developed market-based segment within our financial systems. Institutional 
investors play a pivotal role in this structural evolution. At the European 
7 
Scharfstain, D. S., “Presidential Address: Pension Policy and the Financial System,” The Journal of 
Finance, 73 (2018), 1463–1512.
8  McCahery  J.  A.,  Z.  Sautner  and  L.  T.  Starks,  “Behind  the  Scenes:  The  Corporate  Governance 
Preferences of Institutional Investors,” The Journal of Finance, 71 (2016), 2905–2932.
9  Bolton, P., X. Freixas, L. Gambacorta and P. E. Mistrulli, “Relationship and Transaction Lending in a 
Crisis,” The Review of Financial Studies, 29 (2016), 2643–2676.
6
level,  this  aim  is  being  pursued  by  implementing  the  Capital  Markets 
Union project: enriching the types of financing available to non-financial 
corporations, broadening the portfolio choices of investors, enhancing the 
efficiency  of  financial  intermediation,  removing  barriers  to  cross-border 
investment, and increasing funding options for SMEs and infrastructure. In 
Italy, a number of additional initiatives with similar goals have been taken 
in  recent  years,  such  as  minibond  issues,  debt  funds,  tax  incentives  for 
venture capital and allowances for corporate equity. Yet in Italy, as well as 
in many other European countries, the role played by the financial markets 
and non-bank financial institutions is still limited. This is why I am looking 
forward to discussing these issues with our eminent experts.
7
Designed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
