Philip Lowe: A journey towards a near cashless payments system
Speech by Mr Philip Lowe, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the 2018 Australian
Payment Summit, Sydney, 26 November 2018.
 I would like to thank David Emery and Tony Richards for assistance in the preparation of this
talk.
Thank you for the opportunity to address the Australian Payment Summit. The world of payments
has become increasingly exciting, so it is very good to be here today to share in that excitement.
This morning I would like to speak about the shift towards electronic payments; or as the title of
my remarks says, the journey towards a near cashless payments system. For some decades,
people have been speculating that we might one day go cashless – that we would no longer be
using banknotes for regular payments and that almost all payments would be electronic. So far,
this speculation has been exactly that – speculation. But it looks like a turning point has been
reached. It is now easier than it has been to conceive of a world in which banknotes are used for
relatively few payments; that cash becomes a niche payment instrument.
Given this, I would like to structure my remarks around three broad points.
The  first  is  that  the  shift  to  electronic  payments  is  occurring  quite  quickly  and  it  is  likely  to
continue. This shift is a positive development that should promote our collective welfare.
The  second  is  that  if  we  are  to  realise  the  benefits  of  moving  to  a  near  cashless  payments
system, the electronic system needs to offer the functionality, safety and reliability that people
require. People need to have confidence that the electronic payment system will be operating
when they want to make their payments and that it will deliver the payment services that they
need.
The third point is that as we undertake this journey towards a near cashless payment system,
there  will  be  a  greater  focus  on  the  cost  of  electronic  payments.  If  almost  all  payments  are
electronic, then the cost of making these payments matters more than it used to. The electronic
system needs to be as efficient as it can be and to be characterised by strong competition. In my
view, there is further work to be done here.
1. The Shift to Electronic Payments
The Reserve Bank conducts regular surveys of how Australians make their payments. The next
survey will be undertaken in 2019. Until then, perhaps the best illustration of the declining use of
cash for transactions is the sharp decline in the number and value of cash withdrawals through
ATMs (Graph 1). Around the turn of decade, Australians went to an ATM, on average, around 40
times per year. Today, we go to an ATM around 25 times a year and the downward trend is likely
to continue.
 1 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
At the same time as the use of cash for payments has been declining, the number of electronic
transactions has been growing strongly (Graph 2). Today, Australians make, on average, nearly
500 electronic payments a year, up from around 100 per year around the turn of the century.
 2 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
New payment technologies are being developed that will further encourage this shift to electronic
payments.  Perhaps  the  most  significant  of  these  is  the  New  Payments  Platform,  which  has
made  it  possible  for  people  to  make  real-time  person-to-person  payments  without  using
banknotes. A  range  of  payment  apps  are  also  under  development  that  would  have  the  same
effect. So the direction of change is clear.
There  also  continues  to  be  a  decline  in  the  use  of  cheques  (Graph  3).   In  the  mid  1990s,
Australians, on average, made around 45 cheque payments per year. Today, we make around
three per person. Given this trend is likely to continue, it will be appropriate at some point to wind
up the cheque system, given the high fixed costs involved in operating the system. We have not
reached that point yet, but it may not be too far away. Before we do, it is important that alternative
payment methods are available. Progress has been made on this front, but more is required.
1
 3 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
It  is  worth  pointing  out  that  despite  the  decline  in  cash  use,  the  value  of  banknotes  on  issue,
relative to the size of the economy, is close to the highest it has been in fifty years. For every
Australian there are currently around thirty $50 and fourteen $100 banknotes on issue (Graph 4).
 4 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
So  there  is  an  apparent  paradox  between  the  declining  use  of  cash  and  the  rising  value  of
banknotes on issue. The main explanation is that some people, including non-residents, choose
to hold a share of their wealth in Australian banknotes. The opportunity cost of doing this is less
than it used to be because of the low level of interest rates.
While it is difficult to predict the future, I expect that banknotes will remain part of our payments
system for some time to come.
In  some  situations,  paying  with  banknotes  is  quicker  and  more  convenient  than  paying
electronically, although this advantage is less than it once was. Some people also simply prefer
paying  in  cash  –  our  2016  survey  indicated  that  around  14  per  cent  of  Australians  had  a
preference for using cash as a budgeting tool.
Banknotes  also  allow  payments  to  be  made  anonymously  in  a  way  that  is  not  possible  in
systems that leave an electronic fingerprint. This privacy aspect is valued by some people. In
some circumstances this desire for privacy is entirely legitimate, but in others it has more to do
with tax evasion and illegal activities.
Perhaps a more important source of ongoing demand is the fact that using cash does not require
the  internet  to  be  up,  electricity  to  be  working  and  the  banks’  systems  to  be  operational.
Banknotes  are  therefore  an  important  emergency  or  back-up  payment  instrument.  They  are
 5 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
particularly useful in the event of natural disasters or failure of the electronic system. Perhaps
one day the various systems will be so reliable that a backup will not be needed, but that day still
seems some way off.
Overall, the shift to electronic payments that is occurring makes a lot of sense – it is similar to
other aspects of our lives where things that used to be physical have been supplemented with, or
replaced  by,  technology.  This  shift  is  likely  to  promote  our  collective  welfare.  I  say  that  even
though the Reserve Bank is the producer of banknotes and earns significant income, or as it’s
known, seigniorage, for the taxpayer from their use. The greater use of electronic payments can
bring  efficiency  benefits,  with  lower  costs  and  more  functionality  and  choice  for  users.  One
example  of  this  is  the  reduced  tender  time  involved  in  card  transactions  due  to  contactless
technology.  There  are  also  non-trivial  production  and  distribution  costs  involved  in  the  cash
system. Some of these are fixed costs, so the average cost of cash transactions is likely to rise
as the volume of cash transactions falls. Looking ahead, there is also more limited scope for
fundamental innovation in the cash system compared with the scope for dynamic innovation in
electronic payments. So this journey is in our national interest.
2. Functionality, Safety and Reliability
I would now like to discuss three interrelated factors that will influence how quickly we undertake
that  journey.  These  are:  the  functionality  offered  by  the  electronic  system;  the  safety  of  that
system, and the reliability of that system. The other factor that is also relevant is cost, and I will
touch on this a little later.
Functionality
The rapid adoption of contactless payments in Australia shows that Australians change how they
pay quite quickly when new functionality is offered. Contactless card payments were slow to take
off  but  once  critical  mass  was  established,  they  grew  very  quickly.  In  our  2013  consumer
payment study they accounted for around over 20 per cent of point of sale card payments; three
years later they accounted for over 60 per cent. So the functionality of the electronic payments
system is key.
The development of the electronic payment system took a major step forward earlier this year
with  the  launch  of  the  New  Payments  Platform  (NPP).  This  system  allows  people  to  make
payments 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, using just a simple identifier such as a mobile phone
number  or  an  email  address.  It  also  allows  a  lot  of  information  to  accompany  the  payment.  I
expect that over time this extra functionality will further reduce the use of cash in the economy
and also improve the efficiency of the electronic system.
The number of transactions through the NPP is steadily increasing (Graph 5). After a relatively
low-key start, there are now around 400,000 NPP transactions per day. Over 2 million PayIDs
have  also  been  registered,  and  we  expect  further  growth  as  the  banks  continue  to  roll  out
services to their customers.
 6 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The concept behind the NPP is that so-called ‘overlay’ services are developed, and that these
overlay services offer new functionality that utilise the real time capability of the NPP. The first
overlay  service  provides  for  a  basic  account-to-account  payment.  Among  the  subsequently
planned overlay services are ones that will allow someone to send a request to pay, perhaps to a
friend for their share of a meal out. Another overlay service would allow a link to a document to be
sent with a payment; this could be a payslip or a detailed record of the transaction.
It was originally anticipated that these two overlay services would be up and running not long after
the NPP launch. Unfortunately, this timeline has slipped. A number of the major banks have also
been slower than was originally expected to roll out NPP functionality to their entire customer
bases. This is in contrast to the capability offered by smaller financial institutions, which from
Day 1 were able to provide their customers with NPP services. Given the slow pace of roll-out by
the banks, and the prospect of delays for additional overlay services, I recently wrote to the major
banks on behalf of the Payments System Board seeking updated timelines and a commitment
that these timelines will be satisfied. It is important that these commitments are met.
It is worth observing that in other countries where banks have been slow to develop payment
applications that meet the needs of the public, other possibilities emerge. China is perhaps the
best example of this, with the emergence of QR-code-based payments. I expect that the NPP
infrastructure will be the backbone of our electronic payments system for many years to come.
 7 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
But for this to be the case, the system will need to provide the functionality that people require,
and it will need to do this on a timely basis.
There are a range of fintech firms that are excited by the capabilities offered by the NPP and the
potential  for  it  to  be  used  for  innovative  payment  solutions.  In  October,  the  RBA  issued  a
consultation paper seeking views on the functionality and access arrangements for the NPP. In
particular we are interested in views on whether the various ways of accessing the NPP, and
their various technical and eligibility requirements, are adequate for different business models.
A  topic  that  I  get  asked  about  from  time  to  time  is  whether  the  functionality  of  the  electronic
system would be enhanced by the RBA issuing an electronic version of the Australian dollar, an
eAUD. I spoke about this issue at this conference last year, concluding that we did not see a
public policy case for moving in this direction at the time. In particular, it is not clear that RBA-
issued electronic banknotes would provide something that account-to-account transfers through
the  banking  system  do  not,  particularly  with  the  emergence  of  the  NPP.  Another  important
consideration was the implications for financial stability. A year on, our views have not changed.
Security
A second important influence on the rate at which we shift to a more electronic payments system
is the public’s confidence in the security of the system.
Given this, a recent focus of the Payments System Board has been the high and increasing level
of fraud in card-not-present transactions (Graph 6). Card-not-present fraud rose by 15 per cent in
2017  and  now  represents  87  per  cent  of  total  scheme  card  fraud  losses.   In  contrast,  the
industry  has  had  successes  in  addressing  card-present  fraud,  with  the  introduction  of  chip
technology and the switch to PINs. Despite this, growth in e-commerce activity has provided new
opportunities for would-be fraudsters.
2
 8 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  Payments  System  Board  identified  the  rise  in  card-not-present  fraud  as  a  priority  for  the
industry. In August this year, the Board was pleased to welcome AusPayNet’s publication of a
draft industry framework to mitigate card-not-present fraud, and supports continued collaboration
on this issue.
A separate but not unrelated priority for the industry is to progress work on digital identity. This is
another area where barriers to effective coordination can arise. I am pleased that AusPayNet is
undertaking work here, under the auspices of the Australian Payments Council. Digital identity is
likely to become increasingly important as more and more activity takes place online. The RBA is
highly supportive of industry collaboration on this issue and views it as important that substantive
progress is made.
More broadly, individuals, businesses, governments and financial institutions all need to be aware
of  cyber  risks.  In  the  RBA’s  most  recent  Financial  Stability  Review  we  noted  the  increasing
sophistication of cyber attacks and that regulatory authorities have increased their focus on cyber
issues.
 9 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Reliability
A  third  factor  is  the  confidence  that  people  have  that  they  will  be  able  to  use  the  electronic
system when they need to make their payments. As I noted earlier, people will still want to hold
and use banknotes if they can’t be sure that the electronic system will be available when they
need it. In our consumer payments survey in 2016, we asked people about why they held cash in
places outside of their wallet. The most common response, from nearly half of respondents, was
that it was for emergency transaction needs.
Over  recent  times,  there  have  been  a  number  of  serious  operational  incidents  that  have
interrupted the payments system. On some occasions these have been caused by problems
with  the  telecommunications  companies  and  at  other  times  by  problems  at  the  banks.  An
operational incident at the RBA in August as a result of problems with a routine fire test also saw
a  number  of  RBA  core  systems  unavailable  for  some  hours,  including  the  Fast  Settlement
Service supporting the NPP.
We all need to do better here. As we rely less on cash, outages affecting retail transactions can
have a significant impact on businesses and individuals. So continued effort needs to be made
by  all  participants  in  the  payments  system  to  reduce  operational  problems.  If  this  does  not
happen,  then  it  is  possible  that  the  Payments  System  Board  could  consider  setting  some
standards.
3. Increased focus on Cost and Competition
My third broad point is about the cost of electronic payments and the importance of competition.
As  we  move  to  a  predominantly  electronic  world,  there  will  be  more  focus  on  the  cost  of
operating the electronic payments systems and how those costs are allocated between those
making and receiving payments.
Looking forward, I expect that over time the cost of electronic payments will decline further, due
to both advances in technology and economies of scale. Even so, there are significant costs to
operate  the  electronic  systems,  including  costs  for  front-  and  back-end  systems  to  maintain
accounts, and to deliver functionality and convenience to users, as well as costs in preventing
fraud and ensuring resilience. How these costs are managed and who pays for them will have a
significant bearing on the efficiency of the overall system.
In terms of card payments, merchants in Australia currently pay less than merchants in many
other countries. The comparison with the United States is particularly stark (Graph 7). For credit
cards,  Australian  merchants,  on  average,  pay  0.8  per  cent  of  the  transaction  value  for
Mastercard/Visa  transactions.  In  the  United  States  the  figure  is  much  higher  at  around
2.2 per cent. There are also differences in the cost of debit cards and American Express cards
between the two countries.
 10 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The main reason for the lower merchant costs in Australia is our lower interchange fees. These
fees were reduced in Australia as a result of regulation by the Reserve Bank commencing in
2003. The RBA’s reforms reduced average interchange fees in the Mastercard and Visa systems
by  around  45  basis  points.  This  has  been  reflected  in  merchant  service  fees;  indeed,  these
merchant fees have fallen by somewhat more than the cuts to interchange, likely reflecting an
increased focus on card acceptance costs by merchants (Graph 8). In addition, as a result of
competitive  pressure,  including  from  the  removal  of  no-surcharge  rules,  fees  on  American
Express and Diners Club have also fallen over time.
 11 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Notwithstanding the reduction in interchange fees, these fees still represent, on average, around
60 per cent of the total merchant service fee on credit cards. So they remain an important part of
the total cost to merchants. Conversely, these fees mean that the cardholder’s bank gets paid
each time the card is used. This has meant that the cost to consumers of using these cards is
often low; in some cases, cardholders are actually subsidised to use their card, through reward
points and/or interest-free credit. The subsidy is provided by the cardholder’s bank, but ultimately
paid for by the merchant.
The  close  link  between  interchange  and  merchant  costs  means  that  there  continues  to  be
significant  focus  on  interchange  and  its  implications  for  the  distribution  of  costs  between
merchants and consumers. For example, there have been recent recommendations from the
Black Economy Taskforce and the Productivity Commission for the Reserve Bank to consider
regulatory action to lower, or even ban, interchange fees. The Payments System Board will again
examine the arguments for lower interchange fees when it next conducts a formal review of the
card payments system.
On  the  competition  front,  one  area  that  merits  close  attention  is  the  market  for  acquiring
services.  This  has  come  into  sharper  focus  as  a  result  of  concerns  about  the  costs  to
merchants in the debit card system, where most cards allow for transactions to be processed by
either of the two networks enabled on the card. The longstanding view of the Payments System
 12 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Board has been that merchants should at least have the choice of sending the debit payment
through the lower cost system, whether that be eftpos or the international scheme.
For  merchants  to  be  able  to  do  this  though,  acquirers  need  to  offer  terminals  and  technical
systems  enabled  to  allow  least-cost  routing.  Some  acquirers  have  already  completed  the
necessary  work  and  are  attracting  new  merchants.  Others,  including  the  major  banks,  made
commitments earlier in the year regarding the timetable for this work to be completed. Partly on
the basis of those commitments, the Payments System Board made a decision not to regulate.
Since then, I regret to say there has been slippage by some, who have cited technical problems.
It is important that the banks get back on track here. A failure to deliver on commitments or to
provide the payment services that the community needs will inevitably lead to calls for further
regulation.
4. Looking ahead
Looking beyond interchange and acquiring competition, new technologies open up the prospect
of new payment options developing. Recently, there has been much discussion on the role that
so-called ‘Big Tech’ firms might eventually play.
These firms have potential advantages over existing providers of payments services. In some
cases, their technology and systems are more flexible, they have a greater ability to use and
process information, they have well established networks which they can leverage and they are
often better at interacting with their users and customers. Given this, one scenario is that these
firms become significant players in the payments industry. They might be able to do this through
developing new payment applications that provide a commercial return, not through charging for
payment services, but by commercialising the value of the information that they obtain as a by-
product of offering these services. If this scenario were to play out, it could significantly change
the payments landscape, providing both merchants and consumers new payment options at low
monetary cost. At the same time though it would raise a number of important issues related to
data privacy, ownership and security.
The  probability  of  Big  Tech  firms  entering  the  payments  arena  is  higher  if  merchants  and
consumers  feel  that  the  existing  payment  systems  do  not  offer  them  the  services  they  need
and/or the prices that are being charged are too high. As I noted earlier, where banks have been
slow to respond, other payment applications have emerged.
This  scenario  highlights  a  broader  point.  The  way  that  people  are  charged  for  payments  is
complex and is changing: among other things, it is influenced by interchange fees, how the value
of information is commercialised, and commercial pressures on banks. It is difficult to predict
how things will ultimately play out, but these are issues the Payments System Board continues
to keep a close eye on.
5. Summing Up
To conclude, I expect the shift to electronic payments will continue. The issues of functionality,
security and reliability, and cost are central to the development of the system. The Payments
System Board will be keeping a close eye on these issues.
While I have talked about a near cashless payments system, I want to emphasise that we don’t
yet envisage a world without banknotes. The RBA is committed to providing cash consistent with
demand  by  users  and  to  support  its  distribution.  Our  development  of  the  Next  Generation
Banknote  series  is  a  clear  commitment  to  ensuring  that  cash  continues  to  have  public
confidence and to meet the needs of the community.
The launch of the NPP this year was a big step forward for the industry and a credit to all of the
staff  at  participating  organisations  who  worked  hard  over  the  life  of  the  project  to  bring  it  to
 13 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
fruition. As I mentioned, there are some key things that need to be done for the full benefits of the
NPP to be available to end-users, but I am optimistic that these can be achieved and this new
infrastructure can provide great functionality for Australia.
1
2
For a more detailed discussion of cheques, see Tellez (2017), ‘The Ongoing Decline of the Cheque System’,
RBA Bulletin, June.
Fraud  statistics  are  published  every  half-year  by Australian  Payments  System  Limited  (AusPayNet)  (2018),
Statistics, 
Fraud 
accessed
22 November 2018.
<www.auspaynet.com.au/resources/fraud-statistics>, 
available 
at 
 14 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
