Jens  Weidmann:  Lessons  learned  from  the  crisis  and  economic
policy challenges
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank's
Capital City Reception, Berlin, 17 October 2018.
 1 Welcome
Esteemed ladies and gentlemen,
Colleagues,
Rocks  can  wander.  Straight,  curved  and  zigzag  furrows  inscribed  in  the  dry  loam  soil  of  the
Californian Mojave Desert are proof that even heavy boulders really can move out there. Tracks
1
stretching as far as one hundred metres have been discovered.
In the Land of Opportunity, this mysterious place is known as Racetrack Playa. For a long time, it
was not known whether this was the work of pranksters or a natural phenomenon. That was until
several years ago, when a team of researchers solved the mystery with the help of cameras,
GPS technology and weather data.
After it rains at night during the winter months, a thin ice layer forms. When this ice begins to
melt in the morning sun, it breaks up and “sails” along the meltwater. Lights winds are then all
that  is  needed  to  make  these  panels  of  ice  slowly  push  rocks  across  the  desert  floor.  The
2
furrows become visible once they have been dried out by the wind and sun.
But what does this fascinating natural phenomenon have to do with the topics we are addressing
today? Heavy objects can be moved given the right combination of forces. The same is true of
politics: it’s all about the interplay of forces. I would like to use my speech today to talk to you
about the way in which political and economic forces work – looking back at the bank bailout
during the financial crisis, and looking ahead to the challenges facing monetary policymakers in
the euro area and economic policymakers in Germany.
Exactly  ten  years  ago  today,  the  Bundestag  and  Bundesrat  passed  the  Financial  Market
Stabilisation Act  (Finanzmarktstabilisierungsgesetz).  One  month  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman
Brothers, the then Finance Minister Peer Steinbrück explained that there had not been a financial
crisis of such a magnitude in 80 years. To “avert the danger” ] an extensive rescue package was
put together, comprising up to €400 billion in government guarantees for financial institutions.
3
Ten years on from this Herculean effort, many citizens are quite rightly asking how much it cost
to bail out the banks. Federal Finance Minister Olaf Scholz recently put the bill at around €60
billion for central and state government. That equates to just under 2% of German GDP, which
isn’t exactly a small amount. But such calculations are tricky for a number of reasons. First, it
isn’t a final invoice: while risk assets can generate income, new losses can also occur. Second,
it doesn’t factor in the macroeconomic costs of an alternative scenario in which politicians did not
act decisively.
It is simply impossible to say with any certainty what would have happened if we had not rescued
the banks. Would the crisis have potentially taken an even worse turn? Would many more jobs
have been lost? Would taxpayers have had to foot an even larger bill? These risks were real. It
was therefore right and important for the Chancellor and Finance Minister, the Bundesrat and
Bundestag to intervene decisively.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
2 Lessons learned from the crisis
But rescuing the banks was just one of the measures that we, as a united front and working
together  with  international  partners,  implemented  to  ward  off  the  crisis.  In  order  to  stop  the
economy  from  plunging  into  what  might  have  been  a  downward  spiral,  the  bailout  was
accompanied by fiscal stimulus packages and a resolute monetary policy response.
As a result, we managed to avoid a prolonged deflationary economic slump reminiscent of the
Great Depression of the early 1930s. This also garnered central banks a great deal of praise on
the international stage.
Extraordinary  circumstances  require  extraordinary  measures.  But  their  risks  and  side  effects
should not be ignored, particularly when looking at the longer term. Research suggests that, for
instance, monetary policy accommodation can create incentives for financial market players to
take on too much risk, thereby sowing the seeds of new excesses in the financial system.  For
example,  commensurate  effects  on  several  US  banks  were  identified  by  Bundesbank
economists  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis.   This  is  in  line  with  the  literature,  according  to  which
monetary policymakers are one of the causes of these problems and are hence responsible for
6
mitigating new risks.
5
4
The crisis was the product of various factors. With that in mind, the hunt for the perpetrators
doesn’t  play  out  like  a  classic  detective  story  with  one  clear  culprit.  It  is  more  like  Agatha
Christie’s “Murder on the Orient Express”: there were many culprits. Equally varied, then, are the
lessons that need to be learned from the crisis – some of which have, in fact, already been taken
on board.
Thanks to Basel III, banks are required to hold better-quality capital in far greater amounts. That
gives them a buffer to use in case they run into difficulties. And more of their owners’ money is at
stake because regulators have strengthened the liability principle, which is that whoever reaps
the benefits must also bear the liability.
The new resolution regimes are designed to ensure that banks can ultimately exit the market
without triggering turmoil in the financial system. Furthermore, banking supervision and regulation
were  expanded  to  include  macroprudential  policy.  By  taking  a  system-wide  perspective,
macroprudential  monitoring  focuses  not  least  on  the  interconnectedness  of  financial  players,
which could serve as a conduit for contagion effects.
So as you can see, some important lessons were learned from the financial crisis. But in this
regard, the acid test for monetary policy is still to come. I believe the answer here is to ensure
that  monetary  policy  has  a  symmetrical  effect  over  the  whole  of  the  economic  cycle:  in  a
downturn, policymakers must respond vigorously, but in an upswing, they must also be able to
tighten the reins again as needed – regardless of the impact this might have on governments’
funding costs, for example.
Monetary policy should have a stabilising effect similar to that of a cruise control system that
keeps  a  vehicle  moving  at  a  constant  speed.  When  driving  uphill,  the  power  of  the  engine  is
increased so the vehicle does not slow to a crawl. As the road flattens out, the power must also
be reduced. And on a downhill stretch, the car might need slowing down to stop it from going
faster and faster.
The euro area hasn’t quite finished the uphill climb just yet. Admittedly, the economy as a whole
has experienced five years of uninterrupted growth and the latest unemployment rate, at 8.1%, is
substantially lower than the pre-crisis average of 8.7%. But domestic price pressures are still
subdued, which is why monetary policy remains extremely expansionary. However, in the latest
forecast from the ECB, experts anticipate that capacity utilisation in the economy will continue to
increase in the next two years on the back of the robust upswing and its driving forces. Core
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
inflation in the euro area, which strips out energy and food, is therefore likely to rise from 1.1%
this year to 1.8% in 2020. And the headline inflation rate will probably persist at a level of 1.7%
this year as well as in the next two years.
From my point of view, this is certainly largely compatible with our medium-term notion of price
stability. As a result, it is now time to set about exiting the very expansionary monetary policy.
The Governing Council of the ECB didn’t set the boulder in motion in June, but you could say it
got the ball rolling by indicating that it wanted to end the net purchases of government bonds and
other securities at the end of the year.
How the rest of the return to normal monetary policy pans out will of course depend on economic
developments, especially the path of inflation. But the financial crisis has taught us not to ignore
the impact of long-term risks on price stability, either.
7
Economists at the Bank for International Settlements underline that economic developments are
affected  not  just  by  business  cycles  but  also  by  financial  cycles,  which  last  for  longer  and
fluctuate  more  strongly.   Financial  imbalances  can  ultimately  be  associated  with  deeper
recessions  and  lasting  damage  to  the  real  economy.  Because  monetary  policy  can  have  an
impact  on  the  financial  cycle,  the  BIS  researchers  suggest  extending  the  time  horizon  for
monetary  policy.  This  would  allow  longer-term  risks  to  price  stability  from  turbulence  in  the
financial system to be factored into monetary policy decisions to a greater degree. Given this
long-term connection, it may be advisable, even for a monetary policy that focuses exclusively on
the objective of price stability, to heed developments in financial markets.
3 Economic policy challenges
Ladies and gentlemen,
I fully understand that the current period of low interest rates is a testing time for savers. Although
households have for many years been able to offset their low levels of interest income – from
savings, for instance – thanks to the good performance of other asset types, the real return on
German households’ financial assets entered negative territory at the beginning of the year. In
part, this was because equity market prices lost some of their earlier dynamism.
But it’s fair to say that citizens are not just savers – they are also employees, property owners
and taxpayers. And as such, they benefit from the low interest rates.
Of course, interest rates will also gradually pick up as monetary policy returns to normal. But
what level they will ultimately reach depends on conditions that monetary policy cannot create.
You see, in a long-term equilibrium, the faster the trend growth of an economy, the higher the
interest rate.
However, strengthening the forces of growth is a task for economic policymakers. Here, it will be
vital to tap into the opportunities presented by digitalisation – through a suitable infrastructure,
education,  and,  not  least,  market  economy  conditions  such  as  modern  competition  law.
Economists are now focusing closely on what have been dubbed “superstar” firms – businesses
which are becoming hugely powerful market players, mainly as a result of network effects in the
digital segment.  Bearing this in mind, Federal Minister for Economics Peter Altmaier’s initiative
to launch the “Competition Law 4.0 Commission” seems especially relevant.
8
And  there  is  certainly  far  more  scope  elsewhere  for  strengthening  economic  competition  and
thus boosting productivity. Take, for example, the rigid fee schedules in the liberal professions,
which tend to restrict opportunities for competition. The European Commission has also pointed
this out in the past. What’s more, isolationist tendencies in the field of foreign investment could
be more of a hindrance than a stimulus for economic growth.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Europe  is  also  an  important  part  of  the  answer  to  the  challenge  of  increasing  productivity.
Estimates show that a fully harmonised digital internal market would raise economic output by
9
4%.
Conversely,  demographic  change  is  among  the  main  factors  dampening  long-term  growth.
Germany’s ageing population means a reduction in the number of potential workers. By the end
of the next decade, the ratio of the population of usual working age to older citizens will shrink
from 3:1 to roughly 2:1. As a result, by 2060, the OECD expects that Germany’s GDP will only
increase at a below-average rate compared to the other OECD countries.
 There is all the more
reason,  then,  to  bolster  productivity  so  as  to  safeguard  the  growth  potential  of  Germany’s
economy.
10
Demographic change will also place substantial burdens on social security systems and public
finances. For the time being, there are three main levers which can be used to keep the impact
on the statutory pension insurance scheme in check.
One lever is the pension level. The current pension adjustment formula foresees a fall in relation
to earnings. By contrast, according to the forecasts, the real pension level would continue to rise.
The second lever is the contribution rate. The rate is set to rise in order to curb the declining level
of pensions. Yet, this is driving up labour costs and reining in the competitiveness of the German
economy. It is thus essential not to pull this level too far.
I believe that the same applies to a tax-financed increase in the Federal grant. As things are at
the  moment,  the  Federal  grant  will  already  have  to  rise  more  sharply  than  tax  revenue.  An
additional  increase  would  then  either  mean  putting  up  taxes  or  cutting  spending  elsewhere.
There’s only so much pressure that the Federal budget can take.
Bundesbank  experts,  amongst  others,  have  been  pointing  to  the  third  lever  –  the  statutory
retirement age – for some time now. Life expectancy has been rising steadily to date, meaning
longer and longer pension-drawing periods but stagnant contribution periods. This all points in
favour of raising the retirement age beyond 67. And studies show that higher life expectancy also
means better health.
11
If some individuals do need to retire earlier for health reasons, the system of pensions for people
with reduced earning capacity is already in place and has recently been expanded considerably.
However,  this  pension  system  should  not  be  abused  for  early  retirement  in  general.  The
challenge here is to set the eligibility criteria as objectively as possible to avoid undermining the
aim of raising the retirement age.
Countries such as Denmark and the Netherlands have already pegged their statutory retirement
age  to  life  expectancy.  There,  the  retirement  age  is  set  to  rise  to  68  in  2030  and  might  even
exceed the 70 mark by 2050.
On  the  back  of  a  long  period  of  economic  growth,  Germany  is  currently  basking  in  very
favourable public finances. However, burdens stemming from demographic change are looming
on the horizon.
Moreover, we cannot kid ourselves that the current period of economic prosperity will last forever.
Now  is  precisely  the  time  for  fiscal  policymakers  to  safeguard  their  capacity  for  effective
intervention. These calls go out, not least, to those countries in Europe where debt levels are still
very  high  and  have  not  come  down  by  much  in  the  past  few  years.  These  countries  are
benefiting, in particular, from the current low interest rates.
But it would be wrong to simply expect things to stay this way. Monetary policy needs to return to
normal and interest rates will then rise again. And it is the highly indebted countries that will feel
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  strain.  The  Stability  Pact,  moreover,  requires  Member  States  to  have  a  medium-term
objective of a structurally close-to-balance budget.
12
And it is precisely when the debt pile is big that these efforts must not be neglected. Otherwise
the debt ratios will stay put at a high level. In Italy, for instance, the debt-to-GDP ratio has been at
more than 130% for years. The rules stipulate that significant consolidation is required in Italy
next year. Instead, the Italian government has announced that it will raise the deficit ratio to 2.4%.
This would have a significant knock-on effect on the structural balance, and the extremely high
level of debt would – at best – slip slightly.
Evidently,  such  developments  are  also  a  worry  for  many  investors:  risk  premia  for  Italian
government bonds have risen. Ultimately, this again narrows the room for manoeuvre for those
fiscal policymakers who appear to be promising higher deficits.
The European Commission has thus issued a very critical comment of Italy’s latest budget plans
and the breach of the rules outlined therein and rightly so, in my opinion.
4 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
Together,  wind,  ice  and  water  can  move  heavy  stones.  Ten  years  ago,  many  thought  that
resolving  the  crisis  would  be  a  similar  Herculean  task.  Yet,  today,  Germany  is  enjoying
remarkably favourable economic times.
The  most  important  thing  then  is,  as Agatha  Christie  has  Hercule  Poirot  declare  in  “The  Big
Four”: “Meanwhile we have learnt something, and to know is to be prepared.”
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
G. M. Stanley (1955), Origin of playa stone tracks, Racetrack Playa, Inyo County, California. Geological Society of
America Bulletin 66, pp. 1329–1360.
R. D. Norris, J. M. Norris, R. D. Lorenz, J. Ray, B. Jackson (2014), Sliding Rocks on Racetrack Playa, Death
Valley National Park: First Observation of Rocks in Motion. PLoS ONE 9(8).
Author 
www.tagesschau.de/wirtschaft/rettungspaket148.html
named,  Bankenpaket 
not 
ist 
unter  Dach 
und 
Fach, 
17  October 
2008,
D. W. Diamond, R. G. Rajan (2012), Illiquid banks, financial stability, and interest rate policy. Journal of Political
Economy 120, pp. 552–591; E. Farhi, J. Tirole (2012), Collective moral hazard, maturity mismatch, and systemic
bailouts. American Economic Review 102, pp. 60–93.
C. M. Buch, S. Eickmeier, E. Prieto (2014), In search for yield? Survey-based evidence on bank risk taking.
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 43, pp. 12–30.
M. Schularick, A. M. Taylor (2012), Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles and Financial
Crises, 1870–2008. American Economic Review 102, pp. 1029–1061; C. Borio (2014), Monetary Policy and
Financial Stability: What Role in Prevention and Recovery? Capitalism and Society 9.
C. Borio, P. Disyatat, P. Rungcharoenkitkul (2018), What anchors for the natural rate of interest? mimeo.
D. Autor, D. Dorn, L. F. Katz, C. Patterson, J. Van Reenen (2017), The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of
Superstar Firms. NBER Working Paper 23396.
Copenhagen Economics (2010), The Economic Impact of a European Digital Single Market, Final Report.
Å.  Johansson,  et  al.  (2012),  Looking  to  2060:  Long-Term  Global  Growth  Prospects:  A  Going  for  Growth
Report. OECD Economic Policy Papers No. 3.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
11
12
GBD 2013 DALYs and HALE Collaborators (2015), Global, regional, and national disability-adjusted life years
(DALYs)  for  306  diseases  and  injuries  and  healthy  life  expectancy  (HALE)  for  188  countries,  1990–2013:
quantifying the epidemiological transition. The Lancet 386, pp. 2145–2191.
Deutsche Bundesbank, Design and implementation of the European fiscal rules, Monthly Report, June 2017,
pp. 29–44.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
