Egil Matsen: Management and risk
Speech  by  Mr  Egil  Matsen,  Deputy  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at
Norges Bank, Oslo, 29 November 2018.
Accompanying charts of the speech.
Introduction
 At the beginning of 2018, the Government Pension Fund Global (GPFG) had posted a positive
return  for  six  consecutive  years.  The  average  annual  return  was  almost  ten  percent  in  this
period. Global financial markets are currently experiencing a period of turbulence. This provides a
good opportunity to revisit the risk profile of the GPFG and its management.
Chart 1: Six percent annual return since 1998
The annual return on the GPFG has been six percent since 1998. As shown in Chart 1, there
have been considerable variations in return from one year to the next, ranging from minus 23
percent to plus 26 percent measured in terms of the GPFG’s currency basket.
Although our experience since 1998 is important, a complete picture of the level of risk of a fund
that invests for future generations cannot be formed after as short a period as 20 years. This
November marks the 100  anniversary of the end of the First World War. The world’s population
was then about 1.7 billion. Now there are more than 7.5 billion people in the world, while GDP per
capita has increased more than fivefold over the past 100 years.
th
Chart 2: US moves up, Europe falls back
Global production patterns, and hence the composition of stock markets, have changed just as
1
 In
dramatically. Stock markets’ centre of gravity has undeniably shifted from Europe to the US.
1900, railway shares accounted for 63 percent of the US stock market and 50 percent of the UK
stock market, while today, these shares account for less than 1 percent. New industries have
emerged  and  industries  already  established  in  1900,  such  as  telecommunications,  have
changed radically.    
2
In  the  course  of  these  past  100  years,  global  equity  markets  have  experienced  the  Great
Depression of the 1930s, the Second World War, the oil price shock followed by stagnation in
the early 1970s, the dotcom crash in 2000and the financial crisis ten years ago.
The management of the GPFG must have a long-term perspective that extends just as far into
the future. We do not know which companies or countries the fund will be invested in 100 years
from now, but we do know that investments will have to change over time. We must also expect
that the return on the GPFG will fluctuate substantially in periods and that the fund will have to be
managed  through  future  dramatic  events.  What  we  do  not  know  is  when,  how  or  why  such
events will occur.
Maintaining stable management of the GPFG requires sound management of financial risk. An
important feature of the fund’s strategy is diversification, where the fund’s capital is invested in
many different assets worldwide, reducing the vulnerability of the fund’s return to developments
in  individual  companies,  sectors  or  countries.  Nevertheless,  diversification  cannot  shield  the
GPFG from crises that have a broader impact. Being prepared for this type of risk will make it
easier  for  us,  as  a  society,  to  maintain  the  GPFG’s  long-term  investment  strategy  in  a  future
downturn.  Today,  I  am  going  to  focus  on  some  of  the  most  turbulent  periods  in  global  equity
markets – and on the lessons to be learned.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Owning shares in a large number of companies also exposes the GPFG to another type of risk.
Answers  and  action  may  be  demanded  from  shareholders  in  response  to  an  incident  in  a
company for reasons other than the incident’s effect on expected return. This type of exposure
must  also  be  managed,  and  the  Bank’s  work  on  responsible  investment  is  important  in  this
context. I will come back to this at the end of my speech.
Financial risk
Chart 3: High volatility driven by equities
Chart  3  shows  the  real  return  on  a  hypothetical  portfolio  since  1900,  invested  worldwide  and
comprising  70  percent  equities  and  30  percent  fixed  income  instruments.  The  return  is
measured in USD. As illustrated in the chart, the return has varied widely from one year to the
next.
The fixed income investments cushion the largest falls in value, but as shown in the chart, the
return on the portfolio largely tracks equity market returns. With 70 percent of the GPFG allocated
to equities, changes in the fund’s value ahead will be driven by equity market developments. Let
us therefore focus on equity market risk.
As shown in Chart 3, 2008 stands out as one of the worst years in this period. Ten years ago, on
25 November 2008, Norges Bank presented the GPFG’s results for the third quarter. Lehman
Brothers had gone bankrupt. The world’s central banks were making large and frequent cuts in
policy rates. In the course of autumn 2008, the US stock exchange fell more than five percent on
as many as ten separate days. Norges Bank wrote in its press release that “The third quarter of
2008  was  an  unusually  demanding  quarter  for  the  management  of  the  Government  Pension
Fund  –  Global.” And  it  was  to  get  worse.  The  GPFG  posted  a  return  for  2008  of  minus  23
percent, measured in terms of the fund’s currency basket.
Chart 4: Post-crisis paths have differed
Chart 4 shows developments in the US equity market from 2008 onwards. The rapid reversal in
equity markets, shown in the chart, also affected the GPFG’s results. In 2009, the fund posted a
positive return of 26 percent, largely thanks to a 34 percent return on the equity portfolio. The
return continued to rise in 2010. While the fall in the fund’s value as a result of the financial crisis
in  2008  was  historically  large,  the  fund’s  recovery  in  2009  was  stronger  and  faster  than  had
generally been expected. Owing to a weakened krone, the GPFG’s return was less negative in
terms of NOK than in terms of the fund’s currency basket. Even though changes in the krone
exchange rate do not influence the GPFG’s international purchasing power, the fall in the fund’s
value may have been perceived as less dramatic as a result.
Equity  markets  have  not  always  rebounded  after  a  steep  decline  as  rapidly  as  after  the  2008
financial crisis. The chart shows developments in a global equity index in the period after the
dotcom crash in 2000. From the peak in winter 2000 to the trough in winter 2003, equity prices
plunged  at  the  fastest  pace  since  the  early  1930s.  Fluctuations  in  the  krone  exchange  rate
amplified the fall in the GPFG’s value measured in NOK. The value of the GPFG at the beginning
of 2003 was 30 percent lower than assumed in the National Budget for 2002.
Investors buying equities in Japan’s equity market at the end of 1989 experienced even more
dramatic developments. The market fell and stayed there. The value of the shares traded on the
Tokyo Stock Exchange is still no higher than the 1989 levels. From being the largest in the world
in 1990, accounting for almost 40 percent of global market capitalisation, Japan’s equity market
now  accounts  for  less  than  ten  percent.  However,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  these
developments apply to only one country. Global equity markets in general have shown completely
different developments since 1989.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
What can we learn from these crises?
The first lesson is that crises will occur.
Chart 5: Six large falls in 100 years
If we look at annual returns in global equity markets since 1900, the chart shows that negative
real equity market returns of the same magnitude as during the financial crisis have occurred in
five periods: the Great Depression 1929–31, two world wars, the rise in oil prices at the beginning
of the 1970s and the repercussions after the dotcom crash.  Both the owner and the manager of
the GPFG must be prepared for new crises.
3
Chart 6: The fund is larger
A  larger  fund  also  means  more  pronounced  fluctuations  compared  with  the  wider  economy.
Chart  6  shows  the  same  percentage  decline  in  the  value  of  equities  and  fixed  income
instruments as in 2008, disregarding movements in the krone exchange rate. With today’s fund,
the same decline would have resulted in a fall in the value of the GPFG of NOK 2700 billion. This
is  equivalent  to  more  than  90  percent  of  annual  mainland  GDP,  compared  with  just  over  30
percent in 2008.
In previous periods of falling equity prices, petroleum revenue transfers to the GPFG have been
substantial relative to the fund’s size. Thus, even with a return in equity and fixed income markets
of minus 19 percent measured in NOK, the capital in the GPFG only fell by approximately NOK 5
billion in 2002.  In 2008, the sum of the negative return, the change in the krone exchange rate
and  transfers  of  petroleum  revenues  was  positive,  and  the  value  of  the  GPFG  therefore
increased between 2007 and 2008.
4
The  next  time  equity  prices  fall,  the  figures  will  be  different. As  the  government’s  oil  and  gas
revenues  decline  and  the  size  of  the  GPFG  increases,  the  cushioning  impact  of  petroleum
revenues on any falls in the fund’s value will gradually decrease, making the fund’s value even
more dependent on the return. In years of negative equity market returns, large absolute falls in
the GPFG’s value must be expected.
A second lesson is that stock market crashes do not necessarily reverse quickly. The examples I
have referred to, the financial crisis in the US, the dotcom crash, and Japan in the 1990s, show
that the crises we have observed in the past can vary in depth and duration. The path of the
recovery  since  the  dotcom  crash  has  been  somewhat  U-shaped. Although  the  fall  in  market
values was not as steep as in 2008, the recovery was slower. Developments in Japan have been
more  L-shaped:  the  fall  was  rapid  and  the  recovery  has  been  slow.  Developments  since  the
financial crisis have been V-shaped: a steep fall and a rapid recovery. All these crisis scenarios
could occur again.
The third lesson is that equity market returns have been high despite periods of substantial equity
market declines. Estimates of the future return on the GPFG are highly uncertain, but a lower
equity  allocation  would  have  pulled  down  the  fund’s  expected  return.  The  Ministry  of  Finance
estimates an expected real rate of return on the GPFG of 3 percent.
Underlying  the  decision  to  allocate  70  percent  of  the  GPFG  to  equities  is  an  acceptance  of
expected fluctuations in the fund’s return, in the short and longer term. The investment strategy
has  enjoyed  broad  support  since  the  fund’s  inception.  By  adhering  to  the  strategy  through
turbulent periods, the GPFG achieved a return equivalent to NOK 4 300 billion at the end of the
third quarter. Historical developments since 1900 and since the GPFG’s inception underpin the
expectation of higher returns in equity markets than in fixed income markets over time.
Broad diversification to reduce risk is a key element in the overall investment strategy. At the
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
beginning of 2018, the GPFG was invested in more than 9000 companies in 72 countries. An
important  insight  from  financial  theory  is  that  the  expected  return  on  an  investment  is  not
determined  by  the  risk  associated  with  the  investment  in  isolation,  but  by  that  investment’s
contribution to systematic risk in a portfolio. An investor cannot be expected to be paid for the
extra risk of pursuing a narrow investment strategy. Broad diversification can therefore reduce
the total risk of a portfolio, without necessarily lowering the expected return.
Systematic risk is risk that cannot be eliminated through diversification and is the risk associated
with market returns that must be accepted when investing in global financial markets. This is the
risk that an investor can expect to be compensated for and that delivers a higher expected return.
For the GPFG as a long-term investor, short-term fluctuations are not the most important factor.
Periods of weak economic growth occur in all countries. Investing in a broad range of assets
reduces the risk of the return being dominated by such a period.
The  objection  could  be  raised  that  international  capital  markets  have  become  increasingly
interwoven. Equity markets in different countries are correlated to an increasing extent. Common
factors will often dominate in acute crises.
At the same time, it seems likely that the more fundamental features of an economy are more
important in the slightly longer term, as exemplified in the chart. The calculations are based on a
data set for equities and ten-year government bonds in 42 countries through all or parts of the
period 1950–2016.  The lines show the five percent worst outcomes for the value of two different
portfolios  for  different  time  horizons.  The  light  blue  line  shows  a  portfolio  diversified  across  a
large  number  of  markets.  The  dark  blue  line  is  a  portfolio  invested  in  a  single  country.  The
diversified portfolio has posted considerably lower falls in value in crises, and the gain increases
with the duration of the crisis.
5
Chart 7: Increasing gains from diversification over time
In addition, broad diversification reduces the portfolio’s vulnerability to extreme events, which can
be illustrated by examples from the history of global financial markets since 1900. We have data
for equity market returns in 23 countries for this period. Two of these markets were closed down
last century and the assets expropriated, ie Russia in 1917 and China in 1949. The markets did
not reopen until the beginning of the 1990s. While the Chinese market was small in 1900, the
6
Russian market accounted for six percent of a market-weighted global index.
Chart 8: Fifty years of negative real returns in individual countries
Although developments have been less dramatic in other countries, equity markets in France,
Germany and Japan have all experienced periods of negative real returns of more than 50 years.
7
The longest period of negative real returns for the global index has been just over 20 years.
Diversification  therefore  provides  some  protection  even  against  the  most  extreme  outcomes,
even  though  it  will  never  be  possible  to  completely  shield  the  return  on  the  GPFG  from  such
extreme events.
The risk associated with being a shareholder in 9000 companies
Chart 9: “Diversification is the only free lunch in finance”
Harry Markowitz, the founder of modern portfolio theory, is reported to have said: “Diversification
is the only free lunch in finance”. Broad diversification of the GPFG’s investments is in line with
Markowitz’s  theory.  The  GPFG’s  investment  strategy  contributes  to  an  acceptable  risk-return
profile for the fund.
At the same time, with ownership shares in 9000 companies, the GPFG is also broadly exposed
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
to conditions and events with dimensions other than the effect on financial risk, related to how a
company deals with a specific incident or more fundamental aspects of its operation. A global
listed company that is criticised for its activities will almost without exception include the GPFG
as one of its shareholders. Questions will sometimes be asked about why the fund is invested in
the company and what action is being taken to follow up the fund’s investment.
If questions are often raised about whether the GPFG is being managed in what is considered a
responsible  manner,  support  for  the  investment  strategy  may  be  affected.  This  could  in  turn
increase  the  risk  that  we  will  not  achieve  our  primary  objective  of  enabling  current  and  future
generations to benefit from Norway’s petroleum wealth.
The number of questions related to individual investments cannot be reduced by diversification.
On  the  contrary,  the  number  will  increase  with  the  breadth  of  the  GPFG’s  investments.  The
portfolio contains a large number of companies that could run into difficulties.
A possible way of managing this type of risk is to exclude companies from the portfolio. Ethical
guidelines for the exclusion of companies from the GPFG were established by the Norwegian
authorities as early as in 2004.
Under the guidelines, the GPFG must not be invested in companies producing tobacco or certain
types of weapons, or with significant coal-related operations. Companies may also be excluded if
there is an unacceptable risk that the company contributes to or is responsible for certain types
of behaviour.
The GPFG’s guidelines for excluding companies show that there is some money Norway says
no to. There are some products and some types of behaviour the GPFG’s owners do not want to
be involved in, whether or not they contribute to financial return.
In 2015, the Ministry of Finance decided that the responsibility for excluding companies, based on
criteria laid down by the political authorities, should be transferred to Norges Bank. The Executive
Board’s decisions are based on recommendations and assessments provided by the Council on
Ethics, which is independent of both the Ministry and Norges Bank.
Chart 10: Exclusions are not insignificant
At the beginning of 2018, 133 companies, corresponding to a market value of around NOK 200
billion, had been excluded from the GPFG.  This is a substantial amount, but only a small share
of the fund.
8
There  is  an  inherent  paradox  in  using  exclusion  as  a  responsible  investment  instrument  as  it
transfers ownership shares to investors who do not regard the company as problematic in the
same way. Being invested in the company and at the same time exercising active ownership is
therefore a possible alternative to exclusion.
The ethical guidelines introduced in 2004 also contained guidelines for Norges Bank’s exercise of
ownership rights. Ownership rights were to be used to promote a long-term financial return. And
since then, the mandate has been based on the assumption that a long-term return is dependent
on  sustainable  developments  and  well-functioning  markets.  This  is  particularly  applicable  to  a
large,  diversified  fund  with  a  long-term  perspective  such  as  the  GPFG.  The  fund’s  long-term
return will reflect global value creation.
Responsible investment in practice is today a key part of the investment management mandate
issued by the Ministry of Finance to Norges Bank. Responsible investment is to a large extent
about promoting well-functioning markets and influencing the fund’s investee companies. Norges
Bank complies with international standards and contributes to their further development. Norges
Bank Investment Management (NBIM) votes at shareholder meetings at almost all the companies
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
in the GPFG’s portfolio and is in regular dialogue with close to 1000 of the companies in which
we are most heavily invested. As provided for in the management mandate, NBIM will in some
cases  divest  from  a  company.  In  line  with  the  mandate,  Norges  Bank  performs  this  task
independently. The Ministry of Finance is not involved in individual investments or the exercise of
ownership rights.
The GPFG pursues a responsible investment policy to increase the GPFG’s expected return or
reduce  the  risk  associated  with  the  fund’s  investments.  We  also  consider  that  a  systematic
approach to responsible investment will contribute to maintaining confidence in Norges Bank as
manager of the GPFG.
Conclusion
After 20 years, we have gained some experience of risk in our management of the fund. We have
for example experienced two of the worst periods in equity markets since 1900. This experience
will be useful the next time financial markets fall sharply. But next time will also be different in
many ways.
Norway, through the GPFG, owns a small part of listed companies’ share of global value added.
Our investments have made solid gains. We have been willing to take on risk and have been
compensated for it.
History has taught us that we must be prepared for falls in market value that are both deep and
prolonged. In a crisis, there will be no place to hide for a large global fund. Managing a crisis is
demanding, but for a financial investor, it is essential.
Although we must seek to limit the risks we encounter, we must at the same time reiterate that
some risk is worth undertaking. Broad support for important principles in the management of the
GPFG  is  a  strength  that  will  stand  the  fund  in  good  stead  the  next  time  turbulence  erupts  in
financial markets.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Dimson  E.,  P.  Marsh  and  M.  Staunton  (2018)  Credit  Suisse  Global  Investment  Returns  Yearbook  2018/E.
Dimson E., P. Marsh and M. Staunton (2002) Triumph of the Optimists: 101 Years of Global Investment Returns,
Princeton University Press.
Dimson E., P. Marsh and M. Staunton “Long-Term Asset Returns” in Financial Market History, edited by D.
Chambers and E. Dimson.
The figures are annual figures and the percentage falls are therefore smaller than for measurements from the
peak to the trough on a monthly basis.
The Government Petroleum Fund, Annual Report 2002. Norges Bank.
See Discussion note 1/2017, International diversification for long-term investors, NBIM
Dimson E., P. Marsh and M. Staunton: Credit Suisse Global Investment Returns Yearbook 2018. Dimson E., P.
Marsh and M. Staunton. Triumph of the Optimists: 101 Years of Global Investment Returns, Princeton University
Press, 2002.
ibid.
Estimated market value in the fund’s benchmark index if the companies had not been excluded.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
