Norman Chan: Self-made life pension
Remarks by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the
Philanthropy for Better Cities Forum, Hong Kong, 20 September 2018.
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen
 1.  One of the biggest challenges in many societies in recent decades is how to ensure that the
elderly have sufficient income or financial means to maintain a decent retirement life.  Many
governments have introduced different forms of pay-as-you-go retirement support schemes,
which unfortunately have now proved to be hard to sustain fiscally in the longer run if the
population is ageing rapidly.
2.  The  Hong  Kong  population  is  also  ageing.    While  we  celebrate  having  the  longest  life
expectancy in the world, with women reaching 87 and men 81, this also creates tremendous
challenges for retirement protection.  In the context of retirement protection, I can divide the
population into three groups:
              (i)
high  income  people  who  have  accumulated  significant  amount  of  savings  and
wealth during their working life. They have the financial means to take good care of
themselves during retirement and we need not worry about them;
  (ii)
the  underprivileged,  working  poor  or  lifelong  poor.  This  group  of  people  depends
crucially on the social safety net provided by the Government as they don’t have the
ability or financial means to look after themselves. In Hong Kong, the Government
support mainly takes the form of Comprehensive Social Security Assistance, highly
subsidized housing, health care and education. As for the elderly, the Government
provides a non-contributory means tested Old Age Living Allowance for those aged
65 or above; and
(iii)
people that do not fall within either of the first two groups. Typically this group of
citizens are those who have worked hard for their whole life, used up the bulk of
their earnings in raising their children, and may be owning a small apartment. Most
of them, by the time they retire, do not enjoy any pension or other forms of voluntary
retirement  benefits.  They  do  have  some  accumulated  savings  in  their  Mandatory
Provident Fund accounts, but it is unlikely that, for various reasons, the amount, on
its own, would be large enough to support a decent retirement life.
3.  It is the retirement protection of this third group of citizens that I wish to address today.  In
Hong Kong, about 70% of the 1.7 million privately owned residential housing units, including
subsidized home ownership flats, are owner-occupied.  Around 65% of the owner-occupiers
have  fully  paid  down  the  mortgage  loans,  if  any,  of  their  properties.    For  those  owner
occupiers who have already paid off their mortgages, many of them don’t have a lot of other
savings or assets at their disposal.  Even for those with some savings, they are having a
tough time in managing their money if they don’t have the expertise or the appetite in active
investment.    This  is  understandable  because,  under  the  prolonged  period  of  quantitative
easing by the major central banks in the advanced economies, bank deposits and bonds
offer rather low and unattractive interest income.  As for the stock market, the volatility in
share prices will expose the retirees to significant market risks.  As a result, there can be a
fairly large group of retirees who find them not having enough cash flows to support a decent
retirement life, despite the fact that the properties they own and occupy are worth quite a lot. 
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
At the same time, their cash savings are basically left idle, yielding very little, if any, cash
flow income.  Many old folks would feel apprehensive to dip into the principals of their bank
savings to meet daily expenses, as this would expose them to the uncertain but rather scary
longevity risk.  This situation is not unique in Hong Kong as there are many places that have
similar  problems.    So  it  may  be  useful  if  I  share  with  you  the  Hong  Kong  experiment  in
helping  this  group  of  retirees  through  some  market  based  and  financially  sustainable
solutions.
 
HKMC and Market-based Financial Solutions for Retirees
4.  These  market  based  retirement  protection  solutions  are  developed  and  operated  by  the
Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation (HKMC), which was set up in 1997 and is fully owned by
the Government through the Exchange Fund managed by the Hong Kong Monetary Authority
(HKMA).  The HKMC runs on commercial principles and its main role is to offer financial
products  that  would  facilitate  market  development  as  well  as  achieve  desirable  social
objectives.  The core products offered by the HKMC include the purchase of mortgage loans
from  banks  for  securitization,  the  Mortgage  Insurance  Programme  to  help  eligible
homebuyers  with  their  down  payments,  and  the  SME  Financing  Guarantee  Scheme  that
supports SME financing by banks.  In addition, two HKMC products, the first one launched in
2011  and  the  second  one  a  few  months  ago,  are  of  particular  relevance  to  the  financial
wellbeing of the retirees. 
 
Reverse Mortgage
5.  The first retirement protection product is the Reverse Mortgage Programme, which enables
homeowners to convert or monetize the equity in their self-occupied homes into guaranteed
monthly  payouts  over  10,  15,  20  years  or  for  life,  while  still  enjoying  the  use  of  the
properties.  For example, a married couple at the age of 65 with a property value of $5 million
would  get  a  guaranteed  payment  of  $11,000  per  month  for  life  and  be  able  to  live  in  the
property for life.  There is no need for them to worry about repayment at all.  Their monthly
payouts are guaranteed for life even if the value of the property falls in subsequent years, or
the  interest  rates  rise  significantly,  or  the  couple  enjoys  very  long  life.    When  the  couple
passes away, and if their children choose not to redeem the property, the bank will recover
the outstanding loan with accrued interests by selling the property in the open market.  Any
surplus will be returned to the children of the borrowers or their designated estate.  If there is
any shortfall, the HKMC will take care of the difference because the borrowers, when taking
out  the  Reverse  Mortgage,  have  already  bought  insurance  from  the  HKMC  to  cover  the
shortfall risk.  This scheme would not have been commercially viable for the banks without
the insurance provided by the HKMC to cover the potential shortfall risk due to either falling
property prices, rising interest rates or increasing longevity of the borrowers.  So far, over
2,500 households have joined the Reverse Mortgage Programme.  The initial take-up rate
was not fast but is picking up steadily.  It has taken some time for Hong Kong people to get
to understand and appreciate this new product.  Also, it is quite common amongst Chinese
parents wishing to pass their properties to their children without encumbrances, which will
not be the case if they have joined the Reverse Mortgage Programme.  However, there is
increasing awareness amongst retirees that they do need to take care of themselves rather
than suffering from a steady drop in living standards due to insufficient recurrent cash flows.
 
Life Annuity Scheme
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
6.  The  second  retirement  protection  product,  which  has  just  been  launched  by  the  HKMC
through its subsidiary, is the Life Annuity Scheme (LAS).  The Scheme aims to provide a
financial  solution  to  retirees  who  prefer  to  convert  their  lump  sum  savings  into  a  steady
stream of cash flows that are not affected by the fluctuations of the financial markets or how
long they live.  In other words, they prefer something like the old fashioned pension through
which  the  employees  would  receive  guaranteed  monthly  payments  for  life.   As  we  know,
people now live longer due to improvement in healthcare, diet and exercise etc.  At the same
time,  most  if  not  all  employers  have  withdrawn  from  offering  life-long  pension  benefits
because of the huge costs involved.  Moreover, the current low yield environment coupled
with high volatility of the financial markets have also made it hard for any defined contribution
pension plans to guarantee anything other than a rather low rate of return.
7.  What the HKMC is doing is to offer a life annuity product to those aged 65 and above.  The
HKMC  will  guarantee  an  immediate  fixed  amount  of  monthly  payout  for  each  annuity
policyholder.    For  a  person  at  65,  with  a  HK$1  million  premium,  the  monthly  payment
guaranteed for life is HK$5,800 for male and HK$5,300 for female, equivalent to an annuity
rate of about 7% for men and 6.4% for women.  The reason that the HKMC can offer rather
high  annuity  rates  is  because  it  will  place  the  entire  annuity  premium  received  from
policyholders  with  the  HKMA.    The  HKMA  will  then  invest  the  money  alongside  with  the
Exchange Fund portfolios, half in the public markets (bonds and listed equities) and half in
private markets (private equity and real estate).  As the HKMA already has the investment
capability and infrastructure for managing a portfolio as large as around HK$4 trillion, it would
be easy to take on the additional investment generated by the HKMC’s annuity premium. 
The  HKMC  has  now  received  around  10,000  applications  amounting  to  $5  billion  in
subscription.    We  are  processing  the  applications  and  the  exercise  is  expected  to  be
completed soon.  By end-October or early November this year, the first annuitants will be
receiving their first monthly annuity payments.
8.  Let  me  do  some  quick  maths  here  by  using  a  married  couple  at  the  age  of  65  who  has
joined both the Reverse Mortgage Programme and the Life Annuity Scheme.  If the property
they  own  is  worth  HK$5  million,  (which  is  the  average  value  of  the  properties  under  the
Programme), then they would get a monthly payment of $11,000 plus the right of lifelong
occupancy  under  the  Reverse  Mortgage  Programme.    If  they  each  subscribe  for  HK$1
million Life Annuity, then they will get another HK$11,100 ($5,800 + $5,300) per month.  So
they will receive HK$22,100 per month.  When the couple reaches the age of 70, they are
entitled to a non-means tested Old Age Allowance of $2,690 ($1,345 x 2) provided by the
Government.  So this couple will be receiving up to HK$24,800 (or US$3,180) per month or
around HK$300,000 (or US$38,000) per year, and have the benefit of being able to stay in
their own property, for life.  Compared with the median income of two-person households in
Hong  Kong  of  HK$20,000  (or  US$2,560)  per  month,   this  guaranteed  monthly  payout  of
HK$24,800 would really help support a decent retirement life and protect the retirees from
highly volatile market risks and from increasingly high longevity risk.       
1
 
Conclusion
9.   I would like to conclude by making the following observations:
 (a)
The Reverse Mortgage Programme and the Life Annuity Scheme, when combined,
will create an economic outcome similar to a life pension. This self-made pension is
a market based solution to provide steady cash flows for life by liquefying the fixed
and  financial  assets  accumulated  by  the  retirees  during  their  working  life.  The
schemes  are  commercially  and  financially  viable  and  will  therefore  not  involve
Government subsidies;
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
  (b)
The  launch  of  the  Life Annuity  Scheme  has  helped  promote  the  annuity  market  in
Hong Kong, which has up till now been rather underdeveloped. In 2016, the annuity
business  only  accounted  for  less  than  2%  of  all  long-term  insurance  business  of
private  insurers  in  Hong  Kong.  However,  once  we  announced  the  launch  of  the
HKMC  Life  Annuity  Scheme  in  2017,  there  has  been  marked  increase  in  the
awareness and interest in annuity products. Many insurance companies have seen
sharp  increase  in  the  volume  of  business  in  underwriting  other  forms  of  annuity
products to customers;
(c)
The HKMC solutions, when implemented more fully, will not only help those who have
retired  but  also  provide  a  strong  incentive  for  the  middle  income  citizens  to  save.
With  the  Life Annuity  Scheme,  they  can  see  the  prospects  that  their  hard  earned
savings accumulated over their working life could be entrusted to a reliable manager
to  produce  reasonable,  hassle-free  and  guaranteed  cash  flows  that  support  their
retirement. This is particularly helpful to those who feel that the small amounts that
they save today would not add up to support their retirement, hence find it tempting to
spend more now and save less, relying instead on the social security net provided by
the government when they retire.
10.  Ladies and gentlemen, it may be a bit too early to assess the success or otherwise of the
Hong  Kong  experiment.    However,  I  am  very  excited  by  the  prospects  of  the  two  HKMC
schemes in helping retirees in Hong Kong to create self-made life pension.  The model that
we are pursuing in Hong Kong is not only highly innovative, it also serves as a pilot that, if
proved to be successful, would provide a good model for many countries in the world as an
additional retirement support option that is financially viable and thus sustainable over the
long run.
11.  Thank you very much.
1
Figure for the first quarter of 2018.  Source: Quarterly Report on General Household Survey (Q1 2018), Census
and Statistics Department.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
