Benoît Cœuré: Forward guidance and policy normalisation
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Deutsches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung (The German Institute for Economic Research),
Berlin, 17 September 2018.
 Forward guidance has become a valuable and effective policy instrument in central banking over
recent years. There is by now compelling international evidence confirming that forward guidance
has been successful in boosting growth and inflation outcomes by steering future interest rate
1
expectations while central banks have been constrained in their policy space.
More recently, some central banks, including the ECB, have also started to use forward guidance
when  heralding  the  transition  out  of  a  phase  characterised  predominantly  by  the  use  of  non-
standard monetary policy measures. In my remarks this morning I would like to explain why the
need for policymakers to enhance transparency increases at times when past policy regularities
2
may offer less guidance, or when the inflation outlook is surrounded by exceptional uncertainty.
In these circumstances, forward guidance may not only be helpful, but also highly effective in
reducing  unwarranted  uncertainty.  I  will  show  evidence  that  this  claim  holds  true  for  the
enhanced  forward  guidance  that  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  delivered  at  its  June  monetary
policy meeting.
In  the  future,  there  might  be  a  case  for  the  Governing  Council  to  extend  its  current  forward
guidance beyond the timing to lift-off. If warranted, I will argue that this should be done by further
clarifying policymakers’ reaction function rather than publishing a numerical forecast of the future
path of short-term interest rates.
Forward guidance on the timing to interest rate lift-off
Let me start with a simple observation.
On my first slide you can see the textbook case for the need of a central bank to embark on
unconventional  policy  measures.  The  usual  caveats  aside,  until  recently  the  prescriptions  of
simple Taylor-type policy rules have systematically been below actual short-term money market
3
rates.
  1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
To fill this policy void, in July 2013 the ECB started to use state-contingent forward guidance that
has contributed to reducing both interest rates, including at longer tenors, and the sensitivity of
money market rates to macroeconomic and political news. This eased financial conditions and
insulated  them  from  external  shocks  that  would  have  otherwise  resulted  in  an  unwarranted
4
tightening.
Starting in June 2014, forward guidance has been complemented by a series of credit easing
measures  that  have  also  entailed  large-scale  asset  purchases  and  the  adoption  of  negative
interest rates. Empirical evidence confirms that these measures have jointly provided substantial
additional policy accommodation that has been instrumental in securing a return of inflation to
5
levels closer to 2%.
What  my  first  slide  also  suggests,  however,  is  that  recently  –  judging  from  these  simple  rule
prescriptions – the policy gap has vanished as the growth and inflation outlook has improved. In
fact, there is now a striking consistency between simple Taylor-type policy rule estimates and the
actual  level  of  money  market  rates,  both  current  and  projected.  In  other  words,  one  may
conclude  from  this  chart  that  there  is  no  longer  a  need  for  policymakers  to  resort  to  forward
guidance  as  a  means  to  provide  the  monetary  stimulus  that  would  be  consistent  with  simple
benchmark prescriptions.
Of course, central banks do not follow simple policy rules in practice. But the chart nevertheless
raises the legitimate question of why the Governing Council, at its June monetary policy meeting,
decided to be more explicit about its expectations for the timing to interest rate lift-off. After all, in
the past major central banks typically did not issue any specific guidance on the timing and pace
6
of future rate hikes.
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
As you will certainly remember, during past upswings ECB guidance was limited to signposting
7
and to the use of a few key words in the introductory statement to the press conference.
Central  banks  rather  signalled  future  policy  intentions  implicitly,  by  revealing  information  other
than  the  future  policy  path  –  most  notably,  information  about  the  economic  outlook  and  the
broader  monetary  policy  strategy,  including  an  arithmetic  definition  of  price  stability  that  could
8
serve as a long-term nominal anchor for the economy.
This  approach  to  communication  and  transparency  reflected  the  risks  inherent  in  any  type  of
explicit forward guidance: that such guidance could crowd out the important diversity of market
views, thereby aggravating the risks of herding, and that it could potentially be taken by outsiders
9
as an unconditional commitment.
Our experience with forward guidance has at times confirmed this risk, although its benefits have
by  far  exceeded  its  costs.  Too  often,  academics  and  market  participants  have  interpreted
forward guidance as Odyssean, while for policymakers it can only be Delphic.
The case for the ECB’s enhanced forward guidance
Why then didn’t the Governing Council decide, in June 2018, to simply return to the well-tested
pre-crisis  framework  of  managing  expectations  when  there  was  no  longer  a  need  to  provide
additional policy accommodation? Here it is useful to first consider the market environment we
were facing during the first half of this year and up until the 13 June Governing Council meeting.
You can see this on my second slide.
What you can see here is that, compared to a year earlier, uncertainty around the future path of
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
short-term  interest  rates  had  increased  measurably.  In  the  first  months  of  this  year,  markets
believed that an unusually wide range of policy outcomes would be possible in 2019.
A dispersion of views is not in itself a bad thing, of course. It is usually an encouraging sign that
markets remain attentive to changes in the outlook. The information-processing role of markets
can in fact be expected to recover during periods of policy normalisation. Herding, by contrast, is
often a sign of perilous complacency.
A  dispersion  of  views  does  become  a  source  of  concern,  however,  if  it  reflects  uncertainty
around  the  central  bank’s  reaction  function.  Such  uncertainty  is  not  unusual  in  periods  of
transition.  Once  policy  has  succeeded  in  shifting  upwards  the  distribution  of  risks  around  the
growth and inflation outlook, uncertainty about the future path of interest rates naturally begins to
increase.
I would argue, however, that our environment is characterised by two factors that vindicate the
need for stronger forward guidance and that have contributed to amplifying uncertainty around
our near-term policy intentions.
The first has to do with the peculiar anatomy of the inflation process we are currently facing.
Although  uncertainty  around  the  inflation  outlook  is  receding  and  a  sustained  convergence  of
inflation to levels closer to our aim is in sight, underlying inflationary pressures have long proven
stubbornly weak – to an extent that, in the past, threatened to destabilise public confidence in the
return of inflation to levels closer to 2%.
10
In addition, there is still considerable uncertainty as to whether the key parameters underlying our
workhorse  Phillips  curve  models  have  undergone  structural  change  –  whether  inflation  has
become less responsive to economic slack, be it through globalisation, technological progress or
structural product and labour market reforms.
11
At  a  time  when  policy  rates  remain  deeply  in  negative  territory,  such  parameter  and  model
uncertainties imply that the costs of committing a type II error – of failing to anticipate a much
slower than usual return of inflation to pre-crisis levels – may be uncomfortably high.
Communicating our expectation that the ECB key interest rates would remain at their present
levels at least through the summer of 2019 was therefore consistent with the “risk management”
approach to monetary policy that the Governing Council has repeatedly applied in recent years,
including in our earlier decisions to clarify our reaction function or to change our policy stance
pre-emptively in the face of tail risks.
12
The second factor that has called for more transparency around our policy intentions relates to
the effects of unconventional monetary policy measures. Unwinding policy accommodation in a
multi-dimensional policy space is terra incognita for both financial markets and policymakers.
For this reason, the Governing Council started a long time ago to communicate its expectation
that the key ECB interest rates would remain at their present levels for an extended period of
time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases. Transparency about the envisaged
sequence in the adjustment of our various policy instruments was an important element of our
communication strategy.
Yet, on my next slide you can see that, at some point in early 2018, markets expected the ECB to
hike its deposit facility rate one month after the expected end of net asset purchases. Given our
previous indications, and the experience of other central banks, this was an extraordinarily early
expectation, in particular as changes to our key policy rates would have affected the entire term
structure of interest rates.
13
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
 In other words, the slide suggests that gradual progress towards a sustained convergence in the
path of inflation increasingly injected volatility into the expected future rate path.
We therefore judged that more clarity on the timing to lift-off could help condense the focus of
market uncertainty from two variables – the end-date of asset purchases and the definition of
“well past” – to one variable – “at least through the summer” – which the Governing Council could
more easily control with its communication.
On my next slide you can see that our enhanced forward guidance has been effective in reducing
uncertainty around the short end of the EONIA forward curve. Shortly after our press conference
on 14 June there has been a notable compression in the option-implied densities around three-
month EONIA forwards. Dispersion around the median expected path has become much more
condensed.
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Guidance on the future path of short-term interest rates
Now, communication about lift-off expectations is, of course, only a first step in managing the
transition towards policy normalisation. A natural question to ask, then, is: should policymakers
also provide guidance on the envisaged subsequent path of future short-term interest rates and,
ultimately, on the expected level of the terminal rate, and if so, how?
There are two broad ways in which central banks can increase transparency around the future
path.
The  first  is  to  publish  policymakers’  projection  of  the  future  path  of  short-term  interest  rates
conditional on the macroeconomic outlook.
14
The  second  approach  is  to  broadly  maintain  within  the  confines  of  current  practice,  which  is
geared towards explaining in more detail the central bank’s reaction function and to communicate
policymakers’  conditional  expectation  of  the  likely  future  pace  of  policy  adjustment.  The  key
difference between the two approaches is, hence, the level of precision with which policymakers
are willing to communicate their future policy inclinations.
The  first  approach  is  by  no  means  uncharted  territory  in  the  central  banking  community.  A
number of pioneering central banks, led by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand in 1997, regularly
publish numerical interest rate forecasts to reinforce their inflation targeting commitment, very
much in line with modern monetary theory.
15
The  experience  of  these  central  banks  shows  that  there  have  been  many  instances  where
guidance on the future path has been successful in coordinating disperse market views.
 But
16
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
there have also been instances of stark and persistent discrepancies between the path expected
by market participants and that published by policymakers.
17
Some academics have resolved this impasse by arguing that the optimal degree of transparency
depends  on  the  central  bank’s  ability  to  forecast  the  economy.
  Put  simply,  transparency
around future policy intentions is likely to be welfare enhancing if the central bank has established
a convincing track record of systematically beating private sector inflation forecasts.
18
But neither the private sector nor central banks have been particularly good recently at predicting
inflation.  More,  even  a  well-established  projection  track  record  may  not  be  enough  to  tilt  the
balance  in  favour  of  publishing  a  path  for  future  policy  –  mainly  for  four,  largely  interrelated,
reasons.
First, it is often more important how central banks communicate than what they communicate.
Back in 2004, Alan Blinder already pointed out that a monetary policy committee that releases
dispersed  views  could  cause  a  “cacophony”  in  communication  and  ultimately  create  more
confusion than clarity.
19
Indeed,  I  believe  that  one  reason  why  the  ECB’s  enhanced  forward  guidance  has  been  so
effective is precisely the fact that it represents the Governing Council’s unanimous view.
For a large committee to agree on an entire path of future policy rates is, however, a completely
different endeavour and unlikely to be possible in practice, in particular when global uncertainty
severely clouds the medium-term outlook.
20
Incidentally, most market criticism of the Federal Reserve’s dot plot focuses on the fact that the
dots represent individual views rather than the committee’s joint assessment.
21
Second,  even  a  credible  interest  rate  path  may  cause  misperceptions.  Consider  the  current
market  environment  that  is  characterised  by  regulatory-driven  demand  for  high  quality  liquid
assets and large securities holdings by central banks.
One tangible consequence of these two factors is an increased demand for safe assets that has
led to substantial and unprecedented negative term premia at the short end of the curve.
This means that the path for rates truly expected by investors is likely to be materially higher than
that suggested by plain forward rates. This greatly complicates the clarity of any guidance on the
future path.
A very simple way to see this is to compare market-based and survey-based expectations. You
can see this on my next slide, where the grey shaded area represents the difference between the
median  fed  funds  rate  projections  in  the  New  York  Fed’s  Survey  of  Primary  Dealers  and  the
nominal fed funds futures rates.
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Clearly, a good part of the discussion around this gap would vanish if the signals extracted from
market prices were treated more carefully. The chart shows a snapshot of the situation earlier
this year, but the argument holds more widely.
A third source of confusion, specific to the ECB, relates to the policy rate the central bank should
provide a numerical path for.
In the current environment of large excess liquidity the deposit facility rate is de facto our key
policy  rate.  But  charting  its  future  path  would  be  complicated  by  the  endogenous  impact  of
changes  in  excess  liquidity  on  its  level. At  longer  tenors  in  particular,  it  would  be  difficult  for
markets to disentangle the fraction of the path that reflects a genuine change in policy rates from
that reflecting changes in excess liquidity.
Numerical guidance on our main refinancing rate, by contrast, might be of little value to market
participants  at  shorter  horizons,  unless  we  were  to  convey,  in  parallel,  information  on  the
expected  width  of  the  rate  corridor.  In  fact,  one  might  even  argue  that  would  the  Governing
Council decide to publish a path for future interest rates, it would have to anticipate decisions on
the ECB’s long-term operational framework, such as whether we intend to retain the pre-crisis
framework  of  steering  short-term  rates  within  an  interest  rate  corridor  or  whether  we  plan  to
adopt a floor system. These are important decisions that need time and careful deliberations.
22
Finally, it is difficult to communicate about a concept on which the central bank itself has little or
poor information, such as the “terminal rate”, or the neutral level of the policy interest rate that is
expected to prevail once all shocks have dissipated.
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is a well-known fact that estimates of the natural rate of interest, commonly referred to as r*,
are  highly  uncertain  no  matter  which  approach  is  used.  For  example,  the  Holston-Laubach-
Williams  estimate  of  the  US  natural  rate  could  currently  be  anywhere  between  -3%  and
+5%. The same uncertainty applies to estimates of natural rates in other economies, including
the euro area.
23
24
So, all in all, a central bank needs to carefully weigh these risks against the potential benefits of
publishing a numerical forecast of the future policy rate path.
I would argue, however, that the second option I mentioned earlier for providing guidance on the
future  path,  if  warranted,  might  help  overcome  many  of  these  risks.  That  is,  rather  than
publishing  a  full  numerical  interest  rate  path,  policymakers  may  continue  to  signal  their
inclinations by clarifying their reaction function, even in the period of instrument normalisation.
For example, state-contingent forward guidance could clarify the pace with which policymakers
expect to remove policy accommodation beyond the timing to lift-off. Such guidance can help
improve  policy  predictability,  while  avoiding  the  pitfalls  that  precise  numerical  guidance  on  the
future path of short-term interest rates might entail.
One of the benefits of this type of forward guidance is that it remains a product of the economic
conditions that give rise to it – in other words, it remains Delphic, as it has always been. Should
those conditions change, policymakers may reformulate or repeal the guidance altogether.
Forward guidance linked to specific economic regimes – “Aesopian” forward guidance as it has
recently  been  dubbed  –  has  also  been  found  to  be  more  effective.
  Empirical  evidence
suggests  that  the  public  tends  to  pay  more  attention  to  policy  signals  in  unusual  economic
circumstances than during normal times.
25
26
This is certainly our experience with forward guidance in the current uncertain environment but it
also  suggests  that,  in  the  future,  given  the  complexity  of  chartering  a  multidimensional  policy
space,  a  further  clarification  of  our  reaction  function  might  help  market  participants  and  the
broader public to better anticipate the likely future path of short-term interest rates.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
Empirical  evidence  demonstrates  that  the  enhanced  forward  guidance  that  the  Governing
Council adopted in June 2018 has been effective in reducing uncertainty around the expected
future  path  of  short-term  interest  rates.  It  has  helped  to  preserve  the  current  accommodative
financial conditions on which the sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but
close to, 2% over the medium term is based.
Looking ahead, should economic conditions warrant, there might be a case for the Governing
Council  to  go  beyond  the  timing  to  lift-off  in  further  clarifying  the  pace  at  which  it  expects  to
remove policy accommodation. In the euro area context, I believe that the risks of publishing a
precise numerical forecast of the future path of policy rates are, however, likely to outweigh the
benefits.
Thank you.
1
2
See e.g. Campbell et al. (2016), “Forward Guidance and Macroeconomic Outcomes since the Financial Crisis,”
NBER  Macroeconomics  Annual  31  (2016),  pp.  283–357;  and  Charbonneau,  K.B.  and  L.  Rennison  (2015),
“Forward Guidance at the Effective Lower Bound: International Experience,” Bank of Canada Discussion Papers,
No 15–15.
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Today’s remarks focus on rate forward guidance and abstract from forward guidance on the future size and
composition of the central bank’s balance sheet.
Simple estimated policy rules suffer from two important caveats. First, they do not capture the two-way feedback
between monetary policy and the economy. Second, they are predicated on pre-crisis constant natural rates of
interest, while empirical analyses indicate that the natural rate is likely to have declined since then.
See  Cœuré,  B.  (2017),  “Central  bank  communication  in  a  low  interest  rate  environment”, Open  Economies
Review, Vol. 28, Issue 5, pp. 813–822; and European Central Bank (2014), “The ECB’s forward guidance”,
Monthly Bulletin, April.
See e.g. Altavilla, C., G. Carboni and R. Motto (2015), “Asset purchase programmes and financial markets:
lessons from the euro area”, ECB Working Paper No 1864; Andrade, P., J. Breckenfelder, F. De Fiore, P. Karadi
and O. Tristani (2016), “The ECB’s asset purchase programme: an early assessment”, ECB Working Paper No
1956; and Blattner, T.S. and M. Joyce (2016), “Net debt supply shocks in the euro area and the implications for
QE”, ECB Working Papers, No 1957.
A notable exception was the Federal Reserve’s forward guidance introduced in May 2004, to which I will refer
later in my remarks. The Federal Reserve’s date-based guidance issued in 2011 was of more “conventional”
nature as it was used in the face of increasing downside risks to the economic outlook. For an overview, see
Moessner, R., D. J. Jansen and J. de Haan (2017), “Communication About Future Policy Rates in Theory and
Practice: A Survey”, Journal of Economic Surveys, Vol. 31, Issue 3, pp. 678–711. For date-based guidance, see
Raskin, M. (2013), “The Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Date-Based Forward Guidance”, Federal Reserve
Board, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, No. 2013–37.
Back in 2006, then ECB President Trichet noted that “the ECB does not embark on a particular multi-monthly
pre-commitment  on  interest  rates  or  on  the  path  of  future  policy  interest  rates”.  See  Trichet,  J.C.  (2006),
“Monetary  Policy  and  Economic  Prospects  in  the  Euro  Area”,  speech  at  the  Institute  of  Economic  Affairs
conference  on  “The  State  of  the  Economy:  Overcoming  Key  Challenges  to  Sustainable  Economic  Growth”,
London, 6 February.
See, for example, Blinder, A.S., M. Ehrmann, M. Fratzscher, J. De Haan and D. J. Jansen (2008), “Central Bank
Communication and Monetary Policy: A Survey of Theory and Evidence", Journal of Economic Literature, 46 (4),
pp. 910–45.
See Morris, S. and H. S. Shin (2002), “Social Value of Public Information”, American Economic Review, 92 (5),
pp. 1521–1534; and Mishkin, F. (2004), “Can Central Bank Transparency Go Too Far?”, NBER Working Papers,
No 10829.
On a bigger scale, this relates to an issue I have commented upon extensively in recent times: the threat of
hysteresis. See Cœuré, B. (2017), “Scars or scratches? Hysteresis in the euro area”, speech at the International
Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, Geneva, 19 May; and Cœuré, B. (2018), “Scars that never were?
Potential output and slack after the crisis”, speech at the CEPII 40th Anniversary Conference, Paris, 12 April.
See, for example, Dotsey, M., S. Fujita and T. Stark (2017), “Do Phillips Curves Conditionally Help to Forecast
Inflation?,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Papers, No 17–26; and IMF (2017), “Recent wage
dynamics in advanced economies: drivers and implications”, IMF World Economic Outlook, October.
See Cœuré, B. (2017), “Central banks as risk managers”, speech at the 53rd SEACEN Governors’ Conference/
High-Level Seminar and the 37th Meeting of the SEACEN Board of Governors, Bangkok, 16 December. See also
Powell, J.H. (2018), “Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy”, speech at the symposium “Changing Market
Structure  and  Implications  for  Monetary  Policy",  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,
Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming, August  24;  and  Greenspan, A.  (2004),  “Risk  and  Uncertainty  in  Monetary  Policy”,
speech at the Meetings of the American Economic Association, San Diego, California, 3 January.
One reason for the formation of such expectations might have related to the growing appreciation of the strength
of the stock effect of central bank asset purchase programmes. See Cœuré, B. (2018), “The persistence and
signalling power of central bank asset purchase programmes”, speech at the 2018 US Monetary Policy Forum,
New York City, 23 February.
This could be done with or without confidence bands signalling the uncertainty around the central projection.
See,  for  example,  Woodford,  M.  (2003), Interest  and  Prices:  Foundations  of  a  Theory  of  Monetary  Policy,
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
Princeton University Press. The Reserve Bank of New Zealand was followed by the Norges Bank in 2005 and
the Sveriges Riksbank and the Bank of Israel in 2007, and a few others thereafter.
See, for example, Bongard et al. (2016), “Connecting the dots: market reactions to forecasts of policy rates and
forward guidance provided by the Fed”, DNB Working Papers, No 523; and Brubakk, L., S. ter Ellen and H. Xu
(2017), “Forward guidance through interest rate projections: does it work?”, Norges Bank Working Papers, No 6-
2017.
The case of the Riksbank in 2011 is probably the most prominent example in this respect. See Svensson, L.E.O
(2014), “Forward Guidance”, NBER Working Papers, No 20796.
See,  for  example,  Walsh,  C.  E.  (2007),  “Optimal  Economic  Transparency”, International  Journal  of  Central
Banking 3 (1), 5–36.
See Blinder, A. S. (2004), The Quiet Revolution in Central Banking Goes Modern, Yale University Press.
For the difficulties of committees in agreeing on a path of future interest rates, see also Blinder, A., C. Goodhart,
P. Hildebrand, D. Lipton and C. Wyplosz (2003), “How Do Central Banks Talk?”,  Geneva Reports on the World
Economy, No 3.
See, for example, Olson, P. and D. Wessel (2016), Improving The Fed’s Dots, The Brookings Institution.
See Cœuré, B. (2016), “The ECB’s operational framework in post-crisis times”, speech at the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City’s 40th Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, 27 August.
See Fiorentini, G., A. Galesi, G. Pérez-Quirós and E. Sentana (2018), “The Rise and Fall of the Natural Interest
Rate”, Banco de España Working Papers, No 1822.
See Fries et al. (2017), “National natural rates of interest and the single monetary policy in the Euro Area”,
Banque de France Working Papers, No 611.
See Moessner et al. (2017, op. cit.).
See, for example, Nimark, K. P. (2014), “Man-bites-dog business cycles”, American Economic Review 104(8):
2320–2367; and Woodford, M. (2005), “Central-bank communication and policy effectiveness”, paper presented
at the FRB Kansas City Symposium on “The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future,” Jackson Hole, WY, August
25–27.
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
