Benjamin E Diokno: Evolving inflation dynamics
Opening remarks by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the
central bank of the Philippines), at the Annual Research Conference "Inflation Dynamics in Asia
and the Pacific", co-hosted with the Bank for International Settlements, Manila, 19 August 2019.
 A very good morning to all and welcome to this year’s Annual Research Conference. 
The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP), which is currently celebrating the 70th year of central
banking in the Philippines, is pleased to co-host this conference with the Bank for International
Settlements (BIS).
The theme for this year is “Inflation Dynamics in Asia and the Pacific.” For central bankers, this
provides an opportunity to discuss and think about issues that have direct implications on the
core  mandate  of  central  banks.  For  academics  and  research  economists,  this  is  a  policy-
relevant research that may be openly shared and discussed. 
The global financial crisis (GFC) that started in 2008 challenged conventional monetary policy,
pushed  many  central  banks  outside  of  their  comfort  zones,  and  dramatically  altered  the
landscape of monetary policy. While it was a challenging time for policymakers, it provided fertile
ground for macroeconomic research. 
A particular topic, which received much attention among macroeconomists and central bankers
after and during the financial crisis, was inflation dynamics.  An advance Google search for the
phrase “inflation dynamics” for pre-crisis period 1997–2007 yielded 4,490 articles. For the post-
GFC period of 2009–2019, the search generated 13,000 articles – an increase of almost 190
1
percent.
Of  course,  we  are  all  well  aware  of  the  challenges  faced  by  central  banks  in  advanced
economies after the global crisis; that despite rock-bottom interest rates and massive liquidity
injections, inflation in their economies remained muted.  Why this was so was the subject of
many studies.  
But  perhaps  one  of  the  reasons  for  the  rapidly  rising  of  studies  on  inflation  dynamics  is  the
remarkable  decline  in  global  inflation,  which  began  even  before  the  GFC.    For  the  advanced
economies, this appears to have started in the 1990s, and for the emerging market economies,
the trend became apparent in the 2000s.
2
On  a  regional  basis, Asian  countries  show  lower  inflation  trends  among  emerging  markets.  
Studies reveal that a confluence of both structural and policy-related factors have contributed to
this trend in the region.
Among  these  include  the  marked  increase  and  changing  patterns  of  international  trade,
especially with the accession of China in the World Trade Organization; technological innovation;
trade  and  financial  market  integration;  demographic  transition;  structural  reforms  in  labor  and
product  markets  that  led  to  greater  competition  and  lesser  price  rigidities;  and  more  resilient
policy  frameworks  in  some  emerging  market  and  developing  economies—particularly  the
successful adoption of inflation targeting as well as the more effective and transparent exchange
3
rate, and monetary and fiscal policy frameworks (World Bank, 2019).
For central bankers, understanding inflation dynamics in relation to other economic variables is
crucial.    Most,  if  not  all,  central  bankers  will  agree  with  me  that  controlling  infla¬tion  is  a
demanding task.  Yes, the central bank can influence inflation by tightening and easing monetary
policy.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
However, the transmission process involves long and variable lags and a degree of uncertainty
amid the continuously evolving structure of an economy.  Add to this is the increasing influence
of global and regional factors on domestic inflation.  Amid these challenges, central banks need
to adopt a robust communication strategy to effectively anchor inflation expectations. 
Case in point, the Philippines’ headline inflation decelerated from an average of 15.1 percent in
the 1980s to 9.7 percent in the 1990s.  This slowed further to 3.8 percent from 2002 to 2018,
when the country adopted the inflation targeting framework.
The implementation of the inflation targeting framework in the last 16 years has enabled the BSP
to  manage  and  keep  inflation  within  manageable  bounds.  This  provided  support  to  greater
economic activity, despite international and domestic shocks.
Moreover, the improved transparency, greater accountability and more effective communication,
resulting from the implementation of inflation targeting, have enhanced the BSP’s credibility. This
led to the continued anchoring of market inflation expectations to monetary policy decisions.
However,  in  the  first  few  years  after  the  global  crisis,  the  BSP  experienced  pressure  in  its
monetary operations as short-term market interest rates diverged from the BSP’s policy rate. 
This was mainly due to strong capital inflows arising from the highly accommodative monetary
policies, the extraordinary liquidity support of central banks in advanced economies, the steady
stream  of  remittances  from  overseas  Filipinos,  and  revenues  from  Business  Process
Outsourcing (BPO). 
To address this divergence, the BSP launched the interest rate corridor (IRC) system in June
2016 to enhance the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  by  guiding  money  market  interest  rates
towards our policy rate.
To date, this objective has already been achieved as the market rate is now moving in line with
the BSP’s policy rate. In the long term, recalibrations and additions to the monetary policy tools
will strengthen the BSP’s influence on the demand and supply of money.   I am pleased to note
that the recently enacted amendments to the BSP charter restores our authority to issue our own
debt securities (even during normal times) which further enhances our monetary policy tool kit. 
Further, we will continue to pursue the reduction of   reserve requirements from the current 16
percent to single digit by 2023 to promote a more efficient financial system. This is part of the
BSP’s broad financial sector reform agenda.
We  expect  that  all  these  will  aid  in  the  further  development  of  Philippine  capital  markets  by
fostering money market transactions and active liquidity management by Philippine banks.
Indeed, the BSP’s monetary policy framework has been an effective tool in mitigating the risks
emanating  from  here  and  abroad.    However,  we  recognize  that  as  the  domestic  and  world
economy  evolve,  all  our  tools  need  to  be  kept  constantly  appraised.    We  continually  take
measures  to  further  enhance  the  implementation  of  our  inflation  targeting  framework  by
improving  our  array  of  models,  data,  software,  and  the  capability  of  our  technical  staff  and
modelers. 
We  likewise  ensure  prudent  exercise  of  judgement  by  using  all  relevant  data  in  our  policy
decisions.    Moreover,  we  recognize  the  value  of  being  able  to  communicate  the  basis  of  the
BSP’s policy decisions in a manner that is easy for the public to understand.
All these concepts, and more, will be the subject of this conference’s discussions in the next two
days.  We can rely on an eminent group of economists, who have joined us to present their work
and examine issues concerning inflation dynamics and monetary policy. 
As  central  bankers  and  policymakers,  we  appreciate  this  effort  to  continuously  expand  our
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
understanding of inflation dynamics and its implications on monetary policy.  This is especially so
amid  the  current  global  economic  environment  that  continues  to  shift  with  the  ongoing  policy
uncertainties and structural changes.
I wish you all a very fruitful conference and a pleasant stay in Manila.
1
2
3
 Search excluded patents and citations, conducted on 24 July 2019.
2 Based on the International Monetary Fund (IMF) World Economic Outlook April 2019 database. 
3 Inflation in Emerging and Developing Economies Evolution, Drivers, and Policies, eds. J. Ha, M. A. Kose, and
F. Ohnsorge. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
