Carlos da Silva Costa: Crisis management, resolution and recovery
in  small  European  countries  on  an  IMF  programme.  Comparative
presentation - the experience of Portugal
Address by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the Conference held
by  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  “Looking  back  and  looking  forward&#58;  How  do  we  preserve
monetary and financial stability?”, Reykjavik, 12 July 2019.
1.      Introductory remarks
 Good  morning.  I  would  like  to  thank  Governor  Már  Gudmundsson  for  his  kind  invitation  to
participate in today’s Conference and to share with you the Portuguese experience in regard
to adjustment programmes, including those of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Ten  years  after  the  start  of  the  great  financial  crisis,  the  Portuguese  economy  is  in  a  growth
phase,  economic  agents  continue  to  benefit  from  favourable  financing  conditions,  the  public
accounts have improved and the banking sector is stronger. Unemployment is now below pre-
crisis  levels  and  private  and  public  leverage  ratios  have  improved. In  the  coming  years,
economic  activity  in  Portugal  is  expected  to  continue  to  benefit  from  a  relatively
favourable economic and financial environment. This is good news, because growth is a key
ally in the process of rebalancing the economy.
However, not only in Portugal but in any economy, we cannot ignore the fact that growth periods
also tend to lead to a greater propensity to take on excessive risk. And, in the absence of a
sense  of  emergency  stemming  from  bad  economic  performance  or  imminent  financial
market  pressure,  policymakers’  continued  commitment  to  economic  reform  and  social
consensus becomes much harder.
This is why it is crucial in the current environment to bear in mind the lessons learned from the
crisis and, above all, to prevent the resurgence of the factors that led up to it. The Conference
today will certainly help enhance the level of awareness of all the participants.
2.      Portugal had to resort to assistance programmes on three occasions – with similar
problems, but different monetary policy regimes and prescriptions
As you know, in the first half of 2011, Portugal had to resort to official financing under an
assistance programme negotiated with the European Union (EU) and the IMF. Public and private
indebtedness had accumulated as a result of a credit boom dating from the mid-1990s, and large
current account deficits emerged. After twelve very difficult months, recourse to official financing
under an assistance programme became unavoidable.
Before speaking about the 2011 assistance programme and the factors that led to it, let me say
that  this  was  not  the  first  time  Portugal  had  to  resort  to  official  financial  assistance. We  had
already negotiated adjustment programmes with the IMF in 1977–1978 and in 1983. The
root cause of the accumulated imbalances was then essentially the same: excessive domestic
demand growth in relation to the productive capacity of the economy, leading to external debt
accumulation.
However, given that in the 1970s and 1980s Portugal was not part of a monetary union and
had full monetary autonomy, the symptoms of the crisis and the policy prescriptions at the time
had some important differences when compared to the 2011 crisis.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
In a context of monetary sovereignty, the imbalances translated into currency depreciation,
international reserves depletion and high and rising inflation rates. With monetary policy
fully available at national level, financial repression prevailed. The policy prescription consisted of
interest rate increases, credit growth targets, capital controls and the devaluation of the escudo,
to contain domestic demand and restore export competitiveness.
As a result of the adjustment strategy, the real value of wages, pensions and savings declined
sharply  and  wealth  was  transferred  from  creditors  to  debtors. Money  illusion  blurred  the
perception of the adjustment costs and of the fundamentally unbalanced burden-sharing.
Also, as nominal variables were targeted and competitiveness was restored in the short term,
structural  supply-side  imbalances  and  long-term  competitiveness  failed  to  be  properly
addressed. As a consequence, the country’s competitiveness remained fragile and anchored in
low wages.
The  2011  programme  was  agreed  in  a  completely  different  environment.  Without  the
monetary instrument, money illusion was no longer there and the policy prescription had to be
different.  As  a  result,  the  need  for  deleveraging  and  structural  supply-side  reforms  became
inescapable.
To better understand the crisis that hit the Portuguese economy in 2011 and to draw lessons for
the future, it is important to analyse the factors and policies that led to it.
3.      The 1995–2007 period – the accumulation of macroeconomic imbalances
To find the deepest roots of the problem, we have to go back in time to the mid-1990s.
The  Portuguese  economy  presented  no  significant  macroeconomic  imbalances  at  that  time.
Meanwhile, financial liberalisation and the prospect of joining the single currency translated into
cheaper  and  more  accessible  financing,  leading  to  strong  credit  growth,  and  a  fall  in
households’ savings rates. From 1995 to 2007, the stock of credit to the private sector increased
by  more  than  ¾  of  GDP,  whereas  households’  savings  rates  almost  halved  during  the  same
period.
Furthermore, the increase in indebtedness was mainly used to finance consumption and low-
return investments, mostly in the non-tradable sector. As a result, imports expanded and large
current  account  deficits  materialised,  without  a  corresponding  increase  in  the  economy’s
growth potential.
A macroprudential policy and a countercyclical fiscal policy would have helped contain the risks
associated  with  the  expansion  of  domestic  demand.  However,  macroprudential  policy  was
simply not part of the standard toolbox and the mostly pro-cyclical fiscal policy that was followed
aggravated  the  macroeconomic  imbalances.  In  fact,  in  the  1995–2007  period,  the  budget
deficit was, on average, 4.3% of GDP and, according to the most recent (revised) data, it was
never below the 3% limit. The large interest savings and windfall tax revenue coming from the
plummeting interest rates and booming private spending of the second half of the 1990s were
used to finance higher current public spending. Following the introduction of the euro, interest
rates stabilised as they had broadly converged to the best performers and tax revenue fell as a
result of decelerating activity in the early 2000s, causing a sharp deterioration in the public
accounts.
Large  and  persistent  current  account  deficits  translated  into  a severe  deterioration  of  the
Portuguese economy’s international investment position, which went from being close to
balance in the mid-1990s to almost –90% of GDP in 2007. Developments in gross external
debt over the same period were even more striking: external debt grew from approximately
60% to 195% of GDP.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
This rising external indebtedness was largely intermediated by the Portuguese banking
system.  Banks  raised  (mostly  short-term)  funds  in  the  international  financial  markets  and
converted these into (long-term) loans to the private sector. The banking sector’s loan-to-deposit
ratio increased from nearly 89% in 1998 to around 156% in 2007. The public sector also resorted
to foreign finance extensively.
In hindsight, it is clear that the pro-cyclical fiscal policy and less demanding regulatory context,
coupled  with  the  complacency  of  international  financial  markets,  contributed  decisively  to  the
accumulation of important macroeconomic imbalances from the mid-1990s.
4.      The 2008–2010 period – the global crisis, fiscal expansion and increasing difficulty
to access external financing
The  imbalances  that  I  referred  to  made  the  Portuguese  economy  extremely  vulnerable  to  the
international financial crisis that started in 2008 and to its contagion effects.  When the crisis hit,
followed by a global recession, an expansionary fiscal policy was once again adopted, and this
time it was particularly intense, despite the imbalances hitherto accumulated and the absence of
fiscal space. In 2010, the budget deficit was above 11% of GDP and gross public debt was
around 96% of GDP – of which, more than half was external debt.
The high and rising level of external indebtedness, coupled with weak growth of potential output,
fuelled  investors’  concerns  about  the  country’s  ability  to  pay  back  its  debt.  Domestic
banks and the government found it increasingly difficult to obtain external financing: banks had to
turn to the Eurosystem, whereas public debt was increasingly placed in domestic banks.
This situation ultimately resulted in the country’s inability to fund itself in the international
financial markets in the first half of 2011, after the 10-year yields had nearly doubled those of
the  previous  year,  reaching  over  9%. Recourse  to  external  official  financing  under  a
financial assistance programme became unavoidable.
5.      2011 onwards – the adjustment programme
The Economic and Financial Assistance Programme was agreed in May 2011 between the
Portuguese authorities, the EU and the IMF.
On  the  basis  of  a  strategy  aimed  at  restoring  international  financial  market  confidence  in  the
Portuguese  economy  and  fostering  competitiveness  and  sustainable  economic  growth, the
Programme rested on three major pillars:
Fiscal consolidation;
Safeguarding the stability of the financial system; and
Structural transformation of the Portuguese economy.
Banco de Portugal participated in the definition and implementation of the Programme’s financial
stability pillar, which aimed to:
Reinforce  solvency,  promote  gradual  and  orderly  deleveraging  and  ensure  the  stable
financing of the banking system;
Reinforce banking system supervision;
Improve the regulatory framework.
Banco  de  Portugal’s  responsibilities  in  the  Programme’s  implementation  were  mostly
related to its mandate to safeguard the stability of the Portuguese financial system. The
Bank  also  participated  directly  and  indirectly  in  other  ways  –  for  example  by  providing
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
economic and financial advice to the Government and reporting statistical data – and took part in
different  initiatives  led  by  the  Portuguese  authorities.  The  Bank  also  shared  responsibilities  in
processing  the  financial  assistance  disbursements  and  interest  payments,  acting  as  an
intermediary between the financing bodies and the Portuguese Treasury and Government Debt
Agency.
The total amount of financial assistance for the 2011–14 period was set at €78 billion, of
which  €52  billion  corresponded  to  funding  through  the  European  mechanisms  (the  European
Financial Stabilisation Mechanism and the European Financial Stability Facility) and €26 billion to
assistance from the IMF, under an Extended Fund Facility. Of this total amount, €12 billion was
allocated to a Bank Solvency Support Facility. Overall, eleven disbursements were made, which
corresponded  to  approximately  97%  of  the  agreed  package. The Programme expired on 30
June 2014. During the programme years, 12 review missions took place.
Remarkable  progress  was  achieved  with  the  implementation  of  the  financial  assistance
programme:
The budget deficit significantly declined and public debt was put on a downward trend;
Private sector deleveraging is ongoing; and
The banking sector is more robust, with a stronger liquidity position, higher solvency ratios
and improved asset quality.
The Portuguese adjustment programme has widely been regarded as a success story. In
my view, this success was due to three factors:
Programme ownership. Portugal was committed to the implementation of the programme,
its  urgency  was  understood  and  accepted  by  the  general  public  and  there  was  a
constructive  dialogue  with  social  partners.  This  ensured  the  success  of  the  quarterly
reviews.
The  speed  and  intensity  of  the  response  from  the  tradable  sector,  in  particular
exports,  was  key  to  the  rapid  rebalancing  of  the  external  accounts  and  mitigation  of  the
impact of lower domestic demand on the non-tradable sector.
The preservation of confidence in the banking sector, as evidenced by the behaviour of
deposits. This was crucial to preventing the economy from collapsing with a credit crunch
and avoiding the imposition of capital controls.
The  macroeconomic  adjustment  has  continued  after  the  programme  ended  in  2014,  with
encouraging results. After the end of the programme, Portugal was subject to post-programme
monitoring/surveillance  by  the  IMF  and  the  European  institutions.  The  post-programme
monitoring  by  the  IMF  ended  upon  the  conclusion  of  the  early  repayment  of  the  IMF  loan  in
December 2018.  An early repayment strategy was possible thanks to a marked improvement in
Portugal’s  market  access  conditions.  This  strategy  sent  a  positive  signal  to  the  markets,
improved the maturity profile of public debt and generated important interest savings.
6.            What  lessons  has  Portugal  learned  from  the  2011  crisis  and  the  adjustment
programme?
The  Portuguese  experience  shows  that  when investors’  concerns  about  the  sovereign’s
capacity to pay back debts intensify and a country is unable to fund itself on the international
markets, an adjustment programme must be negotiated.
The country’s authorities need to ensure ownership of the programme and a fair distribution
of costs across the society, so as to create a collective sense of purpose.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The reaction of the tradable sector, in particular exports, is crucial for rebalancing the external
accounts and mitigating the impact of lower domestic demand on the non-tradable sector.
Safeguarding confidence in the banking sector and the regular financing of the economy, i.e.
preserving  financial  stability,  is  also  a  key  factor  in  avoiding  a  credit  crunch  and  a  deeper
economic recession.
It is also important to keep in mind that adjustment programme goals are always short-term
by  nature.  Therefore,  the  adjustment  will  only  be  sustainable  if  there  are  structural  and
institutional  changes  that  prevent  the  recurrence  of  the  conditions  that  led  to  the  need  for
adjustment.
This  means  that,  despite  the  undisputed  progress  made  during  and  after  the  2011–2014
programme, there is no room for complacency. The experience of the past 40 years teaches
us  that  the  initial  impact  from  an  assistance  programme  will  only  be  sustainable  if  there  are
structural changes that foster higher potential growth.
7.      Major challenges ahead
Portugal has made remarkable progress since the time of its adjustment programme but
several vulnerabilities and important challenges still remain.
The  crisis  had  a  significant  impact  on  the  accumulation  of  capital,  with  negative
repercussions  on  potential  output.  Reducing  the  high  levels  of  indebtedness,  in  parallel  with
creating conditions that allow investment to increase (both in quantity and in quality) is essential
for improving the Portuguese economy’s current situation.
In  my  opinion,  the  real  challenge  Portugal  is  confronted  with  is  that  of generating  and
maintaining  high  levels  of  employment  and  productivity to  ensure  a  lasting  trajectory  of
growth and convergence with its European partners. This is a necessary condition to (i) bring
Portuguese workers’ wage levels closer to European standards; and (ii) finance the welfare state
in a context of unfavourable demographic developments.
This  means  that  we  need  to  activate  the four  most  critical  ‘levers’  of  employment  and
productivity:
Investment (it is vital to increase both the stock of capital and investment in intangibles,
learning from past mistakes, particularly by scrutinising investment projects in a far more
demanding way);
Skills (employees’  skills  have  improved  considerably  in  recent  years  but  significant  gaps
remain in relation to European averages);
Management  (management  frameworks  must  encourage  openness  to  risk  and  favour
decentralised decision-making);
Innovation  policies  (innovation-friendly  public  policies  are  also  critical  to  stimulating
productivity and employment).
A long-lasting improvement in the economic welfare of the Portuguese people depends crucially
on  the maintenance  of  a  sustainable  macroeconomic  framework  that  provides  suitable
incentives  for  economic  agents  and  on  following a reform agenda that supports long-term
sustainable growth.
8.      Concluding remarks
Although my intervention focused on the Portuguese situation, we should bear in mind that there
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
are also important challenges ahead at European level.
While  we  should  not  underestimate  how  much  has  been  achieved  in  recent  years,  in  the
aftermath of the financial crisis, we cannot ignore the fact that the foundations of Europe’s
financial architecture are still not sufficiently robust and need to be reinforced further to
withstand the impact of a future crisis,  to  preserve  financial  stability  and  safeguard  social
cohesion. Their strengthening should be a priority for policy-makers and relevant institutions.
In the case of both Portugal and the EU, we are talking about the deep institutional and
structural foundations of the economy. The task is hard, and it will take time to complete and
bear fruit. This means we have to start right away and be determined and tenacious, focusing on
what really matters from a long-run perspective.
At EU level, decisive political will to move forward with the completion of the banking
union is required. In the absence of this will, Europe must revisit its existing rules to safeguard
financial  stability.  This  is  in  the  best  interests  of  its  citizens.  Not  many  things  can  be  more
destructive to public trust in European institutions than threats to financial stability.
As  I  have  already  said,  one  of  the  key  elements  of  Portugal’s  economic  success  through  its
adjustment programme was the political consensus in a time of crisis. Given that today, at this
Conference, we are talking about lessons from the crisis, I believe that the importance of
collective  ownership  and  consensus  should  be  highlighted  both  for  Portugal  and  for
Europe as a whole.
Thank you.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
