Lael Brainard: Financial stability
Testimony  by  Ms  Lael  Brainard,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve
System,  before  the  House  Financial  Services  Subcommittee  on  Consumer  Protection  and
Financial Institutions, US House of Representatives, Washington DC, 25 September 2019.
 Thank  you,  Chairman  Meeks,  Ranking  Member  Luetkemeyer,  and  members  of 
subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to be here today to discuss financial stability.
The Federal Reserve’s Role in Promoting Financial Stability
the
Safeguarding  financial  stability  is  integral  to  achieving  the  Federal  Reserve’s  objectives  of  full
employment and price stability. We need only look back a decade to see the dramatic damage
from financial vulnerabilities that increased unchecked: millions of Americans lost their livelihoods
and their homes, businesses failed, and the government had to provide extraordinary support.
We learned from this experience that we must be especially vigilant to fortify the resilience of our
financial system in good times when vulnerabilities may be building.
Following the financial crisis, the Congress assigned important responsibilities for safeguarding
the stability of the financial system to domestic regulators. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform
and  Consumer  Protection  Act  created  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  (FSOC)  to
identify,  coordinate  and  respond  to  emerging  threats  to  the  financial  system.  The  Federal
Reserve was assigned responsibility for enhanced supervision of systemic firms, and we have
placed  great  emphasis  on  strengthening  our  approach  to  promoting  financial  stability.
Safeguarding  financial  stability  is  a  shared  responsibility,  requiring  cooperation  across  U.S.
regulatory  agencies,  as  well  as  with  foreign  regulators  and  central  banks.  Chair  Powell
represents the Federal Reserve in the FSOC, where we participate alongside other domestic
regulators and the Treasury, and I am pleased to be joined today by Dino Falaschetti of the Office
of  Financial  Research.  We  also  participate  in  a  variety  of  international  forums,  including  the
Financial  Stability  Board,  which  Vice  Chair  Randal  Quarles  chairs,  and  where  I  serve  as  the
Federal Reserve representative.
The Board instituted a new organizational framework to carry out our responsibilities on financial
stability.  We  created  the  Division  of  Financial  Stability  to  strengthen  our  cross-disciplinary
approach to the analysis of potential risks to the financial system and to support macroprudential
supervision of large financial institutions. I serve as chair of the Committee on Financial Stability,
which was created to guide staff work and make recommendations to the Board.  We develop a
financial stability assessment four times per year that is discussed by the Board and the Federal
Open Market Committee.
1
2
We have also taken steps to ensure transparency and accountability. Last year, I was pleased
that the Board accepted my recommendation to publish a public Financial Stability Report twice
a  year.   The  report  provides  an  account  of  our  assessment  of  vulnerabilities  as  well  as  a
summary of market participants’ views on potential risks to the financial system. Through this
public communication, we hope to gain feedback from the broader financial stability community
and the public on threats to the financial system.
How the Federal Reserve Approaches Financial Stability
Our approach to financial stability recognizes that the financial system and the broader economy
are intertwined. The buildup of financial imbalances in good economic times has the potential to
amplify  shocks  in  a  downturn  and  push  the  economy  away  from  full  employment  and  price
stability.  When  financial  vulnerabilities  build,  adverse  developments  can  lead  to  disruptions  in
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
credit and other financial services, potentially amplifying declines in employment and economic
activity. Our goal is to promote a resilient financial system that is able to continue meeting the
demands of households and businesses for financial services when faced with adverse events.
Accordingly, we have developed a systematic forward-looking approach to assessing financial
vulnerabilities  that  could  amplify  negative  shocks,  transmitting  damage  more  broadly.  The
historical record here and abroad points to several key areas of vulnerability. Vulnerabilities can
build when there is excessive or poorly underwritten borrowing across many households, such
that incomes are not keeping up with debt payments. Similarly, elevated levels of corporate debt
can create problems not only for the borrowers, but also for lenders, when the business cycle
turns, and debt servicing obligations or refinancing prove challenging, leading businesses to pull
back on investment and employment. Vulnerabilities historically have often been associated with
conditions  where  asset  prices  are  higher  than  what  economic  fundamentals  support,  often
because of elevated risk appetite, potentially leading to much larger-than-expected losses should
a  sharp  correction  occur.  Separately,  we  track  leverage  in  the  financial  system  for  signs  that
banks and other financial intermediaries potentially have inadequate buffers of capital to absorb
adverse  shocks,  increasing  the  risk  of  their  distress  and  possible  spillovers  to  the  financial
system. We also monitor funding risk in the financial system. Where banks or nonbank financial
intermediaries fund long-term lending through potentially flighty short-term borrowing, it may pose
the risk of a loss of confidence, precipitating a withdrawal of short-term funding and strains on
institutions as they try to meet withdrawals.
To illustrate, I will provide my brief assessment in each of these areas. In contrast to the years
preceding the crisis, when household borrowing was growing at a pace far above that of gross
domestic  product  (GDP),  it  has  since  come  down  and  is  now  growing  more  slowly  than  the
economy overall. Moreover, while much of the increase before the crisis reflected borrowing that
proved unsustainable, more recent borrowing has been concentrated among households with
strong credit profiles. That said, the increase in student debt in recent years deserves attention,
although not primarily through the prism of financial stability.
The  regulated  financial  sector  is  more  resilient,  owing  to  far-reaching  reforms  as  well  as
favorable  conditions.  Insurers  appear  generally  well  capitalized,  and  broker-dealers,  including
those  not  affiliated  with  large  bank  holding  companies,  have  reduced  their  leverage  in  recent
years. In contrast, there has been some evidence of rising use of leverage by hedge funds over
the past couple of years. Large banks increased both the size and quality of their capital buffers
following the crisis, although the risk-weighted capital ratio at the largest banks has moved down
somewhat as payouts have exceeded earnings over the past couple of years.
Financial  reform  has  reduced  funding  risks  associated  with  banks  and  money  market  funds.
Large  banks  subject  to  liquidity  regulation  are  less  reliant  on  unstable  short-term  wholesale
funding and have thicker liquidity buffers. Money market reforms have also reduced funding risks.
A  range  of  asset  prices  remain  high  relative  to  historical  benchmarks,  even  with  the  recent
financial market volatility. In particular, yields on high-yield corporate bonds relative to Treasury
securities  remain  somewhat  narrow  on  a  historical  basis  despite  recent  increases.  Similarly,
although they have moved up in recent months, spreads on leveraged loans remain in the bottom
half of their range since the financial crisis, which is notable given the evidence of weakening
protections.  Finally,  capitalization  rates  on  commercial  real  estate  properties,  which  measure
annual  income  relative  to  prices  for  recently  transacted  properties,  have  been  low  relative  to
Treasury yields. In addition to generating losses for investors, declines in valuations could make
it  more  challenging  for  firms  to  obtain  or  extend  financing—especially  among  risky,  indebted
firms—which in turn could be amplified by the high levels of risky corporate debt.
Finally, business borrowing has risen more rapidly than GDP for much of the current expansion
and now sits near its historical peak. The run-up in corporate debt has brought the ratio of debt to
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
assets  close  to  its  highest  level  in  two  decades  on  an  overall  basis,  and  this  is  also  true  for
speculative-grade  and  unrated  firms. And  whereas  previously,  mostly  high-earning  firms  with
relatively  low  leverage  were  taking  on  additional  debt,  analysis  of  detailed  balance  sheet
information indicates that firms with high leverage, high interest expense ratios, and low earnings
and cash holdings have been increasing their debt loads the most. Historically, high leverage has
been  linked  to  elevated  financial  distress  and  retrenchment  by  businesses  in  economic
downturns.
Regarding corporate bonds outstanding, recent years have witnessed little change in the relative
shares of investment-grade bonds and high-yield bonds. Credit quality has deteriorated within the
investment-grade segment, where the share of bonds rated at the lowest investment-grade level
has  reached  near-record  levels. As  of  mid-2019,  just  over  half  of  investment-grade  corporate
bonds outstanding were at the lowest end of the investment-grade segment. In comparison, the
share of high-yield bonds outstanding that are rated “deep junk” has stayed flat at about one-third
over the past few years, well below the financial crisis peak of 50 percent.
In an economic downturn, widespread downgrades of these low-rated investment-grade bonds
to  speculative-grade  ratings  could  induce  some  investors  to  sell  them  rapidly—for  instance,
because lower-rated bonds have higher regulatory capital requirements or because bond funds
have limits on the share of non-investment-grade bonds they hold. This concern may be higher
now than in the past, since total assets under management in bond mutual funds have more
than  doubled  in  the  past  decade,  and  these  funds  now  hold  about  one-tenth  of  the  corporate
bond market. The redemption behavior of investors in these funds during a market correction is
unclear.
Further  down  the  credit  quality  ladder,  there  has  been  sizable  growth  in  leveraged  lending,
accompanied  by  a  notable  deterioration  in  underwriting  standards.  Net  issuance  of  leveraged
loans to risky borrowers grew rapidly last year and boosted leveraged loans outstanding to a level
exceeding  $1  trillion  overall,  although  the  pace  of  issuance  has  slowed  more  recently  as  the
interest  rate  environment  has  shifted.  While  leveraged  loans  have  traditionally  had  important
investor protections, covenants for leveraged loans issued in the past few years have weakened
dramatically, and they often include features that increase opacity and risk. A substantial share of
the  leveraged  loans  are  packaged  in  collateralized  loan  obligations  (CLOs)  whose  issuance
increased  sharply  in  2018  and  has  since  moderated  somewhat.  Many  large  banks  originate
leveraged  loans  with  an  intent  to  distribute,  often  to  CLOs.  While  the  direct  exposures  of  the
banking  system  in  the  form  of  loan  portfolios  and  warehousing  exposures  can  be  monitored,
there are also indirect exposures, including through bank investments in CLOs and credit lines,
which bear vigilance. By contrast, nonbank exposures are harder for us to track. To date, the
default rate on leveraged loans has been at the low end of its historical range, and corporate
credit conditions have been favorable, with low interest expenses and low expected default rates.
However, if spreads rise sharply or economic conditions deteriorate significantly, we could see
downgrades, refinancing challenges, rising delinquencies and defaults, and losses to investors.
Recognizing that financial imbalances played a key role in each of the past three U.S. downturns,
policy  should  seek  to  moderate  financial  vulnerabilities  when  they  are  likely  to  materially
exacerbate  an  economic  downturn,  leading  to  deeper  declines  in  output  and  higher  levels  of
unemployment. Both economic theory and econometric evidence point to the risk that excesses
in  corporate  debt  markets  could  amplify  adverse  shocks  and  contribute  to  job  losses.  Over-
indebted businesses may face payment strains when earnings fall unexpectedly, and they may
respond by pulling back on employment and investment. The slowdown in activity lowers investor
demand for risky assets, thereby raising spreads and depressing valuations. As business losses
accumulate,  and  delinquencies  and  defaults  rise,  banks  are  less  willing  or  able  to  lend.  This
dynamic feeds on itself, potentially amplifying downside risks into more serious financial stresses
or a downturn.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
toolkit 
regulatory 
to  strong 
through-the-cycle 
requirements,  our 
Recognizing  this  feedback  loop  between  financial  imbalances  and  the  macroeconomy,  in
addition 
includes  a
countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB). The CCyB is intended to require the nation’s largest banks
to  build  capital  when  conditions  are  favorable  to  sustain  resilience  for  times  when  there  is
elevated  risk  of  above-normal  losses,  which  often  follows  periods  of  rapid  asset  price
appreciation or credit growth. CCyB requirements are intended to lean against rising risks at a
time  when  the  degree  of  monetary  tightening  needed  to  achieve  the  same  goal  could  be
inconsistent  supporting  full  employment  and  target  inflation.  And  they  build  resilience,  unlike
monetary  policy.  Second,  when  conditions  are  favorable,  the  covered  banks  could  build  the
modest additional buffer simply by moderately reducing payouts. Third, the CCyB is a simple,
predictable, and slow-moving tool that applies equally across all large banks. It does not single
out  shortfalls  in  particular  banks  or  result  in  volatility  in  individual  banks’  stressed  capital
requirements.  Finally,  the  additional  capital  can  be  released  when  conditions  deteriorate  to
ensure the ability of large banks to lend into a downturn.
The criteria for implementing the CCyB described in the Board’s framework of September 2016
are calibrated so that the CCyB will be above its minimum value of zero about one-third of the
time, when financial vulnerabilities are assessed to be in the upper one-third of their historical
distribution.  The Board votes once a year on the level of the CCyB. The Board voted to set the
5
CCyB at zero earlier this year.  Many other jurisdictions have raised their CCyB above zero.
3
4
Going  forward,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  financial  vulnerabilities  closely,  recognizing  the
potential  for  such  vulnerabilities  to  amplify  any  negative  developments.  We  plan  to  share  our
assessment with you in our next Financial Stability Report later in the year and look forward to
hearing from you about any issues that warrant further monitoring.
Thank you and I look forward to your questions.
1
2
3
4
5
Federal Reserve Board www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/bios/board/default.htm. 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, Financial Stability Report (Washington: Board of Governors).
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, “Framework for Implementing the U.S. Basel III Countercyclical
Capital Buffer (PDF),” September 8, 2016.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, “Federal Reserve Board Votes to Affirm the Countercyclical Capital
Buffer (CCyB) at the Current Level of 0 Percent,” press release, March 6, 2019.
the 
See 
www.bis.org/bcbs/ccyb/index.htm#table.
Basel  Committee 
on 
Banking 
Supervision, 
updated  August 
21, 
2019,
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
