Philip Lowe: Remarks at Darwin Community Dinner
Remarks  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  at  the  Darwin
Community Dinner, Darwin, 2 July 2019.
Good evening.
 A very warm welcome to this community dinner with the Reserve Bank Board and senior staff.
This morning the Board held its monthly meeting here in Darwin. We were very kindly hosted at
the Northern Territory Parliament building. The last time the Board met in Darwin was more than
50 years ago. I am sure that we all agree that this was too long ago. I can promise that you will
be seeing more of us over the years ahead. This evening I would first like to talk a little about our
history in the Northern Territory and how things have changed and then talk about today’s interest
rate decision.
The  previous  Board  meeting  in  Darwin  was  held  on  5  June  1968.  The  Board  met  here  to
celebrate  the  opening  of  the  RBA’s  new  branch  on  Bennett  Street.  We  operated  out  of  this
building  for  around  30  years,  distributing  banknotes  and  providing  banking  services  to  the
Northern  Territory  Government.  But  beyond  this,  as  many  of  you  will  know,  the  building  on
Bennett  Street  has  played  an  important  role  in  the  history  of  Darwin.  It  was  one  of  the  few
buildings that was virtually unscathed by the fury of Cyclone Tracy in 1974. This meant that in the
aftermath of Tracy, we were able to make our banking chamber available to the police to use as
their emergency coordination and communications centre.
In some ways this experience symbolises the RBA itself. We build on strong foundations, we
place  great  weight  on  stability  and  resilience,  and  we  seek  to  serve  the  public  interest.  Our
presence here in Darwin did all this. I am very pleased to see that the building is still serving the
public interest as the location of Tourism Top End.
In preparation for our meeting today, I looked back at our archives for details of the meeting in
1968, including the Minutes of that meeting, which I am glad to be releasing today. That meeting
was  the  second  last  for  Governor  Nugget  Coombs  before  he  retired.  Reading  this  archival
material reminded me of how much the world has changed.
One obvious change is in the way that monetary policy works. The main decision made by the
Board at that meeting back in 1968 was that Dr Coombs recommend to the Treasurer that he
adjust the interest rates on trading bank fixed deposits and saving bank deposits by a quarter of
a per cent. From today’s perspective, this is remarkable on two levels. First, the RBA was just
making a recommendation to the government – this was obviously before the days of central
bank  independence.  Second,  monetary  policy  was  exercised  partly  through  direct  controls  on
bank  deposit  rates.  So,  it  was  a  very  different  world.  Today,  the  Board  makes  its  decisions
independently of government and we don’t directly control bank interest rates for households and
businesses.
Another  difference  that  struck  me  was  the  way  the  Board  worked  and  its  approach  to  risk
management.  In  1968,  the  Board  was  made  up  of  nine  men;  no  women  at  all.  This  is  very
different from our Board today. In 1968, the Board also took advantage of the trip to Darwin to
make a one-week tour of northern Australia, visiting Gladstone, Weipa, Gove, Kununurra, the Ord
River, Dampier, Mt Tom Price and Alice Springs. Almost the entire Board travelled together on a
private chartered plane. Today, our risk management guidelines wouldn’t allow this. They don’t
allow us to travel all together and we certainly don’t take private planes. And unfortunately, the
demands of today’s globalised world make such an extensive trip very difficult in 2019.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
One  other  area  where  there  has  been  much  change  since  the  Board  last  met  here  is  in  the
relationship between the Original people of this land and the wider Australian community. In his
last  months  as  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  Nugget  Coombs  began  work  as  Chair  of  the
Council for Aboriginal Affairs. The Council was established by Prime Minister Harold Holt after the
1967 referendum. Coombs worked tirelessly for almost three decades advocating for Indigenous
rights and social justice. He was a strong advocate of land rights and encouraging pride in the
identity of Indigenous Australians. He cared passionately about their welfare and the preservation
of cultural values and traditions.
Over the years, Nugget Coombs developed a particularly strong relationship with the people of
Arnhem  Land,  especially  with  the  Yolngu  around  Yirrkala.  You  might  recall  that  they  were
responsible  for  the  Yirrkala  bark  petitions  submitted  to  the Australian  Parliament  in  1963.  The
Yolngu wanted to be consulted as the traditional custodians of the land before the government
granted mining rights. These petitions were an important step towards the native title rights that
exist today. Coombs travelled to Yirrkala many times, the first time being shortly before the Board
met here in 1968. He wanted the interests of the community to be recognised and was looking
for ways that its members could benefit from the new bauxite mine at Gove.
Tomorrow, I will have the great honour of being able to travel to East Arnhem Land and Yirrkala
just as Nugget Coombs did. I am incredibly pleased to be accompanied on this trip by Susan
Moylan-Coombs. Susan was born in Darwin and is part of the group known today as the Stolen
Generations  and  was  adopted  by  Nugget’s  oldest  son,  John,  and  John’s  wife,  Jan.  Susan  is
continuing  her  Grandfather’s  work  as  a  tireless  advocate  for  the  welfare  and  prosperity  of
Indigenous Australians. We will be accompanied by two members of the Reserve Bank Board:
Phil Gaetjens, who is also Secretary of the Australian Treasury, and Catherine Tanna, who is
also Chief Executive of Energy Australia. We are all greatly looking forward to the visit. We want
to pay our respects to the traditional owners of the land and to learn from their wisdom. We will
also  unveil  a  plaque  to  Nugget  Coombs,  whose  ashes  are  buried  both  at  Yirrkala  and  the
Australian National University in Canberra, which he helped found in 1946. I am hopeful that our
visit will help keep alive the long relationship between the RBA and the people of East Arnhem
Land.
Turning back to today’s Board meeting, we had a thorough discussion of the Northern Territory
economy. We discussed the difficulties that you have faced as investment has fallen following
the completion of the LNG plant. The effects of this decline in investment are evident right across
the economy: in the housing market; in retail spending; in the labour market; and in public sector
finances. As we reviewed these indicators, though, we were struck by the fluidity of the labour
market and the population here in the Northern Territory. Despite employment falling significantly
over the past year, the unemployment rate remains below the national rate.
At our Board meeting we also discussed the future opportunities facing the Northern Territory
economy,  including  in  the  areas  of  defence  infrastructure,  tourism,  the  cattle  industry,  and  in
minerals and gas. In addition, we considered the progress that has been made in addressing the
sources  of  disadvantage  for  Indigenous  Australians.  There  are  many  areas  where  Nugget
Coombs would have been pleased to see the progress that has been made. But, regrettably,
there are too many areas where not enough progress has been made and where the progress
has been too slow.
I would now like to turn to today’s interest rate decision.
As I am sure you are aware, this morning the Board decided to reduce the cash rate by a quarter
of a percentage point to 1 per cent. This follows a similar adjustment last month. This easing of
monetary policy will support jobs growth across the country and provide greater confidence that
inflation will be consistent with the medium-term target of 2 to 3 per cent.
Our assessment is that despite the Australian economy having performed reasonably well over
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
recent years, there is still a fair degree of spare capacity in the economy. It is both possible and
desirable  to  reduce  that  spare  capacity.  We  should  be  able  to  achieve  a  lower  rate  of
unemployment than we currently have and we should also be able to reduce underemployment.
If,  as  a  country,  we  can  do  this,  we  could  expect  a  further  lift  in  wages  growth  and  stronger
growth in household incomes. These would be good outcomes. As I hope you are aware, the
Reserve  Bank’s  monetary  policy  framework  is  centred  on  the  inflation  target,  but  the  ultimate
objective  of  our  policies  is  to  promote  the  collective  economic  prosperity  of  the  people  of
Australia.
In  the  Board’s  judgement,  the  easing  of  monetary  policy  last  month  and  this  month  will  help
promote our collective welfare. At the same time, though, we recognise that the benefits are not
evenly distributed across the community and that there are some downsides to monetary easing.
Partly for these reasons, over recent times I have been drawing attention to the fact that, as a
nation, there are options other than monetary easing for putting us on a better path.
One option is fiscal support, including through spending on infrastructure. This spending adds to
demand  in  the  economy  and  –  provided  the  right  projects  are  selected  –  it  also  adds  to  the
country’s  productive  capacity.  It  is  appropriate  to  be  thinking  about  further  investments  in  this
area, especially with interest rates at a record low, the economy having spare capacity and some
of our existing infrastructure struggling to cope with ongoing population growth.
Another  option  is  structural  policies  that  support  firms  expanding,  investing,  innovating  and
employing people. A strong, dynamic, competitive business sector generates jobs. It can help
deliver the productivity growth that is the main source of sustainable increases in our wages and
incomes. So, as a country, we need to keep focused on this.
To repeat the point, it is important that we think about the task ahead holistically. Monetary policy
does  have  a  significant  role  to  play  and  our  decisions  are  helping  support  the  Australian
economy. But, we should not rely on monetary policy alone. We will achieve better outcomes for
society as a whole if the various arms of public policy are all pointing in the same direction.
The  two  cuts  in  interest  rates  the  Board  has  delivered  recently  will  make  an  important
contribution  to  putting  us  on  a  better  path  and  winding  back  spare  capacity.  It  is  also  worth
drawing your attention to a few other developments.
First, borrowing costs for almost all borrowers are now the lowest they have ever been. As an
illustration, the Australian Government can borrow for 10 years at around 1.3 per cent, the lowest
rate it has faced since Federation in 1901. It is also able to borrow for 30 years at an interest rate
of less than 2 per cent. Private businesses and households also face low borrowing rates. This
is not only because official interest rates are low, but because credit spreads are low too.
Second,  Australia’s  terms  of  trade  have  risen  again,  largely  due  to  higher  iron  ore  prices.
Investment in the resources sector is also expected to increase over the next few years, after
having declined steadily for almost seven years. To be clear, we are not expecting another major
mining boom, but we are expecting a solid upswing in the resources sector, which will help the
overall economy. I hope that, in time, the effects of this upswing will be felt here in the Northern
Territory too.
Third, the exchange rate has depreciated over the past couple of years and, on a trade-weighted
basis, is at the bottom end of its range of recent times. This is helping support important parts of
the economy.
And  fourth,  we  are  expecting  stronger  growth  in  household  disposable  income  over  the  next
couple  of  years,  partly  due  to  the  expected  implementation  of  the  low  and  middle  income  tax
offset. Stronger growth in incomes should support household spending.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Together, these various developments will help the Australian economy.
At  the  same  time,  though,  we  need  to  watch  global  developments  very  closely.  Over  recent
times, the uncertainty generated by the trade and technology disputes between the United States
and China has made businesses in many countries nervous about investing. Many are preferring
to sit on their hands, rather than commit to capital spending that is difficult and costly to reverse.
The  result  is  less  international  trade  and  a  weakening  trend  in  investment  globally.  If  this
continues for too much longer, the effects on economic growth are likely to be significant. For
this reason, the risks to the global economy remain tilted to the downside.
The combination of these persistent downside risks and continuing low rates of inflation has led
investors  around  the  world  to  expect  interest  rate  reductions  by  all  the  world’s  major  central
banks.  In  Europe  and  Japan,  official  interest  rates  are  already  negative  but  investors  are
expecting  the  central  banks  to  go  further  into  negative  territory.  And  in  the  United  States,
investors are expecting a substantial reduction in interest rates over the period ahead. This is
quite a different world from the one we were facing earlier in the year.
What all this means for us here in Australia is yet to be determined.
We need to remember that the central scenario for both the global and Australian economies is
still for reasonable growth, low unemployment and low and stable inflation. As I discussed a few
moments ago, there are a number of developments that are providing support to the Australian
economy. So we will be closely monitoring how things evolve over coming months. Given the
circumstances, the Board is prepared to adjust interest rates again if needed to get us closer to
full employment and achieve the inflation target in a way that supports the collective welfare of all
Australians, including those who call the Northern Territory home.
Thank you once again for joining us this evening and for listening.
Related Information
Minutes of the June 1968 Reserve Bank Board meeting
Historical photographs of the Reserve Bank’s presence in Darwin
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
