Mario  Draghi:  Twenty  years  of  the  European  Central  Bank’s
monetary policy
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  ECB  Forum  on
Central Banking, Sintra, 18 June 2019.
 Central banks were often established in the past with the aim of bringing stability in the aftermath
of historic episodes. The Bank of England was established during the sovereign debt crisis of
1690, when the government was unable to obtain funding in the market. The Federal Reserve
was created after a series of panics that had rocked the US banking system in the late 19th and
early 20th century.
The  euro  was  introduced  20  years  ago  in  response  to  repeated  episodes  of  exchange-rate
instability and the need to secure the Single Market against competitive devaluations. The ECB
was established as the keystone of the new Economic and Monetary Union (EMU).
The first decade of the Monetary Union was characterised by calm macroeconomic conditions,
with  limited  volatility  and  steady  economic  growth.  The  second  decade,  however,  has  seen
profound shifts in the prevailing environment – including both financial and sovereign debt crises
– and our monetary policy strategy has had to adapt with it.
I would like to discuss this morning why this evolution came about and how it was achieved –
and what the past twenty years can tell us about the ECB’s monetary policy in the future.
Monetary policy before the crisis
The  ECB’s  mandate  is  given  by  the  Treaty  as  price  stability.  In  1998,  the  Governing  Council
defined price stability as inflation within a range of 0-2% over the medium term, which constitutes
the ECB’s objective. Then, in 2003, the Governing Council clarified that, within this range, it would
aim at a focal point of below, but close to, 2%, which remains our medium-term aim to this day.
This was a formulation that differed from the standard inflation-targeting framework of the time,
which was typically based around a point target for inflation. But there were sound reasons why
this definition was put in place.
In common with central banks across the world, the ECB faced a macroeconomic environment
before the crisis that was predominantly defined by low volatility and moderate shocks, with the
distribution of shocks to inflation almost exclusively to the upside. In the euro area, HICP energy
prices  rose  by  80%  between  January  1999  and  September  2008.  Under  these  conditions,
establishing  a  strong  reaction  function  against  high  inflation  was  seen  as  crucial  to  anchor
inflation  expectations.  Emphasising  an  aim  of  “below,  but  close  to,  2%”  was  seen  to  imply  a
stronger commitment than a standard inflation-targeting regime.
But monetary policy in the euro area also faced a special challenge. The ECB was a new central
bank operating in a very heterogeneous monetary union, which created a particular imperative to
establish  inflation  credibility.  Establishing  a  commitment  to  controlling  inflation  was  seen  as
critical  to  cement  lower  inflation  expectations  across  the  euro  area  –  especially  as  moderate
inflation was a relatively new phenomenon in several Member States.
Over  the  two  decades  up  to  1999,  inflation  had  averaged  above  3%  in  10  of  the  12  original
members. The decline in inflation in many countries in the run-up to EMU was in large part due to
expectations  of  joining,  as  well  as  to  a  number  of  extraordinary  actions  taken  by  national
authorities to meet the convergence criteria. From 1989–99, long-term inflation expectations had
fallen from a range of between 2.5-4.5% in the four largest euro area economies to below 2%
across the board. It was now the task of the new central bank to lock in this moderate-inflation
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
environment  –  and  it  did  so  successfully.  Over  the  next  decade,  inflation  expectations
internalised the ECB’s commitment to keep inflation down and remained below 2%.
But  this  process  of  building  inflation  credibility  had implications  for  the  ECB’s  reaction
function. As a matter of accounting, stabilising headline inflation largely caused by its volatile
components  must  mean  that  core  inflation  adjusts  downwards.  Rolling  cross-correlations
between energy inflation and core inflation show that an episode of high energy inflation between
1999 and 2007 was accompanied by a period of rapidly softening core inflation.  As  a  result,
between January 1999 and September 2008 headline inflation in the euro area averaged 2.35%,
while core inflation averaged 1.7% and exceeded 2% less than 15% of the time.
1
Central  banks  in  other  advanced  economies  faced  similar  challenges  and  adopted  similar
strategies. But differences in mandates – and length of track records in fighting inflation – led to
differences in how much energy price pass-through to headline inflation others were comfortable
accommodating.  For  example,  energy  prices  in  the  US  CPI  rose  by  160%  over  the  same
period   and  headline  inflation  averaged  2.9%.  The  Federal  Reserve  reacted  less  to  headline
3
inflation, and core CPI inflation averaged 2.2%.
2
The upshot was that the euro area entered the crisis having succeeded in establishing its anti-
inflation credentials, but with underlying inflation dynamics that were perhaps relatively weaker.
This was not immediately apparent, as inflation stayed at fairly elevated levels for more than four
years after the Lehman crash. Monetary policy responded decisively to the global financial crisis
and disinflationary threats seemed to pass quickly.
But in hindsight it seems reasonable to conclude that the inflation process was vulnerable to
a shift in the environment – which is what transpired from around mid-2012 onwards.
New challenges for monetary policy
At  this  point,  headline  inflation  in  the  euro  area  began  what  was,  in  retrospect,  a  prolonged
downward drift, and core inflation fell by almost a percentage point from mid-2012 to early 2014.
There are two factors that help explain the switch to a disinflationary trend.
First,  the distribution  of  shocks  to  inflation  moved  strongly  to  the  downside  and  the
amplitude  of  the  shocks  increased.  Supply-side  shocks  gradually  dissipated  over  the  years
following the Lehman crash and the sovereign debt crisis. Negative demand shocks, driven at
different times by domestic demand and external demand, instead became the dominant source
of  macroeconomic  fluctuations  in  the  euro  area.  ECB  analysis  shows  that  negative  demand
shocks have weighed on euro-area inflation by more than 1 percentage point on average since
the start of the crisis. In the previous ten years, their effect was neutral overall, with periods of
4
both upward and downward pressure.
The second factor was a change in the macroeconomic policy mix. While in the first phase of
the crisis fiscal and monetary policy had eased in tandem – with fiscal policy loosening by a total
of about 3% of potential GDP between 2008 and 2010  – thereafter the stance of monetary and
fiscal  policy  decoupled.  The  euro  area  fiscal  stance  turned  contractionary  in  response  to  the
sovereign  debt  crisis,  tightening  by  around  4  percentage  points  of  potential  GDP  until  2013  –
years the euro area was mostly in recession.
5
This stands in contrast to the United States, where fiscal policy eased more in the initial phase of
the crisis, by about 6.5% of potential GDP in total over 2008–09, and then tightened by about
5.5% of potential GDP from 2011 to 2013 when the economic recovery was underway. The euro
area  was  forced  onto  a  different  path  by  the  need  in  some  countries  to  re-establish  fiscal
credibility. But on aggregate the euro area did not have less fiscal space than the United States:
public  debt  levels  were  similar  in  the  two  jurisdictions.  The  key  difference  was  that  fiscal
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
stabilisation  in  the  United  States  took  place  at  the  federal  level,  while  the  euro  area  lacked  a
central fiscal instrument to act counter-cyclically.
The policy mix is also relevant when it comes to financial sector policies. After the crisis, it
was inevitable that banking sectors in advanced economies would have to deleverage, both to
cover losses and to re-focus their business models. The United States ensured that this process
happened  quickly  and  early. Around  500  failing  banks  were  resolved  by  the  Federal  Deposit
Insurance Corporation, while struggling banks were stress-tested and recapitalised through the
Troubled Assets  Relief  Program.  Between  2008  and  2011,  US  banks  improved  their  leverage
ratio  by 1.6 percentage points from 7.2 to 8.8%.
6
The response in the euro area was more sluggish. Despite being more levered than their US
peers  before  the  crisis,  euro  area  banks  improved  their  leverage  ratio  by  just  0.9  percentage
points, from 3.7 to 4.6%, and this was achieved more through shedding assets and less through
raising capital.  This in part reflected the fact that, due to the fiscal rules, public support for banks
was  concentrated  in  countries  with  fiscal  space.  Moreover,  without  a  common  resolution
framework  only  around  50  banks  were  resolved  in  the  euro  area  in  this  period.   So  a  weak
banking sector continued to drag on the euro area economy, which was especially pernicious
given the importance of the banking lending channel for financing.
7
8
In  sum,  the  ECB  faced  an  environment  where  there  was both  an  increasing  need  to  counter
demand shocks, and an increasing burden on monetary policy to do so. Our strategy therefore
had to adapt to these new circumstances in order to continue delivering our aim.
Monetary policy responded first in the summer of 2012 by acting to defuse the sovereign debt
crisis,  which  had  evolved  from  a  tail  risk  for  inflation  into  a  material  threat  to  price  stability.
Announcing  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  established  our  commitment  to  counter
unwarranted  redenomination  risks  in  sovereign  debt  markets  and  acted  as  a  powerful  circuit
breaker.
While OMT was never activated, the effect of its announcement was equivalent to that of a large-
scale asset purchase programme: spreads in vulnerable countries fell on average by more than
400  basis  points  over  the  next  two  years.  The  macroeconomic  impact  of  OMT  was  also
analogous to other purchase programmes: ECB research finds that the GDP and price effects of
OMT were broadly in line with those estimated for the QE that took place in the United States and
9
the United Kingdom.
But  the  lingering  effects  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  dented  the  capacity  of  this  stimulus  to
counter the new disinflationary trend. The delayed bank deleveraging process in the euro area
began to accelerate, with banks further shrinking their balance sheets and paying back central
bank loans. Bank balance sheets declined by around 20 percentage points of GDP in 2013 alone
and, at the end of 2013, credit growth to the private sector was contracting at a rate of 2.4%
relative to a year earlier. On the demand side, risk appetite in the private sector collapsed, with
investment subtracting 1.6 percentage points from GDP growth in 2012.
The ECB therefore reacted again in 2013 by cutting its main refinancing rate twice, from 0.75%
to  0.25%,  and  by  seizing  the  opportunity  of  the  launch  of  European  banking  supervision.  We
carried out a comprehensive assessment of bank balance sheets, with the aim of steering the
process  of  balance  sheet  repair  towards  a  positive  macroeconomic  outcome.  Banks
strengthened their balance sheets by over €200 billion in advance of the outcome.
 That put the
banking sector in a much stronger position to transmit our policy.
10
But at this point, the euro area economy was hit by a further downward shock to inflation in the
form of a 60% collapse in oil prices in mid-2014, which pushed inflation into negative territory.
With underlying inflation already weakening, inflation expectations began to be affected. As the
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
scope  for  further  interest  rate  cuts  was  now  limited,  it  became  increasingly  clear  that our
reaction function needed to evolve to address these new challenges.
Indeed,  since  our  policy  framework  had  never  been  systematically  tested  by  persistent
disinflationary risks, the ECB had not yet had a chance to demonstrate its intolerance for inflation
remaining below its aim for protracted periods of time.
At the same time, there appeared to be some uncertainty about which tools we would be able to
deploy if the effective lower bound were reached. Unlike in other major economies, the ECB had
not resorted to large-scale asset purchases during the global financial crisis and its aftermath.
Some even questioned the legality of asset purchases in Europe and their effectiveness in our
bank-based economy.
If  these  uncertainties  were  not  removed,  there  was  a  material  risk  that  falling  inflation  could
become  self-fulfilling:  the  public  could  begin  expecting  a  smaller  monetary  policy  response  to
future inflation undershoots, and revise their inflation expectations further downwards.
In other words, credibility now relied not just on perceptions of the ECB’s commitment to our aim,
but also on perceptions of our capability to fight low inflation. We responded to the situation in
three main ways.
The ECB’s policy response
The first was by clarifying the symmetry of our aim. While the quantitative definition of price
stability was instrumental in establishing credibility in the first decade, its asymmetric formulation
may  have  led  to  misperceptions  in  a  low-inflation  environment.  Thus  we  made  clear  that  our
policy aim was fully symmetric,
 and it was symmetric around the level that we had established
in 2003: below, but close to, 2%. It is achieving this aim over the medium term that steers our
policy decisions.
11
12
In addition, we clarified that symmetry meant not only that we would not accept persistently low
inflation,  but  also  that  there  was  no  cap  on  inflation  at  2%. As  I  emphasised  on  a  number  of
occasions,
 our medium-term orientation implies that inflation can deviate from our aim in both
directions,  so  long  as  the  path  of  inflation  converges  back  towards  that  focal  point  over  the
medium-term policy horizon.
The  second  part  of  our  response  was  to lay  out  the  tools  we  would  use  to  counteract
downside inflation risks, which began with a speech I gave in Amsterdam in April 2014 that
described  three  contingencies  and  the  instruments  we  would  use  to  react  to  them.  This
established  unambiguously  that  we  had  no  taboos  about  resorting  to  unconventional
measures.
  There  was  nothing  institutionally  or  legally  special  about  the  euro  area  that
prohibited monetary policy from adding accommodation once the lower bound was approached.
Third, as these various contingencies played out, we operationalised our reaction function by
launching a series of new instruments. We broke through the zero bound by  lowering  our
deposit  rate  into  negative  territory,  launched  our  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations
(TLTROs)  to  provide  incentives  for  banks  to  lend,  and  implemented  a  large-scale  asset
purchase programme (APP) of public and private securities. These measures were deliberately
designed to work as a package and ease the stance through complementary channels, working
both through banks and the wider matrix of capital markets.
13
The negative rate policy challenged market expectations that when rates reached zero they could
only go up and not down, which helped skew the distribution of rate expectations and depress the
short end of the risk-free curve – a key benchmark for the pricing of bank loans. Asset purchases
in tandem compressed yields at the longer end of the curve, pushing down mortgage rates and,
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
at the same time, making bank lending to firms more attractive in risk-adjusted terms. And bank-
based transmission was amplified by the TLTROs, which lowered funding costs and increased
competition among banks.
14
Over time, we also enhanced this framework with state- and date-based forward guidance ,
allowing us to rotate the marginal tool for determining the policy stance from asset purchases to
forward  guidance  as  the  economic  outlook  improved.  Today,  this  forward  guidance  links  our
expectations  on  the  path  of  future  rates  to  the  path  of  inflation  towards  our  aim,  leading  to
automatic easing if the convergence path towards 2% is delayed.
There is mounting evidence that these instruments have been effective.
 Negative rates have
proven to be a very important tool in the euro area – and more so than they would have been in
an economy like the United States. Indeed, the Federal Reserve eschewed negative rates in part
due to concerns about their effects on the money market industry, which are key intermediaries
in the US financial system. But this factor is less relevant in the euro area, since many money
market funds have been operating as Variable Net Asset Value funds, and therefore are more
flexible to extend duration to seek additional returns.
15
Furthermore, the euro area is a relatively open economy for its size, with total trade making up
51% of GDP,
 compared with 27% in the United States. This means that the impact of negative
rates on inflation and financing conditions via the exchange rate is more powerful.
16
In short, faced with a new environment of downside risks and limited conventional policy space,
the ECB showed that it had no shortage of tools available to respond. Unconventional measures
proved suitable substitutes for conventional ones: using market prices to construct a so-called
“shadow short rate”,
 the stimulus provided appears broadly in line with the recommendation of
monetary policy rules as suggested by recent academic research.
17
18
Our capacity to react in this way was made possible by the flexibility embedded in our mandate –
a flexibility that was confirmed by the recent ruling of the European Court of Justice. This not only
affirmed that asset purchases are a legal instrument of monetary policy in the euro area, but
emphasised  the  broad  discretion  of  the  ECB  in  using  all  our  tools  in  a  necessary  and
proportionate way to achieve our objective.
19
However, although we have seen the successful transmission of monetary policy to financing
conditions,  and  from  financing  conditions  to  GDP  and  employment,  the  final  legs  of  the
transmission process to wages and inflation have been slower than we expected. Wage growth
is now strengthening as slack in the labour market diminishes. But the pass-through from wages
to  prices  remains  weak.  This  may  reflect  structural  changes,  such  as  globalisation  and
digitalisation, which mostly have an impact at this point in the pricing chain. Lingering cyclical
weakness  can  also  delay  wage-price  pass-through  as  firms  elect  to  squeeze  margins  rather
than raise prices and risk losing market share.
Current challenges for monetary policy
In this environment, what matters is that monetary policy remains committed to its objective
and does not resign itself to too-low inflation. And, as I emphasised at our last monetary
policy meeting, we are committed, and are not resigned to having a low rate of inflation forever or
even for now.
We have described the overall orientation of our monetary policy as being “patient, persistent
and prudent”. Patient, because faced with repeated negative shocks we have had to extend the
policy  horizon. Persistent,  because  monetary  policy  will  remain  sufficiently  accommodative  to
ensure the sustained convergence of inflation to our aim. And prudent, because we will pay close
attention to underlying inflation dynamics and to risks and will adjust policy appropriately.
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  orientation  is  expressed  in  our  current  policy  framework,  which  allows  us  to  adapt  our
forward guidance and react flexibly as the macroeconomic situation evolves. That was illustrated
by the monetary policy decisions taken at our meeting earlier in June.
Looking forward, the risk outlook remains tilted to the downside, and indicators for the coming
quarters point to lingering softness. The risks that have been prominent throughout the past year,
in particular geopolitical factors, the rising threat of protectionism and vulnerabilities in emerging
markets have not dissipated. The prolongation of risks has weighed on exports and in particular
on manufacturing.
In  the  absence  of  improvement,  such  that  the  sustained  return  of  inflation  to  our  aim  is
threatened, additional stimulus will be required.
In our recent deliberations, the members of the Governing Council expressed their conviction in
pursuing our aim of inflation close to 2% in a symmetric fashion. Just as our policy framework
has evolved in the past to counter new challenges, so it can again. In the coming weeks, the
Governing  Council  will  deliberate  how  our  instruments  can  be  adapted  commensurate  to  the
severity of the risk to price stability.
We remain able to enhance our forward guidance by adjusting its bias and its conditionality to
account for variations in the adjustment path of inflation.
This applies to all instruments of our monetary policy stance.
Further cuts in policy interest rates and mitigating measures to contain any side effects remain
part of our tools.
And the APP still has considerable headroom. Moreover, the Treaty requires that our actions are
both necessary and proportionate to fulfil our mandate and achieve our objective, which implies
that the limits we establish on our tools are specific to the contingencies we face. If the crisis has
shown anything, it is that we will use all the flexibility within our mandate to fulfil our mandate –
and we will do so again to answer any challenges to price stability in the future.
All these options were raised and discussed at our last meeting.
What matters for our policy calibration is our medium-term policy aim: an inflation rate below, but
close to, 2%. That aim is symmetric, which means that, if we are to deliver that value of inflation
in the medium term, inflation has to be above that level at some time in the future.
But  fiscal  policy  should  play  its  role.  Over  the  last  10  years,  the  burden  of  macroeconomic
adjustment  has  fallen  disproportionately  on  monetary  policy.  We  have  even  seen  instances
where fiscal policy has been pro-cyclical and countered the monetary stimulus.
If  the  unbalanced  macroeconomic  policy-mix  in  the  euro  area  in  part  explains  the  slide  into
disinflation, so a better policy mix can help bring it to a close. Monetary policy can always achieve
its objective alone, but especially in Europe where public sectors are large, it can do so faster
and with fewer side effects if fiscal policies are aligned with it.
Recreating fiscal space by raising potential output through reforms and public investment, and
respecting the European fiscal framework will maintain investor confidence in countries with high
public debt, low growth and low fiscal space. But as fiscal expansion in the other countries may
have limited spillovers, national fiscal policies remain constrained. So work on a common fiscal
stabilisation  instrument  of  adequate  size  and  design  should  proceed  with  broader  scope  and
renewed determination.
Conclusion
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let me conclude.
The euro was introduced twenty years ago in order to insulate the Single Market from exchange-
rate crises and competitive devaluations that would threaten the sustainability of open markets. It
was also a political project that, relying on the success of the Single Market, would lead to the
greater integration of its Member States.
On both counts, the vision of our forefathers has scored relatively well. Imagine where the Single
Market would be today, after the global financial crisis and rising protectionism, had all countries
in Europe been free to adjust their exchange rates. Instead, our economies integrated, converged
and coped with the most severe challenge since the Great Depression. That leads me to four
observations.
First, the integration of our economies and with it the convergence of our Member States has
also  greatly  increased.  Misalignments  of  real  effective  exchange  rates  between  euro  area
countries are about a half those between advanced economies with flexible exchange-rates or
countries linked by pegged exchange rates and they have fallen by around 20% in the second
decade of EMU relative to the first.
20
Second, the dispersion of growth rates across euro area countries, having fallen considerably
since 1999, is since 2014 comparable to the dispersion across US states. Third, this has been
driven  in  large  part  by  the  deepening  of  European  value  chains,  with  EMU  countries  now
significantly more integrated with each other than the United States or China are with the rest of
the world.
 Most EMU countries export more with each other than with the US, China or Russia.
Fourth, employment in the euro area has reached record highs and in all euro area countries but
one stands above its 1999 level.
21
But the remaining institutional weaknesses of our monetary union cannot be ignored at the cost
of seriously damaging what has been achieved. Logic would suggest that the more integrated
our  economies  become,  the  faster  should  be  the  completion  of  banking  union  and  capital
markets union, and the faster the transition from a rules-based system for fiscal policies to an
institution-based fiscal capacity.
The journey towards greater integration that our citizens and firms started twenty years ago has
been long, far from finished, and with broad but uneven success. But overall, it has strengthened
the  conviction  of  our  peoples  that  it  is  only  through  more  Europe  that  the  implications  of  this
integration  can  be  managed.  For  some,  that  trust  may  lie  in  a  genuine  faith  in  our  common
destiny, for others it comes from the appreciation of the greater prosperity so far achieved, for yet
others that trust may be forced by the increased and unavoidable closeness of our countries. Be
that as it may, that trust it is now the bedrock upon which our leaders can and will build the next
steps of our EMU.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Rostagno et al. (2019), forthcoming.
The difference in growth in energy prices between the euro area and the United States can in large part be
attributed to differences in tax rates, which are typically higher in the euro area. As such, the share of the final
price paid by consumers accounted for by oil is much smaller in the euro area, and CPI energy prices are less
affected in aggregate by movements in oil prices. That being said, the energy component has a higher weight in
euro area HICP, so a 1 percentage point increase in CPI energy prices has a greater impact on headline
inflation in the euro area than in the United States.
The equivalent figure for core PCE inflation was 1.9%.
Rostagno et al. (2019), op.cit.
Measured as the change in the cyclically adjusted primary balance.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Leverage ratio calculated as Tier 1 capital/Total assets. Source: Consolidated Banking Data for euro area banks
and FDIC data for US banks.
It should be noted that deleveraging was also more challenging in Europe than in the US, given the larger size
of bank balance sheets relative to GDP and less developed market-based finance.
Sapir, A. and Wolff, G. (2013), “The neglected side of banking union: reshaping Europe’s financial system”,
note presented at the informal ECOFIN on 14 September 2013, Vilnius.
Altavilla,  C.,  Giannone,  D.  and  Lenza,  M.  (2016),  “The  Financial  and  Macroeconomic  Effects  of  the  OMT
Announcements”, International Journal of Central Banking, 12(3): 29–57.
See ECB’s in-depth review shows banks need to take further action, Press release, 26 October 2014.
For example, in the February 2014 press conference, the ECB President responded to a question about the
symmetry of the inflation objective on the downside by recalling that the central bank did not “have a cool attitude
at all with respect to the present level of inflation rates […] these levels of inflation for a protracted period of time,
are a risk on their own […] so, we [still] have a symmetric attitude.”
For example, at the press conference in March 2016, the ECB President noted that “our mandate is defined as
reaching an inflation rate which is close to 2% but below 2% in the medium term, which means that we’ll have to
define the medium term in a way that, if the inflation rate was for a long time below 2%, it will be above 2% for
some time. The key point is that the Governing Council is symmetric in the definition of the objective of price
stability over the medium term.”
Draghi,  M.  (2014),  “Monetary  policy  communication  in  turbulent  times”,  Speech  at  the  Conference  De
Nederlandsche Bank 200 years: Central banking in the next two decades, Amsterdam, 24 April.
Forward guidance on interest rates had first been introduced in 2013 but was enhanced in this period.
For  a  review  of  the  evidence  see  Hammermann,  F.,  Leonard,  K.,  Nardelli,  S.  von  Landesberger,  J.  (2019),
“Taking stock of the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programme after the end of net asset purchases”, ECB
Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2019.
Measured as total extra-euro area trade in goods and services as a share of GDP.
See Krippner, L. (2015), Term Structure Modeling at the Zero Lower Bound: A Practitioner’s Guide, Palgrave-
Macmillan.
Bobeica, E., Ciccarelli, M. and Vansteenkiste, I. (2019), “The link between labor cost and price inflation in the
euro area,” Working Paper Series, No. 2235, European Central Bank.
Fidora, M., Giordano, C. and Schmitz, M. (2017), “Real exchange rate misalignments in the euro area”, Working
Paper Series, No. 2108, ECB.
Imbs, J. and L. Pauwels (2019), “Twenty Years of Convergence”, paper presented at ECB Forum on Central
Banking, 17–19 June 2019.
Hartmann, P. and Smets, F. (2018), “The first twenty years of the European Central Bank: monetary policy,”
Working Paper Series, No. 2219, European Central Bank, forthcoming in the Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
