Mario Draghi: IMFC Statement
Statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  thirty-ninth
meeting of the International Monetary and Financial Committee, Washington DC, 12 April 2019.
 The  euro  area  economy  expanded  at  a  slower  pace  in  2018,  following  robust  growth  in  the
previous year. The economy grew by 1.9% in year-on-year terms, marking a sizeable moderation
in  the  pace  of  economic  expansion.  While  there  are  signs  that  some  of  the  idiosyncratic
domestic factors dampening growth are fading, global headwinds continue to weigh on euro area
growth developments. The persistence of uncertainties, related to geopolitical factors, the threat
of  protectionism  and  vulnerabilities  in  emerging  markets,  is  leaving  marks  on  economic
sentiment. At the same time, the economy continues to exhibit a high level of capacity utilisation,
and  the  unemployment  rate  in  the  euro  area  has  continued  its  downward  trend,  falling  to  its
lowest level since October 2008. The number of people in employment has increased by more
than  ten  million  since  mid-2013.  Nevertheless,  since  the  Annual  Meetings  in  October  2018,
incoming data have been weak, in particular in the manufacturing and tradable goods sectors,
reflecting a slowdown in external demand. This was compounded by some country and sector-
specific  factors  that  are  turning  out  to  have  somewhat  longer-lasting  effects  than  previously
expected.
Our  monetary  policy  measures  continue  to  support  domestic  demand,  which  remains  the
backbone  of  the  euro  area’s  economic  growth.  Private  consumption  is  driven  by  employment
gains  and  rising  wages. Although  business  investment  has  lost  some  momentum,  economic
fundamentals  remain  supportive;  high  levels  of  capacity  utilisation,  together  with  favourable
financing conditions and robust demand, are expected to continue to further support investment.
In addition, the expansion in global activity is expected to continue, although at a slower pace.
Since the Annual Meetings, short-term economic projections have been revised downwards. The
latest ECB staff projections put annual real GDP growth at 1.1% in 2019, 1.6% in 2020 and 1.5%
in 2021. At the same time, the persistence of uncertainties related to geopolitical factors, rising
protectionism  and  vulnerabilities  in  emerging  markets  poses  downside  risks  to  the  euro  area
growth outlook.
Headline inflation in the euro area has lately been hovering around 1.5%, somewhat lower than in
the summer of last year, when it was around 2.0%. This largely reflects the volatility in the annual
rate  of  change  in  energy  prices.  Measures  of  underlying  inflation  remain  generally  muted,  but
labour cost pressures have strengthened and broadened amid high levels of capacity utilisation
and tightening labour markets. Looking ahead, underlying inflation is expected to increase over
the medium term, supported by our monetary policy measures, the ongoing economic expansion
and  rising  wage  growth.  The  latest  ECB  staff  projections  foresee  annual  euro  area  headline
inflation of 1.2% in 2019, 1.5% in 2020 and 1.6% in 2021.
At  its  last  monetary  policy  meeting  on  10 April,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  confirmed  that  it
continues to expect the key ECB interest rates to remain at their present levels at least through
the end of 2019, and in any case for as long as necessary to ensure the continued sustained
convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The
Governing  Council  also  intends  to  continue  reinvesting,  in  full,  the  principal  payments  from
maturing securities purchased under the asset purchase programme for an extended period of
time past the date when we start raising the key ECB interest rates, and in any case for as long
as  necessary  to  maintain  favourable  liquidity  conditions  and  an  ample  degree  of  monetary
accommodation.  The  Governing  Council  also  reiterated  its  readiness  to  adjust  all  of  its
instruments, as appropriate, to ensure that inflation continues to move towards the Governing
Council’s inflation aim in a sustained manner.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
In March, the Governing Council had decided to launch a new series of quarterly targeted longer-
term refinancing operations (TLTRO-III), starting in September 2019 and ending in March 2021,
each with a maturity of two years, with a view to helping to preserve favourable bank lending
conditions  and  the  smooth  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  The  Governing  Council  will
communicate  the  precise  terms  of  the  TLTRO-III  at  one  of  the  forthcoming  meetings.  In
particular,  the  pricing  of  the  new  TLTRO-III  operations  will  take  into  account  a  thorough
assessment  of  the  bank-based  transmission  channel  of  monetary  policy,  as  well  as  further
developments  in  the  economic  outlook.  In  the  context  of  the  Governing  Council’s  regular
assessment,  it  will  also  consider  whether  the  preservation  of  the  favourable  implications  of
negative interest rates for the economy requires the mitigation of their possible side effects, if
any, on bank intermediation.
Overall,  an  ample  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  remains  necessary  to  safeguard
favourable  financing  conditions  and  support  the  economic  expansion,  and  thus  to  ensure  that
inflation remains on a sustained path towards levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the
medium term. Significant monetary policy stimulus is being provided by the forward guidance on
the key ECB interest rates, reinforced by the reinvestments of the sizeable stock of acquired
assets and the new series of TLTROs.
In the euro area, in order to reap the full benefits of our monetary policy measures, other policy
areas must contribute more decisively to raising the longer-term growth potential and reducing
vulnerabilities.  The  implementation  of  structural  reforms  in  euro  area  countries  needs  to  be
substantially stepped up. The mildly expansionary euro area fiscal stance and the operation of
automatic  stabilisers  are  providing  support  to  economic  activity. At  the  same  time,  countries
where government debt is  high  need  to  continue  rebuilding  fiscal  buffers. All  countries  should
reinforce  their  efforts  to  achieve  a  more  growth-friendly  composition  of  public  finances.  The
transparent  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  EU’s  fiscal  and  economic  governance
framework, over time and across countries, remains essential.
Continued  domestic  economic  growth  last  year,  together  with  micro-  and  macroprudential
actions,  also  helped  support  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  financial  sector.  The  aggregate
Common  Equity  Tier  1  ratio  of  significant  institutions  reached  14.2%  at  the  end  of  the  third
quarter of 2018. Outstanding non-performing loans (NPLs) declined by €94 billion in the first three
quarters of 2018, and euro area significant institutions’ aggregate NPL ratio stood at 4.2%, down
from  5.2%  a  year  earlier.  However,  banks’  profitability  in  the  euro  area,  as  in  some  other
jurisdictions, remains low.
Risk-taking  in  parts  of  the  financial  and  real  estate  markets  contributed  to  mild  signs  of
overstretched  valuations  in  some  areas,  with  marked  cross-country  differences,  while  risks
continued  to  grow  in  the  non-bank  financial  sector.  In  view  of  the  current  conditions,  it  is
particularly important to continue improving the resilience of the financial sector and to ensure
that it has sufficient buffers in place that can be released in times of stress.
The euro area is now more robust than before the crisis. The Economic and Monetary Union
(EMU)  needs  to  be  strengthened,  first  and  foremost  by  implementing  what  has  already  been
agreed  and  finishing  the  common  projects  we  have  started:  completing  the  banking  union,
strengthening  the  operational  capacity  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  in  full  compliance
with Union law, and making ambitious progress on the capital markets union. In particular, the
agreement on establishing a backstop to the Single Resolution Fund, which demonstrates the
euro area’s commitment to completing the banking union, now needs to be operationalised to
ensure that it works swiftly and effectively. We should also rekindle trust in our economic and
fiscal framework by making it more effective in ensuring sound policymaking at national level.
These actions are also further supported at the European level by the recent decision to launch a
euro area budgetary instrument for convergence and competitiveness. A more complete EMU
will be a better foundation for a stable and resilient euro area economy that contributes to global
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
economic growth and financial stability.
We take note of the fact that the European Council has agreed on an extension of the United
Kingdom’s  membership  of  the  EU  until  31  October  2019,  provided  the  UK  participates  in  the
forthcoming European Parliament elections in accordance with Union law. While this means that
the  risk  of  a  cliff  edge  has  likely  been  avoided  in  the  short  term,  the  financial  sector  should
continue to prepare for all possible contingencies, including a disorderly Brexit.
The  outlook  for  the  euro  area  fundamentally  depends  on  global  growth  momentum.  The
escalation of trade tensions, the downturn in global manufacturing and a turn in the tech cycle
have increased the euro area’s external headwinds. Multilateral cooperation is needed to reduce
trade frictions and mitigate  risks  of  major  disruptions  to  global  economic  activity  and  financial
stability. Preserving openness is crucial if the global economy is to thrive and secure its growth
potential.
The  key  elements  of  the  post-crisis  regulatory  reforms  have  been  agreed.  We  must  remain
committed  to  implementing  them  and  evaluating  their  effects  to  ensure  they  are  working  as
intended. At the same time, while progress has been made towards more resilient market-based
finance, it is important to continue monitoring emerging risks and vulnerabilities in the financial
system and to address them if necessary.
The ECB sees a need for the Global Financial Safety Net (GFSN) to be further strengthened with
a  strong,  quota-based  and  adequately  resourced  IMF  at  its  centre.  In  the  absence  of  an
agreement  on  an  increase  in  IMF  quotas,  the  ECB  would  strongly  welcome  a  substantial
increase in the New Arrangements to Borrow as a second-best outcome towards ensuring that
the Fund has adequate resources. While the first line of defence for national and international
stability is to have sound domestic policies in place, the IMF’s role at the centre of the GFSN
strongly supports global financial stability.
The ECB welcomes the start the G20 has made in addressing some of the proposals from its
Eminent Persons Group. We look forward to further proposals on the finance track being taken
up in the second half of the year.
Finally,  as  regards  the  forthcoming  Financial  Sector Assessment  Program  Review,  the  ECB
would welcome an agreement for holding a regular euro area review along the same frequency
as for other major currency areas in the future.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
