  MOBILE MONEY @ 10 - STAKEHOLDER WORKSHOP 
              DR. MAXWELL OPOKU-AFARI 
FIRST DEPUTY GOVERNOR 
BANK OF GHANA 
 THURSDAY, JULY 11, 2019 
KEMPINSKI GOLD COAST HOTEL, ACCRA 
  Honourable Minister of Finance 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good morning 
 
1.  Thank you for the invitation and it is a pleasure to join you 
today at this workshop which also celebrates ten years of 
MTN  Mobile  Money.  The  chosen  theme  “A Decade of 
Driving  Financial  Inclusion  and  Socioeconomic 
Development – The Impact of MoMo”  is  broadly  aligned 
with  the  Bank  of  Ghana’s  strategy  to  widen  the  scope  of 
mobile  money  transactions  and  in  so  doing  promote 
financial inclusion in the economy. Over the past ten years, 
MTN  has  been  a  pacesetter  in  the  mobile  money  space 
with  the  introduction  of  innovative  financial  products  and 
services  to  their  clients.  I  am  sure  this  workshop  will 
among  others  provide  an  opportunity  for  MTN  to  share 
insights on its successes within the mobile money space. 
 2. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Bank of Ghana has undertaken 
several  reforms  to  deepen  financial  intermediation  and 
promote  financial  inclusiveness  for  broad-based  economic 
growth.  More  recently,  the  Bank  has  taken  advantage  of 
the  rapid  technological  advances  and  widespread  use  of 
2 
 mobile  money  to  accelerate  the  country’s  migration  to 
 electronic payments so as to expand the scope of financial 
services to all and sundry. Consequently, the Bank worked 
towards  achieving  a  more  diversified  financial  system 
which  meets  the  needs  of  various  consumers  and 
businesses.  
 3.  The start of these developments dates back to 2007 when 
the  payment  infrastructure  was  established,  that  is,  the 
Ghana  Interbank  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems.  This 
was  further  enhanced  with  supportive  structures  such  as 
the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  System  (RTGS),  the 
electronic  Central  Securities  Depository  (CSD), 
the 
Automated  Clearing  House  (ACH)  system  and  Codeline 
Cheque Truncation system.  
 4.  Considering  the  rapid  growth  in  mobile  money  usage 
within  the  financial  system,  the  Branchless  Banking 
Guidelines  was  issued  in  2008,  and  replaced  with  the 
Guidelines  for  Electronic  Money  Issuers  in  2015  after  a 
significant  policy 
intervention.  This  provided 
the 
supportive  regulatory  environment  for  mobile  money 
services kick started partnerships between banks and non-
 3 
bank  entities  including  telecommunication  companies  to 
 set  up  subsidiaries  to  offer  mobile  money  services  and 
deliver innovative financial products and services.  
 5.  The  objective  was  to  leverage  on  the  prevailing  high 
mobile  phone  penetration  to  deliver  affordable  financial 
services  to  the  growing  financially  excluded  segment  of 
the population. These regulatory interventions incentivised 
telecommunication  companies  to  partner  banks  in  the 
provision  of  innovative  products,  culminating  in  increased 
uptake  of  mobile  money services.  The  outcome  has  been 
overwhelming  and  we  are  currently  witnessing  rapid 
expansion in mobile money usage pioneered by the telcos 
and fintechs. 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, recent developments suggest that 
6. 
mobile  money  technology  has  evolved  and  gained  public 
acceptance,  and 
in  almost  a  decade,  contributed 
significantly towards financial inclusion in the country. For 
instance,  the  number  of  mobile  money  accounts  has 
reached 32.6 million in December 2018 compared with 3.8 
million  in  December  2012.  Total  float  balances  as  at 
 4 
December  2012  was  GH₵19.6  million  compared  with 
 GH₵2.6 billion recorded in December 2018.  
 7.  Mobile  money  has  therefore  continued  to  help 
in 
expanding  financial  services  to  the  unbanked.  Currently, 
the  mobile  money  wallet  is  used  for  domestic  transfer  of 
funds,  payment  of  goods  and  services,  utility  bill 
payments,  salary  payments,  micro-credit  and  micro-
insurance  services.  In  May  2018,  the  payment  and 
settlements  system  was  firmed  up  with  the  successful 
implementation  of  mobile  money  interoperability.    With 
this  in  place,  banks  can  now  leverage  on  the  existing 
396,599  mobile  money  agents  to  reach  out  to  the 
unbanked.  
 8.  Also,  there  are  enormous  opportunities  for  banks  to 
leverage  on  the  over  30  million  existing  mobile  money 
accounts  to  expand  the  scope  and  appeal  of  electronic 
payments,  offer  more  innovative  payment  products  that 
provide  convenience,  simplicity  and  speed  at  minimal 
transaction  costs,  as  well  as  offer  efficient  means  of 
delivering financial services even in the remote areas. This 
will  further  enhance  financial  inclusiveness,  promote  the 
 5 
country’s  cash-lite agenda, and most  importantly,  deepen 
 financial intermediation. 
 9.  To  further  enhance  regulatory  environment  for  mobile 
money  and  other  similar  innovations  within  the  financial 
ecosystem,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  reviewed  the  Electronic 
Money  Issuers  Guidelines  (2015)  and  the  Payment 
Systems  Act  2003  (Act  662)  which  culminated  in  a  new 
regulatory  framework  for  the  payment  systems.  The  new 
law,  the  Payment  Systems  and  Services  Act,  2019  (Act 
987)  was passed  in  May  this year  to  further  promote  the 
role  of  non-financial  institutions  such  as  mobile  money 
operators  and  other  payment  service  providers 
in 
expanding the usage of digital financial services.  
 10.  Broadly,  implementation  of  the  Act  is  expected  to  further 
liberalize the payment system and pave the way for direct 
licensing of fintechs by the Bank of Ghana, and ultimately 
facilitate  electronic  means  of  payment.  In  the  long-run, 
Ghana’s  new  Payment  Systems  and  Services  Act  should 
help  improve  not  only  the  payments  system  but  also 
create  an  enabling  environment  for  the  surging  financial 
digitization processes in the economy. 
 6 
  11.  The Bank of Ghana is engaging the industry and currently 
reflecting  their  views  to  inform  the  operationalization  of 
this  new  Act. We  will  be  coming  out  with  the  operational 
guidelines and licensing requirements for FINTECHs in the 
next  couple  of  weeks.  Views  from  ongoing  stakeholder 
engagements  will  help  us  to  develop  a  licensing  regime 
and  requirements  that  allow  FINTECHs  to  operate 
independently under this new Act.  
 12.  To  promote  financial  inclusion  means  we  need  a  flexible 
regulatory environment for FINTECHs, in which innovation 
is promoted, but at the same time, we are able to strike a 
good balance between risks and the level of oversight and 
compliance  requirements.  The  Bank  of  Ghana  remains 
committed  to  continuously  review  regulations  to  ensure 
that they remain relevant and accommodate for advances 
in  technology  and  piloting  of  new  ideas,  where  possible, 
by using regulatory sandboxes.  
 13.  The  revolution  of  mobile  money  transactions  in  the 
Ghanaian  economy  has  instigated  a  paradigm  shift  to  a 
 7 
new  kind  of  retail  banking  system  where  large  segments 
 of  the  unbanked  populace  are  being  absorbed  into  the 
financial  services  sector.  According  to  the  World  Bank 
Global  Financial  Inclusion  Index  released  in  April  2018, 
Ghana’s  financial inclusion  has  increased  from 41 percent 
in  2014  to  58  percent  in  2017  mainly  on  account  of 
adoption  of  digital  channels  such  as  mobile  money  for 
service delivery. 
 14.  Indeed,  the  success  of  mobile  money  transactions  in 
advancing  financial  inclusion  cannot  be  overemphasized, 
but there is still scope for further expansion and we need 
to  focus  on  areas  such  as  pricing  of  digital  financial 
services  to  promote  competitive  practices  to  foster 
increased  usage.  Broadly,  market  players  are  seeking  to 
lower  costs  and  increase  access  channels  to  make  digital 
financial services affordable to the general public.  
 15.  To  be  successful,  electronic  payment  products  should  be 
affordable and sustainable. And, sustainability requires 
leveraging  on  an  enlarged  network  which  supports 
payment  service  providers  to  build  critical  mass  and 
achieve  the  desired  economies  of  scale.    In  this  regard, 
 8 
collaborative  efforts  with  the  financial  digital  space  to 
 develop  and  share  infrastructure  should  be  encouraged. 
This  could  be 
the  needed  enabler 
to  promote 
modernization of the payment system.  
 16.  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  another  equally  important  aspect 
that  requires  attention  strengthening  transactions 
security  to  minimize  fraud  and  instil  confidence  in  the 
use  of  electronic  payments.  Counter  fraud  measures  and 
risk  management  practices  should  be  effective  and 
proportionate  to  each  service  providers  risk  levels.  These 
factors  would  require  the  attention  of  stakeholders  as 
collectively, we progress  towards a more cash-lite society 
to  ensure  secured,  affordable  and  convenient  digital 
financial services.  
 17.  For mobile money entities and fintechs to be successful in 
an  increasingly  competitive  payment  ecosystem,  the 
industry needs to have a long-term view and be ready to 
build  sustainable  and  affordable  electronic  payment 
solutions  that  meet  the  needs  of  diverse  clientele  in  the 
society.  
  9 
18.  I  hope  this  workshop  will  highlight  some  of  these 
 discussions 
and 
propose 
directions 
for 
further 
improvement of digital financial services in the country.  
 19.  To end, let me note that, the Bank of Ghana will continue 
to  create  the  enabling  environment  by  removing  price 
distortions,  promoting  competition  and  protecting  the 
interest  of  the  consumers.  Let  me  say  congratulations 
once again to MTN and I wish you a successful workshop.  
 
Thank you for the attention. 
     10 
