Remarks by Lesetja Kganyago,  
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the annual dinner for the Heads of Foreign Missions  
accredited in South Africa 
South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria 
12 June 2019 
    Introduction 
 
Dean of the Diplomatic Corps, Ambassadors, High Commissioners, Counsellors and 
Diplomats, ladies and gentlemen – good evening.  
 
Thank you for accepting our invitation to this annual dinner hosted in honour of the 
Ambassadors and High Commissioners appointed to the Republic of South Africa.  
 
We use this dinner to share our thoughts on the developments in the South African 
economy,  and  to  highlight  issues  of  importance  in  the  area  of  global  and  bilateral 
cooperation.  
 
Tonight,  I  would  like  to  focus  my  remarks  on  two  important  issues  that  are 
increasingly coming under threat globally, namely multilateralism and central bank 
independence.  
 
The  impact  of  technological  advances  on  global  value  chains,  rising  inequality, 
extreme  weather  conditions  related  to  climate  change,  increased  cross-country 
migrations  and  escalating  trade  tensions  have  all  brought  multilateralism  under 
closer scrutiny, as nationalistic tendencies and inward-looking policies gain traction. 
On the other hand, the difficulties related to sustaining the global growth recovery 
have  resulted  in  a  discourse  that  many  believe  requires  broader  mandates  and 
increased action from central banks.  
 Page 1 of 7 
As with other calls for change in recent economic history, all this was spurred by a 
crisis. 
 
Key global developments and international cooperation  
 
During  the  most  recent  global  financial  crisis,  efforts  to  avert  a  second  Great 
Depression saw international cooperation reach a new high. Central banks acted 
decisively and in a coordinated manner to shore up liquidity in financial markets. In 
the face of continued and significant volatility and vulnerabilities in sovereign debt 
markets,  the  financial  resources  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  were 
significantly  increased  and  the  IMF  revisited  its  lending  toolkit,  making  it  more 
relevant and more effective. However, while the global financial crisis brought forth 
new and stronger cooperation, the post-crisis recovery has not been as strong as 
was hoped.  
 
Globalisation is therefore increasingly being blamed for the lacklustre recovery in 
some countries and for the significant negative spillovers of the crisis across borders. 
Many  are  blaming  globalisation  for  the  lack  of  inclusive  growth,  both  within  and 
across countries.  
 
In some countries, significant numbers of people have been lifted out of poverty and 
new industries have been created. In others, there have been increased job losses, 
especially among the middle class. Some countries have also experienced elements 
of deindustrialisation. Consequently, there has been a move towards populism and 
elected politicians are increasingly turning to protectionist policies as a solution.  
 
Unfortunately, trade wars and protectionism are not the panacea some believe them 
to be. The IMF has estimated that the current and threatened United States (US)-
China tariffs could cut the global gross domestic product (GDP) in 2020 by 0.5% – 
or about US$455 billion. To put this into perspective, the estimated loss is larger 
than South Africa’s annual economic output.1  
 
                                                           
1 Financial Times, ‘Lagarde warns of trade war’s “self-inflicted wounds”’, 5 June 2019 
 Page 2 of 7 
We  are  already  seeing  the  impact  of  trade  tensions  reflected  in  weaker  trade 
volumes,  declining  investment  levels,  and  worsening  investor  sentiment.  The 
manufacturing  sectors  in  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and 
Development (OECD) countries, which have strong links to the global value chain, 
have been significantly influenced by the recent tariff measures.  
 
In  addition,  uncertainty  around  future  trade  developments  is  expected  to  reduce 
OECD’s  business  investment  growth  from  3.5%  in  2017/18  to  around  1.7% in 
2019/20. As long as these trade tensions persist, the downside risks to global growth 
will increase.  
 
Before  more  damage  is  done,  a  more  integrated,  cooperative  and  coordinated 
approach  is  required,  incorporating  the  principles  of  multilateralism.  Protectionist 
and isolationist approaches to dealing with global challenges will simply not take us 
very far.  
 
In  October  last  year,  IMF  Managing  Director  Christine  Lagarde  called  for  a  ‘new 
multilateralism’ – one that is dedicated to improving the lives of all citizens, one that 
ensures that the economic benefits of globalisation are shared much more broadly, 
and  one  that  focuses  on  accountable  governments  and  institutions  that  work 
together  for  the  common  good.  This  ‘new  multilateralism’  is  key  to  providing  the 
foundation  for  global  cooperation  to  tackle  the  many  transnational  challenges, 
including  managing  the  risks  related  to,  among  other  things,  climate  change, 
cybercrime, increasing conflict and refugee flows, failures of governance, and illicit 
finance flows.  
 
An essential component of global cooperation relates to the global financial safety 
net (GFSN). Today, the GFSN includes international reserves, bilateral swap lines, 
regional  financing  arrangements,  IMF  resources  and  market-based  instruments. 
While the size of the GFSN is larger than it was before the global financial crisis, the 
adequacy  and  coverage  of  the  GFSN  as  well  as  its  capacity  to  handle  future 
economic and financial crises continues to be debated.  
 
 Page 3 of 7 
South Africa and the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) have continued to be active 
participants in international efforts to promote constructive dialogue as we seek global 
solutions  to  global  challenges.  As  part  of  this  work,  we  interact  with  many  of  the 
countries that you represent, be it as a member of the IMF, the G202, BRICS3, the 
Southern African Development Community (SADC), the Association of African Central 
Banks, and various standard-setting bodies and regulatory forums.  
 
The  initiatives  that  the  SARB  has  been  involved  in  since  we  last  met  include  the 
following:  
•  There have been ongoing discussions about providing adequate resources to 
ensure that the IMF can fulfil its role at the centre of the GFSN. 
 
•  Enhancing the effectiveness of the BRICS Contingency Reserve Arrangement 
(CRA)  has  also  remained  top  of  the  agenda.  The  CRA  is  a  self-managed 
contingent reserves arrangement instituted to forestall short-term balance of 
payments pressures, provide mutual support, and further strengthen financial 
stability. 
 
•  Another priority has been strengthening the macroeconomic research capability 
  to support the CRA. 
 
In the region, the SADC Real Time Gross Settlement System4 has continued 
to gain momentum. Between July 2013 and February 2019, more than 1 million 
transactions were settled on the platform, representing a value of R5.5 trillion.  
 
In addition, we have successfully collaborated with the European Central Bank, 
the Bank of England and the Bundesbank to develop certain skills of SARB staff 
members and to share and transfer knowledge in areas related to the SARB’s 
domestic and regional work. 
                                                            
2 Group of Twenty (Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors) 
3 Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa 
4 Previously known as the SADC Integrated Regional Electronic Settlement System (SIRESS) 
 Page 4 of 7 
The independence of central banks and the South African Reserve Bank’s role 
in the South African economy  
 
Another  topic  that  has  been prominent  over  the  past  two  years  or  so,  and  which 
seems to be gaining momentum, relates to central bank independence. In the words 
of  Kenneth  Rogoff,  ‘with  the  global  rise  of  populism  and  autocracy,  central  bank 
independence  is  under  threat’.5  This  applies  to  many  countries,  developing  and 
advanced, including South Africa.  
 
South  Africa’s  disappointing  economic  performance  over  the  past  10 years  has 
contributed to growing calls for the expansion of the mandate of the SARB to directly 
stimulate growth and address unemployment.  
 
The SARB’s mandate, which is to achieve and maintain price stability in the interest 
of balanced and sustainable growth, is enshrined in the Constitution. In this regard, by 
keeping  prices  stable,  the  SARB  creates  the  necessary  economic  environment for 
sustainable  growth  and  development.  An  economy  with  stable  inflation  provides 
certainty, improves planning, and therefore supports consumer, business and investor 
confidence, which are essential in driving economic activity that facilitates growth and 
employment  creation.  Lower  prices  also  support  South  Africa’s  competitiveness  in 
global trade.  
 
The  inflation-targeting  framework  has  served  South  Africa  well.  It  has  helped  us 
achieve lower inflation and therefore lower interest rates. It has also increased the 
transparency  of  monetary  policy,  and  made  the  SARB  more  accountable  for  its 
actions. We have come a long way from the days when the Governor could decide on 
interest rates in his office on a Friday afternoon, and not even publicise his decision, 
let alone his goals or reasons.  
 
In terms of inflation, South Africa has joined many other emerging markets in getting 
inflation down to fairly low single-digits. In the 1980s our average inflation rate was 
15%. It was nearly 10% through the 1990s. Since the introduction of inflation targeting, 
                                                           
5Kenneth Roggof (2019, April) “How central bank independence dies” Available at: 
https://www.project-syndicate.org/onpoint/how-central-bank-independence-dies-by-kenneth-rogoff-2019-05 
 Page 5 of 7 
in 2000, inflation has averaged just over 6%, at the top of our target range but still 
substantially lower than in the preceding decades. It has also fallen further in recent 
years, to about the middle of our target range – the average last year was 4.6%, and 
we expect 4.5% this year.   
 
Lower  inflation  means  we  can  have  lower  interest  rates.  This  is  an  economic 
relationship that makes a lot of sense, because lenders expect to be compensated for 
inflation, but it is often underappreciated in debates about inflation and the inflation 
target. The historical experience shows us we should take this point seriously: in the 
1980s the SARB’s average policy rate was around 13%. In the 1990s it was nearly 
16%  -  with  a  lot  of  volatility,  including  spikes  over  20%,  because  policymakers 
sometimes tried targeting the exchange rate, which is a much more difficult target than 
inflation. The repo has averaged 8% over the inflation targeting period, and just 6% 
since the Global Financial Crisis. As I always remind people, if you want lower rates, 
you need lower inflation. We see this process working once again at the moment: our 
forecast model indicates inflation will be close to 4.5% over the next few years, which 
is where we want it – in the middle of our target range. Given the weak economy, our 
model suggests we might have room to cut rates over the next year or so.  
 
While  the SARB  recognises  the  role  that macroeconomic policy  has  to play  in the 
economy, the primary contribution monetary policy can make to growth is smoothing 
output  fluctuations  over  the  business  cycle.  The  current  challenges  constraining 
economic growth are primarily structural in nature. To ensure that monetary policy 
settings  have  a  sustained  positive  impact  on  growth,  they  should  be  appropriately 
supported by other macroeconomic policies.  
The longer-term costs of higher inflation and a deterioration in inflation expectations 
have potentially adverse impacts on policy credibility, consumer purchasing power, 
borrowing costs, and the global competitiveness of South African firms.  
 
To make a marked impact on potential output and employment levels, what is required 
is  the  implementation  of  prudent  macroeconomic  policies  underpinned  by  credible 
structural policy initiatives. Tough times call for tough actions.  
 
 Page 6 of 7 
Monetary policy is not a substitute for structural reform. Price and financial stability is, 
however,  key  to  ensuring  that  any  structural  reform  agenda  is  successfully 
implemented. The SARB remains committed to fulfilling its mandate in this regard.   
 
Conclusion  
 
Allow me to conclude. 
 
Many of the existing and emerging challenges confronting the global economy today 
require  the  strengthening  of  cross-border  cooperation.  We  therefore  need  to 
strengthen  our  resolve  to  seek  rules-based  multilateral  solutions.  In  a  highly 
interconnected  world,  unilateral  action,  especially  in  the  systemically  relevant 
economies,  is  not  the  solution  to  fixing  trade  imbalances.  Instead,  it  undermines 
confidence, increases adverse spillover effects, and ultimately reduces global growth.  
 
Central banks and monetary policy have come under increased attention around the 
world recently. There are expectations that monetary policy should shoulder more 
responsibilities in addressing growth constraints. However, these expectations need 
to be based on the constitutional or legislative mandates of central banks. They also 
need  to  acknowledge  the  merits  of  central  bank  independence  in  safeguarding 
macroeconomic and financial stability, which is key in ensuring that the economy is 
on a sustainable growth path.  
 
In this regard, I would like to reiterate that the SARB remains committed to fulfilling 
its  primary  mandate  of  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  interest  of  balanced  and 
sustainable economic growth. In addition, we will pursue this objective ‘without fear, 
favour or prejudice’, as the Constitution calls upon us to do so.  
 
Thank you. 
 Page 7 of 7 
