Yakiv  Smolii:  National  Bank  of  Ukraine  press  briefing  -  monetary
policy statement
Speech  by  Mr  Yakiv  Smolii,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Ukraine,  at  a  press  briefing  on
monetary policy, Kyiv, 18 July 2019.
 Dear colleagues,
Please be informed that the Board of the National Bank of Ukraine has decided to cut the
key policy rate to 17.0% per annum effective 19 July 2019.
The  NBU  continues  the  cycle  of  monetary  policy  easing  as  inflation  is  declining  towards  the
target of 5%.
What inflation developments followed the last monetary policy meeting?
In June, annual inflation came in at 9.0%. Thus, inflation approached the trajectory of the
NBU’s April forecast  after  temporary  factors  caused  a  deviation  from  the  target  in  previous
months.
Core inflation slowed somewhat in Q2, also being close to the forecast.
The tight monetary policy was the main factor that restrained the underlying inflationary pressure.
In particular, due to the hryvnia appreciation and an improvement in expectations of households,
businesses, banks, and financial analysts. At the same time, inflation remained relatively high.
Robust consumer demand, higher production costs, and further growth in administered prices
put pressure on prices.
What will be the future trajectory of inflation?
The NBU reiterates its forecast that inflation will decline to 6.3% as of the end of 2019, return to
the target range in early 2020, and reach the medium-term target of 5% at the end of 2020.
The tight monetary conditions will continue to be the disinflation driver. Despite the fact that the
key  policy  rate  is  reduced  gradually,  its  real  value  will  remain  high  on  the  back  of  improved
inflation  expectations.  High  real  interest  rates  will  make  hryvnia  financial  instruments  more
attractive  for  investors,  which  will  support  the  exchange  rate  of  the  hryvnia.    Moreover,  such
monetary policy stance will limit the pressure from consumer demand.
Other factors contributing to slower inflation will include:
a prudent fiscal policy
the slowdown in wage growth
relatively low energy prices in the global markets
ample supply of domestic and foreign food products.
The NBU has also performed scheduled revisions of other macroeconomic forecasts
The NBU has revised its economic growth forecast to 3% in 2019 (from 2.5%) and 3.2% in 2020
(from 2.9%) amid stronger domestic demand, better terms of trade, and larger harvest of grain
crops.
Domestic demand will remain the main driver of economic growth over the coming years. Private
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
consumption growth will decelerate, albeit remaining high owing to an increase in real household
income  –  wages,  pensions,  and  remittances  from  abroad.  Capital  investment  will  continue  to
grow rapidly, which will also provide significant support to the economy.
Economic  growth  will  be  dampened  by  a  weak  global  economic  activity  and  decrease  in  gas
transit  to  European  countries  starting  in  2020,  due  to  the  construction  of  bypassing  gas
pipelines. 
The 2019–2021 current account deficit will remain acceptable.
In 2019, the deficit will narrow to 2.6% of GDP, thanks to the bumper grain harvest, a drop in
energy  prices,  and  a  decline  in  dividend  repatriation.  In  future,  the  current  account  deficit  will
widen slightly, driven by the decrease in gas transit, less favorable terms of trade, and stronger
consumer and investment demand.
Further cooperation with the International Monetary Fund remains the basic assumption
of the macroeconomic forecast.
This will allow Ukraine to attract other official financing, improve the conditions of access to the
international  capital  markets,  and  support  the  interest  of  investors  in  Ukrainian  assets.  These
borrowings will make it possible for the government to finance large payments on the external
public debt. In addition, the private sector will get an opportunity to attract foreign investment.
As a result, international reserves will reach USD 23 billion in 2021.
The  main  internal  risk  to  the  above  scenario  is  a  further  strengthening  of  threats  to
macrofinancial stability.
Court  rulings,  legislative  initiatives,  or  other  steps  that  invalidate  previous  achievements,  and
delays  in  implementing  key  reforms  may  increase  the  vulnerability  of  Ukraine’s  economy  and
pose  an  obstacle  to  further  cooperation  with  the  IMF.  That  could  affect  exchange-rate  and
inflation expectations and make it harder for Ukraine to access international capital markets in
order to repay a heavy debt load in the coming years.
The following risks also remain important:
a suspension of Russian gas transit through Ukraine starting in 2020
an escalation of trade wars and rising geopolitical tensions
an escalation of the military conflict, and the imposition of new trade restrictions by Russia.
Considering the revised macroeconomic outlook and the balance of risks that threaten to worsen
it, the NBU Board has decided to cut the key policy rate to 17.0%.
The NBU has also decided, from today onward, to start publishing the forecasts of its key policy
rate as part of the quarterly revisions of the macroeconomic outlook.
Publishing interest rate projections marks an evolutionary improvement in the transparency of
monetary policy conducted by inflation-targeting central banks.
The  NBU  expects  that the  publication  of  the  key  policy  rate  forecast  will  improve  the
understanding of the NBU’s monetary policy by all stakeholders. This information will be
useful  to  businesses,  analysts,  investors,  and  households.  It  may  inform  their  investment
decisions, business development plans, savings decisions, etc.
The key policy rate forecast will shape the expectations of financial market participants, enabling
the NBU to strengthen the impact of the key policy rate on the value of financial resources and,
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
hence, on inflation. The publication of the key policy rate forecast will make everyone better off.
It should be noted that the forecast imposes no obligations on the NBU, and thus the actual key
policy rate may differ from the forecast if macroeconomic conditions change.
What will be the NBU’s monetary policy stance in future?
The NBU’s baseline scenario envisages the key policy rate to decrease further, to 8% over
the coming years, provided that inflation steadily declines to the 5% target.  
This  has  been  made  possible  by  the  years  long,  consistent,  systemic  policy  of  the  reformed
NBU, which ensured the reduction of inflation to a single-digit figure and which will continue to be
the main driver of inflation-reducing efforts in the years to come.
The largest decrease is expected over 2020, along with inflation returning to the target range and
inflation expectations improving.
If existing inflation risks, both internal and external, materialize, the key policy rate could decline to
8% more slowly.
At  the  same  time,  higher  demand  for  hryvnia  government  bonds  from  nonresidents  and  the
subsequent strengthening of hryvnia will allow reducing the key policy rate at a faster pace than
envisaged in the baseline scenario.
As usual, a new detailed macroeconomic forecast will be published in the central bank’s Inflation
Report on 25 July 2019.
A  summary  of  the  discussion  by  Monetary  Policy  Committee  members  that  preceded  this
decision will be published on 29 July 2019.
The next meeting of the NBU Board on monetary policy issues will be held on 5 September 2019.
Thank you for your attention!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
