  Address by Lesetja Kganyago, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at 
the 14th BCBS-FSI high-level meeting for Africa on ‘strengthening financial sector 
supervision and current regulatory priorities’ 
 Cape Town, South Africa, 31 January – 1 February 2019 
 
Introduction 
 
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
 
I am pleased to once again welcome you to South Africa, Cape Town for the 14th Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) – Financial Stability Institute (FSI) high-level 
meeting for  Africa  on  ‘Strengthening  financial  sector  supervision  and  current  regulatory 
priorities’.  
 
Allow me to first thank you all for attending this meeting, which has become an important 
annual event for the South African Reserve Bank, BCBS, FSI as well as representatives 
from other various sub-Saharan African central banks and supervisory authorities. I hope 
that this meeting will be as successful as the past meetings we have had over the years.  
 
Importance of financial sector regulation 
 
Before  we  get  bogged  down  in  very  technical  discussions  around  financial  sector 
regulation and our regulatory priorities, it is important that we first remind ourselves of the 
policy imperatives behind the need to continuously strengthen the regulation and improve 
the resilience of our financial systems. 
 
The financial sector plays an important intermediation role in the economy – by allocating 
capital  from  savers  to  borrowers,  managing  financial  risks,  facilitating  trade,  as  well  as 
offering  access  to  the  payment  system.  Financial  intermediaries  and  financial  markets 
play this role by moving funds throughout the economy that in turn affect businesses and 
the production of goods and services1. A financial system is therefore the lifeblood of a 
modern economy. Inclusive growth and sustainable development objectives would not be 
achieved without a stable and well-functioning financial system.  
 
The 2008 global financial crisis highlighted the strong connection between the financial 
sector and the real economy and the extent to which challenges in the financial sector can 
have  negative  effects  on  the  real  economy.  While  the  financial  crisis  originated  in 
developed  countries,  it  negatively  impacted  on  most  of  the  emerging  market  and 
developing  economies,  in  very  significant  ways.  On  our  continent,  the  effects  were 
                                                           
1  “Reforming the Financial System in Sub-Saharan Africa: the (long) Way Ahead”, Peter Gakunu, 2007 
 -1- 
particularly  felt  through  reduced  foreign  investment,  trade  and  remittances.  The  crisis 
exhibited  itself  in  growing  budget  and  trade  deficits,  currency  impacts,  higher  rates  of 
inflation, increasing public debt and dwindling currency reserves2.  
 
So to reiterate, a stable and well-regulated financial sector is vital for the achievement of 
our long-term sustainable economic growth and developmental objectives.  
 
Given the growing interconnectedness of financial markets, international financial stability 
has become a global public good. Despite governments, central bankers and regulatory 
bodies mainly operating in their respective jurisdictions, we need to recognise that some 
of  the  decisions  we  make  in  our  own  jurisdictions  can  have  global  reach.  In  order  to 
achieve  a  stable  global  financial  system,  coordination  and  cooperation  becomes 
important. Our gathering here is one such form of coordination and cooperation towards 
the  strengthening  of  our  financial  sector  supervision  and  contributing  towards  a  more 
resilient and safer global financial system. The interactions here, the sharing of ideas and 
experiences as well as the fostering of professional relationships will make the regulation 
of our financial sector better. 
 
Financial sector development in Africa 
The financial system in Sub-Saharan Africa is generally bank based and somewhat less 
sophisticated than our developed country counterparts, with countries on different levels 
of  development.  However,  there  has  been  remarkable  progress  over  the  past  two 
decades.  While  the  emergence  of  non-bank  financial  institutions  and  other  alternative 
sources of capital, such as stock markets has been noticeable,  with the exception of a 
few, financial systems are still dominated by informal finance and traditional banks, most 
of which are state or foreign-owned.  
 
The  banking  sector  in  Africa  is  undergoing  reforms  focused  on  privatisation  and  other 
forms  of  restructuring  with  respect  to  state-owned  banks,  with  a  view  of  improving  the 
quality of the banks3. A review of the Sub-Saharan Africa banking system published4 by 
the IMF in 2013 makes the following observations: 
 
  banking  systems  account  for  the  preponderance  of  financial  sector  assets  and 
  activities; 
the depth and coverage of financial systems – as measured by the ratios of broad 
money (M2) and private sector credit to GDP – have been gradually increasing over 
the past decade, albeit from a low base; 
the scale of financial intermediation in the region remains significantly lower than in 
other developing regions of the world; 
  access  to  financial  services  is  also  relatively  low,  reflecting  a  combination  of  low 
income levels, small absolute size, and infrastructure weaknesses; 
                                                           
2 The Economics Student Society of Australia, Julia Pham, 2017 
3 “Review African financial systems: A review”, Franklin Allen etal, Finance Department, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, 
2011 
4 Banking in Sub-Saharan Africa: The Macroeconomic Context,  Montfort  Mlachila, Seok Gil Park, and Masafumi Yabara, Washington DC,   
IMF, 2013 
 -2- 
  most banking systems are small in absolute and relative size, characterised by low 
  loan-to-deposit ratios; 
large  shares  of  assets  are  held  in  the  form  of  government  securities  and  liquid 
assets; 
lending  is  mainly  short-term  in  nature,  with  about  60  percent  of  loans  having  a 
maturity of less than one year; and  
  market structures are typically oligopolistic, as indicated by the high share of total 
assets  accounted  for  by  the  three  largest  banks,  which  tends  to  constrain  the 
intensity of competition. 
 
I  am  highlighting  these  key  elements  of  our  financial  system  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa,  to 
ensure  that  we  have  context.  The  structure  of  our  regional  financial  system  and 
development  should  also  play  a  role  in  informing  and  shaping  our  regulatory  priorities. 
This context matters, particularly in light of the discussions we are going to have around 
proportionality of regulation and institutional reforms.  
 
Furthermore, according to the report published by the IMF I have just alluded to, the Sub-
Saharan Africa banking systems were well positioned to handle the 2008 financial turmoil 
given: 
 
low leverage; 
 
  generally healthy capitalisation levels; 
  ample liquidity; 
 
 
little reliance on external funding; and  
limited or no exposure to either foreign and/or toxic financial assets. 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, while the Sub-Saharan Africa region was broadly able to weather 
the shock from the 2008 global financial crisis, without suffering severe banking failures 
as was experienced in other parts of the world, this is not a reason to be complacent. In 
the main, the banking systems in Sub-Saharan Africa came under pressure indirectly via 
international  trade  linkages,  as  the  global  economic  turmoil  fed  into  reduced  exports; 
slower  domestic  economic  growth  and  rising  unemployment.  This  in  turn  adversely 
affected  borrowers  and  contributed  to  increased  default  risk as  well  as  higher  levels  of 
nonperforming loans.  
 
No one can claim to know the exact nature, origin and timing of the next financial crisis. 
We then need to ensure that we continuously strengthen and enhance our regulatory and 
supervisory frameworks to ensure that they are current and sufficiently robust. This is not 
necessarily aimed at reducing the probability of failure by individual institutions, the reform 
agenda is targeted at allowing orderly resolution of failing institutions in order to safeguard 
stability and depositor interests. 
 
Financial sector regulation post the global financial crisis 
Let  me  now  say  a  few  words  about  the  overarching  regulatory  priority  reforms  that  the 
G20 put in place in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. I will be quick to say that 
 -3- 
most of the policies are largely in place and – even more relevant to our gathering today– 
I will also touch on the specific Basel Committee reforms.  
 
The comprehensive financial sector reform programme was put in place in order to build 
a  safer  and  more  resilient  global  financial  system.  The  G20  reform  package  included, 
among  other  key  reforms;  ending  too-big-to-fail,  building  resilient  financial  institutions, 
making  derivative  markets  safer  and  enhancing  resilience  of  non-bank  financial 
intermediation.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  was  tasked  with  coordinating  the 
implementation of these reforms. 
 
As  a  member  of  the  G20,  South  Africa  has  made  significant  progress  in  implementing 
these  reforms  and  we  continue  to make  progress.  Some  of  the major  highlights  are  as 
follows: 
 
  we implemented the Twin Peaks regulatory approach to strengthen our regulatory 
framework – my colleague, Unathi Kamlana will touch on that in greater detail during 
the session on ‘institutional arrangements for financial institutions’; 
  we have developed and implemented our macro-prudential toolkit to strengthen and 
 embed our financial stability mandate; 
the process of adopting a resolution framework for dealing with banks and non-bank 
SIFIs is at an advanced stage – the reform package includes the establishment of a 
Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  as  well  as  seeing  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank 
becoming the Resolution Authority;  
  work for the implementation of margin requirements for non-centrally cleared over-
the-counter (OTC) derivative transactions, is at an advanced stage; and 
  development of a regulatory framework for financial conglomerates is ongoing – my 
colleague, Denzel Bostander will also touch on this in one of the next sessions. 
 
Colleagues,  we  are  committed  to  implementing  all  the  G20  financial  reforms  that  are 
applicable  to  our  financial  system.  We  are  duty-bound  to  improve  the  resilience  of  our 
financial sector to make sure that it is safe and prudentially sound. 
 
Turning to specific reforms in the banking sector, the Basel III framework, announced in 
2010 is a fundamental response by the Basel Committee to the global financial crisis. As 
you  are  aware,  the  framework  was  put  in  place  in  order  to  address  a  number  of 
weaknesses that were identified during the financial crisis and provides a basis for a more 
resilient banking system. This first phase of the reforms focused at achieving the following:  
 
improving the quality of regulatory capital;  
increasing the level of capital requirements;  
 
 
  enhancing risk capture by revising areas of the risk-weighted capital framework;  
  adding macroprudential elements to the regulatory framework;  
 
  mitigating excessive liquidity risk and maturity transformation. 
specifying a minimum leverage ratio requirement to constrain excess leverage; and 
  -4- 
Implementation of these reforms is progressing well, driven by a broad-based consensus 
to reduce the negative spillovers emanating from deep financial crises like the one we saw 
ten years ago.  
 
The finalisation of the remaining elements of Basel III in 2019 also marked the completion 
of the post-crisis reforms. The amendments were put in place to restore credibility in the 
risk based  capital  framework  as  well  as  address  weaknesses  identified  with  the  use  of 
internal models for the calculation of regulatory capital. The 2017 improvements seek to 
improve the comparability of banks’ capital ratios by:  
 
  enhancing  the  robustness  and  risk  sensitivity  of  the  standardised  approaches  for 
   credit risk, credit valuation adjustment risk and operational risk;  
constraining the use of the internal model approaches – by placing limits on certain 
inputs used to calculate capital requirements under the internal model approach and 
removing the use of internal models in some cases;  
introducing a leverage ratio buffer – to further limit the leverage of global systemically 
important banks; and  
replacing  the  existing  Basel  II  output  floor  with  a  more  robust  risk-sensitive  floor 
based on the revised Basel III standardised approaches.  
 
Emphasis is now being placed on complete and timely implementation of the reforms in a 
consistent manner in order to secure the benefits of a more resilient financial system. In 
the  case  of  South  Africa,  the  implementation  of  Basel  III  is  largely  in  place  and  we  are 
currently busy with implementing the remaining elements of the Basel III reform package 
as articulated above. 
 
I am sure there is going to be interesting discussions around these matters over the next 
day and a half.  
 
Addressing the unintended consequences of the reforms 
Let me turn to another matter which is of great importance especially to emerging markets 
and developing economies.  
 
Given the progress made with the implementation of the G20 reforms, an analysis of the 
unintended consequences of these reforms is becoming possible. To this end, the FSB 
has already developed a Framework for Post-Implementation Evaluation of the Effects of 
G20 Financial Regulatory Reforms to guide analyses of whether the reforms are achieving 
their  intended  outcomes,  and  to  help  identify  material  unintended  consequences  that 
might need to be addressed, without compromising the objectives of the reforms.  
 
The evaluation is motivated by the need to better understand the effects of the reforms on 
the  financing  of  real  economic  activities.  Unintended  consequences  of  the  reforms  on 
specific  areas  such  as  trade  finance,  infrastructure  finance,  SME  finance  and  market 
liquidity may lead to sub-optimal social outcomes.   
 
 -5- 
The reforms aimed at ensuring that the global financial system is safe and stable should 
be balanced with the need to ensure that the financial sector continues to play its important 
role  in  the  economy.  A  very  stable  financial  sector  that  plays  no  meaningful  role  in 
economic development is not beneficial – as such, there is a pressing need to consider 
and understand the costs versus benefits of regulatory reform. This should be done fully 
appreciative  of  the  fact  that  an  unstable  financial  system  poses  a  significant  risk  of 
reversing  the  short  terms  gains  emanating  from  unsustainable  growth  in  the  economy. 
These are trade-offs that require a careful balancing act.  
 
Banks can only effectively and efficiently serve the public interest when they are safe and 
sound.  A  collapse  of  the financial  system  has dire  consequences  on  the  economy  with 
negative effects on the general welfare of households. 
 
In  the  letter  to  the  G20  leaders  in  November  2018,  the  former  Chair  of  the  FSB,  Mark 
Carney, pointed out that “In assessing what is working as intended and addressing any 
inefficiencies or unintended consequences, the FSB is tailoring not tapering. It is critical 
that  this  process  of  evaluation  and  adjustment  does  not  compromise  overall  system 
resilience.  Safeguarding  progress  does  not  mean  defending  all  aspects  of  reform  at  all 
costs”. This is a very key message to keep at the back of our minds as we have robust 
discussions around this matter. 
 
Evaluation  of  the  effects  of  regulatory  reforms is  an  important  aspect  of  any  regulatory 
reform process. As you might be aware, there are some jurisdictions that have already 
signalled  to  alter  post-crisis  reforms  should  they  find  that  they  have  unintended 
consequences to their financial systems. It is an issue that we cannot ignore. However, 
we have agreed at the FSB level that any assessments and possible adjustments thereof 
need to be ‘evidence-led’ and implemented in a coordinated manner across all relevant 
jurisdictions. 
 
The  local  adjustments  are  often  as  a  result  of  “one  size  fits  all”  approach  that  requires 
small  players  to  comply  with  rules  that  are  designed  for  larger  institutions  like  Global 
Systemically  Important Financial  Institutions.  With  increased  financial  sector  regulation, 
shadow  banking  has  also  been  on  the  rise.  The  regulatory  gap  in  respect  of  shadow 
banking  was  also  particularly  felt  during  the  global  financial  crisis. We  subscribe  to  the 
notion  that  the  regulation  of  shadow  banking  should  be  a  priority  in  order  to  reduce 
regulatory  arbitrage  and  prevent  the  shifting  of  risks  from  the  regulated  financial 
institutions to unregulated parts of the financial system, compromising financial stability.  
 
The issue of proportionality when looking at regulatory reforms also becomes an important 
consideration  to  ensure  that  different  financial  institutions  are  regulated  proportionately 
according  to  the  size,  scope  and  complexity  of  regulated  financial  institutions  and/or 
activities.  
 
The evolution of the financial sector and emergence of new risks  
I  would  also  like  to  turn  to  a  very  topical  issue  these  days  on  the  increasing  use  of 
technology in the financial sector.  
 -6- 
 
The financial sector has evolved over time and continues to evolve. The adoption and use 
of technology in the provision of financial services has been at the centre of innovation in 
the financial sector and is changing the way financial service providers operate and deliver 
products and services to their consumers. The accelerating pace of technological change 
has  real  implications  not  only  for  the  regulated  sector  but  also  for  policy  makers  and 
regulators.  The  evolution  of  the  financial  sector  requires  that  our  regulatory  and 
supervisory  frameworks  also  evolve  to  ensure  adequate  and  effective  regulation  of  the 
sector.  
 
I am aware of the work that has been conducted by the Basel Committee to provide insight 
into the fast-growing adoption of financial technology (FinTech) specifically by banks. We 
appreciate the contributions made by the Basel Committee and others in the official sector 
to get a better handle of developments in this area. 
 
FinTech  has  helped  to  reduce  costs,  manage  risks  better,  create  new  business 
opportunities, improve people’s lives and has even assisted authorities to achieve public 
policy  objectives  such  as  financial  inclusion  and  competition  in  the  financial  services 
sector. Like all positive developments, FinTech has also brought with it new risks and new 
challenges for supervisors and regulators.  
 
While  financial  innovation  fosters  competition  in  the  provision  of  financial  services, 
regulations  must  apply  equally  to  all  types  of  market  players,  banks,  non-banks  and 
electronic platforms offering services similar to those offered by financial institutions. This 
will  ensure  that  we  avoid  pushing  the  market  towards  a  particular  structure  (regulatory 
arbitrage). 
 
The same innovative technologies that are driving FinTech are now also being used by 
financial institutions to ensure that they implement the latest regulatory changes, monitor 
compliance  and  report  correctly  to  the  various  supervisory  bodies,  through  Regulatory 
Technology (RegTech). RegTech has been necessitated by increasing levels of regulation 
and a greater focus on data and reporting. Adoption of RegTech means improved data 
quality that can be shared quickly and securely with various entities as well as improved 
compliance, both of which are positive for the stability of the financial system. 
 
Financial  innovation  is  changing  traditional  banking  business  models,  structures  and 
operations as well as the nature and scope of banking risks. Key risks associated with the 
emergence  of  fintech  include  strategic  risk,  operational  risk,  cybersecurity  risk  and 
compliance  risk.  It  has  also  become  important  for  supervisors  to  assess  their  current 
staffing and training programmes to  ensure that the knowledge, skills and tools of their 
staff  remain  relevant  and  effective  in  supervising  the  risks  of  new  technologies  and 
innovative business models.  
There has been increased use of technology by supervisors and regulators to support the 
supervision of financial institutions through Supervision Technology (SupTech). SupTech 
is  currently  found  primarily  in  two  areas:  data  collection  and  data  analytics  and  helps 
supervisory  authorities  to  digitise  reporting  and  regulatory  processes,  resulting  in  more 
 -7- 
efficient and proactive monitoring of risk and compliance at financial institutions. FinTech, 
RegTech and SupTech are all new innovations that we need to embrace. 
 
While we harness the benefits of new financial technologies we need to ensure that the 
risks posed by such innovations, particularly to financial stability are adequately managed 
and mitigated.  
 
The rise in cybersecurity-risk 
Financial  innovation  has  also  led  to  an  increase  in  cybersecurity  risk,  which  is  slowly 
becoming  a  major  concern  than  before.  The  remote  access  of  financial  services  by 
customers through electronic gadgets has presented an opportunity for hackers and other 
cyber-criminals. Financial institutions need to ensure that they have effective IT and other 
risk  management  processes  and  control  environments 
that  effectively  address 
cybersecurity risk. This is one of the issues that are very close to my colleague Deputy 
Governor Francois Groepe and I am sure he will discuss this matter with you in greater 
detail during the relevant session on this topic.  
 
Conclusion 
As we enter the second decade following the global financial crisis, the strides we have 
made in developing the financial sector regulatory reforms geared towards addressing the 
identified  weaknesses  are  under  constant  scrutiny. With  the  finalisation  of  the  Basel  III 
reform package in 2017, which marked the completion of the post-crisis reforms, emphasis 
has now shifted to implementation and evaluation of the effectiveness of reforms and to 
address any unintended consequences. This is a critical step in the process if we are to 
ensure that we build a safe and resilient global financial system. As we engage with each 
other today and tomorrow, let us learn from each other’s experiences and strive to make 
our financial system better to serve our citizens and deliver our developmental aspirations.  
 
Please engage robustly and enjoy the meeting. 
 
Thank you 
 -8- 
