Philip R Lane: Interview with Yle
Interview with Mr Philip R Lane, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
and Yle (Finnish public service broadcasting company), conducted by Mr Aapo Parviainen and
broadcast on 1 July 2019.
 What are the alternatives to fight for the euro when recession hits the euro area next
time?
What I said today at the conference is the ECB has been creative in developing a toolkit, moving
the  interest  rate  below  zero,  being  active  in  purchasing  government  debts,  special  lending
programmes for banks and also communicating about future policies. Taken together this has
worked quite well, it’s worked quite well so far and I’m confident if there is a downturn more can
be done. So if you like the main conclusion of my talk today is that we should be confident that
even under these conditions the ECB has the policy measures to allow it to respond to shocks to
the economy, shocks to inflation. Being a central bank is a very powerful institution, the ability to
influence  financial  conditions  is  quite  extensive  and  so  we  should  be  confident  about  the
effectiveness of our policies at the ECB.
Do we have to accept these negative interest rates looking forward?
I  think  we  should  view  this  as  a  temporary  measure.  The  negative  interest  rate  allows  more
spending by firms, more spending by households. By allowing the European economy to grow
more quickly when the economy has recovered then the interest rate will turn positive again. So
not forever but for a while.
Can you give a time estimation?
It  depends  on  what  happens,  as  you  know  the  world  is  quite  uncertain,  we  have  a  baseline
forecast which remains optimistic for Europe but we recognise there are downside risks.
What about inflation then? It’s far from target.
Well I think we have to take a measured approach. Compared to say 2014 there’s been a good
recovery of inflation, so compared to the risk in 2014 year by year inflation is moving upwards.
But  as  you  say  it’s  still  not  yet  at  the  objective  level.  So  we  continue  to  have  a  lot  of
accommodation and we have said that if there are further negative shocks, we can do more. So I
think it’s important to be in the middle, inflation is recovering, we expect it to continue to recover
but the job is not over.
But there is no need to change the target?
The target is, I think, not at the centre of any issue right now. At the centre right now are the
shocks hitting the world economy and the importance of the ECB to respond to those shocks.
Looking at the world economy now, how big a risk is this trade war?
So  I  think  it  is  important  to  recognise  that  domestically  the  European  economy  has  many
positives.  By  the  way  the  trade  war  does  not  extend  to  the  Single  Market,  most  trade  in  the
European Union, most trade for Finland, a lot of that is going to be with the other members of the
European Union, which has no trade war. But unfortunately the trade war, the trade discussion
between  China  and  the  United  States  does  carry  risks  for  the  European  economy  and  many
firms here in Finland sell to Asia, to America, many firms across Europe, so the quicker this
trade dispute is settled the better for the European economy.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
If we take another risk – Brexit – how do you see that?
Again we have a situation now where there is a lot of uncertainty. Either we will have a Brexit that
is negotiated or we have a no-deal Brexit or there are other scenarios. So I think in the coming
weeks  and  months  we’ll  get  some  answers,  this  cannot  go  on  forever.  I  think  everyone  is
indicating we need to come to a conclusion and once that conclusion is reached – especially if
there is a reasonable negotiation, a reasonable outcome – then uncertainty will be reduced and
that can be good news. On the other hand if it’s a no-deal Brexit that will cause more disruption.
And your favourite deal is?
Well again it’s up to the politicians. As for the ECB we will just respond to whatever happens. It’s
up to the political leaders of the United Kingdom to finalise Brexit.
In Finland we always compare ourselves to Sweden. When this first crisis hit Sweden
they kept doing well and Finland not so well, and then comes this question of if it has
been a good idea at all to be a member of Economic and Monetary Union. How do you
see this?
So I’m a very big fan of the euro. I think it’s pretty important to recognise that without the ECB the
crisis  we  had  would  have  been  worse.  Imagine  the  crisis  of  those  years  without  a  powerful
shared central bank. If we had had 19 separate currencies during the crisis the outcome would
have  been  worse.  Especially  for  small  countries,  the  euro  provides  a  lot  of  stability.  I  think
increasingly as you know in the surveys the euro is very popular and I think that assessment by
the European population is correct. It is a very good invention for Europe and I think for all of us in
the euro area we should be proud of our common currency.
One personal question. You are an academic, how do you see your new position now as
Chief Economist? Your position is very important in the ECB.
So I think monetary economics, central banking is very closely connected to academia. One of
the reasons the Bank of Finland is having this conference today is to recognise the importance of
interaction between central bank officials like myself and university professors and students. This
is an area where I’ve said in the speech the ECB has to be a learning organisation, we have to
learn from our own research, from the university sector, from other central banks. So actually I
think this is an area where I feel coming from a university background helps me in my current job.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
