Elvira  Nabiullina:  Review  of  Russia's  economic  and  financial
developments in 2018
Speech by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, at the plenary session of the
State Duma of the Russian Federation, Moscow, 30 May 2019.
Good afternoon, esteemed colleagues.
 Today, I draw to your attention the report on the Bank of Russia’s activity in 2018.
The Report was sent to the State Duma three weeks ago, and we had a chance to discuss it in
working groups, at parliamentary group meetings and at the joint meeting of relevant committees.
Allow me to express my gratitude for your attentive consideration and deep interest in what we
do.
I would like to dwell on our key activities determined by the Constitution and the Central Bank
Law. They are associated with the national development goals set forth in the Presidential May
decree and strategic goals of the Bank of Russia.
I will start with monetary policy issues. Our main goal is near 4% inflation. This is stipulated in
the Presidential decree. Low inflation is paramount to long-term investments and a rise in public
prosperity.
We first reached the inflation target in 2017, as we had promised. Since that period, our policy
has aimed to keep inflation close to this level.
In 2017 and early 2018, both internal and external factors were favourable and we could cut the
key rate, whereas in the second half of 2018 serious inflation risks emerged. They include rising
petrol prices, ruble depreciation on the back of both capital outflow from emerging markets and a
tougher geopolitical environment, and the decision to raise VAT.
Our  monetary  policy  was  aimed  at  anticipating  and  preventing  these  risks.  Our  key  rate
influences  future  rather  than  current  inflation.  As  a  result,  we  raised  the  key  rate  by  0.5
percentage points. This was sufficient for inflation to deviate slightly from the target at the lower
bound of our forecast and to promptly resume its movement towards the target. Moreover, it was
the prompt response that allowed us to avoid a significant rise in the key rate.
This showed, in particular, that our monetary policy tools have the effect we planned to achieve,
address  challenges,  and  allow  us  preserve  a  stable  environment  that  favours  economic
development.
The May and April data suggest that monthly price growth (seasonally adjusted) across all core
groups of goods and services has already declined to our target level. Annual inflation is set to
return to target in the first half of 2020.
Now that the proinflationary factors we needed to address have largely faded, we believe it is
possible to resume rate cuts in the second or third quarter.
Financial stability
As you know, both internal and external risks may emerge.
One of the tools the Central Bank has at its disposal to control external risks to financial stability
is foreign currency reserves. Given the geopolitical environment and unstable oil prices, we are
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
accumulating foreign currency reserves. Currently, our reserves stand at 491 billion US dollars,
which is close to the 500 billion US dollar benchmark we set several years ago. We are pursuing
a  policy  of  reserve  diversification  in  order  to  ensure  both  safekeeping  of  reserves  and  their
availability at any time. We increased the share of gold and renminbi, while reducing the share of
the US dollar.
We are continuing our pursuit of de-dollarisation policy, or more accurately, a reduction in the
share  of  foreign  currency  in  the  financial  system;  the  proportion  of  FX  loans  and  deposits  is
decreasing.  Foreign  debt  is  also  reducing,  and  was  down  by  12.4%  over  the  year.  We  are
moving  forward  with  settlements  in  national  currencies  with  our  main  trading  partners.  These
measures mitigate Russia’s external risks of both economic and political nature.
In the domestic market, measures to enhance financial stability are aimed at cooling the riskiest
market segments and preventing bubbles.
We are keeping a close watch on mortgage loans with a low down payment of under 20%. As
you may remember, it was high-risk mortgage loans that caused the financial crisis in the US
which then spread worldwide. We introduced increased ratios on such mortgages for banks.
Starting this autumn, we will introduce a debt burden indicator for individuals in the consumer
lending market – the debt-to-income ratio that banks and microfinance organisations will have to
take  into  account  when  extending  loans.  This  move  should  curb  growth  in  household  debt:  if
customers take more loans than they can service, it is a threat to their personal well-being and
the stability of banks.
We  believe  that  this  move  is  well  timed  because  the  consumer  lending  market  is  expanding
rapidly, outpacing growth in corporate lending, and we should keep retail lending under control.
The average level of household debt burden for the country may seem low: it is currently roughly
10%, which means that on average, households use this share of their income to repay loans.
However, when measured for borrowers only, the indicator suggests that they have to spend as
much as 44% of their income on repaying loans. Therefore, we need to calculate the debt burden
for each individual borrower.
Development of the banking sector
Last year, banks increased lending and cut interest rates on loans. Lending to the economy rose
by  5.8%  compared  to  3.7%  in  2017.  In  the  first  four  months  of  this  year, corporate  lending
expanded by 2.5%, whereas in the same period of the previous year this figure was 2.3%.
Interest rates on loans went down most of the year until inflation risks turned to growth and the
Bank  of  Russia  raised  its  key  rate.  We  are  currently  expecting  interest  rates  to  resume  their
downward trend on the back of falling inflation.
Banks can further increase lending, as they have both capital and liquidity. We are introducing
incentive-based regulation measures, which should encourage lending to the real sector.
We are placing an increased focus on lending to small businesses, and simplifying regulatory
requirements  for  banks  as  regards  SME  lending.  They  include  the  scope  for  securitisation,
reduced risk ratios for ‘good’ loans to small businesses, and banks’ possibilities to assess small
business customers based on a wide range of data, relieving them of the necessity of preparing
complex document packages.
We  also  introduced  insurance  of  small  businesses’  accounts  with  banks,  and  I  thank  the
deputies for adopting this law. This is another factor of small business development.
Last year, we launched proportionate regulation in the banking sector. Currently, 142 banks hold
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
basic licences. The priority of these banks is lending to small and medium-sized enterprises. We
discuss challenges faced by these banks on both bank associations’ platforms and the Bank of
Russia’s platform, and we are ready to fine-tune our regulation to create the best environment for
SME operations.
Moving on to mortgage lending. This is the most socially important type of lending. Last year,
mortgage lending expanded at a high pace with interest rates falling throughout most of the year.
Currently,  banks  are  resuming  rate  cuts  after  a  short  period  of  their  upward  revision  –  we
registered growth to 10.4% after an all-time low of 9.4%. Mortgages are long-term loans, and
interest  rates  depend  on  inflation  and  inflation  expectations.  Our  monetary  policy  is  therefore
aimed at keeping inflation sustainably low in the long run. This is the key factor for a reduction in
interest rates on housing mortgage loans. We believe it is entirely plausible to reduce mortgage
interest rates to 8% within the period stipulated in the Presidential decree.
Bank  lending  is  certainly  an  important,  but  not  the  only  source  of  financial  resources  for
businesses. Both debt (loans) and equity (capital participation) instruments are important so that
companies can raise funds to deliver on the national objective of raising fixed capital investment
to  25%.  We  have  already  expanded  the  range  of  such  instruments.  We  revise  regulations  to
simplify and accelerate the process of security issue for issuers. They already can register bond
programmes, which considerably reduce procedural costs. In the near future, they will be able to
register  issues  electronically.  Currently,  bonds  account  for  18%  of  total  corporate  borrowing,
which is more than 7 trillion rubles. Therefore, the accessibility of borrowings for our companies
should mean not only bank lending, but also expansion of corporate bonds.
However, companies need to expand their capital stock along with the use of debt financing. An
improved  approach  to  corporate  governance  is  of  paramount  importance  in  raising  equity
financing. Investors will only invest in enterprises whose operations they can understand, where
their  rights  are  protected,  and  there  is  a  clear  picture  of  how  they  can  earn  money.  Public
companies  have,  therefore,  enhanced  the  controlling  and  strategic  functions  of  their  board  of
directors, and will continue further enhancement. A board member is not a figurehead, as they
may  seem,  but  someone  responsible  for  the  company’s  development.  Companies  establish
functions  of  risk  management  and  internal  controls,  and  protect  dividend  rights  of  their
shareholders in the best possible way.
And the last point I would like to make on the banking sector is the outcomes of major banks’
resolution  under  a  new  mechanism.  Last  year,  we  almost  completed  the  resolution  of  three
major banking groups and Asian-Pacific Bank. We created a bank of non-core and toxic assets,
and  all  banks  that  underwent  resolution  already  operate  in  the  market  in  compliance  with  all
ratios. It would be fair to say that the most difficult stage of banking sector resolution is behind us.
Certainly,  it  was  not  painless  and  came  at  a  cost.  Last  year,  the  Bank  of  Russia  registered
losses associated with the resolution and establishment of a non-core asset bank. However, the
losses  on  the  Bank  of  Russia’s  balance  sheet  mean  that  depositors  keep  their  money  and
entrepreneurs  whose  funds  were  placed  in  accounts  with  these  banks  remain  solvent.  We
avoided larger losses in the economy and knock-on effects in the financial market. Our current
objective is to return as much funds as possible through the sale of these banks and operations
with non-core assets.
Insurance market
Last year, we launched an OSAGO reform. Its first stage, which included the expansion of the
rate  corridor,  improved  applications  of  the  bonus-malus  coefficient,  and  an  update  of  driving
licence categories, has already reduced the cost of OSAGO in nearly all regions, with a country-
average decrease in the policy cost totalling 4%. The next stage involves rate personalisation for
drivers; it should ultimately solve problems faced by OSAGO policy holders. Firstly, it should put
an end to the injustice when careful and responsible drivers have to pay for those who drive in a
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
risky manner and often have accidents.
Microfinance organisations
The  microfinance  market  faces  the  same  fair  criticism  now  as  in  recent  years  because  of
usurious interest rates, and incredible fines and penalties. We came up with a serious tightening
of  the  regulation  of  microfinance  organisations.  Currently,  there  are  half  as  many  such
organisations  in  the  market  as  there  used  to  be  five  years  ago.  From  now  on,  the  law  caps
interest rates at 1% per day, while the full cost of borrowing with all fines and penalties included
is  limited  to  1.5  times  the  loan  amount.  These  conditions  will  allow  borrowers  to  use
microfinancing to settle their temporary financial problems without running the risk of ending up in
an even worse situation.
Moving forward, we believe that one of our priorities is to prevent losses from illegal operations in
the economy and damages from fraud suffered by households.
The value of dubious transactions in the financial system continued to decline last year, and this
is  a  stable  trend  of  recent  years.  The  slides  show  data  over  several  years.  Cashing-out
transactions  halved,  while  illegal  overseas  withdrawals  shrank  by  20%.  These  are  last  year
figures.
The development of digital technologies increases potential cyber-risks. We are controlling cyber
resilience  of  financial  organisations.  The  Bank  of  Russia  continuously  monitors  cyber-attacks
and operates a system of information exchange and support for market participants.
As regards the protection of households against fraud, our objective is to minimise the period of
time  between  the  moments  when  a  Ponzi  scheme  or  an  organisation  that  illegally  provides
financial services is revealed and liquidated. This requires large-scale monitoring. Last year, we
established  two  special-purpose  centres  in  our  Krasnodar  and  Khabarovsk  branches,  which
helped us detect fraudulent entities more promptly. Last year, we revealed 168 Ponzi schemes,
which is 25% more than the year before.
We are working together with law enforcement agencies, including regional authorities. It is law
enforcement  agencies  that  bear  responsibility  for  putting  an  end  to  the  activity  of  such  illegal
entities.
Illegal  lenders  pose  the  greatest  threat  to  the  public.  Under  the  guise  of  microfinance
organisations (that is why microfinance organisations often face criticism), they offer loans which
are  sometimes  secured  against  housing,  and  afterwards  demand  that  borrowers  repay
enormous amounts of money. Illegal lenders usually operate via the Internet and we must stop
their activity. Therefore, we ask you to authorise the Central Bank to promptly block websites
advertising illegal financial operations, among other things.
We  have  already  forwarded  the  respective  bill  to  the  State  Duma  and  look  forward  to  your
support.
In order to reduce the chances of the public getting trapped by illegal lenders, since last year, we
have been working together with Yandex on a joint project aimed at labelling websites of legal
trustworthy microfinance organisations registered with the Central Bank with special symbols.
We are discussing similar projects with other search engines.
Development of the Mir card
Currently, as many as 59 million cards have been issued; the share of the Mir card has been
growing both in issue volumes and cashless operations. Countrywide, people use cards on a
daily  basis;  in  more  than  half  of  Russian  regions,  transport  cards,  and  in  some  regions,  also
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
social cards are attached to the Mir card. We hope this trend will continue.
Mir cards are accepted in member states of the Eurasian Economic Union and Turkey (last year
we told you we were conducting negotiations). In the near future, we are planning to ensure that
these cards are accepted in non-CIS countries popular with Russian tourists, and to expand their
acceptance in CIS countries.
The development of cashless payments is not restricted to the use of Mir cards.
Last  year,  we  completed  the  development  of  the  Bank  of  Russia’s  special  project,  Faster
Payments System (FPS), which we launched early this year.
As  many  as  14  banks  have  already  joined  the  system,  and  114  more  have  applied.  Our
estimates  suggest  that  early  next  year,  250  banks  will  have  joined  the  system.  At  the  later
stages, only small banks with a basic licence, which need more time to introduce changes, will
join.
According to our estimates, the introduction of the Faster Payments System will reduce fees for
retail remittances more than 2-3-fold.
We  are  currently  working  to  further  develop  the  system  and  ensure  payments  for  goods  and
services via the Faster Payments System. Firstly, this will support the trend toward the rise in
cashless payments, given that FPS fares for trade and service companies will be lower than
those for merchant acquiring services. You may remember that this topic is currently very acute.
Last  year,  we  also  introduced  remote  biometric  identification  for  financial  services  provision.
Biometrics is currently collected in branches of 146 banks; by the end of the year, these will be
collected in all banks with a universal licence in accordance with regulatory documents. In the
near future, biometrics will also be collected in multifunctional centres and used to provide not
only financial services, but also other public services in digital format. Given these factors, we
expect that the use of biometrics will expand considerably next year.
Last year, we launched Masterchain, a blockchain-based project elaborated in association with
FinTech Association  and  market  participants;  this  is  an  advanced  transaction  record  system.
Together  with  Rosreestr,  we  have  already  implemented  a  masterchain-enabled  electronic
mortgage project.
Consumer protection
I  will  now  talk  about  consumer  protection. A  rare,  but  one  of  the  most  painful  situations  for
consumers in the financial market is when depositors lose an uninsured portion of their deposits
with  banks  from  which  we  revoke  licences.  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  this  issue,
because  it  was  repeatedly  raised  at  our  discussions  of  changes  to  the  deposit  insurance
system.  If  we  consider  the  number  of  depositors’  accounts,  99.5%  of  them  are  completely
covered with the 1.4 million ruble insurance under the deposit insurance system. However, these
are only 57.4% of deposits in terms of value. This suggests that, on the one hand, the current
insurance payments provide complete coverage of most depositors’ funds (99.5%); on the other
hand, however, the public is well informed and keeps their deposited amounts under 1.4 million
rubles.  Should  we  increase  the  insurance  coverage  in  these  circumstances?  Certainly,  this
move should not be made in favour of very rich people who, in my opinion, can manage their
risks. However, we believe it is reasonable to take a closer look at the situation when a depositor
has a large amount of money deposited with one bank by coincidence, because the customer
did not have a chance or enough time to manage their funds and the bank’s licence was revoked.
In such cases, we believe it would be reasonable to increase the insurance coverage. Deputies
have proposed this move and we support it.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Which circumstances should this apply to? Inheritance, insurance or social payments, payments
awarded by a court decision, proceeds from the sale of real estate, etc. are cases where we
deem it possible to raise the insurance coverage to 10 million rubles.
Another aspect of consumer protection is conduct supervision. This is a system that controls
whether  financial  organisations  conduct  sales,  conclude  agreements  and  deliver  on  their
obligations in a reliable manner. Do sellers disclose information about potential risks when they
sell their products? Do they provide fair information about returns? Do they impose unnecessary
services to customers? Last year, we had to pay attention to the practice of life insurance policy
sales. We received a lot of complaints that customers had been lured by high returns, but as a
result earned less than they could have earned if they had deposited their money with a bank.
Investment  life  insurance  grew  at  an  outpacing  rate  and  the  collected  insurance  premiums
reached large amounts. Currently, the market is on a downward trend, shrinking by 27% in the
period from 2018 Q1 until 2019 Q1. It is an expected development. This is the result of both the
public’s  disappointment  in  the  product  and  the  regulator’s  tighter  requirements.  We  want  the
financial market to demonstrate healthy growth rather than to be driven by deception. Moderate
growth rates are acceptable if the market develops in a healthy manner.
Last year, we established the institute of financial ombudsman. A special law we had discussed
for  many  years  was  adopted.  Currently,  it  is  coming  into  effect  and  should  raise  consumer
protection. For the public, this will mean a simpler short procedure of dispute settlement with
financial  organisations.  We  realise  that  customers  are  often  weak  in  disputes  with  financial
organisations, but we are offering them protection.
We continue to develop financial literacy programmes, which has also raised many questions.
The regulator will not be able to effectively protect customers without providing information and
education  to  the  public.  We  are  working  together  with  the  Ministry  of  Education.  The  financial
literacy module has been included in the school curriculum (29,000 schools or roughly 70% of all
secondary schools already have this module in their curriculum). We conduct online and offline
workshops and lectures for the public, and we also offer special programmes for orphans and
elderly  people.  We  post  advertising  materials,  including  on  public  transport.  Our  regional
branches are making a large contribution, which we find extremely important.
I  would  like  to  conclude  by  saying  a  few  words  about  financial  inclusion.  Many  deputies  are
concerned about this issue and raise it at almost every parliamentary group meeting, because
voters are concerned about it.
The  overall  level  of  financial  inclusion  in  the  country  is  adequate  and  new  technologies  are
developing faster in Russia than in many other countries. Certainly, they offer new opportunities
to  households  and  businesses.  This  is,  certainly,  an  average  indicator  typical  of  big  cities.  In
some  regions,  where  there  are  many  remote  and  thinly  populated  towns  and  rural  areas,
financial inclusion is low. This remains a pressing issue. Therefore, we adopted a special three-
year programme last year to raise financial inclusion and have launched its implementation in
every region, taking its specifics into account.
Our  key  measures  include  working  with  major  banks  with  a  country-wide  branch  network  to
persuade  them  to  stay  in  such  areas  before  alternative  channels  emerge,  including  mobile
offices and multifunction automated stations, and new formats, like simple transactions delivered
by a post office, and cash withdrawal at points of sales. These options are now available. We are
developing remote services in cooperation with Rostelecom. We signed an agreement to have
the Internet installed in these areas on a priority basis. Last year, we launched a pilot project to
raise financial inclusion in the Far Eastern Federal District and are currently launching it in the
Southern  Federal  District.  Financial  inclusion  challenges  in  these  regions  are  of  higher
importance in these regions than in other areas.
We believe that new technologies will open new possibilities for consumers. Currently, 45% of
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial consumers use remote financial services, with the indicator doubling over the past three
years. This is a good indicator, because there were doubts whether consumers were willing to
use remote services. However, we can see that their willingness is increasing. Therefore, we are
placing  great  efforts  to  develop  financial  technologies.  I  have  already  mentioned  biometric
identification, the Faster Payments System, and financial services marketplaces. We are grateful
to  the  State  Duma  for  its  contribution  to  these  projects.  These  are  complex  projects,  but  we
believe  that  they  are  essential  to  technology  development,  and  among  other  things,  to  raising
financial inclusion, so that we could bridge that gap between advanced cities and regions and
ones  where  services  are  unavailable.  To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  say  that  we  are  continuing
consistent  efforts  in  all  areas  of  the  Central  Bank’s  responsibility  –  monetary  policy,  financial
market resolution and strengthening, encouraging competition, the development of the national
financial  infrastructure,  and  raising  quality  and  reducing  costs  of  financial  services  for
households and businesses.
I would like to repeatedly thank the State Duma for its cooperation with the Bank of Russia and
massive  efforts  to  improve  financial  market-related  laws.  This  is  a  tangible  contribution  to
strengthening our financial system, and its capability to foster economic growth and raise public
well-being.
Thank you for your time.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
