  G7 2019 Conference – Banque de France, 10 May 2019 
Cybersecurity: Coordinating efforts to protect the financial sector in the global 
economy 
Conclusion by François Villeroy de Galhau 
Governor, Banque de France 
               Press contact: Mark Deen (mark.deen@banque-france.fr). 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Page 1 sur 6 
First, I would like to thank the moderators and the panelists for their very rich 
comments and the very useful ideas. We are all convinced that cybersecurity 
of the financial sector will remain on our agenda for a long time. The challenge 
is no longer about gaining awareness anymore, but to find ways to intensify 
and rationalise our action.  
Based  on  the  discussions  today,  let  me  start  with  one  pre-requisite  – 
coordination  -  and  then  propose  concrete  steps  and  tangible  actions  to 
improve  our  coordination  in  three  areas:  I.  Regulation  and  supervision;  II. 
Information; III. Preparation. 
A. Global threats, coordinated action 
Panel  1  questioned  the  importance  of  cyber  threats  for  the  financial  sector. 
There is a consensus that the level of cyber threats has never been so high, 
but  at  the  same  time,  we  must  acknowledge  that  the  capacity  to  anticipate 
attacks needs to be reinforced. Following an attack, we need to address the 
potential contagion issues to the entire financial system or the entire economy. 
This is why coordination is a pre-requisite, not an easy one but a necessary 
one.  While  remaining  realistic,  there  will  not  be  a  “world  organization  for 
cybersecurity”  for  obvious  reasons,  including  trust.  Hence,  coordination 
should  be  cross-jurisdictional.  Contagion  can  be  global  as  our  countries' 
financial systems are interconnected. This follows President Macron's call for 
an  "Internet  of  Trust"  at  the  UNESCO  Forum  in  November  2018,  which 
includes helping low-income countries to keep pace with developed countries. 
The  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  are  encouraged  to  further  develop  their 
assistance program. In addition, coordination should be cross-sectors. The 
financial sector is not the only one concerned with cyber-attacks. Other critical 
sectors are also at risk, some of which are essential to the functioning of the 
financial sector. This reinforces the importance of a cross-sectoral approach. 
National security agencies use this approach, and financial sector authorities 
 
could also do the same at their level, taking into consideration the forthcoming 
G7 CEG Fundamental elements. 
Page 2 sur 6 
Finally  coordination  should  be  cross-authorities,  with  national  security 
agencies.  As discussed  in  Panel  1,  those  agencies  have  the  role  to  protect 
the countries’ critical economic sectors, including the financial sector, against 
cyber-attacks.  Financial  authorities  have  the  role  to  supervise  the  financial 
sector’s  capacity  to  manage  its  risks,  including  cyber  risks.  Both  authorities 
have a mutual interest in coordination.  
B. Three concrete areas to improve our coordination 
I. Regulation and supervision 
I would like to start with the issue of regulation, which was addressed by panel 
2.  One  difficulty  with  regulation  is  about  reaching  a  balanced  situation. 
Regulation is needed, irrespective of the level of institutions’ awareness and 
self-discipline…  But,  too  much  regulation  may  lead  to  a  decrease  in  self-
discipline and turn institutions’ effort into a compliance exercise.  
Since 2015, cybersecurity issues attract an increasing level of attention, and 
regulators have produced a large number of regulatory texts, both at national 
and international levels. This was called for to trigger the appropriate response 
and efforts from the industry. It helped the sector to reinforce its safeguards. 
Nevertheless,  we  must  ask  ourselves  whether  the  multiplication  of  new 
regulations  can  have  a  counterproductive  effect.  From 
the  panelists’ 
interventions, two issues need to be addressed: 
•  First, we should avoid the possible proliferation of texts by standard-
setters  for  banking,  payments,  securities  services,  insurance  and/or 
financial  markets.  The  FSB  has  already  provided  such  evidence  in  a 
stock-taking  exercise  performed 
in  2017.  Regulators  are  paying 
attention  to  cyber  risks,  and  while  they  share  the  same  objectives, 
regulatory texts tend to  differ across regulators and as a result add to 
firms’ burden in terms of compliance with these various regulations, with 
 Page 3 sur 6 
little marginal gain. Clarity would be enhanced by reducing the multiple 
variations in the formulation of requirements across institutions. In turn, 
regulators’  efforts  would  be  streamlined  and  their  experts  employed 
more effectively.    
How can we better coordinate regulation? Obviously, a “principle-based” 
regulation  on  cybersecurity  is  preferable,  rather  than  increasingly 
prescriptive standards, too rigidly “rules-based”. Supervision completes 
regulation.  Principle-based  regulation  would  give  supervisors  some 
room for manoeuvre to modulate their expectations to the risk profile of 
the institutions.  
•  But  then,  we  should  also  pay  attention  to  the  risk  of  regulatory 
arbitrage.  Regulatory  differences  can  create  opportunities.  If  not  all 
regulations  are  aligned,  some  private  actors  could  (re)locate  their  IT 
systems  in  less-demanding  jurisdictions.  This  is  the  reason  why  we 
need homogeneity among international regulatory texts with the largest 
outreach.  
Who  could  lead  this  coordination  role  on  cybersecurity  regulation?  The  G7 
expert  group  has  been  extremely  successful  in  producing  “Fundamental 
elements”, but this group has no standard-setting role and its texts can only 
guide regulators in their work. I believe the FSB is best placed to engage the 
dialogue with the various standard-setters to foster the alignment of their texts, 
as  well  as  to  conduct  global  outreach,  and  limit  the  proliferation  of  working 
groups. 
 II. Information  
Cyber  threats  are  increasing,  but  adequate  and  consistent  measurement  is 
challenging. I would like therefore to make two proposals: 
About incident reporting. Many reporting obligations on cyber incidents have 
emerged, requested by various authorities. But these incident reports give little 
Page 4 sur 6 
 
information  to  measure  the  intensity  and  sophistication  of  threats  and  their 
evolution. The indicators requested vary from one report to another and this 
limits  the  scope  of  diagnosis  and  comparisons.  The  institutions  themselves 
can  struggle  to  transmit  information  about  their  incidents  in  different  formats 
and with different details to the various authorities in charge. FSB agreed on a 
“cyber  lexicon”. 1  As  we  have  done  in  the  past  for  operational  risk,  I 
recommend  that  we  work  on  a  common  categorization  of  cyber  incidents  to 
better measure the impacts of attacks, and better understand their evolution. 
About information sharing and threat intelligence. As evidenced by panel 
4, little information on cybersecurity is actually shared, due to sensitivity issues 
and trust. A pragmatic approach is for financial authorities to engage bilaterally 
in  Memoranda  of  Understanding  (MOUs)  with  authorities  with  whom  they 
share  mutual  trust.  Singapore  and  Hong-Kong  already  paved  the  way.  This 
can be done between G7 countries and among other trusted countries as well. 
 III.  Preparation  for  cyber  crisis  management  through 
exercises 
large  scale 
The third panel showed how valuable crisis simulations are in the building of 
an  operational  preparatory  capacity.  The  exercises  organized  so  far,  at 
domestic or regional levels, allowed us to acquire experience in coordinating a 
response and the recovery during a major incident. Our ambition must be as 
high as the risks to which our evolving and interconnected financial systems 
are exposed to, due to the increasing sophistication of cyber-attacks. In other 
words, and this is something that clearly emerged from today’s discussions, a 
more global approach to cyber resilience exercises is needed. 
In this regard, let me briefly insist on the G7 joint crisis management exercise 
to be held in early June, coordinated by Banque de France.  We will have an 
excellent  opportunity  to  assess  our  ability  to  exchange  information  and  take 
collective decisions in a mock crisis situation. Good and clear communication 
                                                            
1 FSB, 12 November 2018. 
 
will  be  essential,  underlying  the  critical  role  of  the  communication  protocol 
designed in this regard.  
Page 5 sur 6 
But preparation against cyber threat is a moving target. A number of avenues 
need to be explored.  
•  First,  if  this  exercise  is  necessary  per  se,  its  full  potential  will  be 
delivered  only  if  all  lessons  are  properly  drawn.  Some  guiding  key 
principles, or “Fundamental elements”, to be designed in the wake of the 
G7 exercise, will help achieve this objective. 
•  Second, we must leverage on this G7 exercise: the regular practice of 
coordinated  crisis  management  exercises  should  be  encouraged  in 
order to enhance the resilience of the financial system.  
•  Third,  an  enlargement  beyond  the  remit  of  G7  countries  should  be 
considered  with  some  other  jurisdictions  and/or  with  BIS  involvement, 
and possibly beyond the sole financial sector actors. In future exercises, 
the  current  format  will  require  cooperation  arrangements  on  a  wider 
scale.  
 Regulation and supervision, information, and preparation: these are the areas 
where  we  clearly  need  to  improve our  coordination.  I  would  like  to conclude 
with a last imperative: action. We all share the principles, but there was today 
in this conference a sense of urgency, of concrete urgency. This is where the 
French presidency of the G7 intends to be useful: 
•  First, by giving greater visibility and support to the CEG work, which is 
going  to  deliver  important  papers  on  cross-sector  coordination  and  on 
the assessment of vulnerabilities. 
•  Second,  by  proposing  to  the  FMCBG  meeting  in  Chantilly  in  July  to 
engage on three additional steps:  
-  on regulation, to mandate the FSB to deal with the proliferation of 
regulatory texts;  
 Page 6 sur 6 
-  on information, to define within the CEG a categorization of cyber 
incidents;  
-  on  preparation,  to  take  stock  of  the  lessons  of  the  first  G7  joint 
crisis  management  exercise,  and  be  ready  to  extend  it  as 
appropriate.  
There is no threat which we are surer of than cyber risks in the financial sector. 
And there is no perimeter more suitable to deal with it than the G7, although 
not an exclusive one. We cannot afford to wait; let us act, together. 
