  5 April 2018 
 
Speech 
 
Már Gudmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank, 
delivered  at  the  57th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  5  April 
2018. 
 
Mr. President; Prime Minister, other Ministers, Speaker of Parliament, Directors 
and Ambassadors; Ladies and Gentlemen! 
 
The Icelandic economy has been in fine fettle recently, with full employment, to 
say the least,  as  we have had to import a large  number of  workers to  support 
economic  activity.  The  risk  of  overheating  has  receded  somewhat  in  the  past 
year, however; the positive output gap has narrowed, and the residential housing 
market is less stretched than it was a year ago.  
 
Until last month, inflation had been close to target but below it for four years 
running.  Inflation  expectations  have  been  at  target  by  most  measures  in  the 
recent past. It is this that has enabled the Bank to lower its policy interest rate by 
0.75  percentage  points  since  our  last  Annual  General  Meeting.  Inflation 
expectations have fallen  to  the target  and have become more  firmly  anchored 
there, reflecting the success of monetary policy in the recent term. The Bank’s 
Chief Economist  recently  published a Working  Paper explaining  this success, 
noting as well that the decline in inflation to the target between 2012 and early 
2014 was virtually costless, partly because of increased credibility of monetary 
policy.1  If changes are made to the monetary policy framework in the coming 
term, it is important to preserve this success.  
 
One of the main reasons for reduced demand pressures in the economy is that 
GDP growth has subsided after peaking in 2016 and is now approaching its long-
term trend rate. The slowdown in GDP growth reflects weaker export growth, as 
the tourism boom cannot be expected to continue at the pace seen in the recent 
past.  Furthermore,  the  improvement  in  terms  of  trade  has  slowed  down 
considerably. This means that the effects of the positive shocks that enabled us 
to  grow  rapidly  and  simultaneously  keep  inflation  low  are  tapering  off.  The 
appreciation of the króna played a major  role in  the economy’s adjustment to 
these shocks. However, the Bank intervened in the foreign exchange market and 
imposed a special reserve requirement (SRR) on capital inflows to prevent the 
                                                 
1 Thórarinn G. Pétursson (2018), „Disinflation and improved anchoring of long-term inflation 
expectations: The Icelandic experience“, Central Bank of Iceland Working Paper no. 77. This 
improved performance of monetary policy is also discussed in detail in Central Bank Special 
Publication no. 11, entitled “Monetary policy based on inflation targeting: experience since 
2001 and post-crisis changes”. See: www.sedlabanki.is  
 1 
 króna from overshooting. Now, however, a significant additional rise in the real 
exchange rate would be risky.  
 
Interest  rates  in  Iceland  are  currently  low  in  historical  context,  particularly  in 
view  of  the  business  cycle  position.  With  one  short-lived  exception,  indexed 
Treasury bond rates have never been lower, and indexed mortgage lending rates 
are also at a historical low. Apart from a short period early in this decade, when 
Iceland was at an entirely different point in the business cycle than it is now, the 
Central Bank’s interest rates are at their lowest since the early 1990s, when they 
became an important monetary policy instrument. We must therefore consider 
realistically whether we can expect further reduction of interest rates without an 
outright  slack  in  the  economy.  Developments  in  Central  Bank  rates  over  the 
coming term will be determined by economic developments, which could be in 
either direction.  
 
When we met a year ago for the Bank’s Annual Meeting, the vast majority of 
the  capital  controls  had  just  been  lifted.  As  expected,  exchange  rate  volatility 
increased  afterwards.  But  that  volatility  proved  temporary,  and  short-term 
fluctuations in the exchange rate subsided markedly in the latter half of the year. 
In recent months, short-term volatility has actually been limited in historical and 
international  context.  The  Central  Bank  has  not  intervened  in  the  foreign 
exchange market in recent months, supporting the conclusion that this reduced 
volatility is due to improved balance in capital flows.  
 
According to currently available forecasts, GDP growth is set to remain robust 
and  the  domestic  economy  will  experience  a  “soft”  landing.  The  outlook  is 
uncertain, however, and various risks could materialise, not only in Iceland but 
also  abroad,  where  uncertainty  is  considerable  at  present.  In  addition,  it  is 
important  that  there  is  considerable  scope  for  interest  rates  and  large  foreign 
exchange  reserves  to  respond  to  adverse  developments.  The  longer  long-term 
inflation expectations are anchored to the target, the greater that scope will be. 
One of the main tasks of monetary policy, of course, is to foster such an outcome. 
However, if other decisions that affect domestic cost levels and demand pull in 
another  direction,  such  a  tug-of-war  could  result  in  a  further  rise  in  the  real 
exchange rate and could adversely affect employment levels. 
 
Honoured guests: Although nearly all of the capital controls were lifted in March 
2017, a few restrictions on capital transfers remain: on the one hand, restrictions 
on  offshore  krónur,  and  on  the  other,  restrictions  on  speculative  derivatives 
transactions involving the króna and other transactions that could undermine the 
efficacy of the SRR.  
 
In order to be released from the current exemptions provided for in international 
agreements on free movement of capital, vis-à-vis both the EEA and the OECD, 
we must lift these restrictions, and it is appropriate that we aim to do so as soon 
as possible. The Central Bank is of the view that the economic preconditions are 
in place to take the final step towards full capital account liberalisation. This also 
applies to the stock of offshore krónur, which now equals about 3½% of GDP, 
 2 
 down from 40% in late 2008, when the capital controls were first imposed. But 
this cannot be done without statutory amendment.  
 
The Bank does not consider it appropriate yet to begin lowering the SRR. The 
interest rate differential with abroad is still too wide, although it has narrowed 
considerably since the SRR was imposed in June 2016. Given how high the real 
exchange rate is, this is not a good time to take the risk of pushing it higher than 
economic  fundamentals  warrant.  If  forecasts  materialise,  the  conditions  for 
lowering the SRR will improve in the coming term, as Iceland’s positive output 
gap is projected to keep narrowing and global interest rates are expected to rise.  
 
When  the  SRR  was  introduced,  there  were  still  broad-based  restrictions  on 
capital  outflows.  The  SRR  was  justified  in  part  with  reference  to  the 
liberalisation  process,  and  there  were  concerns  that  the  offshore  krónur  that 
exited via the Bank’s June 2016 auction would re-enter immediately in search of 
a new carry trade opportunity. It is surely counterproductive to open the gates 
for  large-scale  carry  trade  before  the  carry  trade  positions  from  the  last  spree 
have been closed out. On the other hand, there will be grounds to revisit the level 
of the SRR and the  asset  classes affected by it  when the  final  capital  account 
liberalisation measures are taken.  
 
The Bank’s large international reserves, which have been financed domestically 
for  the  most  part,  are  the  result  of  the  strategy  of  building  up  large  enough 
reserves to reduce the risks associated with capital account liberalisation, and of 
the positive shocks that made it possible to build up the reserves without foreign 
borrowing. That build-up took place over a very short period in 2014-2016, when 
foreign currency inflows were at a peak.  
 
In  my  speech  at  last  year’s  Annual  Meeting,  I  outlined  the  benefits  of 
maintaining the reserves — benefits enjoyed by many — and I also discussed 
the  costs,  which  fall  mainly  on  the  Central  Bank.  These  costs  derive  from  a 
negative interest rate differential, as the reserves are currently invested abroad at 
low  interest  rates,  while  the  rates  on  the  Bank’s  króna-denominated  debt  are 
much higher. Extrapolations carried out last year indicated that because of this, 
the Bank’s operating results would be negative by roughly 18 b.kr. per year. New 
calculations indicate that this loss has shrunk to 15 b.kr. per year, mainly because 
the international reserves are smaller and the interest rate spread is narrower.  
 
Central banks do not become insolvent in the conventional sense, even if they 
have negative equity; indeed, many respected central banks have operated under 
such  conditions  for  longer  or  shorter  periods.  This  is  because  the  purchasing 
power  of  the  reserves  is  intact  as  regards  the  purpose  they  serve,  and  central 
banks themselves issue the currency they use to pay domestic costs. Even so, it 
could  be detrimental  if the Central Bank of  Iceland has  significantly  negative 
equity, as this could undermine its independence and its ability to achieve the 
price stability objective. In the near future, a number of actions will be taken to 
improve the Bank’s financial outcome, including through having the commercial 
banks participate indirectly in covering the costs of the reserves. It could  also 
 3 
 come to pass that the Bank will call in a portion of the callable equity provided 
for by law. 
 
Honoured  guests:  We  have  made  significant  strides  in  rebuilding  the  banking 
system and placing it on a stronger footing than before the financial crisis. The 
banks  focus  primarily  on  providing  services  to  domestic  households  and 
businesses.  They  are  much  more  resilient  now  than  they  were  before.  Their 
capital  ratios  are  well  above  the  thresholds  set  by  the  Financial  Supervisory 
Authority  —  thresholds  that  are  much  higher  than  before  the  crisis.  Their 
liquidity  position  is  good  as  well.  The  same  can  be  said  of  borrowers,  whose 
position has improved radically. 
 
These improvements in the banking system’s position play a major part in the 
Financial  Stability  Council’s  conclusion  at  recent  meetings  that  there  are  few 
risks  to  financial  system  stability  at  present.  Nevertheless,  the  Council  has 
pointed out some risk factors.  
 
One of them is the high price of residential and commercial real estate, which 
could, in combination with low interest rates and ample collateral capacity, lead 
to  a  strong  increase  in  indebtedness,  with  the  associated  risk  of  a  setback 
followed by increased loan losses. To a degree, the authorities have responded 
to this risk: last year the Financial Supervisory Authority imposed a ceiling on 
residential  loan-to-value  ratios,  following  analysis  and  discussion  within  the 
Systemic Risk Committee, which works for the Financial Stability Council, and 
upon  receiving  an  opinion  from  the  Council.  Developments  in  the  real  estate 
market will continue to be monitored closely in this respect, and the possibility 
of applying additional macroprudential tools will be considered.  
 
Another  risk  factor  that  the  Financial  Stability  Council  has  identified  is 
uncertainty  about  future  developments  in  the  tourism  sector  and  the  potential 
impact that a setback in the industry would have on the position of the banking 
system. At the end of 2017, lending to the tourism sector accounted for 9% of 
the  large  commercial  banks’  total  lending,  but  because  growth  in  tourism  has 
eased recently, this ratio has held broadly steady. The Central Bank of Iceland 
conducts  an  annual  stress  test  in  consultation  with  the  Financial  Supervisory 
Authority, in which it examines the impact of macroeconomic scenarios on the 
commercial banks’ resilience. The results are published in the autumn issue of 
the  Bank’s  Financial  Stability  report.  The  last  stress  test  assumed  that  there 
would be a recession in  trading partner countries, plus a drop in major export 
prices  and  a  steep  decline  in  the  number  of  tourists  visiting  Iceland.  In  this 
scenario,  the  banks’  capital  ratios  would  fall  by  an  average  of  3½  percentage 
points, to a level close to the minimum capital ratios currently required by the 
Financial Supervisory Authority.   
 
These  two  risks  could  easily  occur  in  tandem,  however.  According  to  a  new 
working paper by two Central Bank staff members, growth in private property 
rentals to tourists via Airbnb has increased real house prices by 2% per year in 
the past three years; furthermore, it explains about 15% of the rise in real prices 
 4 
 over this period.2 A contraction in tourism could therefore exacerbate a drop in 
house  prices  stemming  from  other  causes.  The  impact  on  the  banking  system 
would then be greater. It is nevertheless unlikely that they would be unable to 
withstand such a turn of events, but they would probably need to use the capital 
buffers that are designed to cushion against such shocks.  
 
That gives rise to the question of how high the banks’ capital ratios should be. 
Their combined capital, including subordinated loans, was equivalent to 25% of 
the risk-weighted asset base of the three systemically important banks at the end 
of 2017, and their so-called gearing ratio was just under 17%. The gearing ratio 
measures net  equity  relative to  total  assets without  risk adjustment. Approved 
dividend payments will lower the capital ratio to 23½% and the gearing ratio to 
just  under  16%.  These  figures  can  be  expected  to  fall  even  further  during  the 
year, owing to dividend payments and changes in the composition of capital. The 
ratios  are  certainly  comfortably  above  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority’s 
capital adequacy requirements, which are close to 20% for the three commercial 
banks.  They  are  also  well  above  the  levels  generally  seen  in  neighbouring 
countries. For example, European banks of a size similar to Iceland’s banks have 
capital ratios of just over 18% and gearing ratios of about 8%. Elsewhere in the 
world, capital ratios are higher than those in Europe in some cases. Furthermore, 
many observers consider the actual capital in the European banking system is 
too  limited  and  that  Europe  is  therefore  not  the  best  reference  for  Icelandic 
banks. Nonetheless, there is some scope to lower the banks’ capital ratios — and 
gearing  ratios  in  particular  —  with  dividend  payments  and  changes  in  the 
composition  of  capital.  On  the  other  hand,  the  banks  are  being  cautious  in 
maintaining a so-called “management premium” over and above the Financial 
Supervisory Authority’s minimum requirement, as it could erode confidence in 
the banks if their capital ratios fall below the minimum were they to face only 
mild headwinds. Moreover, the banks must bear in mind that the countercyclical 
capital  buffer  is  currently  1.25%,  but  the  Financial  Stability  Council  has 
signalled that  it could  increase it in  stages to  2.5% as the financial  cycle  gets 
more wind in its sails. 
 
In  assessing  a  desirable  level  for  the  banks’  capital,  it  is  important  to  remain 
aware of the costs and benefits. At times, international discussion of this topic 
has been somewhat misleading and, to some extent, affected by bank executives’ 
interest in maximising their own remuneration through risk-taking, knowing that 
a portion of possible losses would be absorbed by taxpayers. Capital is not dead 
money, as is sometimes implied. It is available for disposal in order to finance 
the assets side of the balance sheet, including lending. Furthermore, there is no 
universal principle that says banks with more capital have less lending capacity; 
in fact, research has confirmed that banks with stronger capital had an easier time 
obtaining  funding  during  and  after  the  financial  crisis,  and  they  reduced  their 
lending to customers less than other did — aside from merely surviving.  
 
                                                 
2 Lúdvík Elíasson and Önundur Páll Ragnarsson (2018) “Short-term renting of residential 
apartments, Effects of Airbnb in the Icelandic housing market”, Central Bank of Iceland 
Working Paper no. 76. See: www.sedlabanki.is   
 5 
 Most companies need equity, as banks and other lenders are usually reluctant to 
grant  loans  to  companies  without  it.  But  where  banks  are  concerned,  other 
factors are involved. Banks receive sight deposits, which are a part of payment 
intermediation in any country, but at the same time they are long-term investors 
on the assets side, with the associated risk of a run that could render them unable 
to  honour  their  obligations.  Such  runs  on  banks  are  often  connected  to 
uncertainty  about  the  banks’  capital.  This  is  where  central  banks  come  in  as 
liquidity providers and lenders of last resort, in addition to deposit insurance and 
other contingency measures that are part of the official safety net for the banking 
system. But the safety net creates a moral hazard that entails taking excessive 
risk at taxpayers’ expense. This is where the regulatory framework enters in: to 
place limits on risk and to set capital requirements so as to reduce the likelihood 
of  a  run  on  the  banks,  leaving  taxpayers  to  pay  the  bill.  How  high  the 
requirements must be is always a balancing act, as it is hardly possible — and 
actually undesirable — to set them high enough to render the banks bullet-proof.  
  
We  must  not  allow  the  banks’  current  resilience  to  blind  us  to  the  great 
challenges facing them. These challenges centre, among other things, on rapid 
technological advances, increased competition with other financial institutions 
and  companies  that  offer  payment  services  and  loans,  increased  regulatory 
burdens, high cost levels, operational risk, cybersecurity threats, and ownership 
issues. Of course, it is the task of the banks themselves and their owners to take 
on  these  challenges,  which  —  as  always  —  represent  both  threats  and 
opportunities. But the legislature and supervisory institutions also have a part to 
play. The regulatory burden should not be any more stringent than is needed to 
limit  risk  at  any  given  time.  Simultaneously,  it  must  be  ensured  that  the 
regulatory framework extends to all financial market service providers that could 
contribute  to  the  creation  of  systemic  risk.  Maintaining  effective  consumer 
protection  is  important  as  well;  otherwise,  there  is  the  risk  that  justified 
dissatisfaction  will  develop  —  dissatisfaction  that  will  ultimately  erode 
confidence in all financial institutions. In this context, one important issue that 
calls  for  supervisory  involvement  is  the  boundary  lines  between  financial 
institutions’  cooperation  on  infrastructure  and  security,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
competition concerning front-line services, on the other. Studies have shown that 
Icelandic banks cooperate considerably less on security and infrastructure than, 
for instance, banks in the Nordic countries. In the recent past, the Competition 
Authority, the Financial Supervisory Authority, the Central Bank, and the banks 
have  worked  together  to  develop  a  shared  understanding  on  these  matters, 
thereby laying a strong foundation for further cooperation. An example of this is 
the  recent  establishment  of  a  temporary  cooperative  forum  on  operational 
security of financial infrastructure, including representatives from the banks, the 
Icelandic  Banks'  Data  Centre,  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority,  and  the 
Central Bank.  
 
The financial system is more than banks; it encompasses financial institutions, 
financial market infrastructure, and financial markets themselves. Systemic risk 
can accumulate in all of these and is sometimes amplified by interactions among 
them. A detailed discussion of these functions is beyond the scope of our meeting 
 6 
 today, but  I would like to  emphasise that the Financial Supervisory  Authority 
and the Central Bank monitor risk in all of these areas and review it in depth at 
meetings of the Systemic Risk Committee and the Financial Stability Council. 
Nevertheless, I cannot leave the topic of the financial system without mentioning 
the  massive  overhaul  of  financial  market  infrastructure  that  is  currently 
underway and the germination of ideas in the area of payment intermediation, as 
the Central Bank is integrally involved with both.  
 
The renewal of the most important core infrastructure elements used for decades 
to  operate  the  financial  system  began  recently.  The  investment  as  a  whole 
represents  the  financial  system’s  largest  IT  investment  ever  undertaken.  The 
overhaul  will  move  us  away  from  “home-grown”  solutions  to  standardised 
international  systems.  The  systems  being  renewed  are  the  banks’  internal 
payment  systems,  the  Central  Bank’s  interbank  payment  systems,  and  the 
Nasdaq securities depository’s securities settlement system.  
 
A  variety  of  benefits  accompany  new  financial  market  infrastructure,  but  the 
implementation  process  can  be  risky,  partly  because  the  new  systems  must 
communicate with the old ones during the transition phase. Supervisory bodies 
monitor this risk. It is analysed at meetings of the Systemic Risk Committee and 
is  identified  as  a  risk  factor  in  statements  issued  by  the  Financial  Stability 
Council. Such a risk materialised to an extent last November and the cooperative 
forum  on  operational  security  of  financial  market  infrastructure  that  I  just 
mentioned was set up afterwards. In that forum and elsewhere, work will be done 
to minimise the operational risk accompanying the ongoing renewal process.  
 
At  the  same  time  as  the  renewal  of  core  financial  market  infrastructure  is 
underway, a great deal is happening in the field of payment intermediation, both 
internationally  and  here  in  Iceland,  owing  to  new  technological  solutions  and 
changes in the regulatory framework that will stimulate competition in this area. 
Among  the  topics  under  consideration  is  the  new  EU  Payment  Services 
Directive, which is to be implemented in Iceland in the near future. In addition, 
virtual currencies have come into use as a medium of payment, both nationally 
and across borders, and there is a great deal of discussion at present of the pros 
and cons of central bank issuance of electronic money.  
 
In  view  of  the  many  changes  currently  underway  in  the  field  of  payment 
intermediation,  the  Central  Bank  has  previously  discussed  the  necessity  of 
establishing  a  permanent  information  and  cooperation  forum  representing  all 
stakeholders in this area. In the near future, the Bank will take the initiative on 
this, with the aim of establishing the forum before the end of this year.  
  
Apart from its Financial Market Infrastructure report, issued in June, the Bank is 
planning to publish two reports on these topics quite soon. One is a report on 
retail payment intermediation from the standpoint of preparedness and financial 
stability,  which  focuses  on  debit  card  use,  real-time  settlement,  and  the 
importance  of  effective  electronic  payment  intermediation  in  Iceland,  both  in 
 7 
 favourable and unfavourable conditions. The other report focuses on the possible 
issuance of electronic krónur.  
 
I don’t want to reveal too much now, but there are a few points worth considering 
in  this  context.  First  of  all  is  the  importance  of  real-time  settlement,  which 
enhances  efficacy  and  security.  This  has  been  a  feature  of  payment 
intermediation in Iceland for a decade and a half, and it is where other countries 
are heading. It is therefore vital that we preserve that feature during the changes 
now taking place. Second, it is important to keep the cost of domestic payment 
intermediation down. New and more diverse solutions that, for example, work 
directly with core financial market infrastructure, such as bank deposits and the 
Icelandic  Banks'  Data  Centre’s  systems,  could  help  in  this  regard.  Third,  it  is 
important that it be impossible to stop domestic payment intermediation through 
some sort of foreign intervention. Fourth, there must be alternate routes in the 
system,  in  case  anything  goes  wrong.  This  could  call  for  some  diversity  in 
payment intermediation, using different types of technology. Electronic krónur 
could  play  a  role  in  this.  But  the  topic  of  electronic  krónur  gives  rise  to  big 
questions  that  must  be  discussed  —  questions  about  the  possibilities  for  the 
general public to use electronic claims against the Central Bank (and indirectly 
against  the  State)  as  a  medium  of  payment  instead  of  bank  deposits,  and 
questions about the repercussions this could have on the role and stability of the 
banking system. The discussion promises to be an interesting one, and it is just 
beginning. 
 
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Supervisory  Board  and  the  Monetary 
Policy Committee for their work over the past  year,  and  I  wish to  thank  the 
Central Bank’s many colleagues and collaborators for their cooperation – not 
least  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Affairs, and the Financial Supervisory Authority. I would also like to thank the 
financial  institutions  with  which  the  Bank  interacts  for  their  cooperation. 
Furthermore, I would like to thank the Parliament of Iceland, particularly the 
Economics  and  Commerce  Committee,  for  their  collaboration.  And  last  but 
certainly not least, I want to thank the staff of the Central Bank for a job well 
done over the past year.  
 
 
 
 
 8 
