Adnan Zaylani Mohamad Zahid: Re-inventing payments - the future
of financial services
Keynote address by Mr Adnan Zaylani Mohamad Zahid, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Malaysian  E-Payments  Excellence  Awards  (MEEA)
2019, Kuala Lumpur, 31 July 2019.
 It is my pleasure to be speaking here today, at such an exciting time for our payments landscape.
Malaysia’s progress in migrating to e-payments has been promising. In less than a decade since
2011,  we  have  reduced  cheque  usage  by  half  to  101  million  in  2018.  E-payment  acceptance
points  such  as  point-of-sale  (POS)  terminals  have  more  than  doubled  to  16  terminals  per
thousand  inhabitants  in  2018.  More  merchants  are  also  accepting  QR  payments  with  over
400,000 registrations recorded to-date. Meanwhile, e-payment transactions have almost tripled to
125 transactions per capita in 2018.
At  the  same  time,  new  business  models  are  emerging.  We  estimate  that  40%  of  fintechs  in
Malaysia are in payments or payment-related services – making it the largest segment. The e-
wallet space has been particularly vibrant, contributing to rapid growth in mobile payments. From
2017 to 2018, mobile payment transaction volume had increased twenty-fold from just below two
million transactions to over 34 million transactions within a year.
Keeping  these  developments  in  mind,  allow  me  to  share  three  broad  priorities  in  taking
Malaysia’s payments journey to greater heights.
Greater scope to enhance inclusivity and quality of e-payment adoption
The first priority is to improve the quality of our e-payment migration to be more inclusive, broad-
based and sustainable. The good progress so far means that Malaysia has a solid foundation for
more widespread adoption of e-payments. E-payments are increasingly prevalent, with adoption
picking up across a wide range of use cases. A wider network of merchants is also increasingly
open  to  accepting  e-payments  as  a  possible  driver  of  efficiency  gains  and  revenue  growth.
Importantly,  these  encouraging  developments  have  been  contributed,  in  part,  by  the  market
reforms  and  incentive  structures  implemented  since  2013.  These  measures  have  corrected
market distortions and facilitated the pooling of industry resources to continuously enhance the
payment infrastructure and services.
Nonetheless, there are opportunities for more inclusive and broad-based adoption. Studies have
shown that cash usage is still prevalent with more than 80% of Malaysians reportedly using cash
in a majority of their everyday spend such as F&B, groceries and fuel. E-payment adoption is
also uneven across geolocation and is largely concentrated in the urban centres. This calls for
greater efforts in two key areas to address such market gaps.
The  first  key  area  is  to  significantly  expand  merchant  acceptance,  with  a  focus  on  lower-tier
merchants.  E-payment  acceptance  points  are  not  yet  ubiquitous,  especially  among  micro-
enterprises that are frequented by many Malaysians, such as wet markets, night markets and
hawker stalls.
In this regard, solutions that are ‘infrastructure-light’ could go a long way in boosting e-payment
acceptance among micro-enterprises who are cost-sensitive. New, cost-effective solutions such
as  QR  payments  and  “Tap-on-Phone”,  which  leverage  on  the  already  high  penetration  of
smartphones  in  Malaysia,  may  be  preferred  over  traditional  POS  terminals.  Indeed,  we  are
encouraged to see that industry players are starting to roll out interoperable solutions. Notably,
these include several pilot initiatives ahead of the nationwide roll-out of PayNet’s Interoperable
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
QR payment solution. Such solution has the potential to become a game-changer by facilitating
merchants to accept payments from customers of different participating banks and non-banks by
using only a unified QR code.
Beyond  that,  we  should  accelerate  the  digitisation  of  the  value  chain  for  both  users  and
merchants.  This  could  include  digitising  salary  payments,  and  payments  to  suppliers,
wholesalers  and  distributors.  These  developments  would  make  it  more  compelling  for
consumers and businesses to maintain funds digitally, thereby providing a natural incentive to
keep using and accepting e-payments.
The second key area is on strengthening public confidence. Some segments of the population
may still lack awareness and confidence in e-payments, despite fraud levels being relatively low
in  Malaysia.  Some  consumers  are  also  concerned  about  overspending,  as  they  are  used  to
relying  on  cash  withdrawals  as  a  way  to  budget  and  control  expenses.  These  are  cognitive
barriers that can be overcome with concerted efforts.
Banks  and  non-banks  alike  should  intensify  efforts  on  awareness-building  and  education
campaigns. These could focus on use cases that are central to day-to-day life, such as paying
for fuel, groceries and F&B. Done well, this can have a long-lasting effect on behavioural change
towards greater adoption of e-payments.
To strengthen this proposition to customers, financial institutions should continuously enhance
their security features, and put in place while actively promoting their product arrangements that
will give customers the peace of mind. This may include strengthening the effectiveness of fraud
detection  and  prevention  engine  using  the  latest  technology  such  as  artificial  intelligence  and
machine learning. Additionally, offering liability protection programs and a commitment to resolve
disputes within a stipulated timeframe would go a long way in providing assurance to customers.
Supporting  this,  financial  institutions’  mobile  applications  and  Internet  banking  channels  must
provide seamless ways for users to track their expenses. This would include budgeting features,
instant  notifications  and  possibly  smart  money  management 
these
enhancements  may  be  small  tweaks  with  a  potentially  big  impact  to  get  users  to  be  more
comfortable with e-payments.
Going beyond payments to enhance value proposition to end-users
tools.  Some  of 
This brings me to second key priority – the need to go beyond payments in response to certain
“new normals” in the payments landscape. Today, customers increasingly expect payments to
be fast, frictionless and free. Competition has also heightened. Non-traditional players such as
fintechs and bigtechs are increasingly relying on payments as entry point into financial services.
Against this backdrop, payment service providers must rethink their strategies to remain relevant
and be sustainable in the long run. Today, going cashless is more than just e-payments. Instead,
it should be about putting customers at the core of innovation to address real pain points and
drive  greater  value  creation.  This  means  delivering  integrated  solutions  to  enhance  the  value
proposition to end-users.
In the e-wallet space, we have noticed the practice by some players in offering generous rewards
including cashback to stimulate usage among users. While such practice may be effective in
driving  e-wallet  adoption  at  the  initial  stage,  it  is  questionable  whether  such  practice  is
sustainable  in  the  longer  run.  For  instance,  we  have  observed  that  the  transaction  volume  of
some players tend to fall significantly once the promotion period is over.
To achieve a more sustainable migration, the industry should strengthen the value proposition of
e-payments. Greater focus should be placed on creating innovative and value-added solutions
that go beyond payments. This may serve as a natural incentive for customers to adopt digital
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial services.
To  enhance  the  value  proposition  to  end-users,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  also  focused  its
efforts on evolving our regulations to facilitate new business models. The ongoing work on the
digital  banking  framework  is  one  example,  amid  growing  interest  among  traditional  and  non-
traditional players to enter this segment.
Of importance, the success of these new business models will depend on the industry players’
ability to harness customer data to develop value-added services while ensuring compliance with
data protection laws and regulations. This is key to enable greater customisation and offering of
new services. For example, industry players that understand their clients’ cash flow, turnover and
supply chain can potentially identify new growth areas. These may include the provision of short-
term credit, insurance and wealth management services to customers and businesses.
In  harnessing  customer  data,  there  are  clear  synergies  between  existing  and  new  players.
Incumbents have vast amounts of data, but legacy systems and culture can pose challenges to
turn such data into insights. On the contrary, new players could face the opposite challenge –
with more agile technological capabilities built from the ground-up, but having little or no data to
work with. 
It is thus no surprise that more strategic partnerships between traditional and new players are
emerging, in Malaysia and abroad. Such initiatives could foster vibrant ecosystems that could
penetrate market segments that were previously underserved or unserved.
Similar  opportunities  are  also  possible  on  the  cross-border  payments  sector  amid  increasing
migration flows, global e-commerce and internationalisation of value chains. Concerted industry
efforts  are  imperative  to  bring  the  cross-border  payment  experience  up  to  par  with  that  for
domestic payments. Likewise, a customer-centric approach that goes beyond just payments can
potentially be transformational.
In an increasingly globalised economy, Malaysian SMEs stand to gain significantly from cross-
border  payment  innovation.  Better  integration  of  payment  services  with  regional  or  global  e-
commerce  networks  could  expand  market  access.  Value-added  features  could  also  be
embedded to eliminate existing frictions for cross-border trade. This may include digitising trade
finance  documentation  and  streamlining  back-end  processes  of  financial  institutions  and
corporates to drive greater efficiency and expedite compliance process. 
Future-proofing the payments landscape will be key moving forward
Finally,  let  me  turn  to  the  third  key  priority  for  payment  infrastructures  to  be  future-proofed.
Payment systems of the future must be inclusive and able to accommodate the speed of change
for implementing new solutions at scale.
In  this  regard,  we  have  achieved  a  key  milestone  with  the  launch  of  the  Real-time  Retail
Payments  Platform  (RPP)  last  year.  It  is  designed  to  be  more  scalable,  flexible  and  open  to
support new use cases such as Proxy Payments, Request-to-Pay, e-Mandates and services to
support more seamless customer onboarding processes. The RPP represents the first step of a
multi-year  journey  to  future-proof  our  retail  payment  infrastructure.  Additionally,  the  Bank  is
currently embarking on a study to identify possible opportunities to renew or enhance Malaysia’s
large value payment system, RENTAS, to support the emerging needs of the economy.
Across  the  board,  four  key  elements  will  be  important.  The  first  is  interoperability  which  can
enhance competition and drive greater efficiency through wider network reach and economies of
scale. Last year, we established the Interoperable Credit Transfer Framework that facilitates fair
and open access for banks and non-banks to shared payment infrastructures such as the RPP.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The second element is standardisation, which can improve efficiency and foster the development
of new services. For instance, adoption of ISO20022 may provide opportunities for innovations,
enhanced  fraud  and  financial  crime  detection,  and  improved  straight-through  processing.  To
harness  the  full  benefits  of  ISO20022,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  will  undertake  an  industry-wide
consultation  to  develop  a  holistic  migration  strategy  covering  both  domestic  and  cross-border
payments.
The  third  element  is  flexibility  and  openness.  Open APIs  can  pave  the  way  for  businesses  to
scale and offer value-added products and services. They enable rich and diverse ecosystems
that deliver more personalised and wider range of services to customers. While this may be a
shift  from  banks’  traditional  approach  of  managing  customer  engagement  through  their  own
channels, it could be crucial to maintain long-term business agility.
In  this  area,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  supported  the  formation  of  the  industry’s  Open API
Implementation Group to identify and develop standardized open APIs for high-impact use cases.
In  this  regard,  the  Implementation  Group  has  developed  standardized  specifications  for  open
APIs on product information of financial institutions. Moving forward, Bank Negara Malaysia will
undertake further work on secure methods for allowing trusted third parties to access a broader
range of banking information through open APIs, with the customer’s consent.
Last but not least, is payment ecosystem resilience. While interoperable, standardised and open
systems may facilitate enhanced efficiency and competition, it may also introduce new risks in
such  systems  due  to  the  increased  interlinkages. All  future-proofing  efforts  must  therefore  be
anchored on enhancing operational resilience, including cyber resilience, in a rapidly evolving risk
and threat landscape. To this end, the Bank had recently issued its policy on Risk Management
in Technology (RMIT). This sets out baseline standards for financial institutions, and addresses
key fundamentals of technology resilience including governance, cybersecurity risk management
as well as capacity-building.
Conclusion
These are exciting times, where rapid technological innovations, evolving business models and
shifting customer preferences, present new opportunities and challenges to the status quo. Such
opportunities can bring about a positive and transformational impact to our society and economy.
We  should  be  bold  to  capitalize  on  these  emerging  trends,  while  remaining  steadfast  in
managing the associated risks. Times are changing, and change is good. It takes us out of our
comfort zones, and helps us reach new heights. Before I close, I would like to congratulate all the
winners of today’s ceremony and I wish you all a pleasant evening ahead. 
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
