Luís Máximo dos Santos: Corporate governance - importance and
limits
Address  by  Mr  Luís  Máximo  dos  Santos,  Vice-Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Portugal,  at  the
Conference "Corporate Governance - creating value for society", organized by the Portuguese
Institute of Corporate Governance (IPCG), Lisbon, 25 October 2018.
 1. Allow me to begin by thanking you for the invitation to take part in this magnificent Conference
alongside  these  distinguished  the  speakers  and  participants.  I  would  like  to  congratulate  the
chairs  of  the  board  and  general  council, António  Gomes  Mota  and  Pedro  Rebelo  de  Sousa
respectively,  representing  the  Portuguese  Institute  of  Corporate  Governance  (IPCG)  on  the
occasion of its 15  anniversary, for the organisation of this timely event, and warmly greet all the
members of its corporate bodies. 
th
The creation of this Institute 15 years ago was a moment of inspiration, anticipating – at a time
when the subject was still relatively unspoken – the importance that corporate governance would
assume.  
Portugal  needs  strong  private  associations  which  encourage  discussion  on  subjects  of
importance  to  the  development  of  enterprises  and  the  quality  of  management  in  its  broadest
sense, which are able to generate critical mass on complex themes, as is the case of corporate
governance.
A special mention goes to the fulfilment this year of the objective to see approved a Corporate
Governance Code, long pursued by the IPCG, and which is a landmark in private regulation in
Portugal. 
2. The theme of corporate governance has already been reflected upon at length, especially in
the  United  States,  where  some  authors  traced  the  first  uses  of  the  term  to  the  1970s.  In  the
United Kingdom, the so-called 1992 Cadbury Report is considered pioneering. It was produced
by  a  committee  set  up  to  assess  –  even  then  –  the  underlying  causes  behind  a  number  of
corporate failures. 
Since then, attention given to the theme of corporate governance – which has a multidisciplinary
nature, bringing together knowledge of economics, finance, accounting, law, management and
organisational behaviour – has not stopped growing. This growing interest is no stranger to the
succession  of  corporate  scandals  with  wide-reaching  public  repercussions,  even  before  the
financial crisis, as was the case of Barings Bank (1995), Enron (2002) and Parmalat (2003) – to
name some of the most notorious – which in some way motivated the production of a set of
corporate governance best practices by international organisations of note such as the OECD,
World Bank and Basel Committee, amongst others. 
But it was the financial crisis that began in 2007 and its tremendous consequences that brought
the theme of corporate governance to the forefront of public policy, including in regulatory terms,
in the most affected countries and the European Union. 
Without analysing the causes of the crisis – which are numerous – it can be argued that it is
widely accepted that one of the factors that caused and exacerbated it was the abject failure of
the financial institutions’ internal governance models. 
The  crisis  occurring  made  clear  everything  that  had  been  suggested  by  the  theory:  banking
activity is so particular in comparison to non-financial corporations that it is essential to give it
specific rules of governance.  
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The security of funds entrusted to the banks demands that they are managed in a sound and
prudent way in order to preserve the confidence of depositors, customers and investors, thus
maintaining financial stability. This is why the manner in which these institutions manage their
business  is  crucial  to  guaranteeing  a  model  of  sustainable  economic  growth.  Banks’
management problems – and the isolated case of a single bank is enough – harbour high risks to
financial stability that, should they materialise, can infect other banks and, in the last instance,
seriously  affect  the  financing  of  the  economy,  as  the  financial  crisis  well  demonstrated.  This
therefore makes the theme of banks’ internal governance very relevant.
3.  Internal  governance  is  the  system  of  organising  the  duties,  responsibilities,  reporting  and
control lines in the financial institutions that support the management and business model. 
The  management  and  supervisory  boards  take  on  particular  importance  in  the  internal
governance  of  financial  institutions,  as  do  the  holders  of  essential  roles  that,  inter  alia,
correspond  to  those  responsible  for  the  areas  of  risk  management,  compliance  and  internal
audit. 
This includes the following:
1.  The decision-making process that allows the definition, at any time, of the way in which the
interests of the banks’ various stakeholders, internal and external, should be combined; 
2.  The  definition  of  a  strategy  to  promote  the  pursuit  of  these  interests  that  do  not  always
coincide; and 
3.  The concrete operationalisation of the strategy concerned. 
The existence of a plurality of interests – of depositors, bond holders, customers, employees,
shareholders and even managers themselves – inevitably mean there are conflicts. 
A good system of corporate governance naturally means that the issues mentioned are resolved
suitably: management of conflicts of interest and mitigation of information asymmetries. Allowing
us  to  realise  the  importance  of  corporate  governance:  enabling  the  composition  of  diverse,
potentially  divergent  interests  and  determining  the  actions  of  banks  and  the  quality  of  their
decision-making processes. 
The  internal  governance  model  will  therefore  have  a  decisive  role  in  banks’  long-term
sustainability.  This  decisive  importance  of  corporate  governance  for  banking  activity  has
become, especially since the crisis, the focus of intense regulatory scrutiny. 
4. The evolution of regulation has revealed an ever more granular trend, on a path that is not free
from  difficulties.  In  fact,  the  initial  phase,  in  2009  and  2010,  revealed  concern  with  one  of  the
most  salient  aspects  of  the  crisis  –  incentives  misaligned  with  sustainable  and  prudent  risk
management. The practice of compensation schemes based on variable components indexed to
fast expansion of trading volumes led to a culture of excessive risk. As a consequence, the initial
reaction of international regulators was directed towards compensatory policies and practices. 
From  2011,  the  regulatory  agenda  adopted  a  broader  approach  to  corporate  governance,
becoming  concerned  with,  at  this  stage,  regulating  corporate  governance  systems  in  banks,
especially  organisational  and  control  aspects;  and  it  is  in  the  context  of  this  wider  regulatory
vision that other aspects of governance start being regulated: internal audit, external audit and
suitability  of  the  banks’  members  of  the  management  and  supervisory  bodies,  as  well  as  the
holders of essential roles. 
With the approval of Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26
June 2013 on access to the activity of credit institutions and the prudential supervision of credit
institutions  and  investment  firms,  generally  known  as  “CRD  IV”,  the  standards  on  corporate
governance started to be seen from a broad perspective, covering organisation, duties of control,
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
people  and  compensation.  Therefore  an  integrated  vision  of  the  organisational  structure  was
adopted,  of  suitability  of  the  people  who  manage  and  oversee  the  institution  and  those
responsible  for  essential  functions,  of  a  solid  and  effective  internal  control  framework,  of  the
autonomous design of internal governance of risk and remuneration policies aligned with a sound
and prudent risk culture. 
Guaranteeing that the organisational structure of the corporate governance of the institutions is
solid and the management and oversight are adequate became, naturally, a central concern for
banking regulation. 
From the outset, banks should define a profile for members of the management and supervisory
boards and seek candidates that possess the knowledge, skills, experience, integrity and time
necessary to fully carry out their duties. 
Also indispensable is the presence of an adequate number of formally independent members of
the  management  and  supervisory  bodies,  in  order  to  safeguard  the  interests  of  the  various
stakeholders  suitably  and  preserve  sound  and  prudent  management,  and  ultimately,  financial
stability. 
Banks must also fully comply with the rules relating to conflicts of interest (which differ from the
rules relating to formal independence). As well as formal independence, “independence of mind”
is  also  needed,  a  dimension  that  requires  an  absence  of  conflicts  of  interest,  even  potential
conflicts.
The management function within banks cannot supersede internal supervision. On the contrary.
Non-executive members of the management and supervisory bodies must be empowered to fully
exercise their duties of diligence. They must scrutinise the day-to-day management, and respond
to the interests of the banks’ various internal and external stakeholders.
The internal supervisory function must in turn be provided with the information required for the
complete fulfilment of its duties. It should be proactive in obtaining such information, and should
exercise  effectively  its  duties  of  assessing  the  internal  control  system,  which  is  essential  to
ensure the reliability of the information provided during the decision-making process. 
Banks should possess an internal organisation based on a clear distribution of responsibilities
between their various units and functions, as well as clear vertical and functional reporting lines.
Each employee must be fit for the duties they exercise, in accordance with a recruitment and
training policy that conforms to the banks’ specific needs.
In particular, banks should identify and assess the holders of essential positions, that is, those
who exercise duties that confer significant influence on the management or whose duties can
have a material impact on their risk profile.  
The internal control mechanisms should have the empowerment, independence and capacity for
intervention necessary to fulfil their objectives. The management and supervisory bodies should
act  in  a  way  as  to  make  clear  the  internal  control  functions  contained  in  internal  rules  of
procedure,  and  the  assessment,  career  progression  and  compensation  scheme  of  the  staff
employed  in  these  areas  must  obey  specific  criteria,  separated  and  distinct  from  the  criteria
followed for staff employed in commercial areas of the business. 
Assessment  and  career  progression  policies  and  banks’  remuneration  policies  and  practices
must line up with the interests of the members of the management and supervisory boards, as
well as those of the employees in general as a goal of sound and prudent management.  
The banks must possess a conflicts of interest policy that enable such conflicts to be identified
and  eliminated. And  rules  have  also  been  defined  to  seek  to  ensure  that  the  statutory  auditor
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
fulfils their mission with the required independence. 
5. This is only a brief summary of the regulatory requirements imposed by European and national
legislation in this area. Nevertheless, it is enough to recognise that the rules are manifold and
demanding.  However,  events  have  demonstrated  that  these  rules  are  indispensable  when
verifying the absence or ineffectiveness of self-imposed internal governance models.  
With  the  financial  crisis,  it  was  politically  inevitable,  as  a  result  of  the  understandable  social
pressure, that the theme of banks’ internal governance moved from soft law to hard law.  
Is  the  regulatory  framework  and  the  oversight  of  its  compliance  by  the  authorities  enough  to
prevent behaviours similar to those that caused the financial crisis? 
There  is  no  doubt  that  this  regulatory  reinforcement,  established  and  supervised  uniformly  at
European  Union  level,  enables  us  to  say  that  we  are  much  better  provided  for  in  terms  of
corporate governance requirements to ensure financial stability, which cannot go unmentioned. 
But  organisations  are  formed  of  people,  and  as  such,  the  behavioural  dimension  has  been
recognised as essential for the effectiveness of a good internal governance model for banks and
other enterprises. Even the best models may not resist the determination of anyone who might
want to sabotage them. But the better they are, the more difficult it is to do so, hence the extreme
importance of banks being provided with a robust governance model.   
Without an institutional culture that is oriented towards compliance with rules and best practices,
based on values that ensure a lasting reputation, and which are therefore a source of value for
the enterprise, the objectives of public regulation may not necessarily be achieved. 
In  fact,  institutional  culture  is  an  intangible  concept  but  is  decisive  to  the  effectiveness  of
corporate governance. 
Exemplary behaviour is developed in a social environment and becomes more difficult to obtain
unless there is an inherent reward. 
If  society  does  not  value  the  ethical  character  of  behaviours,  it  is  difficult  to  expect  that  an
organisational  culture  emerges  in  enterprises  which  favours  the  effectiveness  of  good
governance and best practice.
For that reason, ensuring the effectiveness of good corporate governance is not only a task for
enterprises,  regulators  and  supervisors;  its  effectiveness  depends  on  our  collective  ability  to
create a society that duly values ethics.   
Thank you very much for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
