Elvira Nabiullina: Review of recent inflation developments in Russia
and economic outlook
Statement by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, in the follow-up to the Board
of Directors meeting, Moscow, 14 December 2018.
 Today the Bank of Russia Board of Directors has decided to raise the key rate by 0.25 pp to
7.75% p.a. This move is aimed at limiting the scale of inflation risks in the coming year. I will
subsequently elaborate on the rationale of this decision.
The  second  decision  made  today  was  to  resume  regular  fiscal  rule-based  foreign  currency
purchases from 15 January. As we said earlier, the postponed purchases will be made gradually
in  the  course  of  several  years.  We  will  decide  on  the  fiscal  rule-based  foreign  currency
purchases  postponed  in  2018  in  due  course,  after  regular  purchases  are  resumed.  We  have
factored in this decision in our forecast.
Let me now proceed to give you the details of the key rate decision. Today’s Board meeting took
an  in-depth  look  at  the  reasoning  for  both  keeping  the  key  rate  unchanged  and  revising  it
upwards.
The  main  argument  in  favour  of  an  unchanged  key  rate  is  the  performance  of  the  domestic
demand. It is expanding moderately without posing any inflation risks. This primarily concerns
consumption. In October, annual growth of retail sales came in at 1.9%. The heads of Bank of
Russia  regional  branches,  who  contribute  to  the  key  rate  decision,  have  also  pointed  to  low
demand  and  mixed  consumption  dynamics  across  regions.  Annual  wage  growth  has  also
slowed considerably after peaking early in the year.
The  savings  rate  has  been  recovering  in  the  recent  months  after  a  considerable  drop  in  the
second and third quarters. Household deposits resumed growth driven by interest rates attractive
for  depositors.  In  this  context,  strong  growth  in  retail  lending  underpins  consumer  demand
without  posing  inflation  risks.  The  evolution  of  the  household  behaviour  model  meets  our
expectations.
However, more arguments call for a key rate hike.
What are these arguments? They are associated with both external and domestic factors.
External factors include, first, the state of the global economy as a whole and the situation in
emerging markets. Certainly, global financial markets have been less volatile this quarter than
they were in August and September. This is partially attributed to the revision of monetary policy
projections  by  major  central  banks.  The  next  year  normalisation  may  prove  slower  than
expected,  thus  mitigating  the  risk  of  capital  outflow  from  emerging  markets.  However,  it  is
important that the altered projections of policy revision by key central banks are associated with
downgraded next year growth forecasts for major economies. Also, the current standstill in trade
disputes  may  merely  prove  a  temporary  truce.  These  risks  are  quite  tangible  for  emerging
market economies.
Second,  we  have  here  the  oil  glut  risk  in  2019.  This  is  partially  associated  with  a  downward
revision of the global demand outlook. However, the main reason is an aggressive expansion of
oil  production  in  the  US.  In  early  December,  OPEC  and  other  oil  exporters  agreed  to  cut
production  in  2019.  However,  the  developments  of  this  year  demonstrate  that  producers  can
rapidly ramp up shale oil production when prices are high.
Another  considerable  external  factor  is  geopolitical  risks  affecting  both  Russia  and  other
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
countries and regions.
As  far  as  internal  factors  are  concerned,  here  we  have  persistent  uncertainty  over  the  price
response to the VAT rate hike, the effect of this year’s weakening in the ruble on inflation, and its
effect on inflation expectations. It means that the uncertainty over price movements is associated
with both an estimated direct effect of proinflationary factors and the scale of secondary effects
dependent on inflation expectations.
Thus, our baseline scenario assumes that the VAT rise will contribute approx. 1 pp to inflation.
However, the possible estimates of this contribution range between 0.6 and 1.5 pp.
The scale of secondary effects is still harder to estimate. Even a temporary acceleration of price
growth  raises  inflation  expectations  of  both  households  and  businesses.  We  saw  it  from  the
surge  in  petrol  prices  registered  in  May-June  this  year.  Petrol  prices  have  been  stable  in  the
second half of the year. However, surveys suggest that Russians are highly concerned about the
rise in petrol prices.
  Inflation  expectations  remain  unanchored.  This  means  that  they  are  highly  likely  to  go  up  in
response to price growth following the VAT rate hike. Therefore, we cannot consider the VAT rate
revision as a purely one-off factor.
Elevated inflation expectations may change consumer behaviour and reduce the propensity to
save. In these circumstances, firms will have an opportunity to raise retail prices even when the
effect of one-off factors is exhausted. If this spiral is set off, inflationary pressure will rise and
inflation may hold above the 4% target for a long period of time. This will require a considerable
and enduring monetary policy tightening.
The task is to reduce as much as possible the risks of this scenario materialising. In addition,
full-year  inflation  will  total  about  4%  in  2018.    This  means  that  we  are  entering  the  new  year
without the inflation buffer we had and with a substantially upgraded inflation forecast for next
year.    This  is  why  we  are  raising  the  key  rate.  At  this  moment  in  time,  in  the  context  of
strengthened risks, it is crucial that we remain proactive. This approach reflects a key inflation
targeting policy principle.
We look to the outrunning response of monetary policy to enable us to constrain the secondary
effects and ensure inflation declines after its temporary rise. We admit that between March and
April inflation could exceed 5.5% or even peak to 6%. Its acceleration in the first quarter of 2019 is
set to precede its subsequent slowdown. Should we take action to curb the secondary effects,
beginning from the second to third quarter of 2019, seasonally adjusted quarterly price growth will
total 1 pp, that is, it will be consistent with 4% annualised inflation. The residual impact of the
one-off factors on annual inflation is set to be entirely gone in one year’s time – in the first quarter
of 2020.
 Now, I will say a few words about the economy and the forecast. Economic growth rates remain
close to their potential levels. Unemployment is invariably low and close to its natural rate. Having
said that, certain economic activity indicators continue to post a mixed performance.
The forecast remains essentially unchanged. Given the state of the global energy market over
recent months, we have downgraded the oil price path somewhat in the baseline scenario. The
assumption has been updated to reflect faster declining oil prices in the course of 2019 – based
on the calculation that the average oil price will total $55 per barrel (from the previous estimate of
$63 a barrel). Moving forward, the average price is set to remain at this level between 2020 and
2021. As before, our approach to oil price assumptions is conservative. The oil price volatility we
saw in the fourth quarter (from $85 to $58 a barrel) is an indication of the validity of this approach.
The running fiscal rule will ensure that the impact of changing oil prices on economic growth
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
remains limited. We therefore leave our GDP growth forecast unchanged at 1.2-1.7% for 2019,
admitting it may rise to 2-3% in 2021 as the Government implements its structural reforms.
Changing  oil  price  assumptions  have  stronger  implications  for  our  estimated  balance  of
payments. We now predict the current account balance to stand at $71 billion in 2019 (compared
to  $95  billion  assumed  in  October).  We  have  also  made  a  slight  downgrade  in  the  financial
account balance of the private sector – to $20 billion, in comparison to $25 billion assumed in
October.
Many will ask why next year’s financial account balance of the private sector will make up $20
billion, whereas it is predicted at $67 billion for this year.
Beyond the decline in oil prices, the reason for this is the decision to suspend and subsequently
resume fiscal rule-based foreign currency purchases in the market. A positive current account
balance is helped by either the buildup of national foreign currency reserves or capital outflow.
This is clearly seen from this year’s movements in the balance of payments. In the first year-half,
the  current  account  totalled  $49  billion,  with  foreign  currency  reserves  at  $31  billion  and  net
capital outflow in the private sector at $13 billion. In the second half of the year, when we moved
to suspend foreign currency purchases under the fiscal rule, this ratio reversed. With the current
account running at $63 billion, we expect capital outflow to run at $54 billion and foreign currency
reserves to expand by no more than $8 billion.
Capital outflow in the private sector is either repayment of external liabilities or accumulation of
foreign assets including in the form of foreign exchange in foreign bank accounts. Hence, in the
second  half  of  the  year,  when  the  buildup  of  government  reserves  ground  to  a  halt,  a
considerable part of export revenue, if unspent to reduce external debt, ultimately settled in bank
accounts as extra foreign currency liquidity. Incidentally, this is why the response of the foreign
exchange  rate  to  the  purchase  suspension  decision  was  fairly  muted.  The  market  essentially
continued to expect their resumption and accumulated assets.
Next  year,  our  baseline  scenario  provides  for  a  return  to  the  2017–2018  situation,  with  a
significant  amount  of  oil  revenues  being  used  to  rebuild  international  reserves  and  the  private
sector’s capital outflow declining. Importantly, in this logic we do not foresee a strong response of
either the current balance or the foreign currency exchange to resumed purchases.
To conclude, let me reiterate that the Bank of Russia will explore the need for further upgrades to
the key rate, taking into account inflation and economic developments against the forecast, as
well as the risks of external conditions and the response of financial markets.
In the current context it is crucial that our approach remains conservative as we assess risks
and conduct monetary policy. Inflation stays close to 4%. More so, it has never climbed above
this figure since the second half of 2017. Although the rise in inflation early next year is set to be
driven  by  transient  factors,  considering  the  need  to  limit  their  negative  effects  and  ensure  a
speedy return of inflation to 4%, it is critical that the response of monetary policy is well-timed. A
consistently conservative monetary policy stance will enable us to curb both inflation risks and
the response of inflation expectations. This will lay the groundwork for looser monetary policy by
late 2019 – early 2020, if the situation unfolds consistent with our forecast.
Before I proceed to answer your questions, let me also inform you about the changes we want to
introduce beginning in March 2019 as regards our communications related to key rate decisions.
First,  a  key  rate  press  release  in  the  follow-up  to  our  policy  Board  meeting  will  include  a
reforecast.  Second, a monetary policy report will be published in a week after a Board meeting.
These arrangements will serve to better reflect the logic of the already made decision.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
