John C Williams: The “new normal” for growth
Remarks by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Community Bankers Conference, hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, New York City, 4 April 2019.
As prepared for delivery
 Note: These remarks are based on those delivered at the Economic Club of New York on March
6, 2019.
Introduction
Good morning, everyone. It’s a pleasure to be hosting this conference, and I’d like to start by
welcoming you all to the New York Fed. I know there’s an opportunity to tour the gold vault later,
and  I  definitely  recommend  it.  There’s  something  very  exciting  about  our  more  traditional
approach  to  storing  money…  even  though  the  gold  bars  pose  certain  logistical  and  practical
challenges. If you drop one on your foot you’ll definitely know about it.
Community Banks
I’m going to start today by talking a bit about community banks. Aside from a short period running
a pizza restaurant, I’ve spent all of my career in the Federal Reserve System. And I’ve had the
opportunity  to  travel  extensively  throughout  the  United  States.  When  you  visit  communities  in
more rural or remote parts of the country, away from big urban centers like New York and San
Francisco, you really see the value of community banks. In many places you’re the only game in
town when it comes to banking services and credit. You know the customers in your community
because you are an integral part of the community.
You represent an essential part of our financial system and economy. But I know you didn’t come
here today to hear me tell you what an important job you do. What I hope is that I can give you
some insights that will be useful going forward.
I know interest rates play a vital role in your businesses, so I’d like to spend a bit of time talking
about the outlook and what that means for monetary policy. But before I do, I need to give the
standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect
those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System.
Where Things Stand
For the last decade we’ve all had our focus on recovery from the Great Recession. The path to
getting back on track has been a long one, and there is a sense that the economy has now fully
recovered. GDP growth came in at 3 percent in 2018 and I expect it to be around 2 percent this
year.
The difference between last year’s numbers and this year’s forecast has caused some concern,
and that’s where I’m going to keep my focus. Many people are hoping for GDP growth of 3 or 4
percent, similar to what we saw in the late 1990s. Less optimistic forecasts for 2019 growth are
therefore, understandably, a source of worry.
But it’s key to remember that this GDP growth is taking place on a backdrop of historically low
unemployment, and low, stable inflation. Unemployment is at 3.8 percent and inflation continues
to run just under 2 percent.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Fed is tasked with two goals: Low and stable inflation and maximum employment. From the
perspective  of  monetary  policy  things  are  going  very  well.  And  the  economic  fundamentals
indicate that slower growth is—far from a sign of doom and gloom—what we should expect.
The Economic Fundamentals
The 3 percent growth of 2018 was boosted by a number of tailwinds. Strong global growth, fiscal
stimulus, and accommodative financial conditions all helped drive GDP growth and a tight labor
market.
These  tailwinds  have  calmed,  and  in  fact  reversed  in  some  cases.  Three  developments
contribute to this view: a downturn in global growth, heightened geopolitical uncertainty, and the
effects of tighter financial conditions. 
If you strip away these factors you’re left with the underlying drivers of potential growth, which are
demographics and productivity growth. Both of these have slowed significantly. Baby boomers
are retiring and fertility rates have come down, which has significantly slowed labor force growth
relative to past decades. Productivity growth has also fallen considerably from the boom years of
the late 1990s and early 2000s.
I put the potential growth rate of the U.S. economy at about 2 percent, which is in line with the
forecasts we’re seeing for this year.
Of  course,  a  number  of  different  scenarios  could  play  out.  Geopolitical  uncertainty  and  other
factors  holding  back  growth  may  recede,  and  the  U.S.  economy  could  resume  the  robust
trajectory of last year. Or GDP growth could continue closer to trend, which is my own forecast.
Finally, there’s always a chance that downside risks could knock GDP growth off course.
But what the data’s telling us is that this period of slow growth isn’t an aberration—it’s the “new
normal” we should expect for the foreseeable future.
Monetary Policy
So what does all this mean for interest rates?
With the economy running close to our dual mandate goals, monetary policy is in the right place.
Looking ahead, the Fed will watch the data and use monetary policy to keep the expansion on
track.  When  growth  is  well  above  trend,  raising  interest  rates  to  keep  the  economy  on  a
sustainable path is the right decision. Equally, when faced with a crisis like the Great Recession,
it’s incumbent upon policy makers to use every tool at their disposal to get the economy back on
course.
It’s  important  to  remember  the  change  in  the  long-run  economic  fundamentals  means  that
interest rates are likely to be lower than what we saw in the 1990s, for example. In addition, the
slope of the yield curve is unlikely to return to levels typically seen in the past. This “new normal”
clearly has implications for banks, large and small.
Conclusion
In conclusion, the outlook is positive. GDP growth is on track, unemployment remains low, and
there are no signs of inflationary pressures building. And while many of you will miss the heady
days of the 1990s when growth rates were at 4 percent, the economic fundamentals indicate that
these are fundamentally different times. But I’m optimistic for bankers like you because of your
relationships with customers and the role you play in your communities.
Please enjoy the conference. I look forward to joining you later for the luncheon.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
