Luljeta Minxhozi: The contribution of the Albanian diaspora to the
nation’s economic development
Speech  by  Ms  Luljeta  Minxhozi,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of Albania,  at  the  Second
Summit of the Albanian Diaspora, Tirana, 4 March 2019.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
 On this special day, we have come together to share thoughts and discuss on how Albanians,
irrespective of where they live in the world, may achieve welfare and prosperity.
This is a time, in our economic history, when the efforts of individual citizens to ensure prosperity
are also considered as social efforts, for our nation to be prosperous and developed.
Such forums – in which Albanians that live abroad come together to discuss, and see that while
working for themselves and their families, they help the nation to advance – are signs of a rising
national conscience and our modern civilisation.
Albania has a large diaspora, which is present in all continents and was estimated at 1.15 million
people in 2017, or around 40% of the population that actually resides within the country.
A characteristic of the Albanian diaspora is that it is closely related economically with the home
country, contributing to increased financial transfers from abroad.
These transfers are in the form of: 
Remittances  which  are  net  transfers  from  abroad  and  are  calculated  in  the  balance  of
payments at around EUR 600 million per year, over 2013–2017, equal to 5.7% of Albania’s
GDP.
Income  generated  from  seasonal  emigration  in  the  form  of  temporary  employment.  This
category  creates  income  in  the  form  of  primary  income-compensation  of  employees,  on
average EUR 250 million annually during 2013–2017.
If  we  add  other  income  unrelated  to  employment,  total  transfers  from  permanent  and
seasonal emigration (remittances) reach around EUR 1 billion annually, or around 9.0% of
nominal GDP.
While the share of remittances, in terms of both the level of flows and of the ratio to GDP, is
lower compared with mid-2000s, their annual growth has resulted stable in more recent years,
averaging 3% for the 2015–2017 period.
Through its economic activity, the diaspora contributes positively to the Albanian economy in two
aspects:
The first aspect are remittances and other forms of transfers. These have an evident role
on  the  aggregate  demand  of Albania,  for  financing  households’  consumption,  and  generating
savings, which help to fund investments.
Their contribution to economic growth of Albania has been cyclical.
In  2009–2013,  this  impact  was  negative  by  0.4%;  this  period  experienced  shocks  that  hit
European economies after the crisis.
Afterwards,  particularly  in  2014,  remittances  increased  notably  due  to  the  tendency  of
emigrants to withdraw their money from European banks (particularly from banks in Greece)
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
and send them as deposits in Albania.
Currently, in 2015–2017, the contribution of remittances is estimated at 0.2% of economic
growth.
The importance of remittances on economic growth has declined over the years, also in line with
the  strengthening  of  domestic  growth  factors;  yet,  they  remain  an  important  element  of
disposable income and, therefore, a determinant factor for the performance of consumption in
Albania. Remittances have an important role in alleviating poverty and mitigating social problems
for certain categories of the society.
The second aspect is the positive impact on the labour market dynamics. The export of the
labour  force  (emigration)  tends  to  push  wages  upward  in Albania,  by  better  balancing  labour
demand and supply. On the other hand, it diversifies the supply of Albania for qualified labour.
Despite  the  increase  of  remittances  and  their  upward  contribution  to  economic  growth,  a  lot
remains to be done to foster the role of the diaspora and create more opportunities for a better
economic use of their savings, as well as to help boost the Albanian economy.
It is difficult to make an exact calculation of remittances due to the numerous formal and informal
channels of their flows. Our banking system does not yet facilitate remote access and use of
bank accounts by emigrants, in order for them to able to easily use them while in their respective
countries;  the  cost  of  banking  transactions  are  higher  and  often  banking  procedures  are
perceived as complicated. 
Due to these factors, in the case of Albania, only 4% of remittances are channelled through the
banking system, 57% through non-bank financial institutions and 39% in the form of cash.
The economic result is that remittances are disbursed in cash at 96% and this form of payment
diminishes the multiplying impact of their contribution to economic growth.
As regulator of the banking and payments systems, the Bank of Albania is strongly committed to
promote and facilitate the transfer of remittances in the Albanian economy:
First, by modernizing the procedures and alleviating transfer costs for remittances. For this
reason, the Bank of Albania, in collaboration with the World Bank, is implementing a project
for formalizing remittances inflows through banking channels, together with resulting effects
such as cutting the costs on transfers, increasing financial inclusion and reducing the use of
cash in the economy.
In  this  context,  in  2017,  a  study  was  realised  focusing  on  retail  payments,  which  include
remittances. The findings were used as a basis for drafting the National Strategy for reforming
the retail payments market in Albania.
In addition, the Bank of Albania has prepared a new draft-law on retail payments, which include
the remittance market. This law will approximate our payments system with the PSD2 Directive
of the EU and aims to promote the creation of an innovative payments system in Albania, the
decrease cash payments and the creation of adequate conditions to boost competition, foster
transparency and enhance the security of the payments systems.
Second, by aiming to further develop and diversify savings and capital market instruments,
so as to increase the interest of Albanian citizens living abroad for depositing their savings in
Albania.
Thank you!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
