Gent  Sejko:  Albania’s  banking  sector  progresses  but  four  key
challenges remain
Address  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of Albania,  to  the  third AAB  Conference  on
Banks for Sustainable Development, Tirana, 14 May 2019.
 1
Your Excellency Madame Minister ,
Dear Chairman of the Albanian Association of Banks,
Dear representatives of the banking sector, dear guests,
Let  me  first  congratulate  the  Albanian  Association  of  Banks  on  its  20th  anniversary.  The
Association, which came into being as token of emancipation in the banking sector, has become
now a genuine platform of communication and coordination within the banking industry, and a key
player in the economic and financial life of the country.
I would also like to congratulate the organisers for this event, which helps the banking sector,
regulators  and  policymakers  alike,  to  identify  the  challenges  lying  ahead  and  explore  the  best
alternatives for addressing them.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
The banking system in Albania has made considerable progress over the last two decades. To
illustrate my point, I would like to bring to your attention some facts and figures. Over the span of
two decades, the portfolio of bank credit has expanded significantly, leaping from 5% to 35% of
the country’s GDP. Similarly, the volume of deposits – in other words, the volume of savings of
the Albanian public administered by the banking sector – has grown from 45% to 70% of the
GDP. At  the  same  time,  the  number  of  households,  whose  deposits  are  guaranteed  by  the
deposit  insurance  scheme,  has  increased  six  fold,  to  2.4  million.  In  parallel  with  quantitative
indicators, the Albanian banking sector has developed, has become more cutting-edge, and has
marked  significant  progress  in  the  range  of  bank  products  and  payment  instruments  that  it
provides.  Lastly,  and  equally  important  to  the  development  indicators,  this  sector  has  proven
resilient to shocks and – unlike many other experiences in regional countries – it did not need to
use public funds.
While highlighting, on the one hand, the progress made insofar, I would like to point out that the
banking sector development – and of the financial system in general – has not been a linear one:
it has constantly faced challenges of different forms and types. These challenges have required
prudence as well as active, intelligent and courageous decision-making. I am confident that our
combined experience may and will help us in future decisions.
Therefore, I consider this conference as an excellent opportunity to reflect on certain challenges
that we may face in the period ahead.
First, let me present a brief overview of the economic and financial situation and development
perspective for Albania.
As we have repeatedly said, the Bank of Albania deems that the Albanian economy is set on a
steady path of improvement of its cyclical position. Aggregate demand has expanded leading, in
turn, to acceleration of economic growth, increase in employment and wages, better utilisation of
production capacities and improvement of the financial situation of enterprises and households.
In  parallel,  the  balance  sheets  of  the  banking  sector  are  sound  and  improving.  The  key
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
parameters  of  liquidity  and  capitalisation  are  above  our  regulatory  requirements,  the  non-
performing loans ratio is on a clearly downward trend, and the banking sector appears profitable.
In addition, as a result of the consolidation process underway in the banking sector, new actors
have been introduced to the market – I take this opportunity to welcome them – and premises for
fostering competition and efficiency in the banking system are created. Lastly, our stress tests
show that this sector is capable – overall – to withstand shocks.
This  process  has  been  anchored  to  prudent  economic  policies:  monetary  stimulus,  fiscal
consolidation and prudential supervision and regulatory policies. In particular, let me point out that
the Bank of Albania has earnestly worked on the following:
Approximation  of  our  regulations  to  European  Union  standards  and  Basel  Committee
requirements;
Improving the supervision architecture of the financial system and strengthening safety nets;
Improving  the  credit  environment  by  facilitating  the  solution  of  issues  related  to  non-
performing loans; and,
Developing and expanding further the financial and payment systems market.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
The  banking  sector  plays  a  key  role  with  regard  to  the  administration  of  the  savings  of  the
Albanian  households,  intermediation  and  allocation  of  funds,  and  expansion  of  financing
instruments, risk management and payments. The level of accomplishment for these functions
will be mutually related to the pace of Albania’s development in the long-term horizon.
From this perspective, let me identify four primary challenges for the sector:
First, the banking sector should accomplish better its intermediation role in the economy. The
improvement of soundness indicators, the reduction of credit risk and the consolidation of the
banking sector should pave the way for a more active approach of banks to lending. The financial
capacity  of  the  country  should  be  reflected  better  in  lending  to  Albanian  enterprises  and
households.
Second, the banking sector should pay more attention to the efficient allocation of funds, toward
more productive and high-potential sectors in the long term.  The banking system, in general, is
matured enough to discern between good and bad borrowers, thus minimising problems arising
from moral hazard and information asymmetry.  Yet, the constant financing and the reallocation
of capital provide the basis for the development and restructuring of the economy. In this regard,
banks  would  need  to  identify  profitable  sectors,  which  may  guarantee  added  value  for  the
economy and employment, and support them with funds.
Third, in parallel to the improvement in the allocation of funds, more efforts are needed for the
financial  inclusion  of  the  population.  The  improvement  in  access  to  finance,  coupled  with
concrete initiatives to deep financial education of the population, with which it is in a complete
symbiotic relationship, helps enterprises and households to capitalise their growth potential, by
generating profit for themselves and gains for the economy.
Lastly, modernisation and innovation should be an important and long-term priority of the banking
sector. A  constant  evolution  would  provide  the  premises  for  a  sector  that  is  competitive  and
efficient  and  avant-garde  with  regard  to  technological  development  in  Albania.  Taking  into
account the insofar substantial impact of the banking sector on the advancement and diffusion of
innovation  to  other  sectors,  this  investment  would  be  necessary  and  profitable  to  both  the
financial industry and the overall Albanian society.
Forward looking, I remain confident that the banking sector will know to rise to these challenges
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
and  that  the  conclusions  of  today’s  conference  will  serve  as  another  stepping  stone  in  this
regard.
Thank You!
1
Ms. Anila Denaj, Minister of Finance and Economy
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
