Philip R Lane: Tail risks and the Irish economy
Lecture  by  Mr  Philip  R  Lane,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the  UCD  School  of
Economics, Dublin, 16 April 2019.
I. Introduction
 My goal today is to discuss some tail risks facing the Irish economy. By tail risks, I mean shocks
that are unlikely to occur but that would have a significant impact on the economy and financial
system. In particular, I will focus on negative tail risks, in view of the mandate of the central bank
to safeguard financial stability.
Although  we  are  currently  facing  a  near-term  risk  event  in  the  form  of  a  possible  disorderly
departure of the United Kingdom from the European Union, this has been much discussed and I
will not dwell on it here.
In  addition,  the  remarkable  post-crisis  recovery  in  the  Irish  economy  means  that  we  are
approaching  full  employment  and  there  has  been  a  parallel  uplift  in  asset  prices,  such  that
cyclical risk is more elevated than a few years ago. Indeed, the recent downgrade in the euro
area growth forecast suggests that a pull back in growth performance is a material cyclical risk
factor. Again, I will not focus on cyclical risk, which is relatively well-understood.
Rather, I wish to explore the tail risks embedded in some structural features of the Irish macro-
financial  system.  In  particular,  the  underlying  structural  factors  driving  macroeconomic
performance and financial conditions may either undergo slow-moving trend shifts over time or,
more acutely, experience discrete shocks that are realised over a relatively short time horizon.
Structural  factors  that  are  especially  relevant  for  the  Irish  economy  include  the  twin  forces  of
globalisation and technological innovation. Over the last several decades, Ireland has benefited
as  a  host  location  for  some  industries  and  firms  that  have  been  to  the  forefront  in  the
globalisation  of  the  world  economy  and  the  rise  of  high-tech  and  digital  industries.  Since  the
multinational  sector  is  such  an  important  determinant  of  overall  economic  performance,
structural  shifts 
firms  constitute  material
macroeconomic tail risks for Ireland. In addition to much-discussed factors such as revisions to
international tax regimes and the world trade system, idiosyncratic shocks to individual industries
and firms could also be systemically important for Ireland, in view of the concentrated nature of
the multinational sector.
that  adversely  affect 
industries  and 
these 
Another type of structural shift relates to climate change. Through an increase in the frequency
and scale of severe weather events, climate change may increase the intrinsic volatility of the
economy. In addition, the structural transition to a low-carbon economy may be mis-managed,
with  both  excessively-slow  and  excessively-fast  adjustment  paths  generating  financial  stability
risks.  Since  I  addressed  these  issues  in  a  recent  speech,  I  will  not  focus  on  this  topic  today
(Lane 2019). The Central Bank of Ireland has also recently joined the Network for Greening the
Financial  System,  which  is  pooling  the  work  of  the  global  central  banking  and  regulatory
community on the macro-financial implications of climate change.
The structure of the rest of this speech is as follows. In Section II, I review some analytical issues
in addressing structural risks. I discuss the resilience of the financial system in Section III, before
turning to fiscal resilience in Section IV. Section V concludes.
II. Some Analytical Issues
How concerned should we be about macro-financial structural risks? It is possible to think about
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
two types of risks: (a) a slow-moving but cumulatively large shift to the level of economic activity
due to a shock to the trend path for the economy; and (b) a disaster event, in which there is an
immediate and persistent disruptive shock (Barro and Jin 2018). While the latter scenario has
been  typically  associated  with  wars,  severe  depressions  and  financial  crises,  the  former
scenario may capture shocks to long-term growth potential or other fundamentals, even if the full
impact is not fully obvious in the short term (Aguiar and Gopinath 2007).
It  is  important  to  appreciate  that  structural  shocks  can  have  a  larger  impact  on  the  level  of
economic  activity  in  more  open  economies.  In  particular,  the  international  mobility  of  capital,
people, technology and finance acts to amplify shifts in the relative attractiveness of a country as
a  location  for  production.  During  the  1990s,  Ireland  benefited  from  a  self-reinforcing  positive
location  shock  that  enabled  a  sustained  period  of  high  growth  rates.  By  way  of  contrast,  an
adverse location shock could be amplified by outflows of capital and labour and the loss of the
technology embedded in departing multinational firms (McGrattan and Prescott 2010).
Of course, it is not easy to tell apart structural and cyclical shocks in real time (Krugman 1998).
Given the difficulties in assigning probabilities, many investors, households and policy officials
will be slow to adjust fully to a structural shock (Gennaioli and Shleifer 2018). The identification of
shifts in the underlying structure of the economy is also made more challenging by the limitations
of  national  accounting  methods  in  a  highly-globalised  economy  (Economic  Statistics  Review
Group 2016, Lane 2017, Avdjiev et al 2018).
At the same time, incomplete information does not justify inaction bias in policymaking. Rather,
given  the  potential  impact  of  adverse  tail  risks  on  the  economy  and  the  financial  system,
prudence  dictates  that  the  policymakers  look  to  ensure  that  the  macro-financial  system  is
resilient to such shocks.
A system is resilient if it buffers the impact of the shock. In contrast, the fragility of a non-resilient
system  serves  to  amplify  the  impact  of  an  adverse  event.  In  relation  to  the  financial  system,
fragile banks that lack sufficient capital and liquidity buffers may respond to an adverse shock by
pulling back on credit provision and thereby deepen its recessionary impact. In relation to fiscal
policy,  a  fragile  sovereign  may  not  be  able  to  engage  in  countervailing  fiscal  measures  on
account of funding difficulties.
Furthermore, as was sharply illustrated during the euro crisis, a doom loop between these twin
fragilities  may  emerge,  with  a  weak  banking  system  threatening  public  solvency  and  a  weak
sovereign damaging the health of the banking system, with these doom loop dynamics operating
through a variety of mechanisms.
For these reasons, it is imperative to build the resilience of both the financial system and the
public finances vis-a-vis tail risks. In Section III, I first focus on the financial system, before turning
to the fiscal situation in Section IV.
III. The Resilience of the Financial System
The resilience of the financial system is built with a variety of tools (see also Donnery 2019). At
the  level  of  individual  firms,  an  intrusive  supervisory  and  inspections  regime  enables  the
prudential regulator to monitor internal risk management systems, assess the fitness and probity
of  senior  executives  and  track  firm-specific  risk  exposures.  In  turn,  if  there  are  concerns,  the
prudential  regulator  can  take  corrective  actions,  whether  through  supervisory  guidance,
remediation programmes, capital add-ons or enforcement actions. One current pan-European
example is provided by the push to reduce the scale of non-performing exposures on the balance
sheets of banks, in view of the threat to resilience posed by these troubled loans in the event of a
future adverse shock.
An additional element in improving financial resilience is contributed by the resolution authority.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
By requiring the implementation of recovery and resolution plans and the issuance of sufficient
loss-absorbing financial instruments, the resolution authority can both strengthen the resilience
of individual firms and limit the systemic fallout in the event of a failure.
At  the  systemic  level,  the  macroprudential  authority  can  introduce  a  range  of  measures  to
enhance  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system.  In  Ireland,  this  has  included  borrower-based
measures  in  the  form  of  the  set  of  limits  on  the  size  of  mortgages,  relative  to  the  value  of  a
property  and  the  income  of  the  borrower.  It  has  also  included  the  so-called  O-SII  (Other
Systemically Important Institutions) capital buffer, which is levied in proportion to the systemic
impact of individual firms.
In 2018, in recognition of the recovery in macro-financial cyclical conditions in recent years, the
counter-cyclical capital buffer (CCyB) was triggered, with banks required to comply with an one
percentage point increase in the ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets by July 2019. The CCyB
safeguards  against  cyclical  risk  by  adding  to  capital  requirements  during  positive  phases,  in
order  that  credit  supply  can  be  preserved  during  downturns  by  corresponding  subtractions  in
capital requirements.
However,  the  CCyB  does  not  address  tail  systemic  risks  that  are  orthogonal  to  the  domestic
macro-financial cycle. As discussed above, the primary systemic risk facing Ireland is its high
dependence on multinational firms (leaving aside Brexit risk). If there were a persistent shock to
this sector, the cumulative decline in economic activity would dwarf a normal cyclical recession,
with attendant implications for the financial system. Moreover, this risk has a substantial country-
specific  element,  in  view  of  Ireland’s  customised  economic  model  and  the  inevitability  of
concentration risk in a small country.
Accordingly, it makes sense for Ireland to address this risk factor by adding the option of the
systemic  risk  buffer  (SyRB)  to  its  macroprudential  toolkit.  The  advantage  of  the  SyRB  is  that
extra  capital  would  improve  loss-absorbing  capacity  if  a  systemic  risk  event  occurred.
Furthermore,  credit  supply  could  be  further  protected  by  switching  off  the  SyRB  under  such
circumstances.
For these reasons, I have recently written to the Minister for Finance and Public Expenditure and
Reform to request that the power to activate the SyRB be granted to the Central Bank of Ireland
in our capacity as the national macroprudential authority. As with any of our policy instruments,
the calibration and timing of the SyRB will be based on a thorough evidence-based assessment
of its benefits and costs. Furthermore, we adopt a holistic approach to policymaking, taking an
integrated view of the interactions across the full set of macroprudential instruments (the range
of capital buffers; the mortgage rules) and the overall capital position of the banking system.
Finally, a systemic shock may also trigger liquidity pressures. It follows that a resilient financial
system is also characterised by a trustworthy deposit guarantee system and access (especially
under crisis conditions) to effective central bank liquidity programmes. (In turn, the availability of
central bank liquidity is only helpful if firms have available assets that can be offered as collateral,
which is an additional element requiring monitoring by the prudential regulator.)
Given the multi-dimensional properties of a resilient financial system, our wide mandate enables
the Central Bank of Ireland to follow a holistic “one Bank” approach. In particular, we are: the
national  central  bank;  the  national  competent  authority  for  prudential  regulation;  the  national
resolution  authority;  the  national  macroprudential  authority;  and  the  operator  of  the  national
deposit guarantee system.
Furthermore, since we are also the national financial conduct regulator, we are able to recognise
and  integrate  our  work  on  building  resilience  with  our  conduct  mandate.  For  instance,  our
mortgage  rules  serve  both  as  a  financial  stability  measure  and  as  a  mechanism  to  protect
individual  consumers  from  the  risk  of  over-borrowing.  Moreover,  in  relation  to  non-performing
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
loans,  our  long-standing  policy  approach  to  mortgage  arrears  fully  incorporates  our  dual
responsibility  to  both  protect  vulnerable  home  owners  and  maintain  financial  stability.  More
generally, consumers are not protected by tolerating a fragile financial system that amplifies the
adverse impact of tail risk events.
Although I have mainly focused on the banking system in this speech, we also pay increasing
attention to the financial stability risks associated with non-bank financial intermediaries (Lane
2018a). At one level, the large externally-focused non-bank sector in Ireland could be affected by
global shocks, even if there might only be a limited domestic impact of disruptions in this sector
(Lane and Moloney 2017). However, investment funds and other non-bank intermediaries also
play an increasing role in the financing of the domestic economy and, accordingly, we are scaling
up our monitoring and analysis of domestically-relevant non-bank financial sector.
Finally, in view of its central role in determining our effectiveness, it should come as no surprise
that  resilience  has  been  selected  as  one  the  five  priority  themes  shaping  our  2019–2021
Strategic Plan.
IV. Fiscal Resilience
Fiscal  resilience  exists  if  the  public  finances  are  sufficiently  sound  to  enable  policymakers  to
buffer  adverse  shocks  through  the  operation  of  the  automatic  stabilisers  and  the  activation  of
proportionate discretionary fiscal measures. In contrast, fiscal fragility amplifies adverse shocks
through damaging feedback dynamics by which increases in the sovereign risk premium raise
economy-wide funding costs and, in extremis, lead to a loss of market access.
The anchor of a resilient fiscal regime is a robust public balance sheet, in combination with a
cyclically-appropriate time path for the budget balance. I have discussed the political economy
challenges of implementing a prudentially-focused fiscal strategy elsewhere (Lane 1998, 1999,
2013, 2018b; Tornell and Lane 1999). Rather, I want to focus on some specific issues relating to
the current Irish situation.
In  particular,  one  current  byproduct  of  Ireland’s  status  as  an  export  platform  for  multinational
firms is that there has been a surge in corporation tax revenues in recent years. A substantial
proportion  of  the  extra  revenue  relates  to  the  external  profits  of  domestically-resident
multinational firms.
In  addition,  the  public  finances  have  also  been  boosted  by  the  low  interest  rate  environment,
especially in view of the high level of sovereign debt (which is owed to foreign investors to a large
degree).  Analytically,  the  combination  of  extra  corporation  tax  revenues  generated  by  the
overseas activities of multinational firms and lower interest payments to foreign investors can be
interpreted as equivalent to a positive inward income transfer.
In  terms  of  the  cross-country  experience,  other  types  of  inward  transfers  include  the  foreign
earnings of commodity producers, net recipients of EU transfers and recipients of official aid.
The analysis of such inward transfers has given rise to an extensive research literature. A basic
lesson is that temporary windfall income should be treated differently to permanent income, due
to  the  welfare  gains  from  smoothing  consumption  and  the  long-term  impact  of  temporary
spending surges that may permanently damage the productivity of the tradable sector. (The latter
phenomenon is known as the “Dutch Disease”.) It follows that temporary windfall income should
be  largely  saved,  through  some  mix  of  accumulating  foreign  assets  and  (subject  to  capacity
limitations) adding to the domestic capital stock. While these principles are easily stated, it is not
so  easy  to  implement,  in  view  of  the  obvious  political  economy  pressures  to  increase
consumption and domestic transfers in response to extra income.
Accordingly, the optimal fiscal strategy depends not only on the expected duration of the fiscal
windfall  but  also  on  the  risks  associated  with  the  cessation  of  these  extra  revenues.  As
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
discussed above, there are clear tail risk scenarios that could induce a reversal in the level of
corporation tax revenues.
Equally, there is a vigorous global debate about the likely persistence of low interest rates. First,
there is a global debate about the underlying trend in the long-term real interest rate. It is clear
that there has been a downward drift in the long rate at least since the 1980s, with some studies
going much further back in time. In turn, a persistent shift in the long rate can be attributed to
trends  in  fundamental  factors  such  as  demographics  and  productivity  growth.  A  permanent
decline  in  the  long  rate  has  implications  for  asset  valuations,  debt  sustainability  and  the  net
incomes of creditors and debtors.
While the long rate debate is common across countries, it is especially relevant for countries
with significant net external debt positions. Ireland is a substantial net debtor, such that the long
rate is an important determinant of national income, taking into account the burden of interest
payments to foreign creditors. Since the Irish government is a significant net debtor, the level of
the long rate is also a central factor in the dynamics of the public finances.
While the decline in the long rate since the 1980s is clear in the data, there is still substantial
uncertainty about the persistence of this trend. For instance, two factors that have contributed to
a  decline  in  the  long  rate  over  the  last  fifteen  years  have  been  the  decision  by  emerging
economies (most prominently, China) to hold substantial quantities of advanced-economy safe
assets  (especially  US  treasuries)  and  the  impact  of  the  global  financial  crisis  on  desired
investment  and  savings  rates.  Over  time,  the  increasing  maturity  of  local-currency  financial
systems and enhanced macroeconomic stability in emerging economies may be accompanied
by  lower  holdings  of  advanced-economy  safe  assets.  The  ongoing  recovery  from  the  global
financial  crisis  (including  substantial  cumulative  private-sector  deleveraging  in  advanced
economies) may also see a decline in desired savings rates and step up in desired investment
rates. All else equal, these factors would operate to push up equilibrium long rates. Accordingly,
the duration and precise level of low long rates remains quite uncertain.
A  current  project  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  is  to  provide  a  model-based  analysis  of  the
economics of such fiscal windfalls (Conefrey et al, 2019). This work delivers several findings.
First,  choosing  to  spend  the  extra  revenues  rather  than  running  a  larger  surplus  has  a  very
different impact if the economy is far away from capacity limits than if there are conditions of full
employment.
In particular, any crowding out of private-sector activity turns on the response of wages to the
surge in public spending. Wage dynamics tend to be quite non-linear: wages do not substantially
increase  in  response  to  extra  demand  unless  there  is  sufficiently  high  pressure  in  the  labour
market.  Accordingly,  the  net  assessment  of  whether  to  spend  windfall  revenues  should  be
revised once the economy hit capacity limits.
Second, it is important to recognise that there may be long-term consequences if the private-
sector is crowded out as a result of excessive fiscal expansion. In particular, if it turns out that
the windfall revenues are only temporary, downward rigidity in wages means that the decline in
demand is not easily absorbed, with unemployment rising under this scenario.
More generally, the squeezing of private-sector activity has a persistent impact due to a range of
factors,  since  myriad  financial,  investment  and  organisational  frictions  mean  that  the  private
sector can recover only slowly from declines in competitiveness (Benigno and Fornaro 2014).
At a qualitative level, these points hold true for all types of public spending (transfers, government
consumption,  public  investment),  even  if  the  precise  composition  of  fiscal  policy  needs  to  be
taken into account in assessing the labour market impact of fiscal expansion. At the same time,
temporary increases in public investment may be easier to reverse than expanding the level of
social  transfers  or  government  consumption,  while  also  adding  to  the  long-run  public  capital
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
stock.
Accordingly, the ranking of alternative spending options during a windfall phase in part turns on
whether the public capital stock is assessed to be below its desired level. In particular, in the
wake of a period of suppressed public investment during the crisis, a temporary phase of extra
public  investment  may  be  less  costly  than  alternative  spending  options  in  relation  to  windfall
revenues.
Third, a failure to run surpluses during windfall phases may limit the capacity of the government
to  offset  negative  cyclical  or  structural  shocks  through  fiscal  loosening.  If  it  turns  out  that
concerns about the fiscal balance or the public balance sheet mean that the government must
temper its fiscal response to an adverse shock, the decline in employment and output will be
larger than if the state of the public finances permitted a full-scale fiscal response.
Finally, it is important to emphasise that the shock to inward windfall income considered in this
discussion  is  quite  a  limited  scenario.  Much  more  disruptive  would  be  an  adverse  shock  that
affected the domestic production decisions of multinational firms, since that would directly affect
domestic  employment,  the  domestic  capital  stock  and  the  technology  determining  domestic
productivity.  The  prospective  scale  of  such  a  shock  reinforces  the  advisability  of  a  prudential
approach to fiscal policy.
V. Conclusions
The theme of this speech has been the responsibility of policymakers to look beyond the short-
term horizon of the macro-financial cycle and also ensure financial and fiscal resilience against
tail risks.
This  principle  is  especially  relevant  for  Ireland,  in  view  of  our  high  dependence  on  the
multinational  sector  and  our  associated  exposures  to  shifts  in  technological  trends,  the
international  trade  environment  and  global  tax  regimes.  In  addition,  we  have  to  be  mindful  of
global structural factors, such as climate change and the trend in the long-term interest rate.
The  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  is  committed  to  safeguarding  financial  stability  through  the  active
deployment  of  macroprudential  tools,  including  the  mortgage  rules  and  the  already-activated
counter-cyclical  capital  buffer.  As  indicated  above,  our  plan  now  is  to  examine  the  potential
additional contribution of the systemic risk buffer in ensuring that the banking system would be
resilient in the event of a structural shock to the Irish economy.
In  relation  to  our  fiscal  advice,  our  analysis  indicates  that  the  impact  of  fiscal  policy  is  quite
different once the economy approaches capacity limits. In particular, the crowding out of private-
sector firms if there is excessive fiscal expansion under conditions of full employment may have
adverse  consequences  for  long-term  economic  performance.  In  addition,  a  failure  to  run
sufficient  surpluses  during  phases  of  good  economic  performance  may  limit  the  ability  of  the
government to offset adverse cyclical or structural shocks.
——————————————————
References
Aguiar,  Mark  and  Gita  Gopinath  (2007),  “Emerging  Market  Business  Cycles:  The  Cycle  Is  the
Trend,” Journal of Political Economy 115, 69–102.
Avdjiev,  Stefan,  Mary  Everett,  Philip  R.  Lane  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2018),  “Tracking  the
International Footprints of Global Firms,” BIS Quarterly Review (March), 47–66.
Barro,  Robert  J.  and  Tao  Jin  (2018),  “Rare  Events  and  Long-Run  Risks,”  mimeo,  Harvard
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
University.
Benigno,  Gianluca  and  Luca  Fornaro  (2014),  “The  Financial  Resource  Curse,”  Scandinavian
Journal of Economics 116(1), 58–86.
Conefrey,  Thomas,  Gerard  O’Reilly  and  Graeme  Walsh  (2019),  “Fiscal  Windfalls:  A  Model-
Based Analysis,” Central Bank of Ireland Economic Letter (forthcoming).
Donnery, Sharon (2019), “Risks and Resilience in Uncertain Times,” Speech, IIEA (9th March).
Economic Statistics Review Group (2016), Report to the Central Statistics Office.
Gennaioli,  Nicola  and  Andrei  Shleifer  (2018),  A  Crisis  of  Beliefs:  Investor  Psychology  and
Financial Fragility, Princeton University Press.
Krugman,  Paul  (1998),  “It’s  Baaack:  Japan’s  Slump  and  the  Return  of  the  Liquidity  Trap,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 29(2), 137–206.
Lane, Philip R. (1998), “Irish Fiscal Policy under EMU,” Irish Banking Review (Winter), 2-10.
Lane, Philip R. (1999), “On the Cyclicality of Irish Fiscal Policy,” Economic and Social Review 29,
1-16.
Lane,  Philip  R.  (2013),  “External  Imbalances  and  Macroeconomic  Policy,”  New  Zealand
Economic Papers 47(1), 53–70.
Lane, Philip R. (2017), “The Treatment of Global Firms in National Accounts,” Central Bank of
Ireland Economic Letter 2017–01.
Lane,  Philip  R.  (2018),  “Macro-Financial  Policies  for  the  Short  Term  and  the  Long  Term,”
Speech, MacGill Summer School (27th July).
Lane, Philip R. (2019), “Climate Change and the Irish Financial System,” Central Bank of Ireland
Economic Letter 2019–01.
Lane,  Philip  R.  and  Kitty  Moloney  (2018),  “Market-Based  Finance:  Ireland  as  a  Host  for
International Financial Intermediation,” Banque de France Financial Stability Review, 63–72.
McGrattan, Ellen R. and Edward C. Prescott (2010), “Technology Capital and the US Current
Account,” American Economic Review 100(4), 1493–1522.
Tornell, Aaron  and  Philip  R.  Lane  (1999),  “The  Voracity  Effect,” American  Economic  Review
89(1), 22–46.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
