Ignazio Visco: The economic and financial outlook of the euro area
-halfway down “the long and winding road”
Keynote  lecture  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the Aaron  Institute  for
Economic Policy Conference 2019, Herzliya, 16 May 2019.
The economic outlook
 This conference comes at a difficult and uncertain juncture for the global economy, the euro area
and Italy. After solid growth in 2017 and early 2018, world GDP decelerated significantly in the
second  half  of  last  year. Although  there  are  signs  that  the  downward  momentum  might  have
stopped, in many countries economic activity remains weak.
According to the IMF’s latest forecasts, in 2019 the global economy will expand at the lowest rate
since 2009, when it recorded a recession.
Trade tensions, mostly fuelled by the new protectionist strategy pursued by the United States,
and their effects on confidence, especially of private enterprises, are contributing significantly to
this poor performance of the world economy. International trade progressively slowed in 2018,
falling by 1.0 per cent in the last quarter of the year, and recent data suggest that the economy
remained weak in the early months of 2019.
The progressive liberalisation of trade that has characterised the last few decades has come to a
sudden halt and is being reversed in some important economies. The average tariff rate applied
to imports by the United States, for example, more than doubled in 2018 (from 1.5 to 3.3 per
cent).  More  generally,  the  system  of  supranational  institutions  and  multilateral  rules  on
international trade that supported the sustained global economic expansion after World War II is
encountering serious difficulties.
Protectionism is a response – a wrong one – to the challenges of globalisation and technological
change, which both have momentous consequences for the job prospects of workers with lower
skills. In the OECD countries, for example, the rise of automation is estimated to cause a high
probability that as much as one job out of seven will be lost, while three out of ten may undergo
significant changes over the next fifteen to twenty years. Even though new jobs will be created,
managing  the  transition  will  be  no  easy  task.  Not  enough  has  been  done  up  to  now  to  make
appropriate  plans  for  an  affordable,  timely  and  adequate  retraining  of  workers,  to  invest
resources in education, and to combat poverty and inequality.
In the shorter term, global risks are still tilted to the downside. The economic outlook remains
vulnerable to persistent trade tensions, to a greater-than-expected cyclical slowdown in China,
and  to  the  possibility  that  the  United  Kingdom  exits  the  European  Union  without  a  deal.  GDP
growth decreased markedly in the euro area as well, to 1.8 per cent in 2018 (from 2.4 per cent in
the previous year). The euro area is much more open to foreign trade than the United States and
Japan.  For  this  reason  its  business  cycle  is  highly  correlated  with  the  international  one.
Dependence on external demand is especially high in Germany, where the export-to-GDP ratio is
close to a stunning 50 per cent, but it is also significant in France, Italy and Spain (where it is
slightly  above  30  per  cent)  due  to  their  integration  in  the  global  value  chains,  including  the
European ones, commonly known as the “European factory”.
In the euro area the negative impact on GDP growth of weaker exports has been amplified by a
slowdown  in  domestic  demand.  Since  mid-2018  the  outlook  for  investment  has  progressively
deteriorated due to the adverse effects of increased global uncertainty on firms’ confidence and
capital accumulation plans. The drop in production in the car sector following the introduction of a
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
new international regulation on emissions from light-duty vehicles has also played an important
role.
Against  this  background,  the  European  Central  Bank’s  monetary  policy  continues  to  be  highly
expansionary. The Governing Council expects official rates to remain at their current low levels at
least until the end of 2019 and, in any case, for as long as necessary to ensure the convergence
of inflation towards its target of a growth rate of consumer prices “below but close to 2 per cent”
to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term.  Even  after  the  first  rate  hike,  the  Eurosystem  will
continue for an extended period of time to reinvest in full the principal payments from maturing
bonds purchased under the asset purchase programme (APP). Last March we also decided to
launch a new series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-III), the first of which
will be conducted next September; these operations will help to preserve favourable bank lending
conditions and ensure the smooth transmission of monetary policy.
Our stance does not endanger overall financial stability. In the current situation, the main risks
come from the weak growth and inflation outlook. As is well known, the global crisis spurred a
widespread debate on whether the mandate of central banks should be broadened to formally
include the preservation of financial stability. Even though the latter is certainly a precondition for
price stability, this change could raise potential conflicts between the two objectives, undermining
the credibility of central banks and the effectiveness of their policies. Preserving financial stability
should  instead be the main task of macroprudential action. The same considerations apply to
regulation  and  microprudential  supervision:  each  policy  can  work  well  only  if  it  has  clear
objectives and targeted intervention tools to achieve them.
The deterioration in the international outlook has also had a strong negative impact on the Italian
economy: economic activity progressively weakened in 2018, recording a slight contraction – a
so-called “technical recession” – in the second half of the year.
Overall GDP growth was just 0.9 per cent last year, around half the level recorded in 2017; all the
main international forecasters expect it to decelerate further this year. The slowdown of activity in
Germany, with which we share close economic ties, and the fall in business confidence, have
been  especially  important  factors  in  the  weakness  of  aggregate  demand  and,  especially,  the
marked deceleration in investment by Italian firms.
Our surveys confirm that weak capital accumulation reflects greater cautiousness on the part of
enterprises  in  the  face  of  uncertainty  about  economic  and  political  factors,  and  the  persistent
trade tensions.
Economic activity returned to slightly positive growth in the early months of this year: according
to the preliminary estimate GDP increased by 0.2 per cent in the first quarter of 2019. This trend
could continue, especially if the global rebound in investors’ confidence observed since late 2018
proceeds and continues to exert its effects in Italy too. But to fully recover the path of sustainable
growth, Italy must tackle its two main structural problems: the stagnation of productivity observed
since the 1990s and the high level of public debt. Italy has been growing on average by around 1
percentage point less than the rest of the euro area since 1999. This is the result of the country’s
delayed response to the big changes of our era: globalisation and the technological revolution. A
short-lived relief provided by fiscal or monetary policy, albeit important, is not enough to solve this
problem.  To  address  it,  Italy  must  quickly  adopt  a  consistent  growth  strategy  combining
measures to support innovation, with those to improve the quality of human capital, and to create
a more favourable environment for “doing business”.
Following the double-dip recession associated with the two financial crises that erupted in the
past decade (the global financial crisis of 2007–09 and the euro-area sovereign debt crisis of
2010–13), many Italian firms have introduced organizational changes that have enhanced their
efficiency, making them more competitive on international markets. The restructuring process
has been more intensive in the export sector and, as a result, domestic firms have been gaining
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
market shares in many countries. It is a process that must continue and be extended to the rest
of the economy, supported by appropriate public policies.
In recent years various measures have been introduced to support high-tech investments and
innovative start-ups. In order to be effective, industrial policy needs stable and appropriate fiscal
incentives, while the regulatory framework must be aligned with international best practices. The
Italian economy has many strengths that can help support these recent positive developments:
private  sector  net  wealth  is  high  by  international  standards,  the  debt-to-income  ratio  of  Italian
families is low, exports remain strong and the current account of the balance of payments is in
surplus  –  it  has  been  this  way  for  many  years  now,  so  much  so  that  the  net  foreign  asset
position is balanced.
A reduction in the risk premium on Italian public sector bonds is another crucial objective: at the
beginning of this week the yield differential with respect to 10-year German bonds was over 270
basis  points,  more  than  twice  the  level  prevailing  in  early  2018,  before  the  latest  general
elections.
The premia on credit default swaps suggest that the yield differential has risen as a result of the
increase in both credit risk and the risk of redenomination of bonds in a different currency. The
high public debt-to-GDP ratio exposes Italy to the volatility of financial markets, with the annual
amount of bonds to be refinanced currently standing at around €400 billion. The average residual
maturity of the public debt is above 7 years; therefore, the initial impact of higher interest rates on
servicing  costs  is  small  but,  if  the  increase  in  rates  persists,  it  would  inevitably  weigh  on
expenditure. Reducing the differential between the interest burden on public debt and the nominal
rate  of  growth  of  GDP  –  which  is  positive  in  Italy,  compared  with  negative  values  in  most
advanced countries and throughout Europe, including in Greece – while maintaining an adequate
primary surplus, is therefore of vital importance.
The transmission of higher rates from government bonds to the cost of loans for households and
firms has been limited so far, thanks to banks’ ample liquidity and improved balance sheets. But
signs of tension are beginning to emerge. According to our surveys, credit conditions tightened
somewhat, especially for small enterprises, following the increase in banks’ funding costs and
the deterioration in the economic outlook. In the longer run, a high risk premium on government
bonds  would  inevitably  end  up  affecting  the  real  economy. A  credible  strategy  to  reduce  the
burden of Italy’s high public debt in the medium term can no longer be postponed and the factors
that lead investors to perceive higher risks, such as lax budgetary conditions and the prevalence
of transfers and subsidies over growth-enhancing measures, should be tackled.
The financial sector: progress and open issues
In the euro area banks’ capital position has strengthened considerably. Between mid-2015 and
end-2018  the  capital  (CET1)  ratio  of  the  so-called  “significant  institutions”  –  those  under  the
direct supervision of the ECB, which account for around 80 per cent of the area’s banking assets
– increased from 12.7 to 14.3 per cent. For the entire Italian banking system it stands at 13.3 per
cent.
In  Italy  the  stronger  capital  position  of  banks  has  been  accompanied  by  a  substantial
improvement in the quality of their assets, mainly thanks to large disposals of non-performing
loans (NPLs). The deterioration in credit quality recorded during the global financial crisis and the
European sovereign debt crisis was due for the most part (about 90 per cent according to our
estimates) to the negative developments in the macroeconomic outlook. As of end-2018 the ratio
of NPLs, net of provisions, to total loans had fallen to 4.3 per cent, more than halving with respect
to  mid-2015,  when  it  had  reached  10  per  cent;  in  the  same  period,  the  value  of  net  NPLs
diminished  from  almost  €200  billion  to  €90  billion. According  to  the  plans  requested  from  all
banks by the supervisory authorities – the ECB for the significant institutions and the Bank of Italy
for the others – the net NPL ratio should decline further, to around 3 per cent at the end of 2021.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Notwithstanding significant progress in Italy and in the rest of the euro area, much remains to be
done.  Four  areas  require  special  attention:  banks’  profitability,  where  intermediaries  need  to
tackle  the  difficult  challenges  posed  by  technology;  the  appropriate  treatment  of  risks  on  the
asset side of banks’ balance sheets; the management of higher funding costs (and the need to
satisfy the new requirements on “bail-inable” liabilities); and the framework for managing banking
crises, which has turned out to be rather complex in recent years.
Profitability. Despite recent improvements, the profitability of European banks remains weak: the
average return on equity (around 6 per cent for the major intermediaries) is barely in line with the
cost of equity in the euro area (and is somewhat lower in Germany and in Italy). The reasons are
not only those related to the weak economic outlook.
Indeed, in Europe the role of banks in financing the economy has been diminishing for over a
decade,  making  it  difficult  to  increase  revenues  by  expanding  credit  volumes.  The  transition
towards  a  more  market-based  financial  system  is  necessary  in  a  modern  economy.  In  this
respect, in the euro area non-financial companies continue to be excessively dependent on bank
credit. The ratio of bank loans to total financial debts is 36 per cent in the euro area (56 per cent
in Italy), against 33 and 27 per cent in the United States and the United Kingdom. By contrast, the
share of bonds is still about 10 percentage points lower than in the United Kingdom and 30 points
less than in the United States. The market capitalisation of listed non-financial companies is also
insufficient:  at  end-2017  it  stood  at  25  per  cent  of  GDP  in  Italy  and  60  per  cent  in  Germany,
against around 125 per cent in the United States.
In order to raise profitability banks must contain costs, diversify the sources of income, and find
ways to significantly raise efficiency levels. The changes that are currently taking place in the
financial  sector  pose  novel  challenges,  but  also  provide  fresh  opportunities  for  well-managed
financial intermediaries, among which banks can certainly be included. FinTech and Big Tech
companies  are  offering  new  financial  services  and  exploiting  innovative  technologies  and
massive amounts of data. Banks are responding by expanding the range of products provided
through digital channels. It is a process that is bound to continue, as more intensive use of new
technologies is necessary to compete effectively in the market and achieve adequate levels of
profitability.
Risks on the assets side. We can draw a number of lessons from Italy’s double-dip recession
and the consequences for its banking system of both the global financial crisis and the sovereign
debt crisis. The first lesson concerns the treatment of impaired assets, an area where Italy’s
experience  has  been  especially  important.  Following  the  large-scale  disposals  of  bad  loans
completed  in  recent  years,  in  Italy  more  than  half  of  banks’  total  NPLs  currently  consist  in
exposures to firms whose difficulties may prove to be temporary (loans defined as “unlikely to
pay”).  Their  management  should  aim  at  maximising  the  probability  that  these  loans  become
performing again. On the one hand, significant benefits could be obtained if non-financial firms,
where  necessary  with  the  collaboration  of  banks,  resorted  to  specialised  operators  such  as
“turnaround  funds”,  able  to  provide  the  knowledge  and  resources  to  relaunch  impaired
enterprises. On the other hand, supervisory and regulatory authorities should consider how best
to support these strategies, including through the adoption of new specific measures.
The  current  European  regulation  on  minimum  coverage  of  new  NPLs,  for  instance,  imposes
increasing provisions on loans based only on the time that has elapsed since their classification
as  non-performing  (known  as  “calendar  provisioning”)  and  distinguishes  only  between
guaranteed and non-guaranteed loans. The difference between bad and unlikely-to-pay loans is
instead overlooked. There is therefore the risk of creating perverse incentives for banks to hold
fire  sales  or  liquidate  NPLs,  amplifying  losses  for  both  the  banks  and  their  customers  and
discouraging an active management of the credit relationship. This is an area in which regulation
could be improved.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Another  lesson  regards  the  debate  that  has  intensified  in  the  aftermath  of  the  sovereign  debt
crisis about the so-called “bank-sovereign nexus” (or “doom loop”).
Some have proposed that the prudential treatment of banks’ sovereign exposures be made more
restrictive. These recommendations are built on the premise that a capital requirement or the
assignment of a risk charge would break the link between banks and the State. But this link goes
well beyond the holding of sovereign bonds. Indeed, it is the real economy that provides the most
important connection: a restructuring of the public debt, for example, might be so disruptive that
firms and households could be swept away by it, damaging the entire banking system regardless
of its capitalisation or its holdings of government bonds. These proposals, moreover, overlook
the stabilising role that banks, by acting as contrarian investors, can play on bond markets in
periods of tension.
For these reasons, after almost three years of work and intensive discussions, at end-2017 the
Basel Committee decided to maintain the current regulation.
The reduction in sovereign risk must ultimately come from sound government policy, as it cannot
be obtained by simply shifting sovereign bonds from the balance sheet of one economic sector
to  that  of  another.  This  requires  not  only  balanced  and  prudent  fiscal  policies  but,  most
importantly,  structural  reforms  aimed  at  regaining  sustained  GDP  growth.  The  latter,  in  turn,
would  help  make  loans  to  households  and  firms  more  attractive,  and  reduce  the  share  of
government debt in banks’ balance sheets.
While  there  has  been  a  heated  debate  about  NPLs  and  sovereign  bond  holdings,  much  less
attention  has  been  paid  on  the  risks  deriving  from  the  stock  of  illiquid  and  opaque  assets  in
banks’ balance sheets, including the instruments classified as Level 2 and Level 3 assets in the
fair  value  hierarchy.  These  risks  are  not  easy  to  measure,  but  available  estimates  put  them
broadly  on  a  par  with  those  associated  with  NPLs.  The  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  has
recently  adopted  some  initiatives  aimed  at  defining  the  most  appropriate  interventions  to  take
adequate account of these risks. These efforts must be intensified.
The increase in the cost of funding is the third area that should not be neglected. In the coming
years all large banks will have to raise a significant amount of “bail-inable” liabilities in order to
fulfil  the  new  global  and  European  regulation  on  total  loss-absorbing  capacity  (TLAC)  and  the
minimum  requirement  for  own  funds  and  eligible  liabilities  (MREL).  Raising  funds  may  indeed
pose a difficult challenge. Regulators and supervisors have to strike the right balance between
the need to set appropriate criteria in order to stop taxpayers bearing the cost of future banking
crises, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, the need to be sufficiently rigorous, with the risk,
in  persistently  adverse  market  conditions  for  many  intermediaries,  of  ultimately  increasing  the
probability  of  future  banking  crises.  The  principle  of  bailing-in  creditors  makes  sense  but  its
concrete application requires care, especially in the current circumstances.
The management of banking crises. Italy’s experience has revealed serious drawbacks in the
new European regulation governing small-and medium-size intermediaries which, under the new
rules, cannot access the facilities embedded in the so-called “resolution” procedure. For these
banks – the vast majority of the roughly 3,000 euro-area institutions – a piecemeal liquidation is
the only option currently available in the absence of interested buyers. But liquidation threatens
the continuity of the supply of financial services, may imply large losses for both creditors and
debtors  and,  due  to  potential  contagion  effects,  may  pose  serious  risks  to  overall  financial
stability. More must be done in this field, and from this perspective the experience of the United
States is especially important. The US Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation – a government
entity whose reserves are made up of private funds, but which can activate a large line of credit
with  the  US  Treasury  –  has  successfully  managed  the  crisis  of  almost  500  financial
intermediaries  since  2007,  minimising  the  harm  for  the  economy  at  large.  It  is  a  lesson  that
merits careful consideration.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
Let  me  conclude. As  the  economic  prospects  for  the  euro  area  are  currently  dominated  by
uncertainty, many analysts fear that should the situation degenerate into a full-blown recession or
lead to deflation, monetary policy would be disarmed. This is a mistake. Central banks can rely
on a wide range of instruments to support economic activity and, if necessary, the Eurosystem is
ready to use them all in order to fulfil its mandate. But monetary policy should not remain alone in
sustaining the economy. In the absence of a common European budget, threats to the growth or
inflation outlook require greater coordination of national fiscal policies, while structural reforms
would provide essential help by boosting productivity dynamics.
On the financial front, the most serious difficulties posed by the global financial crisis and the
European  sovereign  debt  crisis  are  now  being  overcome.  In  Italy  there  has  been  significant
progress:  NPLs  have  been  halved,  provisions  have  increased  considerably  and  banks’
capitalisation  has  risen  significantly,  even  though  the  legacy  of  the  double-dip  recession
continues  to  weigh  on  some  intermediaries.  Further  progress  will  depend  not  only  on  banks’
continued efforts to improve their balance sheets and lending strategies, but, above all, on their
ability to rise to the challenges posed by the digital revolution, adopt strategies based on higher
investment  in  new  technologies,  reduce  operating  costs  and  restructure  their  distribution
network.
Today there are also risks associated with the incompleteness of the European construction, as
we have witnessed since at least 2010. The standstill in the reform of economic governance, due
to  a  mutual  lack  of  trust  among  countries  that  developed  during  the  crisis,  is  particularly
dangerous at this stage, as the constraints on national policies have been rapidly made more
stringent but the introduction of their supranational counterparts has been delayed.
In  the  economic  and  financial  domain,  it  is  clear  what  the  most  immediate  steps  should  be:
completing the banking union, rethinking the management of banking crises, and establishing a
well-functioning  capital  markets  union.  But,  at  the  same  time,  the  reasons  for  discontent  and
criticism of European institutions also require a response. We must work to restore mutual trust,
enhance security, and to create a sense of belonging. Italy must play its part by working hard and
consistently to improve its economic environment and to make a credible commitment to a path
of  gradual  but  significant  debt  reduction.  The  hope  is  that,  after  the  forthcoming  European
elections,  the  conditions  will  be  established  for  resuming  the  reform  agenda  and  pushing  it
forward with renewed vigour. Otherwise, as the song says, “the long and winding road will never
disappear”.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
