Mario Draghi: Macroprudential policy in Europe
Welcome remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank and Chair of the
European  Systemic  Risk  Board,  at  the  fourth  annual  conference  of  the  ESRB,  Frankfurt  am
Main, 26 September 2019.
 It is my pleasure to welcome you to the fourth annual conference of the European Systemic Risk
Board (ESRB). Since this is the last time I will open this conference as Chair of the ESRB, I
wanted to reflect on the development of macroprudential policy over the course of the past eight
years.  In  that  time  it  has  evolved  from  an  idea  that  mostly  existed  on  paper  into  policy
instruments  that  have  been  widely  implemented.  Europe  is  now  better  placed  to  prevent  or
mitigate risks to financial stability than it was in the run-up to the global financial crisis.
Yet  there  is  still  unfinished  business:  analytical  tools  to  assess  systemic  risk  need  to  be
enhanced; macroprudential instruments to prevent or mitigate systemic risk need to keep pace
with  the  evolution  of  the  financial  system;  and  the  policy  framework  needs  to  be  further
developed.
Establishing macroprudential policy in Europe
At the start of my term in 2011, Europe was still dealing with the aftermath of the global financial
crisis. Other financial stability risks – notably those associated with the sovereign debt crisis –
were  also  crystallising.  The  costs  to  society  from  the  crisis  were  substantial.   By  2013,
2
unemployment had risen by 10 million and EU GDP was some 13% below its pre-crisis trend.
1
The build-up of excessive leverage in the financial system was a key element leading up to the
financial crisis, and policymakers were unable to adequately address systemic risk. While many
central banks communicated on financial stability issues prior to the crisis, very few countries
had  established  national  macroprudential  authorities  with  a  specific  mandate  and  precise
instruments for policy action.
Some of the tools that we would today call macroprudential instruments were used by central
banks  in  Europe  during  the  post-war  period,  albeit  usually  for  the  purpose  of  demand
management.   But  most  were  no  longer  used  or  were  dismantled  by  financial  deregulation
during the 1980s and 1990s. And without means of enforcement, warnings published in financial
stability reports prior to the crisis often went unheeded.
3
It was only after the crisis that there was widespread recognition of the importance of the macro
dimension of financial stability.  An internet search on the word “macroprudential” yields 5,000
hits for the eight-year period from 2000 to 2007. By contrast, the past eight years yield 120,000
hits.
4
Despite  that  recognition,  macroprudential  policy  in  Europe  was  far  from  operational  in  2011.
Indeed,  when  the  European  rules  establishing  a  common  legal  basis  for  macroprudential
instruments  for  banking  came  into  effect  in  January  2014,  ten  Member  States  still  had  not
implemented them in primary national legislation.
Even where national authorities had been created, there was uncertainty over the right way to
assess risks, which instruments to use and how to calibrate interventions. Moreover, there was a
real  risk  of  inaction  bias  since  the  costs  of  macroprudential  policy  are  visible  and  are  felt
5
immediately, but the benefits accrue over time and are difficult to quantify.
Given this somewhat tentative start for macroprudential policy in Europe, substantial progress
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
has been made over the past eight years. Macroprudential authorities now exist in all but one
Member  State.  The  gaps  in  our  framework  and  knowledge  have  slowly  been  filled  through
6
research and experience. The ESRB has played an integral part in this process.
The  framework  has  also  helped  to  counter  the  risk  of  inaction  bias.  National  macroprudential
authorities have mandates and legal tools to act. At the European level, the ESRB also holds a
mandate  to  monitor  risks  and  vulnerabilities  and  has  a  number  of  legal  instruments  at  its
disposal.  It  can,  for  example,  issue  warnings  if  it  has  identified  a  significant  risk  to  financial
stability, as well as recommendations setting out remedial steps to be taken on an act-or-explain
basis.
National  authorities  have  certainly  demonstrated  their  willingness  to  use  the  tools  at  their
disposal. Most EU countries currently have at least one measure in place to address risks in the
residential property sector and half have measures to tackle risks in commercial real estate. 12
7
Member States have decided to impose a positive rate on the countercyclical buffer.
The  ESRB  has  likewise  taken  action.  In  2016,  it  issued  warnings  to  eight  countries,  drawing
attention  to  medium-term  vulnerabilities  in  the  residential  real  estate  sectors.  In  six  of  these
countries, the ESRB judges that the vulnerabilities have not been sufficiently addressed and on
Monday  published  recommendations  setting  out  remedial  action  to  be  taken.   Five  further
9
countries were issued with warnings.
Areas for further progress in macroprudential policy
8
Yet the overall framework for macroprudential policy in Europe remains incomplete. We need
progress in three key areas to counter systemic risk more effectively: better analytical tools, new
instruments  that  counter  the  development  of  risk  outside  the  banking  sector  and  a  clearer
framework to govern policy actions.
The past decade has seen a sustained improvement in the tools available to assess risks to
financial stability. Better data and better modelling techniques have revealed important insights.
Developing  the  analytical  toolkit  to  adequately  monitor  interconnectedness  and  contagion
requires granular datasets, and the ability to map and link data across entities and markets. The
sub-prime  crisis  in  the  US  banking  sector  spread  to  European  banks  through  their  direct
exposures, but it also spread to insurers through the use of credit default swaps.
10
Only  a  holistic  view  of  the  system  will  allow  potential  contagion  channels  to  be  identified  and
modelled. And that requires investing in new technologies for data analytics and enhancing the
capacity for authorities to link and share data and technical knowledge.
The second area of improvement for the macroprudential framework in Europe involves keeping
pace  with  developments  in  the  financial  system.  That  requires  broadening  the  range  of
macroprudential instruments beyond those currently available, which focus almost exclusively on
the banking sector.
For  the  insurance  sector,  the  contours  of  such  instruments  are  taking  shape.  They  include
solvency  instruments  such  as  symmetric  capital  requirements  for  cyclical  risks;  liquidity
instruments  for  insurers  with  a  vulnerable  liquidity  profile;  and  instruments  to  target  bank-like
activities to ensure macroprudential policy is consistent across sectors.
11
The  third  area  for  improvement  in  macroprudential  policy  involves  establishing  a  clearer
conceptual framework to govern policy discussions and interventions. Such a framework would
facilitate communication with market participants and the general public, as well as help mitigate
any risk of inaction bias.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
For monetary policy the framework is well known and the reaction function of central banks is
normally well understood by markets.
By  contrast,  the  framework  that  governs  macroprudential  policy  interventions  is  much  less
developed, due in no small part to our limited experience of using these tools. The objective of
financial  stability  is  broader  than  the  objective  of  price  stability,  so  is  less  easily  defined  by  a
single numerical measure.
Developing the policy framework is challenging and will take time. The ESRB approach uses the
concept  of  residual  risk,  which  is  the  difference  between  the  level  of  risk  and  the  current
resilience of the financial system.
 In setting up the framework, policymakers need to establish
the level of residual risk that they consider acceptable.
12
Regular macroprudential policy decisions would then follow a two-stage process. Policymakers
assess the level of residual risk in the system, and if that diverges from the acceptable level, they
then assess the policy tightening or loosening required to realign it.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
Over  the  past  eight  years,  the  implementation  of  macroprudential  policy  in  Europe  has
substantially improved, and the ESRB has played a valuable role in facilitating that process.
The ESRB’s success derives from its broad membership. Systemic risk takes different forms
over time, so discussions incorporating a wide range of viewpoints and experience are vital if
policymakers are to successfully safeguard the stability of the financial system.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
See, for example, European Commission Staff Working Document, Coping with the international financial crisis
at the national level in a European context, p.11, which shows that even in 2015 the contribution of the state to
financial sector repair represented more than 10% of total public debt in many countries.
ESRB (2014), ESRB Flagship report on macroprudential policy in the banking sector.
Kelber, A. and Monnet, É. (2014), “Macroprudential policy and quantitative instruments: a European historical
perspective, Financial Stability Review, Banque de France, April, 18: 151–160.
Some discussion had certainly taken place prior to the crisis. See, for example, Crockett, A. (2000), “Marrying the
micro- and macroprudential dimensions of financial stability”, BIS speeches, 21 September; Borio, C (2003),
“Towards a macroprudential framework for financial supervision and regulation?”, CESifo Economic Studies,
49: 181–216.
See ESRB (2014), op. cit.
See, for example, Recommendation of the European Systemic Risk Board of 22 December 2011 on the macro-
prudential mandate of national authorities (ESRB/2011/3); Recommendation of the European Systemic Risk
Board of 4 April 2013 on intermediate objectives and instruments of macro-prudential policy (ESRB/2013/1); the
ESRB  response  to  the  European  Commission’s  Consultation  Document  on  the  “Review  of  the  EU  Macro-
prudential  Policy  Framework”;  and  the  ESRB  handbook  on  operationalising  macroprudential  policy  in  the
banking sector.
See the ESRB’s website for a breakdown by country. The ESRB’s annual review of macroprudential policy in the
EU provides a detailed description of these measures.
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Sweden.
Czech Republic, Germany, France, Iceland and Norway.
Hellwig,  M  (2009),  “Systemic  Risk  in  the  Financial  Sector: An Analysis  of  the  Subprime-Mortgage  Financial
Crisis”, De Economist, 157(2): 129–207.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
11
12
See ESRB (2018), Macroprudential provisions, measures and instruments for insurance, November. For recent
work on the topic by the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA), see, for example,
EIOPA (2019), Discussion Paper on systemic risk and macroprudential policy in insurance, March.
ESRB (2019), Features of a macroprudential stance: initial considerations, April.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
