  Maintaining credibility in times of 
Panel remarks delivered to the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies  
change 
(Bank of Japan) in Tokyo 
On 30 May 2019 
By Christian Hawkesby, Assistant Governor and General Manager of 
Economics, Financial Markets, and Banking 
Prepared with Cameron Haworth and Omar Aziz  
      
2 The Terrace, PO Box 2498, Wellington 6140, New Zealand 
Telephone 64 4 472 2029 Online at www.rbnz.govt.nz  
     2 
 Introduction 
 
Tena koutou katoa  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to talk about the Reserve Bank of New Zealand and the changes 
we are making to maintain our credibility in times of change. 
 
I would like to focus on two building blocks of credibility:  
 
 renewing a social licence to operate by aligning our objectives with the needs of the 
public; and  
 
•  achieving those objectives through good decision making enabled by a framework of 
good governance. 
 
A common theme is the importance of transparency. 
The imperative for change: Central banks in the 21st century 
 
The first building block of credibility is the renewal of a social licence to operate—by this I 
mean the legitimacy an institution earns by serving the public interest. It is granted by the 
public when an institution is seen to fulfil its social obligations.1 
 
New Zealand was the first country to officially adopt inflation targeting in 1989, with a number 
of  central  banks  around  the  world  following  the  example.2  Under  a  single-decision-maker 
model, we brought inflation down from around twenty percent to two percent in five years. In 
doing so, we helped build our credibility during the high-inflation environment of the times.3 
 
Fast-forward to 2019, and monetary policy in New Zealand has undergone major change. 
Firstly, we have adopted a dual mandate, focused on achieving price stability and supporting 
maximum  sustainable  employment.  Secondly,  we  have  adopted  a  committee  structure for 
decision making, and are delivering greater transparency in our decision making. 
 
Why the change? 
 
The reform of our framework was not merely a simple choice based on technical performance. 
As you can see in figure 1, when it comes to inflation and growth, over the past 30 years 
inflation-targeting central banks (e.g. New Zealand and the United Kingdom) have a pretty 
similar  track  record  to  central  banks  with  a  dual  mandate  (e.g.  Australia  and  the  United 
States).4  
 
The imperative for change comes from more than examining our history; it comes from our 
expectations of the future, and the present we find ourselves in. Our policy framework changed 
because times are changing. For the Reserve Bank to maintain its credibility and relevance, 
we must change too. 
                                                
1 Orr, A. (2019), In service to society:  New Zealand’s revised monetary framework and the imperative 
for institutional change. https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research-and-
publications/speeches/2019/speech2019-03-29 
2 Irwin, N., Of Kiwis and Currencies: How a 2% Inflation Target Became Global Economic Gospel, 
New York Times, Dec. 19, 2014. 
3 McDermott, J. and R. Williams (2018), Inflation targeting in New Zealand: An experience in 
evolution. https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research-and-publications/speeches/2018/speech2018-04-12. 
4 See also Jacob, P. and A. Wadsworth (2018). 
Ref #8058027 v1.4 
     3 
Figure 1: Inflation, and GDP growth across monetary policy frameworks5 
   Wellbeing of our people 
 
Inflation has been low and stable in New Zealand for nearly 30 years.  
 
There is a greater appreciation that low inflation is a means to an end, and not the end itself.  
In the fight to lower inflation that was  perhaps easy to forget. The end goal is, of course, 
improving the wellbeing of our people.6  
 
For  many  in  the  general  public,  employment  is  one  tangible  measure  of  wellbeing. 
Employment can provide an opportunity to earn your own wage, contribute to society, and live 
a fulfilling life. 
 
It is in this light that the Reserve Bank Act (1989) has been amended to include a dual mandate 
with an employment objective alongside our price stability goal. Incorporating the objective of 
supporting maximum sustainable employment, and equally  weighting it alongside inflation, 
emphasises our long-term goal of improving New Zealanders’ wellbeing. This aligns us with 
the needs of the public. And it helps us renew our social licence to operate—the first building 
block for maintaining our credibility. 
 
But it is not enough for the public to believe in and understand our objectives. We must also 
prove to them that they can be achieved. This brings us to the second building block necessary 
for maintaining credibility: establishing modern governance principles for dealing with modern 
problems, and translating good governance into good decisions. 
 
Good governance 
 
In preparing for our dual mandate, and a formal Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), we have 
updated  the  principles  and  processes  that  form  our  governance  framework  for  monetary 
policy.  
 
                                                
5 Inflation data: NZ: Consumer Price Index (CPI) excl. food & energy; UK: CPI excl. food & energy; 
AUS: Trimmed mean CPI; USA: Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) excl. food & energy. 
6 Grimes, Oxley, and Tarrant (2012). 
Ref #8058027 v1.4 
   4 
 In pursuit of greater transparency, we have also published these principles and processes in 
a comprehensive Monetary Policy Handbook (the Handbook).7 This is an essential document, 
for everyone from school students to MPC members.  
 
Importantly, it is also a living document that will evolve as our understanding evolves. 
Principles 
 
The  first  part  of  the  Handbook  I  would  like  to  cover  is  the  section  on  MPC  deliberation 
principles.8  
 
Figure 2: MPC deliberation principles 
 1 
2 
3 
Principle 
Process implications 
Clear objectives 
Each meeting has a defined purpose an agenda. 
Diversity 
Inclusive of different intellectual and personal styles. 
Inclusion of information 
Information and deliberation meetings are expert-led.  
Initial focus on understanding and discussing information; decision meetings 
clearly separated from information and deliberation meetings. 
Decision meetings chaired by Governor. 
Inclusion of people 
Deliberation meetings allocated enough time for discussion. 
Clear avenues provided for expressing minority views. 
  
There are three principles which guide the deliberations within the MPC. 
 
I’ve talked already about providing clarity around our objectives—the equal weighting of our 
employment and inflation goals. This is the first of our three principles. 
 
The  second,  is  diversity—diversity  in  the  skills,  experiences,  thoughts,  and  personal 
characteristics of the MPC members. 
 
The third, is inclusion—inclusion of information and people, ensuring decisions are made on 
the basis of all the available insights, and reflecting the views of all of the committee members. 
 
Why are diversity and inclusion so important?  
 
The governance literature shows that diversity and inclusion improves the pool of committee 
knowledge, insures against extreme views, and reduces groupthink.9 These principles drive 
the committee towards an unbiased policy decision—the best that is possible given existing 
information. 
 
Think about this from a practical perspective. Modern monetary policy is confronted by diverse 
issues such as climate, technological, and other structural and social changes. A sole decision 
                                                
7 The Handbook explains everything the public needs to know about making a monetary policy 
decision, and is available at: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/about-monetary-
policy/monetary-policy-handbook 
9 See Blinder (2006), Gerlach-Kirsten (2006), Maier (2010), and Sibert (2005). 
8 Chapter two of the Handbook. 
Ref #8058027 v1.4 
   5 
 maker or  uniform committee cannot possibly  hope to  possess the broad range of insights 
necessary to consider these issues.  
 
A diverse committee operating in an inclusive environment can. It is these additional insights 
that improve collective understanding, and lead to better monetary policy decisions.  
 
So you see these principles are not simply rhetorical devices. They are carefully chosen pillars 
to support our credibility though good decision making in achieving our dual mandate. 
Good decision making 
Processes 
Our principles of good governance have directly influenced the policy-setting process of the 
MPC.10 This is a process that has been designed with consensus-based decision making front 
and centre, consistent with the agreement with the Minister of Finance.11  
 
Figure 3: The structure of the forecast week for quarterly Monetary Policy Statements 
  Day 1 
 Day 2 
 Day 3 
 Day 4 
 Day 5 
Staff present 
recent 
developments, 
issues, and 
risks. 
Staff present 
outlook and 
strategy. 
MPS discusses 
risks and 
external 
messages. 
MPC discusses 
strategy and 
tactics. 
MPC decides 
on strategy 
and tactics. 
   Day 6 
 Day 7 
MPC finalises 
risks and 
external 
messages. 
MPC decides 
level and 
direction of 
policy 
instrument. 
MPS release. 
Information pooling. 
(Staff as presenters) 
 MPC deliberations. 
(Staff as advisers) 
 MPC decision making. 
 (Staff not present) 
 
We begin with information pooling, which flows through to MPC deliberations, and culminates 
in the final decision making meeting. 
 
As you can see, the policy-setting framework is highly collaborative and deliberate. Deliberate 
in  the  sense that the  process  inspires  lively  debate, giving  MPC  members  every  possible 
chance to challenge assumptions, critique policy judgements and assess a range of policy 
strategies to achieve our dual mandate objectives.  
 
A crucial part of this is that the MPC members hold back their views on the decision until the 
final stages, rather than starting with them. This supports evidence-based decision making 
and guards against confirmation bias.  
 
The process begins with open information pooling on recent developments and the outlook for 
the  economy.  Here,  the  MPC  have  the  opportunity  to  investigate  and  challenge  the 
assumptions made in the staff’s initial forecasts. This is where the MPC member’s judgement 
enters the picture, and where creative tensions improve collective understanding.  
                                                
10 Chapter three of the Handbook. 
11 Consensus-based decision making is requested in section 1b of the charter, available: 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-
/media/ReserveBank/Files/Monetary%20policy/About%20monetary%20policy/Monetary-Policy-
Committee-Charter-April-2019.pdf 
Ref #8058027 v1.4 
   6 
  
While the MPC members may enter the room with different insights and questions about the 
economy,  at  the  end  of  the  information  pooling  stage  the  committee  shares  a  common 
reference point for the economic outlook. 
 
There are numerous opportunities to discuss and reflect on key issues, judgements, risks, 
strategy, and communication throughout the week. There are also a number of anonymous 
internal surveys we perform to gauge collective opinion among staff and MPC members.12  
 
By  the  end  of  the  week-and-a-half,  the  final  monetary  policy  decision  reflects  the  greater 
momentum of the MPC’s discussion.  
 
We publish the final Official Cash Rate (OCR) decision, a Monetary Policy Statement (MPS), 
and a Summary Record of Meeting at the same time.  
 
The Summary Record of Meeting captures the key judgements and risks underpinning the 
central forecasts and decision, as well as indicating where members of the MPC had different 
views.  We  identify  any  differing  views,  and  communicate  where  the  most  significant 
uncertainties lie in our baseline forecasts.13 If consensus cannot be reached, a vote by simple 
majority would be carried out, and the reasoning behind different stances disclosed in the 
Summary Record of Meeting. 
 
Our desire is that the transparency provided in the Handbook can help the public understand 
how the Bank’s collective ‘mind’ works. If the public can see the analytical rigour in our decision 
making, they should have greater confidence in the MPC’s conclusions, and thus more faith 
in the Reserve Bank.  
 
Our credibility will be supported in the long run if the decisions made by the MPC are unbiased 
and effective ones. Our results will speak louder than our words.  
Monetary policy strategy and our May decision 
 
So far I’ve talked about the principles and processes we follow in setting policy. Now I’m going 
to cover how we ‘walk the talk’ in formulating our monetary policy decisions.14 
 
Sound and effective monetary policy strategy requires more than just deciding whether the 
OCR should go up or down on any given day; instead central banks need to be transparent 
about  their  views  of  the  economy  over  the  medium-term  and  how  monetary  policy  might 
respond to a changing economic landscape.   
 
In this regard, around twenty years ago, the Reserve Bank became a pioneer in another way.  
When  publishing  our  interest  rate  decisions,  we  also  began  to  publish  a  forward  (and 
endogenous) projection of interest rates in the future.  We use this to capture the overall stance 
of monetary policy.  
 
                                                
12 One of the specific tools we use are surveys of staff and MPC opinions on the balance of risks in 
the forecasts. This indicates both collective opinion, and quantifies the results. This greatly enhances 
the productivity of the MPC, as they don’t have to spend time discussing everything if they are already 
in agreement, and those who disagree with the majority can speak up and explain their position.  
13 We don’t attribute the views to particular members. This can add noise to the summary, with the 
14 Chapter seven of the Handbook describes the Reserve Bank’s approach to monetary policy 
strategy. 
attribution distracting readers from appreciating the substance of the material.  
Ref #8058027 v1.4 
   7 
 This tool remains integral to how the MPC sets monetary policy and understands the potential 
trade-offs with a dual mandate.  
 
The first monetary policy decision of the new MPC occurred last month, in May. Our starting 
point was a New Zealand economy where the labour market was operating near maximum 
sustainable employment, and annual core inflation pressures were within our 1 to 3 percent 
target range but below the 2 percent mid-point. 
 
We discussed the slowdown in global growth, and how this might affect New Zealand. We 
also addressed the recent loss of domestic economy momentum since mid-2018, through both 
tempered household spending and restrained business investment.   
 
In  order  to  continue  achieving  our  policy  objectives,  we  agreed  that  additional  monetary 
stimulus  was  needed  to  help  bring  inflation  back  to  the  2  percent  mid-point  and  support 
maximum  sustainable  employment.  We  then  turned  to  the  question  of  the  magnitude  of 
stimulus we wanted to adopt (the stance) and the timing and means by which we would try to 
deliver this (the tactics). 
 
Figures 4–6 show how different OCR paths could have been used to achieve our objectives. 
While each path was consistent with meeting our objectives, they each offered different trade-
offs.15  
 
Figure 4: Official Cash Rate (OCR) paths to achieve alternative monetary policy stances 
%
 9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Baseline
Lower OCR
Higher OCR
2005
      2008
      2011
      2014
      2017
      2020
  9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
                                                 
15 Svensson (2014) suggests that central banks should take a balanced approach to inflation and 
employment objectives. If you can’t keep both objectives at target at the same time, you should aim to 
have inflation and employment gaps with opposite signs. i.e., slightly undershooting on one metric, 
and slightly overshooting with the other. If you try to keep one objective at target with a gap in the 
other, it signifies that you are prioritising one of the objectives over the other. 
Ref #8058027 v1.4 
   8 
 Figures 5–6: Inflation, and employment gap under alternative OCR paths 
Annual %
4.0
Inflation
Baseline
Lower OCR
Higher OCR
 Annual %
4.0
 1.5
Employment gap
Baseline
Lower OCR
Higher OCR
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
 1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
 2012
 2014
 2016
 2018
 2020
 2012
 2014
 2016
 2018
 2020
  
If we kept rates unchanged (the higher OCR path), our projections suggested that it would 
have taken a number of years for inflation to return to target, and employment would have 
fallen below the maximum sustainable level.  
 
If we lowered the OCR by around 75 basis points over the next 12 months (the lower OCR 
path),  our  projections  suggested  it  would  result  is  a  situation  where  both  inflation  and 
employment would be overshooting their targets.  
 
By contrast, the baseline (our final published projection), with the OCR around 40 basis points 
lower over the next 12 months, brought inflation back to target in a reasonable time period, 
with  employment  remaining  near  the  maximum  sustainable  level.  We  decided  this  path 
captured our preferred strategy, and was robust to the key risks we had discussed.  
 
After  agreeing  on  the  appropriate  stance  of  monetary  policy,  MPC  turned  to  the  tactical 
decision of where to set the OCR at the May meeting, and decided to cut the OCR by 25 basis 
points to provide a more balanced outlook for interest rates.  
 
This brings us to discuss the future. 
Maintaining credibility in the future 
 
Our central view is that New Zealand’s interest rates will remain broadly around current levels 
for the foreseeable future. However, we need to be ready to adapt to changing conditions, to 
meet our objectives even when confronted with unforeseen developments.  
 
An issue that policymakers and academics are grappling with around the world is the role of 
both monetary and fiscal stimulus in a world of low interest rates.   
 
There  is  emerging  consensus  that  coordination  is  necessary  for  an  optimal  response  of 
broader macroeconomic policy.16 For central banks, operational independence does not have 
to mean operational isolation. Rather, collaboration with government can be done in a way 
that builds and reinforces the social licence to operate, by showing a willingness to work with 
other partners to do whatever is necessary to achieve the broader objective—improving public 
wellbeing.  
  
                                                
16 For a recent and accessible read, see Eichengreen (2019). 
Ref #8058027 v1.4 
   9 
 Even with coordination between monetary and fiscal policy, if further macroeconomic stimulus 
is needed quickly, the first line of defence will still inevitably fall upon central banks.17  
 
In New Zealand, we are in the strong position of having further room to provide conventional 
monetary stimulus if required (using the OCR).  
 
Having effective unconventional policy options expands the toolbox of a central bank, which 
is naturally more relevant in a low interest rate environment. In this spirit, we  published  a 
Bulletin  article  last  year  on  the  practicalities  of  unconventional  monetary  tools  in  a  New 
Zealand context, and we continue to learn from the lessons of our central banking cousins.18   
 
It’s better to have a tool and not need it, than need one and not have it. 
Conclusion 
 
In  the  Handbook,  we  explore  the  history  of  central  banking  objectives,  and  see  how 
dramatically they have evolved over time.19 We haven’t always had a mandate to support 
maximum sustainable employment, or to achieve price stability, or even control over interest 
rates or the money supply.  
 
Nothing lasts forever, and it is possible that the role of central banks may change again in the 
future. Our Handbook will inevitably change. We need to be ready to adapt when changes 
beckon.   
 
 
And it is not enough to grudgingly adapt. In order to maintain credibility, central banks must 
embrace change and prove to the public that they are capable of delivering on their objectives. 
To remain credible is to remain relevant. Central banks should keep their eyes open, and be 
ready to change tack. Our destination—a world with improved wellbeing for our citizens—may 
not change, but the best route for getting there may.  
 
We must adapt. We must continue to improve the wellbeing of our citizens. We must remain 
credible.  
 
Meitaki.  
 
Thank you. 
  on financial conditions during a crisis (Romer, 2011). 
18 Drought, Perry, & Richardson, 2018 
17 Monetary policy can be adjusted more rapidly than fiscal policy, and have some immediate effects 
19 Chapter four of the Handbook. 
Ref #8058027 v1.4 
   10 
 References 
Blinder, A. (2006). Monetary policy by committee: why and how. DNB Working Paper No 92. 
Drought, S., Perry, R., & Richardson, A. (2018). Aspects of implementing unconventional 
monetary policy in New Zealand. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 81(4). 
Eichengreen, B. (2019, May 13). The Return of Fiscal Policy. Project Syndicate. Retrieved 
from https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/return-of-fiscal-policy-by-barry-
eichengreen-2019-05. 
Gerlach-Kristen, P. (2003). Monetary policy committees and the benefits of deliberation. 
University of Basel. 
Grimes, A., Oxley L. and N. Tarrant (2012) Does Money Buy Me Love? Testing Alternative 
Measures of National Wellbeing. Motu Working Paper 12–09. 
Irwin, N. (2014, December 19). Of Kiwis and Currencies: How a 2% Inflation Target Became 
Global Economic Gospel. New York Times. 
Jacob, P. and A. Wadsworth (2018), Estimated policy rules for different monetary regimes: 
Flexible inflation targeting versus a dual mandate, Reserve Bank of New Zealand 
Analytical Note AN2018/11. 
McDermott, J. and R. Williams (2018). Inflation targeting in New Zealand: An experience in 
evolution. Speech delivered to the Reserve Bank of Australia conference on central 
bank frameworks, in Sydney 12 April 2018. 
Orr, A., & Aziz, O. (2019, March 29). In Service to Society: New Zealand's revised monetary 
framework and the imperative for institutional change. Retrieved from 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research-and-publications/speeches/2019/speech2019-03-
29. 
Romer, D. (2011). What Have We Learned about Fiscal Policy from the Crisis? IMF 
Conference on Macro and Growth Policies in the Wake of the Crisis.  
Sibert, A. (2005). Is the structure of the ECB adequate to the new challenge? Challenges for 
Central Banks in an Enlarged EMU, 97-117. 
Svensson, L. E. (2014). How to Weigh Unemployment Relative to Inflation in Monetary 
Policy? Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 46(S2), 183-188. 
Wadsworth, A., & Price, G. (Forthcoming). Effective Monetary Policy Committee Deliberation 
in New Zealand. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin article. 
Williams, R., Aziz, O., Kendall, R., Price, G., Ratcliffe, J., Richardson, A., . . . Wadsworth, A. 
(2019). Monetary Policy Handbook. Retrieved from 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/about-monetary-policy/monetary-policy-
handbook. 
  Ref #8058027 v1.4 
   11 
 Appendix— Extracts from the May Monetary Policy Statement 
Press Release 
Tena koutou katoa, welcome all. 
The Official Cash Rate (OCR) has been reduced to 1.5 percent. 
The Monetary Policy Committee decided a lower OCR is necessary to support the outlook 
for employment and inflation consistent with its policy remit. 
Global economic growth has slowed since mid-2018, easing demand for New Zealand’s 
goods and services. This lower global growth has prompted foreign central banks to ease 
their monetary policy stances, supporting growth prospects. 
However, there is uncertainty about the global economic outlook. Trade concerns remain, 
while some other indicators suggest trading-partner growth is stabilising. 
Domestic growth slowed from the second half of 2018. Reduced population growth through 
lower net immigration, and continuing house price softness in some areas, has tempered the 
growth in household spending. Ongoing low business sentiment, tighter profit margins, and 
competition for resources has restrained investment. 
Employment is near its maximum sustainable level. However, the outlook for employment 
growth is more subdued and capacity pressure is expected to ease slightly in 2019. 
Consequently, inflationary pressure is projected to rise only slowly. 
Given this employment and inflation outlook, a lower OCR now is most consistent with 
achieving our objectives and provides a more balanced outlook for interest rates. 
Meitaki, thanks. 
Summary Record of Meeting 
The Monetary Policy Committee agreed on the economic projections outlined in the May 
2019 Statement in order to provide a sound basis on which to form its OCR decision. 
The Committee noted that inflation is currently slightly below the mid-point of the inflation 
target, and that employment is broadly at the targeted maximum sustainable level. However, 
the members agreed that given the recent weaker domestic spending, and projected 
ongoing growth and employment headwinds, there was a need for further monetary stimulus 
to meet its objectives. 
The Committee agreed that the risks to achieving its consumer price inflation and maximum 
sustainable employment objectives were broadly balanced around the projection. Possible 
alternative outcomes were noted on the upside and downside. 
A key downside risk relating to the growth projections was a larger than anticipated 
slowdown in global economic growth, particularly in China and Australia, New Zealand's 
largest trading partners. The Committee agreed that the projections adequately captured the 
observed global slowdown and its impact on domestic employment and inflation. 
The Committee noted that additional stimulus from central banks had underpinned growth 
and reduced the likelihood of a more-pronounced slowdown. With some indicators of global 
growth improving in recent months, a faster recovery in global growth was possible. 
However, on balance, the Committee was more concerned about a continued slowdown 
rather than a faster recovery. 
The Committee discussed other potential risks to domestic spending. The members 
acknowledged the importance of additional spending from households, businesses, and the 
Ref #8058027 v1.4 
   12 
 government, to meet their inflation and employment targets. However, they noted several 
important uncertainties. 
The Committee noted upside and downside risks to the investment outlook. Capacity 
pressure could see investment increase faster than assumed. On the downside, if sentiment 
remained low as profitability remains squeezed, investment might not increase as 
anticipated over the medium term. It was also noted that firms' ability to invest is constrained 
by the current competition for resources. 
A potential source of additional demand discussed by the Committee included government 
spending being higher than currently projected, in view of the current strength of the Crown 
balance sheet. This view was balanced by the impact of any increase in government 
investment being delayed, for example due to timing of the implementation of new initiatives 
and current capacity constraints in the construction sector. The implications for monetary 
policy remain to be seen. 
Some members noted that with lower mortgage rates and easing of loan-to-value 
requirements, any possible pick-up in the housing market could support household spending 
growth more than anticipated. The Committee noted that employment is currently near its 
maximum sustainable level. However, it was agreed that the outlook for employment growth 
is more subdued and capacity pressure is expected to ease slightly in 2019. 
The Committee agreed that overall risks to the inflation projection were balanced. The 
Committee noted the outlook for inflation is below the target mid-point for longer than 
projected in the February Statement. 
The recent period of rising domestic inflation was discussed. The Committee noted that the 
near-term outlook was more subdued due to lower capacity pressure. It was also noted that 
cost pressures remain elevated, and that there is a risk firms may pass these costs on as 
higher consumer prices by more than assumed. However, it was agreed that inflation 
expectations remain well anchored at the mid-point of the target range. 
The Committee also noted the relatively subdued private sector wage growth, despite 
businesses suggesting that the inability to find labour is a significant constraint on their 
growth. The Committee noted the limited pass-through of the nominal wage growth to 
consumer price inflation. 
Some members noted slower global growth reducing imported inflation was a downside risk 
to the inflation outlook. 
The Committee reached a consensus that, relative to the February Statement, a lower path 
for the OCR over the projection period was appropriate. The lower path reflected the 
economic projections and the balance of risks discussed, and is consistent with both inflation 
and employment remaining near the Committee's objectives. 
After discussing the relative benefits of holding the OCR and committing to a downward bias, 
versus cutting the OCR now so as to establish a more balanced outlook for interest rates, 
the Committee reached a consensus to cut the OCR to 1.50 percent. 
Attendees 
Reserve Bank staff: Adrian Orr, Geoff Bascand, Christian Hawkesby, Yuong Ha  
External: Bob Buckle, Peter Harris  
Observer: Gabriel Makhlouf  
Secretary: Chris McDonald  
Apologies: Caroline Saunders 
 
 
 
Ref #8058027 v1.4 
  