 Eastern Caribbean Central Bank 
REMARKS BY  
TIMOTHY N. J. ANTOINE 
GOVERNOR  
EASTERN CARIBBEAN CENTRAL BANK  
AT THE LAUNCH OF  
THE ECCU PUBLIC DEBT AND MARKET INFORMATION WEB 
PORTAL 
23 JULY 2019 
(ECCB Headquarters, St Kitts and Nevis) 
 
 
Introduction 
Allow  me  to  join  our  Master  of  Ceremonies,  Mrs.  Teresa  Smith,  Director  of 
Statistics in welcoming all stakeholders to the launch of the ECCU Public Debt 
and Market Information Web Portal. 
 
Here assembled, are the builders of this platform together with the suppliers and 
consumers of public debt information. 
 
Today’s launch marks another milestone in our ongoing enterprise to build out an 
ECCU financial market infrastructure that is fit for purpose  – a modern, strong 
and diversified financial system. 
 
Our Motivation  
 
The  Eastern  Caribbean  Central  Bank  (ECCB)  recognises  that  information  is  a 
public  good  and  that  the  dissemination  of  relevant  and  timely  information,  by 
both  the  public  and  private  sectors,  is  an  indispensable  element  in  our  quest  to 
transform the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU). 
 
The launch of the ECCU Public Debt and Market Information Web Portal is an 
important deliverable in the ECCB’s Strategic Plan for this year.  If you are not 
familiar  with  this  Plan,  I  urge  to  visit  the  ECCB  website,  familiarise  yourself 
with it and become an implementation partner. 
 
This  initiative  was  born  of  a  desire  to  ensure  that  the  public  has  the  best 
(accurate and timely) information available to make informed decisions. Whether 
this is: 
1.  an investor considering the purchase of government security; 
2.  a  credit  rating  agency  assessing  the  creditworthiness  of  a 
government; 
3.  a financial institution requiring information to meet their IFRS  9 
obligations; 
4.  a licensed broker providing advice to clients; 
5.  a  regional  or  international  financial  institution  undertaking 
surveillance; 
6.  an academic or student undertaking research; and of course, 
7.  the media, which is essential player in our liberal democracies.  
 Page 1 of 3 
 Eastern Caribbean Central Bank 
 
Indeed,  far  too  often  our  region  is  misrepresented  because  of  a  paucity  of  data 
and  information  for  published  reports.   Furthermore,  our  public  discourse  is 
often  characterised  by  far  more  heat  than  light  because  of  missing  or 
misrepresented facts. 
 
One of the objectives of this particular effort is also to broaden the investor base 
for the Regional Government Securities Market (RGSM), a major component of 
the Eastern Caribbean Securities Market.  The RGSM, now in its 18th year, has 
allowed  governments  to  raise  almost  $14  billion,  delivering  significant  fiscal 
savings in the process. 
 
Scope for Growth of RGSM 
 
The RGSM, which forms part of the capital market in the ECCU, is indicative of 
the benefits that can be derived from our Single Financial Space: 
a)  A country with a small population like Dominica of 72,000 persons can 
expand its potential investor base to nearly 630,000 across the ECCU. 
b)  Investors  in  any  ECCU  country  can  make  an  investment  without 
worrying  about  the  impact  of  a  depreciation  in  the  currency  on  their 
capital. 
c)  Investors  in  any  ECCU  country  can  make  an  investment  without 
worrying  about  exchange  controls  restricting  repatriation  of  principal 
and interest. 
d)  Also,  investors  in  government  securities  do  not  have  to  worry  about 
taxes on these investments. 
e)  Licensed brokers can operate across the space without let or hindrance. 
At  this  juncture,  our  data  indicate  that  less  than  1  per  cent  of  the  ECCU 
population is active on the RGSM.  To put this in people terms, only about 350 
persons  are  current  investors  in  this  market.   When  this  low  level  of  usage  is 
juxtaposed  with  the  longstanding  situation  of  excess  liquidity  in  our  banking 
system, we cannot help but conclude that there is considerable scope to grow this 
market. 
 
Ongoing Support for Debt Management  
 
We  wish  to  record  our  gratitude  to  the  Government  of  Canada  for  its  sterling 
support  of  debt  management  in  the  ECCU  through  the  funding  of  the  Debt 
Management  and  Advisory  Services  Project.  We  have  seen  the  benefits  of  the 
capacity building efforts of this project across the ECCU. It is now incumbent on 
the Participating Governments and the ECCB to build upon this solid foundation 
and create a legacy of professional debt management. 
 
For  its  part,  the  ECCB  remains  fully  committed  to  support  member  countries 
through capacity building in the following areas: 
a)  debt recording and management;  
b)  debt sustainability analyses; 
 Page 2 of 3 
 Eastern Caribbean Central Bank 
c)  debt management strategies; and 
d)  investor relations management. 
Before I conclude my brief remarks, I should like to touch on two decisions of 
the Monetary Council.  
 
First  is  the  decision  that  all  member  countries  should  seek  to  attain  a  public 
sector debt to GDP ratio of 60 per cent by 2030. We note the progress made by 
member countries.  
 
In 2014, debt to GDP for the ECCU stood at 80.2 per cent. At the end of 2018, 
the  ratio  had  fallen  to  68.5  per  cent.  While  several  countries  remain  above  the 
ratio, we are encouraged that the debt trajectory is on the right path.  
 
In pursuing this target, we understand that in some years, on account of natural 
disasters or major capital development projects, the ratio may temporarily rise.  
However,  we  continue  to  encourage  our  governments  to  enact  fiscal  resilience 
frameworks, thereby creating buffers and opportunities to pursue fiscal prudence 
with some enterprise. 
 
Second,  the  Council  has  agreed  that  the  respective  governments  would  lay,  in 
their  respective  parliaments,  their  Medium-Term  Debt  Management  Strategies 
(MTDS)  and  also  publish  them  to  strengthen  and  enhance  the  transparency  and 
the credibility of the debt management process.  
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In conclusion, I wish to thank all my colleagues across the Bank and our several 
partners who have assisted with this Project.   
 
I  specifically  recognise,  Teresa  Smith,  our  Director  of  Statistics,  Mrs.  Juletta 
Edinborough, Deputy Director (Debt), Ms. Rhina Meade, Project Lead and Mr. 
John Venner, Adviser.   
 
I  also  thank:  our  developers:  Ian  Mitchell  and  colleagues  at  eMagine  Solutions 
Inc.  of  Saint  Lucia;  and  our  partners:  Diego  Rivetti  while  he  was  at  the  IMF 
(now  at  the  World  Bank);  Obert  Nyawata  and  Thordur  Jonasson  from  the  IMF 
Money and Capital Markets Department. 
 
Above  all,  I  express  gratitude  to  our  member  governments  for  your  active 
participation and support for this Project. 
 
We trust that you will find this debt information utility useful. 
 
I thank you all.    
 
 
 Page 3 of 3 
