Yannis Stournaras: A retrospective on euro area monetary policy
during and after the recent financial crisis
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  23rd  International
Conference  on  Macroeconomic  Analysis  and  International  Finance,  University  of  Crete,
Department of Economics, Rethymno, 31 May 2019.
Introduction
 2019 marks the 20th anniversary of the euro, which ushered in a new era of European history.
Over  these  past  two  decades,  the  monetary  policy  of  the  Eurosystem  broadly  succeeded  in
creating  a  low-inflation  environment.  Still,  while  the  first  decade,  known  as  the  “Great
Moderation”, was characterised by macroeconomic stability, the second was marked by severe
challenges for policy makers:
First,  a  major  financial  crisis  spread  from  the  US  to  the  rest  of  the  world,  threatening
financial stability and the macroeconomic outlook in the euro area.
Second,  doubts  about  sovereign  and  private  debt  sustainability  in  a  number  of  euro  area
Member States exacerbated the crisis.
Third, a protracted period of low inflation began in the second half of 2013, while risks of a
de-anchoring of inflation expectations intensified.
In  response  to  these  challenging  circumstances,  the  Eurosystem  had  to  adapt  its  monetary
policy to a significant extent.
In  what  follows,  I  will  first  focus  on  the  monetary  policy  conducted  by  the  Eurosystem  during
these three distinct phases , and then turn to the lessons learned and challenges for the future.
First phase of the crisis 2007–2010
1
In 2007, the turmoil in the US subprime mortgage market induced a general re-pricing of financial
market  risks.  Financial  tensions  rapidly  spilled  over  to  the  rest  of  the  world,  generating
considerable  uncertainty  regarding  the  reliability  of  the  banking  sector.  Concerns  about  the
soundness of counterparties seriously impaired interbank and other short-term funding markets,
leading  to  liquidity  hoarding  by  some  counterparties  and  to  funding  difficulties  for  numerous
others.  Financial  market  fragmentation  increased  markedly.  The  unrest  in  financial  markets
impacted  on  the  real  economy,  leading  to  a  severe  contraction  in  international  trade  and,
ultimately, to the “Great Recession” of the global economy.
In the euro area, the financial turmoil led to a collapse of bank intermediation, as evidenced by the
sharp  decrease  of  credit  growth ,  the  contraction  of  economic  growth  by  more  than  7
percentage points in just one year , and the sharp decline of inflation, which entered negative
territory in the summer of 2009.
2
3
In order to meet the banks’ strong demand for liquidity and to counter fragmentation by restoring
the functioning of the monetary policy transmission mechanism, the ECB decided to:
o reduce its policy rates, bringing the rate on the main refinancing operations down to 1% in May
2009,
o  offer  unlimited  liquidity  at  a  fixed  rate,  against  a  widened  pool  of  eligible  collateral,  through
regular refinancing operations; and
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
o provide liquidity for longer periods (through longer-term refinancing operations –LTROs).
In 2009, the ECB also carried out, for the first time, an outright purchase programme, targeting
covered bonds issued by banks, with the aim to stimulate activity in the covered bond market and
to support credit intermediation.
These measures largely succeeded in improving the functioning of the financial markets. At the
start of 2010, macroeconomic developments were encouraging, and inflation rose towards levels
compatible with the ECB’s price stability definition, with headline inflation reaching 1.7%.
Second phase of the crisis (2010–2013)
However, in early 2010, in the wake of a deep recession and expansionary fiscal policies in the
euro area, several Member States began to face intensifying tensions in financial markets, on
account of unsustainable public finances or a weak banking sector. These tensions were further
amplified  by  the  strong  sovereign-bank  nexus,  and  had  their  root  in  the  concerns  about  the
sustainability  of  sovereign  and  private  debt  in  several  vulnerable  Member  States,  including
Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Cyprus, Spain and Italy. The yield spreads of the government bonds
issued  by  these  countries  vis-à-vis  the  respective  German  Bund  soared  to  historic  highs,
reflecting a lack of confidence, as well as redenomination risk [i.e. the risk that euro area assets
could be redenominated in legacy currencies].
The banking system was also confronted with financial fragmentation along national borders. As
a result, monetary policy transmission was severely impaired – hindering the pass-through of the
accommodative monetary policy stance to the stressed jurisdictions. Financial fragmentation in
the euro area peaked in 2012, and still remains above pre-crisis levels . The most vulnerable
Member States lost market access and adopted adjustment programmes, which partly involved
pro-cyclical fiscal consolidation measures. Against this background, the Eurosystem introduced
the  Securities  Markets  Programme  in  May  2010,  purchasing  sovereign  bonds  from  financially
stressed Member States.
4
In early 2012, financial tensions intensified, as the euro area economy slowed down again to a
double-dip  recession   and 
to  price-in
redenomination  risk  in  certain  sovereign  bonds.  The  adverse  confidence  effects  triggered  a
further sharp increase in the spreads of government bonds. In response, the Eurosystem:
re-emerged.  Markets  started 
fiscal  slippages 
5
lowered its policy rates with the deposit facility rate reduced to 0% by July 2012;
offered longer-term refinancing operations, with maturities ranging from one to three years,
in an aim to ensure long-term funding for credit institutions.
following  the  implementation  of  these  measures,  the  balance  sheet  of  the  Eurosystem
almost doubled between 2007 and 2012, with monetary policy-related assets reaching €1.5
trillion by the end of 2012.
Meanwhile,  major  steps  were  taken  to  address  weaknesses  in  the  architecture  of  the
monetary  union,  as,  among  other  negative  consequences,  the  adverse  effects  of  the
incomplete architecture of Economic and Monetary Union on the effectiveness of monetary
policy  had  become  evident.  Far-reaching  measures  were  adopted  to  preserve  financial
stability in the euro area:
In  2012,  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  was  created  to  provide  financial
assistance  to  euro  area  Member  States  experiencing  or  threatened  with  severe  financing
problems.
Another  major  step  was  the  decision  to  implement  a  Banking  Union  with  three  pillars:  a
common  banking  supervision,  a  common  resolution  mechanism  and  a  (yet  to  be
established)  common  deposit  insurance  scheme.  The  decision  to  establish  the  Banking
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Union  contributed  significantly  to  overcoming  the  debt  crisis  and  to  bolstering  financial
stability in the euro area, thereby enhancing the potential for economic growth.
At the end of 2010, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) was established as the main
body for macro-prudential oversight and surveillance of EU financial markets with the aim of
preventing systemic risk.
In  the  summer  of  2012,  President  Draghi  reassured  markets  that  “the  ECB  is  ready  to  do
whatever it takes to preserve the euro” within its mandate, and announced the Outright Monetary
Transactions  (OMT)  programme.  Although  OMT  has  never  been  implemented,  the  ECB’s
commitment  to  safeguard  the  effectiveness  of  the  single  monetary  policy  was  instrumental  in
reducing the rise in yields and spreads and in bolstering confidence in the irreversibility of the
euro. Sovereign bond spreads started to fall rapidly, reflecting the restored confidence of market
participants.
However, the significant contraction in economic activity which had taken place in several euro
area  Member  States,  as  well  as  the  still  weak  confidence,  left  a  damaging  legacy  for  the
economy and prepared the ground for the third phase of the crisis.
Third phase of the ECB’s response to the crisis (2013-present)
In  the  second  half  of  2013,  amid  a  weak  euro  area  economic  environment  characterised  by
anaemic aggregate demand, inflation once again fell, by more than 2 percentage points , and
remained in negative territory for several months in 2015 and 2016. Inflation expectations, which
until  then  had  remained  anchored,  declined  significantly,  reflecting  downward  pressures  on
prices and concerns about a protracted period of low inflation or even deflation. Deleveraging by
banks in the euro area intensified, reducing credit to the real economy to a significant extent,
while the monetary policy transmission mechanism remained impaired.
6
In July 2013, the ECB introduced forward guidance on the future path of its policy rates, in order
to  anchor  policy  expectations  and  guide  the  markets  in  their  efforts  to  assess  its  reaction
function .  Moreover,  policy  rates  were  lowered  further,  and  in  June  2014  the  ECB  went  into
negative interest rate territory when it lowered the deposit facility rate to below zero per cent.
7
Meanwhile, the steps towards the completion of the Banking Union continued:
In  2014  the  first  pillar  of  the  Banking  Union,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),
became effective with the ECB assuming responsibility for supervision of the larger banks of
the euro area.
That same year, the second pillar of the Banking Union, the Single Resolution Mechanism
(SRM), entered into force, with the mission of ensuring the orderly resolution of failing banks,
with minimal costs to taxpayers and the real economy.
In  order  to  revive  credit  provision,  the  ECB  introduced  a  series  of  targeted  longer-term
refinancing operations (TLTROs) on attractive terms, conditional on banks’ lending behaviour to
firms  and  households.  Credit  easing  was  complemented  by  Eurosystem  programmes  for
purchases of covered bonds and asset-backed securities issued by banks, and later of bonds
issued  by  public  sector  entities, 
international  organisations,  development  banks  and
corporations.
Since  the  introduction  of  the Asset  Purchase  Programme  (APP)  in  2015  until  the  end  of  the
positive net purchases in December 2018, total assets purchased by the Eurosystem exceeded
€2.5 trillion. In addition, credit operations reached more than €0.7 trillion in December 2018. As a
result,  assets  related  to  monetary  policy  on  the  Eurosystem’s  balance  sheet  expanded  to
unprecedented levels, at around €3.5 trillion, which corresponds to over a third of euro area GDP.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Quantitative easing, in combination with credit easing, drove up the prices of financial assets and
lowered their yields, thereby reducing medium-to-longer term interest rates and enhancing the
transmission of monetary policy. By providing ample financing and by easing funding conditions,
the ECB successfully contributed to stimulating credit growth and supporting economic growth,
with  a  view  to  achieving  a  solid  economic  expansion .  Furthermore,  gradually  rising  prices
9
supported the convergence of inflation to levels consistent with price stability .
8
However, according to the assessment of the Governing Council in the first half of 2019, in the
face of a weaker-than-expected growth and inflation outlook, monetary policy accommodation is
still needed to secure the path of inflation convergence. To this end, forward guidance on policy
rates was strengthened earlier this year. Policy rates are now expected to remain at their present
levels at least through the end of 2019, and in any case for as long as necessary to ensure the
continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the
medium term. Similarly, the forward guidance on reinvestment suggests that the sizeable stock
of assets bought under the APP will be kept unchanged for even longer
, continuing to provide
an ample degree of monetary accommodation. In the same vein, a new series of targeted longer-
term refinancing operations (TLTRO-III) was announced to help preserve favourable bank lending
conditions  and  the  smooth  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  The  relevant  parameters  of  the
TLTRO-III, to be decided in the near future, will reflect the evolving macroeconomic conditions.
TLTRO may actually prove to be a more powerful monetary policy tool for the future than initially
thought.
Lessons from the recent financial crisis and challenges for the future
10
The recent financial crisis was the most severe in seventy-five years. A key question now is:
“Will it happen again?”
My answer is that − if and when it does happen − it will be different.
1) A valuable lesson is that, “while most of the time the economy works very well left in the care
of the invisible hand, during panics, that hand seems to lose its grip”, as Ahamed Liaquat wrote in
his Pulitzer – award winning “Lords of Finance”. Policy makers around the world have learned
their lessons from the Great Depression: a financial system in distress requires active central
bank  intervention.  Central  banks  this  time  acted  quickly  and  forcefully.  They  developed  their
toolkit  with  a  combination  of  more  flexible,  effective  and  innovative  measures  and  enormous
firepower. Given the success of these policies, some of these instruments may be permanently
included in the new standard-framework, and thus equip policy makers with the tools to engage
in proper and timely action. All in all, it seems that there is no strong case for a fundamental
change in the monetary policy framework. Central banks are expected to continue to use the
asset side of their balance sheets, as well as other tools such as forward guidance, in addition to
their  standard  interest  rate  policies,  as  the  effective  lower  bound  will  likely  continue  to  be  a
binding constraint on interest rate policy in a low inflation, low interest rate environment. Going
forward, central banks are likely to proceed to the downsizing of their balance sheets in gradual
and cautious steps. In any case, even taking into account the hazards, sustaining the present
high levels of central bank assets creates benefits for the economies and financial markets alike.
These benefits relate to the maintenance of accommodative liquidity conditions for banks and the
economy, as well as the avoidance of financial turbulence in the event of a sudden rise in interest
rates in the markets.
2) We, as central bankers, have gained a much better understanding of how the financial system
operates and how risks to the stability of the financial system may develop. A lot has been done
to make the system much safer than it was 10 years ago and as resilient as possible. Such work
has progressed in various directions, including not only more effective regulation but also higher
capital  and  liquidity  buffers  for  banks,  early  warning  systems  and  the  development  of
macroprudential tools to increase resilience to shocks when they occur. This was evident in the
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
results of the recent EU-wide stress tests which show that banks have become more resilient to
financial shocks over the past two years.
3)  Bold  steps  have  to  be  taken  to  strengthen  the  eurozone. At  the  national  level,  euro  area
Member States have stepped up structural reform efforts in the labour and product markets to
make them more flexible, which is necessary in a single currency area, and to boost productivity,
and to make public finances more robust. The Banking Union (with a single supervisor, a Single
Resolution  Mechanism  and  –  a  yet-to-be-established  but  of  utmost  importance  –  common
European Deposit Insurance Scheme) will help to create a better integrated, more efficient and
well-capitalised  European  banking  sector.  Coupled  with  the  completion  of  the  Capital  Markets
Union, and a single rule book for banks and capital markets, it can support the single market and
fund investment and growth. Increased risk sharing is highly desirable, but we should not forget
that  greater  public  risk  sharing  is  only  possible  with  less,  and  not  more,  sovereignty.  Risk
sharing, whether this takes the form of a safe asset, a central fiscal tool, a fund to insure against
unemployment, or a truly European deposit insurance scheme, should proceed simultaneously
with  risk  reduction,  such  as  the  reduction  of  non-performing  loans  or  national  discretions  in
supervisory and resolution rules for banks. It is only in this way that we can transform, what is in
effect today in the eurozone, a non-cooperative zero-sum game into a cooperative, win-win one.
4) Many challenges remain and a lot still needs to be done. The financial system continuously
innovates, and the work of regulators comes with a lag. In fact, certain large financial institutions
that  conduct  activities  similar  to  those  of  banks  but  have  no  banking  license  –  what  we  call
“shadow banks” – remain insufficiently monitored and under-regulated. Important challenges also
remain  outside  the  financial  system,  such  as  an  escalating  trade  war,  geopolitical  risks  and
cyber-risks. As central banks, we have to be prepared for all contingencies.
5) Monetary policy alone cannot stabilise the economy in perpetuity. Fiscal policy should also be
active, in those Member States where fiscal space exists and public debt remains sustainable. In
addition,  in  a  monetary  union  such  as  the  eurozone,  the  adjustment  of  current  account
imbalances  should  be  as  symmetric  as  possible,  implying  that  not  only  should  the  Member
States with excessive current account deficits adjust, but, that the Member States with excessive
current  account  surpluses  should  also  adjust.  Furthermore,  the  sequencing  of  domestic
structural  policies  is  important:  for  instance,  goods  and  services  market  flexibility  is  best
achieved  before,  or  simultaneously  with,  labour  market  flexibility.  Otherwise,  large  real  wage
reductions  might  occur,  which  are  unnecessary  both  from  an  economic  and  a  social
perspective.
6) An important lesson is the need to safeguard the independence of central banks both from
political  influence  but  also  from  business  interests,  which  sometimes  try  to  capture  the
supervisory and other activities of central banks. Central banks also have a duty to speak the
truth to the public, to explain the state of economies and to present their forecasts free from any
outside influence.
11
7) Looking forward, allow me to briefly mention another aspect that is likely to become relevant to
monetary  policy  in  the  future:  climate  change .  Climate  change  will  be  an  increasingly
prominent factor that influences monetary policy due to its potential for exerting multiple impacts
on firms, households, banks and, eventually, the economy as a whole. Any assessment of risks,
forecast or planning will ultimately be affected. It is therefore within the mandates of central banks
and supervisors to ensure that the financial system is resilient to such risks. Central banks also
need to establish access to sufficient high-quality data, in order to be able to assess the risk in
the financial sector correctly, and to conduct relevant research. In addition, interaction is needed
with other important players, who aim to define parameters of green finance and climate change
risks and most importantly to establish global coordination. Having said so, I should also add that
the  main  task  for  tackling  climatic  change  remains  with  governments,  with  the  use  of  the
appropriate tax and subsidy policies as well as with other incentive mechanisms.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
At present, several central banks, including the Bank of Greece and the ECB, participate in the
Network  for  Greening  the  Financial  System  (NGFS),  which  was  set  up  with  the  purpose  to
enhance the role of the financial system in managing climate and environmental risks, analyse
the macro-financial impact of climate change and strengthen the global response to the threat of
climate change. The Bank of Greece  is actively engaged and invests in climate change-related
research. The interdisciplinary Climate Change Impacts Study Committee (CCISC) set up by the
Bank  in  2009  has  been  working  on  all  aspects  of  climate  change,  from  climate  science  to
environmental  macroeconomics,  highlighting  climate  change  as  a  key  factor  that  should  be
horizontally integrated into policymaking as it affects almost all sectors of the Greek economy.
12
  In  conclusion,  the  monetary  policy  conducted  by  the  Eurosystem  has  effectively  tackled  the
crisis — flexibility and realism in the monetary policy framework have been pivotal in this regard.
While such flexibility should be maintained in order to ensure that enough policy space will be
available  to  address  potential  future  adverse  developments,  several  other  avenues  should  be
pursued  in  parallel,  to  further  reduce  vulnerabilities  in  the  euro  area,  including  prominently
deepening European integration.
For  those  of  us  with  a  deep  interest  in  economic  history,  it  is  clear  that  “those  who  cannot
remember the past are condemned to repeat it”. We need not only the ability to learn from the
mistakes of the past, but also the vision to avoid repeating mistakes. At the same time, it is our
duty  to  strengthen  our  safety  net  and  build  the  tools  to  reduce  the  effects  and  length  of
downturns, should risks materialise.
References
Constâncio, V. (2018), “Past and future of the ECB monetary policy”, speech at the Conference
on  “Central  Banks  in  Historical  Perspective:  What  Changed  After  the  Financial  Crisis?”,
organised 
of 
May
(www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180504.en.html).
Central 
Malta, 
Bank 
the 
by 
ECB (2018), Financial integration in Europe, May.
ECB (2019), “Taking stock of the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programme after the end of net
asset Purchases”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 2/2019.
ECB Introductory Statement April 2019
(www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2019/html/ecb.is190410~c27197866f.en.html).
Hartmann,  P.  and  F.  Smets,  (2018),  “The  first  twenty  years  of  the  European  Central  Bank:
monetary policy”, ECB Working Paper No. 2219, December.
Lautenschläger,  S.  (2019),  “Central  Bankers,  Supervisors  and  Climate-Related  Risks”.  Panel
remarks at the Network for Greening the Financial System Conference, 17 April
(www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2019/html/ecb.sp190417~efcf14da2a.en.html) .
Praet, P. (2013), “Forward guidance and the ECB”, Column published on VoxEU.org, 6 August
(voxeu.org/article/forward-guidance-and-ecb).
Stournaras,  Y.  (2019),  Keynote  address  at  the  Symposium  on  “Climate  Change:  Threats,
Challenges”, Solutions for Greece, April
(www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=589&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b).
1
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
See Constâncio (2018), Hartmann and Smets (2018)
The annual growth rate of loans to the private sector in the euro area fell from 11.2% in December 2007 to –
0.6% in January 2010.
Euro area real GDP growth fell from 2.2% in Q1 2008 to –5.5% in Q1 2009, on an annual basis.
ECB (2018)
Euro area real GDP growth fell to –0.4% y-o-y in Q1 2012.
Euro area inflation fell from 1.6% in July 2013 to –0.6% in January 2015.
Praet (2013).
ECB (2019).
Hartmann and Smets (2018).
See ECB Introductory Statement, April 2019: “We intend to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal payments
from maturing securities purchased under the asset purchase programme for an extended period of time past
the date when we start raising the key ECB interest rates, and in any case for as long as necessary to maintain
favourable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation”.
Lautenschläger (2019).
Stournaras (2019).
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
