Yi  Gang:  Further  open  up  the  financial  sector  to  promote  high-
quality growth
Speech  by  Mr  Yi  Gang,  Governor  of  the  People's  Bank  of  China,  at  the  China  Development
Forum "Greater Opening-up for Win-Win Cooperation", Beijing, 24 March 2019.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
Distinguished Guests,
It is a pleasure to attend the China Development Forum and share with you observations on the
progress and outlook of financial sector opening-up in China.
In  2018,  under  the  leadership  of  the  Party  Central  Committee  with  Comrade  Xi  Jinping  at  the
core, the financial sector has enhanced support to the real economy, effectively mitigated and
resolved financial risks, and deepened reform and opening-up. First, providing a proper monetary
environment,  enhancing  the  counter-cyclical  role  of  monetary  policy  and  providing  adequate
liquidity. Second, providing targeted support to key areas and weak links in the economy, through
the  “synchronized  use  of  three  arrows”,  i.e.  bank  lending,  supporting  bond  issuing  by  private
enterprises,  establishing  equity  financing  instruments  for  private  enterprises.  Better  financial
services have been made available to the micro and small enterprises and the private sector.
Third, managing and resolving financial risks effectively, the macro leverage ratio has stabilized
and a balance achieved between stable growth and risk prevention. Fourth, achieving both the
external and internal balance, the RMB exchange rate has been basically stable at an adaptive
and equilibrium level and the BOP position has been broadly balanced. Fifth, making progress in
financial  sector  opening  up,  as  reflected  in  new  measures  of  regulatory  system  reform,  the
improvement  in  the  interest  rate  and  exchange  rate  regime,  and  further  opening-up  of  the
financial sector. Promoting greater openness has been our priority in the financial sector.
I.Breakthroughs in Financial Sector Opening-up
In terms of financial service sector opening-up, President Xi Jinping announced last April in Boao
to further open up the service sector “sooner rather than later”, in particular the financial service
sector. The People’s Bank subsequently released in Boao on behalf of the Chinese Government
a timetable for the implementation of 11 specific measures. Up till now, most of the measures
have  materialized.  The  very  few  measures  that  are  yet  to  materialize  have  reached  the  final
stage of law amendment, and applications from foreign investors have been received and are
being processed. Foreign financial institutions now have improved market access: the UBS has
increased its shareholding in UBS Securities to 51 percent, effectively holding a controlling stake;
Allianz has been approved to establish the first foreign controlled insurance company in China;
the  Standard  and  Poor’s  has  received  a  credit  rating  license  in  China; American  Express  is
creating  a  joint  venture  in  China  and  it  has  been  approved  to  start  preparation  to  provide
electronic payment service in China.
On financial market opening, China has been working to expand access to the onshore bond,
stock  and  derivatives  markets  in  line  with  international  standards,  mostly  by  offering  more
channels  for  cross  border  investment  flows,  and  improving  institutional  arrangements.  These
efforts have contributed to increased openness, stronger competitiveness and greater influence
of the Chinese financial markets, which have been widely acknowledged in international markets,
as  highlighted  by  the  inclusion  of  China’s A  shares  in  the  MSCI  index  in  June  2018,  and  the
announcement by FTSE Russell in September 2018 on including A shares in its key emerging
market  indexes.  Overseas  investment  in  China’s  bond  market  increased  by  nearly  600  billion
yuan in 2018, and the outstanding investment by overseas bond investors has reached 1.8 trillion
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
yuan. Moreover, Bloomberg has confirmed that it will include Chinese bonds in its Bloomberg
Barclays Global Aggregate Index starting in April this year.
Reforming the RMB exchange rate regime has also made progress. China remains committed
to  market  based  reforms,  which  we  believe  are  essential  for  improving  the  managed  floating
exchange  rate  regime  based  on  market  supply  and  demand  with  reference  to  a  basket  of
currencies.  The  People’s  Bank  has  largely  phased  out  regular  interventions  in  the  foreign
exchange market, and the RMB has become more flexible. Market participants are able to adapt
to this increased flexibility.
II.Further FInancial Sector Opening-Up is a Task that We Must Continue Carrying Out
Financial sector opening is  a  key  component  of  China’s  broader  opening  up  strategy.  Further
opening is an independent policy choice we have made. It is essential for the development of the
financial  sector  and  a  necessary  step  towards  deepening  supply-side  structural  reform  in  the
financial sector and quality development of the real economy.
First, the financial sector is in essence a competitive service industry. The financial sector and
financial markets have three major functions. The first one is efficient resource allocation. The
savings rate is high in China. On the one side are those who save money, on the other side are
those who need money. The financial sector performs the function of asset allocation in that it
allocates  them  to  banking,  securities  and  insurance  products  and  transforms  savings  into
financial  assets.  In  addition,  more  and  more  institutional  investors  need  to  invest  in  China’s
financial  market,  including  central  banks,  asset  management  companies  and  pension  funds.
One of the tasks for financial market is to open up in an orderly manner to enable convenient and
effective  asset  allocation  by  both  foreign  and  domestic  investors.  This  is  the  first  important
function of the financial markets.
The  second  major  function  is  risk  management,  i.e.  through  price  discovery  and  risk
management tools. The day-to-day tradings on the financial market necessitate continued price
discovery  and  accurate  pricing.  If  we  take  Government  securities  yield  curve  as  the  risk-free
interest  rates,  financial  market  will  price  all  kinds  of  risk  premiums  of  financial  products  in
transactions and send clear signals. Moreover, financial market also provide all kinds of hedging
tools and adequate liquidity to facilitate the selling and buying activities of market participants, and
enable effective hedging of risks. Once the foreign investors are investing in the onshore market,
they will find a lack of derivatives, hedging tools and other financial products. This year our priority
is to create a supportive environment to provide hedging tools for investors to effectively hedge
and manage risks.
The  third  function  is  to  provide  financial  services  to  households  and  enterprises.  Financial
services are mostly about resource allocation and risk management. Here I wish to emphasize
that professional financial services lower transaction cost and save time. Efficiency of financial
services can be measured by the time saved. For example, 20 years ago, one had to spend half
a day to go to several places to pay the water, electricity and housing bills. Ten years ago, a one-
hour visit to the bank would do the job. Today, the bills can be paid in five minutes through online
banking  service  or  mobile  payment  applications.  This  shows  that  financial  services  are  much
more efficient today. It save consumers time just like eating out is more efficient than cooking at
home,  and  buying  apparel  in  a  store  is  more  efficient  than  making  it  yourself.  Therefore,  the
financial sector is in essence a competitive service industry.
We  will  advance  supply-side  structural  reform  and  open  up  to  foreign  investors  so  that  the
financial system can perform the three functions properly.  On one hand, it increases the supply
of financial factors by bringing in financial institutions, services and products. It allows us to make
better use of both overseas and domestic markets and resources, improve resources allocation,
and  meet  the  needs  for  diversified  financial  services.  On  the  other  hand,  opening  up  of  the
financial sector will help improve domestic institutional arrangements. In this process, China has
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
been  learning  from  institutional  arrangements  from  the  advanced  economies,  making  rapid
progress  in  corporate  governance  of  financial  institutions,  financial  market  development  and
financial regulation.
III. Some thinking on Further Opening up the Financial Sector
In  recent  years,  remarkable  progress  has  been  made  in  the  opening  up  of  China’s  financial
sector.  Nevertheless,  the  degree  of  openness  is  not  high  and  there  is  much  room  for  further
improvement. We should aim high and continue our efforts in opening up the financial sector.
Firstly, we should promote financial service sector opening-up, financial market opening up and
RMB exchange rate regime reform in a well-coordinated way. For the opening up of the financial
sector, equal treatments should be provided for both Chinese and foreign institutions in terms of
regulatory  requirements  and  standards  such  as  equity  holding,  form  of  establishment,
shareholder  qualification,  scope  of  business  and  number  of  licenses.  Chinese  and  foreign-
funded institutions should be treated equally in a way that is more transparent and consistent
with international practice. To open up the financial market, we will further connect domestic and
foreign capital markets, by further improving the QFII regime, Shanghai-Hong Kong Connect and
Shenzhen-Hong  Kong  Connect.  We  will  also  continue  the  exchange  rate  regime  reform,  to
enhance the flexibility of RMB exchange rate and its role as the automatic stabilizer for the macro
economy and balance of payments.
Secondly,  pre-establishment  national  treatment  and  negative  list  should  be  applied.  Financial
institutions, Chinese and foreign alike, shall have equal access to all areas excluding those listed
on the negative list.
Thirdly, institutional arrangements for financial sector opening-up should be improved to achieve
institutional  and  systemic  opening-up.  Convergence  with  international  rules  and  standards  will
accelerate  and  accounting,  taxation  and  other  supporting  rules  will  be  improved.  We  will  also
strengthen top-level design and unify relevant rules. For financial services of the same or similar
category, different rules should be harmonized.
Fourthly, the business environment should be improved. We will further cut red tapes, streamline
procedures for administrative approval, and enhance its transparency and efficiency. There will
be  improved  coordination  and  communication  in  policy  making  to  increase  transparency  and
have simple and transparent rules.
Fifthly,  financial  regulation  will  be  improved.  Financial  institutions,  domestic  or  foreign,  shall
operate  with  licenses  and  under  regulation.  Greater  market  access  will  go  hand  in  hand  with
better financial regulation and regulatory capacity will match openness.
IV. Improve Risk Prevention System for a More Liberalized Financial Sector
Financial  sector  opening  up  does  not  by  itself  lead  to  financial  risks,  but  may  add  to  the
complexity of financial risk prevention. Therefore, efforts should be made to improve the financial
risk prevention system to catch up with the progress of openness.
Since  2018,  significant  progress  has  been  made  in  the  prevention  of  financial  risks  in  China.
Firstly, the financial regulatory system has been reformed. The State Council Financial Stability
and Development Committee have enhanced the coordination in the financial sector. The PBC
serves as the Committee’s Secretariat to support its day-to-day operation. Mandates of the PBC
have  been  strengthened  with  more  coordination  responsibility.  Allocation  of  the  regulatory
resources  has  been  improved.  Secondly,  macro  leverage  ratio  stabilized. As  the  supply-side
structural reform deepens, macro leverage ratio fell by 1.5 percentage points from end-2017 to
249.4 percent at end-2018. Going forward, as China’s financial market evolves and the share of
direct financing rises, part of the debt financing will be converted into equity financing, which will
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
facilitate stabilization of macro leverage ratio. Third, the shadow banking sector has been better
regulated. We introduced new regulations and supporting measures to address the irregular and
unlawful activities in the financial markets, effectively containing the disorderly development of
shadow banking system. Fourth, macro-prudential management has improved, with measures
to strengthen regulation of the Systemically Important Financial Institutions (SIFIs), to improve the
macro-prudential  management  of  cross-border  capital  flow,  resulting  in  stronger  resilience  to
withstand the impact of cross-border capital flows. In addition, we have made important progress
in the resolution of high-risk institutions in a smooth and orderly manner, so as to maintain the
order in the financial market.
Going forward, we will continue to improve the financial risk prevention and management system
to keep pace with further opening-up.
First,  the  coordinating  role  of  the  State  Council  Financial  Stability  Development  Committee
should be fully utilized, to make better overall plans in rolling out policy measures with proper
strength and paces to generate synergy.
Second,  the  two-pillar  framework  of  monetary  and  macro-prudential  policies  should  be
enhanced.  We  will  strengthen  the  counter-cyclical  role  of  monetary  policy  to  ensure  that  the
economy operates within a reasonable range. We will constantly improve the macro-prudential
policy  framework  and  strengthen  regulation  of  financial  holding  companies  and  SIFIs.  We  will
also add new instrument to the policy toolkit, enhance the real-time monitoring of the financial
market, and prevent risk contagions across markets, regions and borders.
Third,  we  will  accelerate  the  development  of  financial  market  infrastructures  and  improve
comprehensive financial sector statistics. We will use advanced technologies and payment and
settlement system to monitor and regulate the online, offline fund flows within China and across
the borders, so that all fund flows are under the radar of financial regulators.
Fourth, we will improve the resolution mechanism for failing financial institutions. We will explore
ways  to  develop  market-oriented  and  law-based  exit  mechanism  for  financial  institutions,  with
deposit insurance as its platform.
This year, we will follow President Xi Jinping’s remarks that “when it comes to improving financial
services and preventing financial risks, a key component is to deepen reform and opening up”,
steadily  promote  the  opening  up  of  the  financial  sector  to  facilitate  the  supply-side  structural
reform  and  the  structural  improvement  of  the  financial  system,  and  to  support  high-quality
economic growth.
Thank you!
Appendix
Transcript of the Question and Answer Session
Question: Financial sector opening up is politically controversial in some countries. Does China
face a similar situation?
Answer: There are different opinions with regards to financial sector opening up in China. Some
support greater opening while others have concerns. Looking at China’s experience in opening
up, all the liberalized sectors have become more competitive and provided better services, while
the closed ones are less efficient and backward. So I think financial sector opening up is good for
China, especially for the Chinese people, because it enables competition between domestic and
foreign institutions. As a result this improves services and efficiency in China’s financial market.
Our conclusion is that further opening up do more good than harm. Meanwhile, we have make
preparation  in  terms  of  laws  and  regulations  accordingly  and  formulated  a  roadmap  and
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
timetable based on Chinese circumstances. All these are in China’s own interests.
Question: Thank you, Governor Yi, for the very encouraging update on the progress of financial
market  opening-up.  Some  foreign  media  seems  to  think  that  the  lack  of  central  bank
independence  in  China  provides  room  for  risk  control  on  the  one  hand  but  does  not  facilitate
monetary policy flexibility on the other hand. Could you share your thoughts with us?
Answer: The central bank formulates and implements monetary policy in accordance with the
Law of the People’s Republic of China on the People’s Bank of China promulgated in 1995. Since
1995, the conduct of monetary policy in China has been sound. Domestic prices have remained
stable. The RMB has been a strong currency, appreciating about 30 percent and more than 20
percent respectively against a basket of currencies and the US dollar in the past two decades
and more. Looking at the capital flows and balance of payment, current account surplus as a
share of GDP declined from 10 percent in 2007 to 0.5% in 2018. The BOP is broadly balanced.
Under  the  current  monetary  policy  framework,  we  have  plenty  of  monetary  policy  instruments
including  interest  rate  policy  and  required  reserve  ratio  and  are  capable  of  managing  risks
effectively. As I see it, we are able to meet the need of financial industry opening-up. Many global
investors  want  to  invest  in  RMB  assets.  To  meet  this  demand,  we  will  facilitate  foreign
investment, and improve the transparency of legal framework, regulations, accounting system
and tax regime. The opening-up for financial institutions and financial service will follow the same
rationale. Under the current monetary policy framework we are able to manage financial risks
associated with China’s integration into the global economy and economic globalization. As the
country has integrated  into the global economy through trade, investment, services and tourism,
we will further open up financial sector and improve monetary policy accordingly.
Question：Financial  innovation,  including  the  rapid  development  of  Fintech,  drives  the  global
expansion of new financial business, and brings increasing challenges to regulators. What are
your views on regulatory coordination with other countries in this field?
Answer：First of all, financial innovation is good. Technologies in financial innovation reduce cost,
promote financial inclusion, and benefit the general public. Second, financial sector is a licensed
sector. In particular, when it involves raising money from general public, special attention should
be  paid  to  risk  prevention.  In  licensing  businesses,  the  emphasis  is  to  protect  public  interest,
especially  interests  of  retail  depositors  and  investors.  This  is  of  utmost  importance.  Third,
financial innovation has increased the importance of cross-border regulatory coordination. Many
financial  innovations  involve  cross-border  flows  of  money,  service  and  asset  management.
Cross-border regulatory coordination is thus imperative. We discuss many of these issues in the
FSB meetings, talking about how to have effective liquidation when problem arises to protect the
interests of creditors in different countries more fairly.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
