Denis  Beau:  Opportunities  and  risks  of  evolving  sources  of
financing for the economy
Speech by Mr Denis Beau, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, at "Les Rencontres du
financement de l’économie", organized by Option Finance, Paris, 26 March 2019.
Accompanying slides.
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  am  very  happy  to  introduce  the  6th  edition  of  the  Rencontres  du
financement  de  l’économie. As  a  backdrop  to  your  discussions,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the
ongoing  changes  in  the  financing  of  the  French  and  European  economies  and  the  related
opportunities and risks, both from the point of view of a central bank, the Banque de France, and
of a supervisor, the ACPR, which are responsible for ensuring the stability of our financial system
and for contributing to a financing of economic growth that is resilient to shocks and sound. This
concern for strong and effective financing of growth is highly topical for three reasons:
- the downside risks to the euro area’s outlook for expansion have increased in recent months,
– the digital revolution has started to spread widely across our economies, offering opportunities
and gains but also raising threats for those who are unable to adjust,
– the predominance of bank lending, which accounts for 60% of corporate debt in France [Slide
1]. The remaining 40% stems from market financing, which is the exclusive preserve of large
enterprises. This situation is not unique to France. It is quite widespread in Europe, in contrast
with what prevails in the United States.
Already, several factors, such as the search for yield driven by a low interest rate environment,
new regulatory constraints on  the  banking  system,  and  digitalisation,  are  changing  the  way  in
which  financing  is  designed,  produced,  distributed  and  managed. This  transformation  is
leading  to  a  more  diversified  financing  structure  for  our  economies. Is  this
diversification desirable? Is this diversification sufficient?
1. A desirable diversification of financing modes to spur growth and innovation, which
must be further supported
My  answer  to  the  first  question  is  yes  because  too  strong  a  reliance  on  bank  financing  may
constitute a source of vulnerability for business development in the event of a shock affecting the
banking system. However, the relatively slow pace of development of this diversification
shows that it is not so simple to achieve, and that it should be further encouraged.
 A. In the short term, the efforts made to adapt the regulatory framework and standardise
the alternative sources of financing to bank lending should be pursued.
In recent years, public authorities have made significant efforts to adapt the regulatory framework
in order to support the development of alternative sources of financing to bank lending. These
efforts must be pursued and matched by those of private players to standardise the market.
Thus, since 2017, the European Union has established a set of new rules for the development of
sound  securitisation,  i.e.  that  is  simple,  transparent  and  standardised,  to  free  banks’  balance
sheet and thus encourage the issuance of new loans, while offering bond market exposure to
borrowers which generally do not have access to such markets, such as SMEs. The potential for
development is significant: in the euro area, ABS and MBS issuance is three times lower today
than before the 2008 crisis .1
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Other  actions  concern  investment  vehicles  that  enable  companies  to  benefit  from  resources
stemming  from  investors  willing  to  take  greater  risks.  For  example,  Euro  Private  Placements
(EuroPP), for which a charter was drawn up in 2015, are now complementary to USPPs in the
United States and Schuldscheine in Germany. Amounts issued by French companies totalled
EUR  2.28  billion  in  2018 ,  but  have  been  declining  since  the  peak  of  2015  (EUR  4.3  billion)
because they do not offer sufficiently attractive interest rates. It is therefore important that market
professionals pursue their efforts to promote this type of investment and step up their actions to
standardise the market.
2
Conversely, the growth of crowdfunding platforms, albeit modest, is rising in France, even if the
3
economic model for these platforms has not yet reached its equilibrium, with EUR 402 million
raised in 2018, up 20% on the previous year, and a growing number of funded projects. This
development benefited from the regulatory framework for crowdfunding implemented in 2014 and
updated  in  2016.  This  French  framework  should  be  further  relaxed  with  the  PACTE  Act.
Eventually,  a  draft  European  regulation  currently  under  discussion  could  partially  replace  the
French framework with a harmonised European statute and thus promote the development of
cross-border transactions.
As regards Initial Coin Offerings (ICO), which enable start-ups to raise crypto asset funds very
rapidly, their flows in France are still small (EUR 71.7 million during the first three quarters of
2018, 0.5% of the world total) but are booming (4 times higher than in 2017) .  The  legislative
framework,  in  preparation,  will  provide  valuable  benchmarks  for  investors,  and  is  likely  to
increase their confidence in the mechanisms associated with crypto assets and thus promote
their development.
B. In the longer term, the objective should be to strengthen capital to finance innovation
4
In an economy close to the “technological frontier", as is the case in France, the key to growth
lies in business innovation, and therefore in equity financing in the long term: as innovation is
more risky, financing it must yield greater rewards.
However, in France, household savings are only modestly invested in equity products, and this is
reflected  in  corporate  financing.  [Slide  2]  There  is  a  significant  contrast  between  the  United
States and France, where corporate equity accounts for 122% and 77% of GDP respectively.
From this point of view, France is not different from the rest of the euro area with the exception of
Germany (80%).
What are the solutions?
At the national level, the PACTE Act proposes certain advances in life insurance, which is by far
French  households’  leading  form  of  financial  savings  (EUR  1,700  billion  at  end-2018),  in
particular to promote the Euro-Growth Fund by making it simpler and more understandable for
savers and to increase insurers’ investment in innovation financing. The French authorities are
also very careful that the current review of the Solvency II Directive is favourable to the long-term
investment of insurers in equities.
At  the  European  level  [Slide  3],  we  need  to  build  a  real  “Financing  Union  for  Investment  and
5
Innovation” to better steer our resources – a savings surplus of EUR 345 billion in the euro area
– towards equity and innovation. This Financing Union must bring together and amplify existing
initiatives, the Capital Markets Union, the Banking Union and the Juncker Investment Plan.
I  would  now  like  to  answer  my  second  question:  is  the  diversification  of  sources  of  financing
sufficient?  From  my  point  of  view,  the  answer  is  no  because  diversification  carries  risks  that
need to be well managed.
II.  Diversifying  sources  of  financing  is  a  complex  business  whose  success  requires
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
managing all the traditional and new risks faced by intermediaries
A. First, there are the risks linked to fast-growing private sector debt
Corporate debt in France is growing much faster than in the rest of Europe [Slide 4]. We are now
significantly above the euro area average. This raises the question of the sustainability of this
debt, and of the impact of an upward shock to interest rates or a downward shock to activity,
especially  in  an  increasingly  uncertain  macroeconomic  context  (trade  tensions,  Italian  budget,
Brexit, yellow vests).
Given the situation, it was essential to avoid an infinite debt spiral. In December 2017, the Haut
Conseil de Stabilité Financière, under the chairmanship of Minister Bruno Le Maire, thus decided
to lower to 5% of their equity the ceiling of the main banks’ exposures to the most indebted large
companies. It also decided to raise the countercyclical capital buffer of French banks, by 0.25%
in June 2018 and again by 0.25% in March 2020. This countercyclical buffer, expressed as a
percentage of core equity and applied to French exposures, aims at enabling banks to build up a
capital reserve to maintain their supply of credit in the event of a turnaround in the financial cycle,
the buffer then being immediately released.
However, these binding instruments apply only to banks, while non-bank intermediation is playing
an increasing role in financing the economy. According to the ECB, the loans and deposits of
investment  funds  have  risen  threefold  since  2011.  Macroprudential  policy  thus  needs  to  be
adjusted to better take account of this new dimension. The HCSF is firmly committed to this goal.
Its powers enable it to intervene outside the banking sector and it has started designing stress
tests that cover all sectors.
B. At the same time, a number of new, more structural risks are also emerging, brought
about by digitalisation and global warming
Digitisation  first  gives  a  systemic  dimension  to  cyber  risk.  The  expansion  of  digital  practices
contributes  to  the  propagation  of  cyber  risk  and  amplifies  it,  through  the  interconnections
between financial institutions, but also between them and their service providers. The fact that
some  of  these  providers  are  Fintechs  and  Bigtechs,  which  are  unregulated  and  not  easily
substitutable, is an additional vulnerability factor.
To cope with these risks, we must resist the temptation to set up a bunker-style security system,
which is a dead end, but rather imagine a system which combines openness and innovation.
This is why we, at the Banque de France and the ACPR, are working with the other supervisors
of the Eurosystem to ensure that the entities we supervise take cyber risk into account and to set
up a broad programme for protecting the infrastructures that we operate. Cyber security is one of
the  key  priorities  of  the  French  Presidency  of  the  G7  in  2019.  The  Banque  de  France  also
contributes to the work conducted in this wider framework by coordinating the preparation and
implementation of a cyber resilience test for the global financial sector.
As regards the risks associated with climate change, they can no longer be ignored. Physical
risks  –  which  correspond  to  the  rise  in  the  frequency  and  severity  of  extreme  weather
phenomena – are obviously the most visible and immediate for the financial sector. Transition
risks  –  which  stem  from  the  adjustment  to  a  low-carbon  economy  –  are  longer  term  and
therefore less visible. To better assess these risks, we need to both measure exposures and
perform forward-looking stress tests.
We  also  need  to  develop  the  considerable  opportunities  associated  with  the  financing  of  the
transition to a low-carbon economy [Slide 5] – this involves finding close to USD 90 trillion by
2030  –  while  preventing  the  risk  of  greenwashing. A  major  work  programme  for  the  Central
Banks and Supervisors Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS), which was launched
by the Banque de France in December 2017 and now counts close to 40 members and entities
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
about to join.
Conclusion
To  conclude  and  summarise  my  speech,  the  diversification  of  sources  of  financing  holds  the
promise  of  improving  the  financial  system’s  ability  to  support  innovation  and  sustainable
economic growth, as long as this diversification is encouraged and its risks are well managed.
Given this promise, the slow pace of change, the modest progress towards a capital markets
union, the complexity of the challenges of digitalisation and green finance should encourage us to
continue to act with determination, patience and perseverance. On the way, we can seek support
and comfort in this quote by the former President of the Czech Republic, Vaclav Havel: “Hope is
not the conviction that something will turn out well, but the certainty that something makes sense,
regardless of how it turns out".
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
Source: Dealogic
Source: Société Générale
Source: Baromètre du crowdfunding en France 2018, Financement Participatif France and KPMG
Source: Autorité des marchés financiers
Current account surplus over the 12-month period ending in January 2019 (source: ECB)
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
