Bank of Italy and Bank for International  
Settlements Workshop on 
‘Computing Platforms for Big Data and  
Machine Learning’
Opening Remarks by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy 
Luigi Federico Signorini
Rome, 15 January 2019
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a pleasure to open this workshop and welcome all the participants.
Everyone is aware that modern societies are generating an unprecedented 
amount  of  digital  information.  The  latest  Data  never  sleeps  annual 
report, published last June, claims that mankind now generates more than  
2.5 exabytes of data every day. The increase is bound to continue: by 2020, 
an estimated 1.7 MB of data will be created every second for every person 
on earth. 
The enormous wealth of information that has thus become available has 
great potential value if effectively captured and aggregated. However, it also 
poses fundamental challenges that are easily overlooked. Let me open this 
workshop  by  briefly  mentioning  three  that  I  think  deserve  more  attention 
than they usually get.
First, big data are worth little if they are used in a methodologically 
unsound  way.  Such  data  are  typically  representative  only  of  selective 
strata of the population; increasing the volume of data will not improve 
the  accuracy  of  estimates  if  the  estimation  procedure  does  not  correct 
for this. Social media data for example, like many other internet-based 
sources of big data, are usually based on a biased sample of the population; 
now-fashionable media-based indicators (of confidence, say, or political 
trends) are often employed with scarcely a thought for this fact. Relatedly, 
the careless use of massive amounts of rough data will sometimes result 
in  an  exceptionally  good  in-sample  fit,  especially  with  non-parametric 
or machine learning approaches, but a poor performance out of sample 
(this is sometimes called the ‘overfitting plague’). Reference texts should 
place  much  more  emphasis  on  these  facts  in  order  to  provide  a  more 
rigorous guide to practitioners and, ideally, educate the public at large as 
the ultimate consumer of processed information.
Second, while the world produces a relentlessly growing mountain of 
data, it has not yet settled on a reliable set of criteria for making (some of) 
it  effectively  accessible  in  the  more  or  less  distant  future.  Large  volumes 
of internet data are casually stored, overwritten and discarded without any 
consideration for what the next generations will need or want to know about 
the world today: and this not just in the general pursuit of knowledge, but 
also for more immediately practical purposes, such as clarifying legal rights. 
Long-term  conservation  of  data  is  also  hampered  by  changes  in  physical 
storage  devices,  IT  platforms  and  software.  The  theory  and  practice  of 
building archives in the big-data era is in its infancy; it needs to grow up fast.
Third,  the  emergence  of  big  data  has  raised  the  importance  of  data 
integrity, confidentiality and privacy to a level never seen before. Protection 
of personal data is central to our societies; one could say that it helps to 
define them, to the extent that it is inextricably linked to the protection of 
individual rights more generally. The sheer amount of personal data now 
available, and the growing ease of connecting individual information across 
databases, have far-reaching implications for fairness and freedom; they 
have thus spurred much digital-privacy regulation. The connections with 
the previous point are, I think, rather obvious (data integrity, for instance, 
is  central  to  both);  so  are  the  implied  trade-offs.  For  instance,  the  right 
to be forgotten, increasingly (and, I think, rightly) granted to individuals, 
conflicts with society’s desire to keep records. No wonder that rules are 
sometimes inconsistent across different jurisdictions, data domains or legal 
purposes. A systematic way of weighing conflicting principles against one 
another should be found. Ideally, one would like to have global standards; 
international cooperation is therefore to be encouraged as far as possible. 
However,  there  are  limits  to  this,  at  least  as  long  as  different  societies 
protect individual freedom to a different extent.  For the time being, we 
have to live with this limitation.
The  challenges  of  big  data  require  continuous  organisational  and 
technological innovation in the institutions that want to use them effectively 
and fairly. At the Bank of Italy we have taken several steps in the past few 
years to enhance our ability to collect, store and exploit huge amounts of data, 
using  state-of-the-art  hardware  and  software.  Other  institutions  are  surely 
doing the same. This workshop is a good opportunity to share experiences.
Preserving  the  confidentiality  of  individual  data  is  one  specific 
challenge that many institutions represented here will often face. The issue 
is not just that the social value of statistical analysis cannot override the 
legal  obligation  to  refrain  from  infringing  on  personal  privacy,  but  also 
that the quality of the data itself is often premised on confidentiality being 
4
guaranteed:  without  it,  proprietary  data  would  be  impossible  to  collect, 
and much sensitive data, such as data on personal wealth, would be next 
to  useless.  We  are  cooperating  with  other  institutions  to  find  ways  to 
reap the value of merging data from different sources, and to make them 
available – insofar as possible – to independent researchers, while avoiding 
confidentiality breaks. 
Let me conclude by thanking once again all the speakers and participants 
for  joining  us  today.  Special  thanks  go  to  those  who  have  contributed 
to  organising  the  workshop.  It  brings  together  highly  professional  data 
scientists,  IT  architects  and  business  specialists  from  central  banks, 
providing views of excellent quality and a broad variety of perspectives. 
I am sure that you can count on having an interesting and productive day.
5
Designed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
