Bank of Uganda 
  Remarks by  
Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile,  
Governor, Bank of Uganda  
  23rd Ordinary Meeting of the East African Community  
Monetary Affairs Committee 
  Kigali Serena Hotel 
  30th July 2019 
   Fellow Governors 
The IMF Resident Representative for Uganda 
Representatives of the EAC Secretariat 
Ladies and gentlemen 
 
Good afternoon, 
 
First,  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  Governor,  John  Rwangombwa; 
management;  and  staff  of  the  National  Bank  of  Rwanda  for  the  warm 
hospitality and the excellent organizational arrangements.  I am pleased to be 
here in Kigali for this 23rd Ordinary Meeting of the East African Community 
Monetary Affairs Committee (MAC).  
 
Allow  me  to  give  you  an  overview  of  the  economic  prospects  back  home. 
Uganda’s economy remains strong, with growth projected at 6.3 percent in FY 
2019/20, largely driven by the accommodative monetary policy stance and the 
ongoing  public  infrastructure  investments.  Inflation  over  the  last  5  years  has 
averaged  4.4  percent,  which  is  well  below  the  inflation  target  of  the  EAC 
Macroeconomic convergence criteria. Private sector credit extension grew by 
12.6 percent in FY 2018/19 compared to 6.8 percent in FY 2017/18 and non-
performing loans as a percentage of total loans have declined from a peak of 
10.5 percent in December 2016 to about 3.8 percent in March 2019. 
 
Governors, notwithstanding these achievements on the domestic scene, allow 
me  to  underscore  the  consequences  of  the  fragile  international  economic 
environment  for  our  economies.  The  medium  to  long-term  prospects  for  the 
global  economy  remain  very  uncertain.  Just  last  week,  the  IMF  reduced  its 
global  growth  outlook,  already  the  lowest  since  the  financial  crisis  to  3.2 
percent, and suggested that policy “missteps” on trade and Brexit could derail 
 Page 1 of 3 
 a  projected  rebound.  The  hazy  global  economic  outlook  coupled  with  the 
continuing uncertainty in global financial markets and financial risks may lead 
exchange rate volatility with adverse consequences for investment and growth 
in our economies.  
 
As  we  deliberate,  we  need  to  be  aware  that  these  external  vulnerabilities, 
emphasize  more  than  ever,  the  need  for  the  EAC  to  build  resilience  by 
strengthening policy co-ordination and intra-regional trade, which I am happy 
to note, is picking-up.  
 
Governors  allow  me  to  reiterate  the  significant  progress  made  towards  the 
operationalization  of  the  EAMU  Protocol.  We  have  made  strides  on 
harmonization  of: monetary  policy  frameworks,  exchange  rate  policies,  rules 
and  practices  governing  bank  supervision,  financial  accounting  principles, 
payment  systems  and  policies  and  standards  on  statistics.  A  number  of 
national laws are also being harmonised.  
 
However, there have been delays in realising targets set out in the EAMU road 
map  and  that  there  are  several  challenges  that  could  further  impede  the  full 
implementation  of  EAMU  protocol.  It  is  therefore  imperative  that  we  assess 
the realism in the timelines embedded in the  EAMU road map and do things 
right.  
 
Going forward, I want to re-iterate BOU’s full support to the EAMU process. 
I fully believe that there are huge pay-offs for our economies if we harmonise 
and integrate our  monetary, financial and payments systems,  even before we 
actualize a single currency system for the Community. May we work steadily 
towards the realization of the EAMU. 
 
Thank you for your attention. 
 Page 2 of 3 
