John Iannis Mourmouras: Fostering British-Greek economic ties in
the post-Brexit era.
Speech by Professor John Iannis Mourmouras, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece,
at the reception of the All-Parliamentary Party Group for Greece in the Houses of Parliament,
Westminster, London, 20 May 2019.
 On Monday, 20 May, at 7.30 pm, at an event hosted by Honourable MP Alberto Costa, Chair of
the All-Parliamentary Party Group (APPG) for Greece, at the Palace of Westminster in London,
Deputy Governor, former Deputy Finance Minister, Professor John (Iannis) Mourmouras gave a
keynote  speech  on  fostering  British-Greek  economic  ties  in  the  post-Brexit  era.  The  panel  of
speakers  who  addressed  the  event  also  included  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Environment,
Michael  Gove,  Secretary  of  State  for  Trade,  Liam  Fox,  and  Greece’s  Alternate  Minister  of
Finance,  Mr.  George  Houliarakis.  The  event  was  also  attended  by  the  Greek Ambassador  in
London, Mr. Dimitris Karamitsos-Tziras, British MPs, as well as distinguished members of the
Greek diaspora living in London, from business, finance, and academia.
 Mr. Chair of the APPG Greece,
Honourable Secretaries of State,
Minister of the Hellenic Republic,
Honourable Members of Parliament,
Your Excellencies,
Dear friends,
It  is  a  great  honour  to  be  here  this  afternoon  with  you.  Within  the  last  month,  my  Bank
commitments took me to both the Atlantic and Pacific, New Jersey and Sydney, but it is a great
joy being here with you, in the mother of all Parliaments, with such distinguished participants. It’s
great to be back in London, my second home, where I lived for 15 years, back in the late ‘80s and
‘90s.
A. Ties between Britain and Greece
I’m  not  here  of  course  to  remind  you  of  the  strong  ties  between  our  two  countries.  Our  two
nations are not only maritime powers, sharing common ideals of freedom and justice, but also
democracies  drawing  inspiration  from  their  cradle,  the Athenian Agora  of  Pericles,  both  also
inspired by Aristotle, the greatest scholar of all times, according to the Harvard citations index,
with major contributions on physics, mathematics, biology, astronomy, philosophy, politics, and
also  inspired  by Alexander  the  Great,  the  greatest  of  all  Greats  in  world  history  who  brought
Macedonian vigour and the Greek spirit to the far corners of the world of that time.
British philhellenes came out strong to support the Greek struggle for independence against the
Ottomans. We fought on the same side on both world wars, in the Second World War against
the Nazis and the whole world knows that we owe our freedom to the UK, and its leader, Winston
Churchill, widely accepted as the greatest European – not only British – statesman of the last
century. For the past 40 years, we are both members of the European Union.
B. Brexit
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Allow me to say one word about Brexit and Europe, before I say more about my own country,
Greece.
Britain belongs to Europe, but apparently quite soon not to the European Union! We, in Greece
and  in  Europe  fully  respect  the  firm  decision  of  the  British  people  to  leave  the  EU.  My  only
comment on this, if I may, is that a prolonged period feeds into uncertainty, and uncertainty is bad
for the economy, for investment, for financial markets.
Personally, as a South European and an acclaimed expert on EMU, I will miss the UK in the EU.
Europe will miss British values, from which it has gained, such as fair play, tolerance, cultural
and social diversity, “my word is my bond”. You have been frontrunners in fighting corporatism
and state cronyism within the EU. The British economy comes top in Europe in terms of pro-
reform policies in the labour market, and second in terms of reforms in the product market. It has
one of the lowest unemployment rates in the whole world right now, sound public finances, and a
dynamic economy. Cassandras claim that the UK will face a recession as a result of Brexit – I’m
not  sure  about  that!  I  have  every  confidence  in  the  UK’s  strong  institutions,  the  rule  of  law,
economic  diplomacy  at  the  highest  level,  innovation  everywhere,  the  best  universities  (LSE,
Oxbridge, etc.) so no matter what, the UK and the City of London as a major financial center, will
not only sail through, but in the medium-term will do very well.
C. Europe
One word on Europe now. As we enter the euro’s third decade, and after this week’s European
elections,  I  –  myself  a  well-known  pro-European  –  could  predict  that  the  serious  challenges
facing Europe won’t go away, even by the 2024 European election! Which are these challenges?
First of all, migration: divisions between EU Member States over migration and asylum policy will
persist.  Given  that  migratory  flows  from  poor  countries  (predominantly  in Africa)  will  continue
(there are already more than one million pending visa applications in the EU and, according to
recent reports, Europe is the top destination for them), this will strengthen populism, which is bad
news  for  reforms  and  good  news  for  big  governments.  Let  me  remind  you  that  four  member
states with populist governments in Europe (Poland, Austria, Hungary, and Italy).
A second challenge has to do with the fact that the North-European Member States are still not
willing to accept burden-sharing (i.e. fiscal transfers, a common eurobond, banking union, etc.).
Finally, the third challenge lies in the continuing divergence between the North and the South with
regard to real wages and productivity and if Europe heads to a recession, this will complicate
matters even more.
D. Greece
Allow me now to say a few words with regard to the current situation and the challenges for the
Greek economy.
Despite its recent economic hardships, Greece is firmly a member of an advanced economic
club with global influence and the second most important reserve currency, it is a member of the
OECD, of the North Atlantic Alliance (NATO), it is an important player in South-East Europe, a
leader  in  the  Balkan  area,  a  pillar  of  stability  and  security  in  the  region.  Greece  also  has  an
increased  strategic,  geopolitical  role  in  the  region  as  it  is  becoming  an  energy  hub  for  the
transport  of  natural  gas  to  the  European  continent  through  the  conclusion  of  international
agreements  on  the  EastMed  (Greece-Cyprus-Israel)  and  TAP  energy  pipelines,  which  are
strongly supported by our traditional strategic ally, the United States.
I will not linger on the causes that triggered the greatest economic crisis in our country after the
Second World War, nor on past mistakes of Greek governments and our lenders during the 3
MoUs. The worst is behind us, the country makes steady positive steps towards returning to the
European normality and the Greek people look to the future with optimism.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
According  to  my  personal  opinion,  the  main  challenge  for  Greece  is  to  maintain  sustainable
growth rates beyond 2% in the next decade. This will be achieved through lower taxation across
the board and especially lower corporate tax rates sending a signal to the international investor
community that Greece means business and, at the same time, rallying their interest to attract
foreign direct investment, that is, greenfield investment, which translates into jobs and growth.
This is now a transformed economy: the country risk has dramatically been reduced, valuations
are  low,  unit  labour  costs  have  dropped  and  serious  reforms  have  been  implemented  in  the
labour and product markets, making this, all in all, a favourable environment in sectors such as
tourism, logistics, energy, start-ups, etc. This is the time to invest in Greece!
Secretaries of State Fox and Gove, we are looking forward to strengthening the bilateral relations
between UK and Greece on trade, finance, investment, environment and climate change.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
