Philip Lowe: The year ahead
Address by Mr Philip Lowe, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the National Press
Club of Australia, Sydney, 6 February 2019.
 I would like to thank Andrea Brischetto for assistance in the preparation of this talk.
Thank you for the opportunity to address the National Press Club. It is an honour to have been
invited.
The  media  and  the  RBA  have  a  special  relationship.  Most  people  in  the  community  hear  the
RBA's messages through the media. You report on what we say, you filter it and you critique it.
We also help you with your work. The RBA is a reliable source of information and analysis on
issues that your audiences care about, including interest rates, housing prices and jobs. This
means we have a strong mutual interest in understanding one another. I hope that today will help
strengthen that understanding.
This is my first public speech for 2019, so I would like to talk about the year ahead and some of
the key issues that the RBA will be focusing on. I will first discuss the global economy and then
turn to the Australian economy and particularly the outlook for household spending. I will finish
with a few remarks on the outlook for monetary policy.
At the outset, I want to emphasise that we don't have a crystal ball that allows us to see the
future  with  certainty.  I  know  many  of  you  are  looking  for  definitive  answers  to  questions  like,
‘Where will the cash rate be this time next year?’, ‘How much will housing prices fall?’, ‘When will
wages growth reach 3 per cent?’. They are all good questions. The reality, though, is that the
future is uncertain. None of us can say with certainty what will happen.
What the RBA can do, though, is highlight the issues that are likely to shape the future, explain
how  we  are  thinking  about  those  issues,  and  discuss  how  they  fit  into  our  decision-making
framework. That is what I hope to do today.
The Global Economy
I will start with the global economy, because what happens overseas has a major bearing on
what happens in Australia. My main point here is that while some of the downside risks have
increased, the central scenario for the world economy still looks to be supportive of growth in
Australia.
It is worth recalling that 2018 was a good year for the world economy. Growth in the advanced
economies was above trend in the first half of the year, unemployment rates reached their lowest
levels in many decades, inflation was low and financial systems were stable (Graph 1). These
are positive outcomes. We should not lose sight of this.
Graph 1
 1 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
There was, though, a change in momentum in the global economy late in the year. This change
was particularly evident in Europe and it was also evident in China. It has been widely reported in
the media, but it is important to keep things in perspective.
Some slowing in global growth was expected, given that labour markets are fairly tight and the
policy tightening in the United States was aimed at achieving a more sustainable growth rate. So,
I  have  been  a  little  surprised  at  some  of  the  reaction  to  the  lowering  of  forecasts  for  global
growth, which has been quite negative. We need to remember that the IMF's central forecast is
still  for  the  global  economy  to  expand  by  3.5  per  cent  in  2019  and  by  3.6  per  cent  in  2020
(Graph 2). If achieved, these would be reasonable outcomes and not too different from the recent
past.
Graph 2
 2 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
What is of more concern, though, is the accumulation of downside risks. Many of these risks are
related to political developments: the trade tensions between the United States and China; the
Brexit issue; the rise of populism globally; and the reduced support from the United States for the
liberal order that has supported the international system and contributed to a broad-based rise in
living standards. One could add to this list the adjustments in China as the authorities rein in
shadow financing.
The origins of these diverse issues are complex, but there is a common economic element to
some of them: that is, the extended period of little or no growth in real incomes for many people.
In a number of countries, growth in real wages has been weak or negative for years. Advances in
technology and greater competition as a result of globalisation also mean that many people worry
about their own future and that of their children. Politicians, understandably, are responding to
these concerns. Time will tell, though, whether the various responses help or not. I suspect that
some of them will not.
Over  recent  months,  the  accumulation  of  downside  risks  has  been  evident  in  business  and
consumer surveys. It was also evident in increased volatility in financial markets around the turn
of the year, with declines in equity prices and an increase in credit spreads (Graph 3). Since
then, though, markets have been more settled and some of the earlier decline in equity prices
has been reversed. This has been partly on the back of a reassessment of the path of monetary
policy  in  the  United  States,  with  markets  no  longer  pricing  in  further  increases  in  US  interest
rates. There has also been a noticeable fall in long-term government bond yields.
 3 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Graph 3
The adjustments in financial markets over our summer sometimes generated reporting that, to
me, seemed overly excitable. I lost count of how many times I read the words ‘crash’, ‘plunge’
and ‘dive’. Yet there is a positive side to some of these adjustments, which gets less reported on.
The risks associated with stretched valuations in some equity markets have lessened. So, too,
have concerns that very low credit spreads could lead to an excessive build-up of risk. And risks
in  many  emerging  market  economies  have  also  receded,  helped  by  the  lower  global  interest
rates and lower oil prices. So it is important to look at the whole picture.
For Australia, what happens in China is especially important. Growth there has slowed. From a
medium-term perspective, this has a positive side, as it mainly reflects efforts to rein in risky
financial  practices  and  stabilise  debt  levels.  But  the  slowing  is  probably  faster  than  the
government  had  hoped  for,  with  the  economy  feeling  the  effects  of  the  trade  dispute  with  the
United States and the squeezing of finance to the private sector. The authorities have responded
by easing policy in some areas, but they are walking a fine line between supporting the economy
and addressing the debt problem. There is also the question of how the economy responds to
the policy easing.
More  broadly,  we  cannot  insulate  ourselves  completely  from  the  global  risks,  but  keeping  our
house in order can go a long way to assist. Our floating exchange rate and the flexibility we have
on both monetary and fiscal policies provide us with a degree of insulation. So, too, does our
flexible  labour  market.  Ensuring  that  we  have  predictable  and  consistent  economic  policies,
credible public institutions and a reform agenda that supports a strong economy can also help in
 4 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
an uncertain world.
The Domestic Outlook
I would now like to turn to the outlook for the Australian economy. Much as is the case globally,
the downside risks have increased, although we still expect the Australian economy to grow at a
reasonable pace over the next couple of years.
The Australian  economy  is  benefiting  from  strong  growth  in  infrastructure  investment  and  an
upswing in other areas of investment. The labour market is also strong, with many people finding
jobs. This year, we will also benefit from a further boost to liquefied natural gas (LNG) exports.
The lower exchange rate and a lift in some commodity prices are also assisting. Against this
generally positive picture, the major domestic uncertainty is the strength of consumption and the
housing market.
We will be releasing a full updated set of forecasts in the Statement on Monetary Policy (SMP) on
Friday. Close readers of the SMP will notice that we will now be publishing forecasts for a wider
set of variables than has previously been the case.  We hope that this helps people understand
the various forces shaping the economy.
1
Today, I can give you a summary of the key numbers.
Our central forecast is for the Australian economy to expand by around 3 per cent over 2019 and
2¾  per  cent  over  2020  (Graph  4).  For  2018,  the  outcome  is  expected  to  be  a  bit  below
3 per cent. This type of growth should be sufficient to see further gradual progress in lowering
unemployment.
Graph 4
 5 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
These forecasts are lower than the ones we published three months ago. For 2018, the outcome
is  affected  by  the  surprisingly  soft  GDP  number  in  the  September  quarter  and  the  ABS's
downward revisions to estimates of growth earlier in the year. We are expecting a stronger GDP
outcome in the December quarter, with other indicators of economic activity painting a stronger
picture than suggested by the September quarter national accounts.
For 2019 and 2020, the forecasts have been revised down by around ¼ percentage point, largely
reflecting  a  modest  downgrading  of  the  outlook  for  household  consumption  and  residential
construction. I will talk more about this in a moment.
The  outlook  for  the  labour  market  remains  positive.  The  national  unemployment  rate  currently
stands at 5 per cent, the lowest in over seven years (Graph 5). In New South Wales and Victoria,
the unemployment rate is around 4¼ per cent. You have to go back to the early 1970s to see
sustained lower rates of unemployment in these two states. The forward-looking indicators of the
labour market also remain positive. The number of job vacancies is at a record high and firms'
hiring  intentions  remain  strong.  Our  central  scenario  is  that  growth  will  be  sufficient  to  see  a
modest further decline in unemployment to around 4¾ per cent over the next couple of years.
Graph 5
 6 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
The other important element of the labour market is how fast wages are increasing. For some
time, we have been expecting wages growth to pick up, but to do so gradually. The latest data
are  consistent  with  this,  with  a  turning  point  now  evident  in  the  wage  price  index  (Graph  6).
Through  our  discussions  with  business  we  are  also  hearing  more  reports  of  firms  finding  it
difficult to find workers with the necessary skills. In time, this should lead to larger wage rises.
This would be a positive development.
Graph 6
 7 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Given  this  outlook,  we  continue  to  expect  a  gradual  pick-up  in  underlying  inflation  as  spare
capacity in the economy diminishes (Graph 7). However, the lower forecast for growth means
that this pick-up is expected to occur a bit later than we'd previously thought. Underlying inflation
is now expected to increase to about 2 per cent later this year and to reach 2¼ per cent by the
end of 2020. The latest CPI data were consistent with this outlook. The headline CPI number
was, however, a bit lower than we had previously expected, reflecting the decline in petrol prices
that started late last year. We expect headline inflation to decline further this year as the full effect
of lower petrol prices shows up in the figures.
Graph 7
 8 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
So that is the summary of the key numbers.
As always, there is a range of uncertainties, many of which will be discussed in the SMP on
Friday.  Today,  though,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  outlook  for  household  spending,  which  is
closely linked to the housing market and the prospects for growth in household income.
Before  I  do  that,  I  would  like  to  touch  on  one  related  uncertainty  that  we  have  been  paying
attention to – that is the supply of credit. This is because a strong economy requires access to
finance on reasonable terms. Over recent years there has been a needed tightening of credit
standards. But the right balance needs to be struck. As lenders have sought to find that balance,
we  have  had  some  concerns  that  the  pendulum  may  have  swung  too  far  the  other  way,
especially for small business.
In that context, I welcome the report of the Royal Commission and the Government's response.
The Commission's recommendations that bear on credit provision are balanced and sensible,
and  should  remove  some  uncertainty.  I  also  welcome  the  Commission's  focus  on:  the
importance of service – as opposed to sales – in the financial sector; the necessity of dealing
properly  with  conflict  of  interest  issues;  and  the  importance  of  accountability  when  things  go
wrong. These are all issues I have spoken about on previous occasions. Addressing them is
central to rebuilding the all-important trust in our financial system.
 9 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Housing Prices and Household Income
But back to household consumption and the housing market.
You might recall that 18 months ago, one of the most talked about issues in the country was the
high and rising cost of housing. This was understandable. In some of our cities, purchasing a
home had become a very difficult stretch for many people, and this had become a major social
issue.
Today,  the  talk  is  about  prices  falling  in  our  two  largest  cities.  We  have  moved  almost
seamlessly from worrying that prices were going up, to worrying that they are going down.
There  is  no  single  reason  for  this  change,  but,  rather,  it  is  the  result  of  a  number  of  factors
coming together.
One is that housing prices simply increased to the point in Sydney and Melbourne where demand
tailed  off,  as  purchasing  a  home  had  become  very  expensive  and  less  attractive  as  an
investment.
A  second  is  that  the  building  boom  over  recent  times  significantly  increased  the  supply  of
dwellings. It took a number of years before the rate of home construction picked up in response
to faster population growth, but eventually it did pick up. This explains much of the cycle.
A  third  factor  is  that  the  demand  from  overseas  investors  softened,  partly  in  response  to  the
Chinese authorities making it more difficult to move money out of China.
And a fourth factor is that lending standards have been tightened and credit has become more
difficult to obtain.
Importantly, unlike most other housing price corrections, this one has not been associated with
rising unemployment or higher interest rates. Instead, mainly structural factors – relating to the
underlying balance of supply and demand – in our largest cities have been at work.
The question is: what effect will this change have on household spending?
Here, my earlier observation about not having a crystal ball is relevant. At this point, though, what
we are seeing looks to be a manageable adjustment in the housing market. It is not expected to
derail  economic  growth.  The  previous  trends  in  debt  and  housing  prices  were  becoming
unsustainable and some correction was appropriate. We recognise that this correction will have
an effect on parts of the economy. But our economy should be able to handle this, and it will put
the housing market on a more sustainable footing.
There are a few considerations here.
The first is that the recent housing price declines follow very large increases in prices (Graph 8).
Even after the recent declines in Sydney, prices are still 75 per cent higher over the decade. In
Melbourne,  they  are  70  per  cent  higher.  While  the  price  falls  are  no  doubt  difficult  for  some,
including people who purchased in the past couple of years, there are many people sitting on
very significant capital gains and there are others who now will find it easier to purchase a home.
And  of  course,  in  a  number  of  cities  and  much  of  regional Australia,  things  have  been  more
stable.
Graph 8
 10 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
A second consideration is that most households do not change their consumption in response to
short-term  changes  in  their  wealth.  Sensibly,  many  people  tend  to  take  a  longer-term
perspective. During the recent upswing in housing prices, the strategy of borrowing against the
extra equity in your home looked less sensible than it once was, especially as debt levels rose.
Some  home-owners  also  see  themselves  as  being  part  of  the  ‘bank  of  mum  and  dad’.  This
meant  that  they  refrained  from  spending  the  extra  equity  so  that  they  were  able  to  help  their
children purchase their own property.
A  third  and  perhaps  the  most  important  consideration,  is  that  household  income  growth  is
expected to pick up and income growth usually matters more for consumption than changes in
wealth.
For  some  years,  growth  in  nominal  aggregate  household  income  has  been  unusually  slow,
averaging just 2¾ per cent since 2016 (Graph 9). For some home-owners, rising housing prices
have provided an offset to this, even though the effect may have been smaller than in the past.
As a result, aggregate consumption has grown faster than income for the past few years. But a
shift is now taking place. Over the next year, we are expecting a pick-up in household disposable
income to provide a counterweight to the wealth effects of lower housing prices.
Graph 9
 11 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
Labour market outcomes are key to this assessment. Continued employment growth and higher
wages growth should boost disposable incomes. The announced tax cuts should also help here.
In our central scenario, consumption is expected to grow at around 2¾ per cent over the next
couple of years, broadly in line with expected growth in disposable income. This is a bit lower
than our earlier forecast for consumption.
There  are,  of  course,  other  possible  outcomes.  Continued  low  income  growth,  together  with
falling housing prices, would be an unwelcome combination and would make for a softer outlook
for the economy. Some Australian households have high levels of debt, so there is a degree of
uncertainty  about  how  they  would  respond  to  this  combination.  So  we  are  monitoring  things
closely.
The  adjustment  in  the  housing  market  is  also  affecting  the  economy  through  residential
construction  activity  and  the  spending  that  occurs  when  people  move  homes.  Residential
construction activity is currently around its peak level and the large pipeline of approved projects
is expected to support activity for a while. Developers, though, are finding it more difficult to sell
apartments off the plan, and lenders are less willing to provide finance. Sales of new detached
dwellings have also slowed. The central forecast is for dwelling investment to decline by about
10 per cent over the next two and a half years.
Putting all this together, our economy is going through an adjustment following the turn in the
 12 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
housing markets in our largest cities. It is important that we keep this in perspective though.
The correction in the housing market follows an extended period of strength. It is largely due to
structural  supply  and  demand  factors,  and  is  occurring  against  the  backdrop  of  a  robust
economy  and  an  expected  pick-up  in  income  growth.  Our  financial  institutions  are  also  in  a
strong position to deal with the adjustment. Indeed, lending standards were strengthened as the
upswing went on. From this perspective, the adjustment in the housing market is manageable for
the financial system and the economy. This adjustment will also help increase the affordability of
housing for many people. Even so, given the uncertainties, we are paying very close attention to
how things evolve.
Monetary Policy
This brings me to monetary policy.
The cash rate has been held steady at 1½ per cent since August 2016. This setting has helped
support  the  economy.  The  Reserve  Bank  Board  has  sought  to  be  a  source  of  stability  and
confidence  while  our  economy  adjusted  to  the  end  of  the  mining  investment  boom  and
responded to the shifting sands of the global economy.
Over the past couple of years, economic conditions have been moving in the right direction. The
labour market has strengthened, and the unemployment rate has fallen and a further decline is
expected. Inflation is also above its earlier trough, although it has not changed much over the
past year. Our expectation has been – and continues to be – that the tighter labour market and
reduced spare capacity will see underlying inflation rise further towards the midpoint of the target
range.  Given  this,  we  have  maintained  a  steady  setting  of  monetary  policy  while  the  labour
market strengthens and inflation increases.
Looking  forward,  there  are  scenarios  where  the  next  move  in  the  cash  rate  is  up  and  other
scenarios where it is down. Over the past year, the next-move-is-up scenarios were more likely
than  the  next-move-is-down  scenarios.  Today,  the  probabilities  appear  to  be  more  evenly
balanced.
We will be monitoring developments in the labour market closely. If Australians are finding jobs
and their wages are rising more quickly, it is reasonable to expect that inflation will rise and that it
will be appropriate to lift the cash rate at some point. On the other hand, given the uncertainties, it
is possible that the economy is softer than we expect, and that income and consumption growth
disappoint. In the event of a sustained increase in the unemployment rate and a lack of further
progress towards the inflation objective, lower interest rates might be appropriate at some point.
We have the flexibility to do this if needed.
The Board will continue to assess the outlook carefully. It does not see a strong case for a near-
term change in the cash rate. We are in the position of being able to maintain the current policy
setting while we assess the shifts in the global economy and the strength of household spending.
It has long been the Board's approach to avoid reacting to the high-frequency ebb and flow of
news. Instead, we have sought to keep our eye on the medium term and put in place a setting of
monetary  policy  that  helps  deliver  on  our  objectives  of  full  employment,  an  inflation  rate  that
averages between 2 and 3 per cent, and financial stability.
Thank you for listening. I look forward to answering your questions.
1
Forecasts will be published online for the various expenditure components of GDP as well as selected other
variables.
 13 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
