Olli  Rehn:  Economic  outlook  and  monetary  policy  –  a  European
perspective
Talk by Mr Olli Rehn, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Council on Foreign Relations, New
York City, 17 April 2019.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 Good morning to everybody. Many thanks for the invitation to give a talk at the Council on Foreign
Relations, which does immensely valuable work to keep the flame of rules-based multilateralism
and the liberal international order alive, in a rather challenging political environment. Hence it is a
great honor and pleasure to address and discuss with you today.
In my opening remarks I will focus on the economic outlook and monetary policy in Europe. After
that I am glad to take questions and comments.
Let us recall what has happened since we tamed the crisis. During the euro area recovery since
2013, over 10 million new jobs have been created, and unemployment has fallen from its peak of
over 12 percent to below 8 percent. The banking sector is now more resilient, the amount of non-
performing  loans  in  banks  have  decreased  significantly,  and  lending  to  households  and  non-
financial  corporations  have  increased.  The  ECB’s  accommodative  monetary  policy  has  been
very important in facilitating and supporting the recovery.  
Following  the  economic  recovery  and  the  then  positive  economic  outlook,  the  discussion  on
monetary policy normalization began to proceed in the euro area in 2018. In June 2018, the ECB
Governing Council expected to end the net purchases of monetary policy at the end of 2018. At
that time, the decision was still conditional and dependent on inflation.
At  its  meeting  in  December  2018,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  decided  to  end  net
purchases  in  the  asset  purchase  program  at  the  end  of  the  year.  At  the  same  time,  the
Governing  Council  announced  that  it  will  continue  to  invest  the  maturing  bonds  fully  for  an
extended  period  of  time  after  the  ECB  Governing  Council  has  raised  the  ECB’s  key  interest
rates, and in any case as long as it is necessary to maintain a favorable liquidity situation and
accommodative monetary policy that supports growth and converges inflation to the ECB’s goal
of close but below 2 percent. The policy rates were expected to remain at their current levels
through the summer of 2019.
Since  then,  the  incoming  data  during  the  first  months  of  2019  have  confirmed  that  global
economic  activity  has  slowed  down,  which  is  now  felt  also  in  the  euro  area.  Prevailing
uncertainty,  stemming  from  the  US-China  trade  tensions,  slowdown  of  growth  in  China  and
Europe’s  internal  problems,  have  all  weakened  the  outlook  for  the  economy.  The  growth
forecasts for the current year have broadly been revised downwards, also for the euro area by
the  ECB  staff  in  March.  While  some  indicators  hint  for  stabilization,  much  of  the  recent  data
continue to be weak, especially for the manufacturing sector. There are both country- and sector-
specific factors, and the impact of these factors is turning out to be somewhat longer-lasting,
slowing down growth momentum during the current year.  
The slowdown of growth has been accompanied with moderating inflation. In March 2019, the
ECB staff forecasted inflation to slow down to 1.2 percent in 2019 and then reaching 1.6 percent
by  2021.  Consistently  with  the  weaker  outlook,  the  market-based  inflation  expectations  have
declined. 
As a consequence of the slowdown, (almost) all major central banks have had to put monetary
policy normalisation on hold and instead to maintain an accommodative policy stance. This holds
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
true for the ECB as well.
th
On the back of the weakened economic outlook, the ECB Governing Council in March and again
last week, on April 10 , took a number of decisions in the pursuit of its price stability objective.
First, a commitment to keep the key policy interest rates at their present low levels at least until
the end of 2019. Second, a commitment to continue reinvesting maturing securities under the
asset purchase programme for an extended period of time, beyond the first rate increase – thus
we apply chained forward guidance on these two policy instruments. And third, launching a new
series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-III), starting in September 2019.
Hence, the ECB Governing Council maintains an ample degree of monetary accommodation to
support the economic expansion. Significant monetary policy stimulus is indeed being provided
by  our  forward  guidance  on  the  key  ECB  interest  rates,  reinvestments  by  a  sizable  stock  of
acquired assets, and the new series of targeted long-term refinancing operations.
Moreover,  as  President  Draghi  said,  the  Governing  Council  stands  ready  to  adjust  all  of  its
instruments, as appropriate, so that inflation converges to our aim, which is below but close to
2% in a sustained manner. It is worth noting that our inflation aim does not imply a ceiling at 2%,
since inflation can deviate from our target in both directions.
At the same time, it needs to be asked whether a more even balance between monetary and
fiscal policy stances would be desirable in order to sustain the growth momentum in the current
conjuncture. In our view it should be underlined that, in order to reap the full benefits from the
ECB’s monetary policy measures, other policy areas must contribute more decisively to raise
the growth potential and reduce vulnerabilities. For the longer term, implementation of structural
reforms is key to boost euro area productivity and growth potential. Regarding fiscal policies, the
mildly expansionary euro area fiscal stance today and the operation of automatic stabilisers are
already providing support to economic activity.
If the slowdown is judged more stubborn, any further fiscal easing should be undertaken within
the limits of debt sustainability and be differentiated according to fiscal space available. In other
words, while countries with elevated public debt levels should focus on consistent consolidation
of public finances, those with available fiscal space could use it to increase growth-enhancing
public investment. In this way, one would enable a more balanced macroeconomic policy mix.
Applying the already worn saying, monetary policy should indeed not be the only active player in
town.
Finally, a word on the longer-term. The ECB – much like other central banks – must operate in
an environment where long run trends, such as population aging, lower long term interest rates,
climate change and concerns about inequality, can have important societal effects. The central
banking  community  needs  to  understand  the  implications  of  these  phenomena  to  growth,
employment and inflation dynamics, in order to deliver more effectively what is in their mandate.
That’s why we need to systematically assess how these transformations affect monetary policy
strategy.
Many thanks for your attention, and I am ready to take your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
