Sabine  Lautenschläger:  Towards  a  more  cyber  secure  financial
system - the role of central banks
Statement  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central Bank, at the G7 2019 conference on "Cybersecurity: Coordinating efforts to protect the
financial sector in the global economy", Paris, 10 May 2019.
 As we all know, cyber threats to the financial sector are continuously evolving and becoming ever
more sophisticated. The attackers – whether they be 16-year old script kiddies, hacktivist groups
or  even  nation  states  –  are  dynamic  and  agile.  They  have  different  reasons  for  targeting  the
financial sector, but they each have the potential to cause disruption. Besides stealing money
and data, they can undermine confidence in the entire financial system.
So what can we, as public authorities, do? As the central banker on this panel, I will, of course,
focus on what central banks can do. I will first outline some key trends in the financial sector,
which make it vulnerable to cyber threats. I will then share some of the insights gained from the
ECB’s key initiatives on cyber risk.
Trends in the financial sector
We see a number of trends in the financial sector related to cyber risk:
First, the close interconnection and complexity of the financial system creates vulnerabilities
which can be exploited by cyber attackers.
Second, attackers seem to be gaining an ever deeper understanding of how the financial
system  operates.  This  enables  them  to  swiftly  detect  and  exploit  weaknesses  more
efficiently and should be a concern for us all.
Third,  both  banks  and  financial  market  infrastructures  are  struggling  to  find  staff  with  the
skills and experience needed to fend off cyber-attacks. Indeed, the skills gap extends well
beyond the financial sector. All relevant stakeholders need to urgently work on strategies to
make  sure  that  our  workforce  has  the  right  skills  for  our  future  economies,  and  that  our
society is able to reap the benefits of innovation.
Finally,  true  innovation  is  always  disruptive.  Fintech  might  disrupt  financial  markets  in
positive  ways.  But  it  also  comes  with  risks:  fiercer  competition  could  lead  some  market
players to embrace and adopt new technologies, services or methods before fully grasping
the related risks – cyber-risks in this case.
Let me point to some information and knowledge we have gathered at the ECB in our banking
supervisory function as well as in our oversight function for financial market infrastructures.
We do see room for improvement at banks and financial market infrastructures with regard to
cyber governance, for example. Financial market infrastructures, or FMIs for short, too often lack
board-approved  cyber  resilience  strategies.  And  if  there  is  a  strategy,  it  is  often  not
operationalised. And if it is operationalised, it is often not monitored, and its effectiveness is not
challenged.
FMIs  and  banks  work  diligently  on  technical  security  measures  in  order  to  detect  threats  and
protect  their  systems.  Some  of  them,  though,  neglect  people  and  processes.  There  is  a
dangerous lack of awareness and training. Successful cyber-attacks often start with a phishing
email to an unsuspecting employee.
Having  mentioned  the  complexity  of  the  financial  system  as  a  vulnerability,  I  need  to  add  the
complexity of IT-systems as well. Banks, in particular, should aim to simplify their IT landscape.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Simpler  IT  landscapes  have  a  smaller  attack  surface. And  the  easier  these  systems  are  to
understand and maintain, the better they can be protected. And, last but not least, we see that a
significant number of FMIs still lack dedicated cyber incident response plans.
These are just a few of the worrying trends and vulnerabilities that we see. So there is clearly
much work to be done.
How is the ECB addressing cyber threats? An oversight and supervision perspective
So, what part can the ECB play?
Let’s first look at our role in overseeing FMIs. In March 2017 the Governing Council approved the
Eurosystem  cyber  resilience  strategy  for  FMIs.  This  strategy  is  intended  to  operationalise  the
CPMI-IOSCO  Guidance on cyber resilience for FMIs. The strategy rests on three pillars: FMI
resilience, sector resilience, and strategic industry-regulator dialogue.
1
Regarding the resilience of FMIs, we started in 2017 by conducting a survey of 76 FMIs across
the European Union, to assess their cyber resilience. The results of this survey have enabled
overseers to enter into productive dialogues with FMIs on their ability to address cyber-threats.
Furthermore, while the principles contained in the CPMI-IOSCO Guidance are important, they are
also quite high level. Smaller institutions in particular need to be informed about best practices in
a more concrete and detailed manner. So, to facilitate the proportionate implementation of the
guidance, the ECB published the Cyber Resilience Oversight Expectations, or CROE for short,
in  December  2018. A  tool  for  FMIs  and  overseers  alike,  the  CROE  sets  out  three  levels  of
increasingly demanding expectations, tailored to the size of the FMI.
To  complement  the  CROE,  the  ECB  has  also  developed  another  tool:  the European  threat
intelligence  based  ethical  red  team  testing  framework  (TIBER-EU).  By  means  of  “ethical
hacking”, red teaming helps to assess a financial institution’s ability to withstand a cyber-attack.
TIBER-EU serves to guide authorities and financial institutions in conducting threat-intelligence
based  red  teaming,  and  to  avoid  duplication  through  the  emergence  of  similar  pan-European
tests.
But testing the resilience of individual FMIs or banks may not be sufficient. The financial system
is highly interconnected and any cyber-attack could thus trigger contagion. This is why the ECB
hosted a market-wide crisis communication exercise, UNITAS, in June 2018. UNITAS facilitated
a  discussion  among  pan-European  financial  infrastructures  on  a  scenario  in  which  a  cyber-
attack resulted in a loss of data integrity and a knock-on effect on other financial infrastructures.
The exercise revealed that there were weaknesses at the European level, which are now being
followed-up on by the Euro Cyber Resilience Board for pan-European Financial Infrastructures,
or ECRB for short.
This  brings  me  to  the  third  pillar  of  our  strategy,  which  seeks  to  foster  strategic  engagement
between regulators and industry. The ECRB was established in 2018 with the aim of facilitating
trust and collaboration among FMIs and authorities and encouraging joint initiatives.
Moving on to banking supervision, the ECB Banking Supervision has addressed IT and cyber risk
from various angles.
First, we have been conducting thematic reviews since 2015 on the topic in the banks that we
directly supervise. These gave us a more detailed understanding of the scope of the problem.
Moreover, the latest horizontal analysis of IT risk conducted in 2018 has revealed deficiencies in
IT security risk management at several banks. For instance, banks’ general risk management
frameworks  sometimes  fail  to  specifically  include  IT  risk. A  significant  number  of  banks  have
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
critical processes that depend on systems which are close to, or have already reached, their end
of  life.  This,  in  turn,  makes  them  more  vulnerable  to  cyber  threats.  We  also  see  a  failure  to
rapidly address critical findings in the area of IT security.
In addition, IT outsourcing is increasing, and many supervised institutions outsource their IT to a
single provider. A classic case of putting all their eggs in one basket, this creates a concentration
risk that should not go unnoticed. There are cases where these concentration risks cannot be
avoided, but this should then go hand in hand with tougher requirements for cyber resilience.
Further, the ECB insists that banks should employ enough sufficiently skilled staff to monitor and
oversee their outsourced activities.
In 2017, the ECB also set up a cyber incident reporting process. The information on incidents
reported  by  banks  is  used  by  the  ECB  to  identify  and  monitor  trends,  and  to  facilitate  a  fast
reaction  of  the  ECB  in  the  event  of  a  major  cyber  incident  affecting  one  or  more  significant
institutions at the same time.
The  number  of  reported  cyber  incidents  has  been  rather  low,  the  most  frequent  type  being
Distributed  Denial  of  Service  attacks  (DDoS).  Other  reported  incidents  were  related  to
unauthorised access, accidental data leakage and phishing attacks. In many cases, there was a
delay between the onset of the attack and its detection. Finally, we see that attackers gained
access  to  banks’  systems  by  exploiting  both  technological  vulnerabilities,  such  as  missing  IT
security measures, and human ones, such as insufficient staff awareness.
Although  the  number  of  reported  cyber  incidents  has  been  rather  low,  I  would  not  dare  to
conclude cyber threat levels are low, or even decreasing. I rather think that it is a matter of time
until we experience a major attack.
ECB  Banking  Supervision  will  continue  to  monitor  IT  and  cyber  risks  facing  banks;  we  will
continue to push for and request banks’ resilience to and preparedness for cyber threats. And we
will of course continue to engage and cooperate with a number of other institutions and agencies.
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
As  you  may  guess  from  my  brief  remarks  today,  we  have  a  great  deal  of  work  ahead  of  us.
Sharing information, knowledge and expertise among public institutions and with the industry will
be essential. In this respect, events like today’s have a valuable role to play. I look forward to our
discussion.
1
Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures and the Board of the International Organization of Securities
Commissions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
