Benoît Cœuré: European capital markets - priorities and challenges
Dinner remarks by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Frankfurt am Main, 25 June 2019.
 The past decade has seen remarkable achievements in strengthening global financial regulation,
and in making our economies safer and more resilient, thanks in large part to the work of the
international community under the auspices of the Financial Stability Board (FSB).
But now, more than ten years after the crisis, priorities have shifted and there are concerns that
the  cooperative  multilateral  order  that  has  underpinned  past  international  achievements  is
increasingly being questioned.
In my remarks this evening I will argue that dismantling regulatory standards would be a mistake,
and would add to market fragmentation. I will also argue that the current low levels of financial
integration  in  the  euro  area  are  inefficient,  and  that,  as  a  response,  we  need  to  intensify  our
efforts if we want to achieve tangible progress in completing banking union and creating a true
capital markets union (CMU).
In  the  last  part  of  my  remarks  I  will  briefly  touch  on  the  ongoing  reform  of  interest  rate
benchmarks, which is essential to safeguard the smooth transmission of monetary policy and
the resilience of the financial system.
Market fragmentation as a source of concern
The achievements of the FSB and the global standard-setting bodies since the financial crisis
are  remarkable.  By  rolling  out  international  standards  and  new  principles  for  regulatory
cooperation, they have made global financial markets more integrated and our financial system
safer and more resilient, protecting taxpayers from costly bailouts.
We have also made significant progress at a regional level. In the euro area, we now have a
single banking supervisor that harmonises supervisory actions across participating countries. At
the  level  of  the  European  Union  (EU),  the  Commission  and  the  co-legislators  have  also
strengthened the single rulebook and launched an ambitious agenda for creating a CMU.
But with the financial  crisis  gradually  disappearing  in  the  rear-view  mirror,  ambition  for  further
reforms is weakening and reluctance to implement already agreed standards is rising.
Hidden forms of financial protectionism, or a relaxation of regulation, would turn back the clock on
internationally agreed rules, revive distrust, and risk regulatory arbitrage and a race to the bottom.
As  a  result,  market  fragmentation  has  become  one  of  the  more  pressing  issues  for  global
standard-setting  bodies  and  the  financial  community  in  recent  months.  The  Japanese  G20
presidency has identified market fragmentation as a key priority, and the FSB published its report
on the matter just ahead of the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting in
Fukuoka on 8 and 9 June.  ISDA itself prominently discussed the topic at its 34th Annual General
Meeting in Hong Kong earlier this year.
1
Market  fragmentation  can  arise  for  a  number  of  reasons,  such  as  technological  differences,
divergent  tax  regimes  or  differences  in  local  financial  structures.  Diverging  regulation  and
supervisory practices can also play a role here.
Not all types of market fragmentation are harmful. Stricter financial regulation in some parts of
the world, for example, may help promote financial stability more widely by mitigating perilous
 1 / 8
2
BIS central bankers' speeches
cross-border  spillovers,  insofar  as  it  does  not  increase  risk  taking  in  foreign  markets.   Other
types of fragmentation may come with real economic costs, however.
2
In Europe, for example, financial integration has gone into reverse since the crisis broke and is
only  very  gradually  coming  back.  Today,  intra-euro  area  cross-border  risk  sharing  is  at
uncomfortably low levels.  And without private risk sharing, country-specific shocks will continue
to cause persistent dispersion in economic outcomes across euro area countries, undermining
real convergence and hampering the conduct of the single monetary policy.
Priorities for CMU after Brexit
3
It is this type of fragmentation that I would like to focus on in the remainder of my remarks.
Financial disintegration is particularly harmful in a currency union where deeper and more liquid
financial markets should be able to compensate for the absence of other intra-regional shock
absorbers, such as flexible exchange rates. Financial markets that can absorb shocks efficiently,
and  contribute  to  macroeconomic  stabilisation  and  resilience,  do  not  waste  costly  political
4
capital. And they create more policy space in downturns, for both fiscal and monetary policy.
I  am  not  arguing  here  that  public  risk  sharing  is  irrelevant.  But  progress  towards  a  euro  area
fiscal capacity with stabilising features, however desirable, will be a long journey. Better private
risk sharing mechanisms can only make it more acceptable. As the US monetary union shows,
both private and public risk sharing are in fact complements, not substitutes.
A true CMU could contribute to filling a substantial part of this void and help diversify and reduce
risk in the euro area. Significant progress has already been made. Under the outgoing European
Commission, 11 of the 13 legislative initiatives tabled under the current CMU action plan were
finalised, together with most of the non-legislative actions.
But  the  pace  with  which  co-legislators,  and  Member  States  in  particular,  have  progressed  on
individual initiatives has been much slower. Ring-fencing and considerable differences in national
legislation  mean  that  CMU  remains  incomplete  in  many  respects,  while  new  challenges  for
financial integration have emerged.
The United Kingdom’s departure from the EU’s Single Market, in particular, will by its very nature
affect the shape of Europe’s future financial market architecture. A large number of banks and
investment firms are in the process of establishing or expanding their euro area presence with a
view to ensuring that they can continue to serve the Single Market after Brexit.
Plans submitted to the ECB indicate that this can be expected to result in a substantial relocation
of activity to the euro area, in the order of over €1 trillion in bank assets, and that, at least in the
short  term,  activity  will  move  to  a  number  of  euro  area  countries,  possibly  resulting  in  the
development of a multi-centric European financial system.
While  the  landscape  may  evolve  further  in  the  future,  in  a  financial  system  with  a  number  of
increasingly  important  hubs,  as  opposed  to  one  dominant  hub  in  London,  it  will  be  more
important than ever for these hubs to be able to efficiently interact with one another and to avoid
differences across Member States providing opportunities for regulatory arbitrage.
So, Brexit reinforces the urgency with which we should pursue policies that address barriers to
capital  market  integration  in  the  EU.  This  discussion  is  also  closely  connected  to  the  parallel
discussion  on  the  global  role  of  the  euro,  which  fundamentally  depends  on  our  ability  to  build
5
deeper and more efficient financial markets.
Advancing  CMU  should  therefore  be  a  top  priority  for  the  new  European  Commission  and
Parliament. The ECB is a key stakeholder in this discussion, as the transmission of our single
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
monetary policy crucially depends on the degree of financial integration in the euro area.
But we should recognise that not all of the numerous initiatives adopted under the CMU action
plan will have the same impact. And some initiatives with greater potential, such as the creation
of a common safe asset, will face considerable political resistance in the short term.
We  should  therefore  choose  our  battles  wisely  when  discussing  policy  priorities  that  could
improve Europe’s financial market architecture in the short term. So what areas should we focus
on when shaping CMU in the future? In the view of the ECB, there are three high-priority areas.
Harmonising insolvency frameworks
The first relates to harmonising insolvency frameworks – an area in which synergies between the
banking  union  and  the  capital  markets  union  are  particularly  strong.  High  non-performing  loan
ratios, and their effects on growth and bank lending, are a case in point.
Transparent  and  efficient  insolvency  frameworks  are  the  backbone  of  cross-border  capital
markets transactions. They safeguard trust and legal certainty for issuers and investors. And by
fostering  effective  and  efficient  resolution  actions,  they  increase  the  expected  return  on
investment and thereby stimulate investment in both credit and capital markets. The end result is
higher rates of economic growth, more dynamic local economies and higher levels of private risk
sharing.
Some  progress  has  already  been  made,  most  notably  through  the  proposal  on  preventive
restructuring  frameworks,  second  chance,  and  measures  to  increase  the  efficiency  of
restructuring, insolvency and discharge procedures.
But the Commission proposal fell short of harmonising core aspects of insolvency, such as rules
on conditions for opening insolvency proceedings, a common definition of insolvency, ranking of
claims  and  avoidance  actions  in  general. And  for  various  aspects  that  were  included  in  the
proposal,  it  has  become  clear  that,  at  the  current  stage,  we  face  significant  challenges  in
overcoming prevailing divergences in views among Member States.
It  thus  makes  sense  for  EU  legislators  to  tackle  this  issue  in  stages,  and  focus  first  on
harmonising specific  elements  of  insolvency  frameworks.  Full  harmonisation  of  creditor
hierarchy in bank insolvency, for example, is one area where achieving tangible results would
have a high impact.
A harmonised depositor preference rule would help create a level playing field for debt issuance
by banks and enhance the robustness of their resolution framework, which benefits the overall
stability  of  the  financial  system  and,  in  turn,  strengthens  banks’  capacity  to  support  the  wider
economy.
More generally, a clear credit hierarchy for all companies, not just banks, would provide cross-
border investors with greater  comparability  and  transparency  on  the  ranking  of  their  claims  in
insolvency.
Supervisory convergence and the oversight and supervision of central counterparties
The  second  area  that  we  should  prioritise  on  the  CMU  agenda  relates  to  supervisory
convergence.
The final outcome of the review of the three European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) fell short of
its  initial  ambitions,  in  particular  on  governance  aspects,  where  national  authorities  retain  a
leading role despite a strengthened profile for the ESAs’ chairpersons.
Ever-more sophisticated technologies and products, climate change and the rise of cybercrime
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
increasingly  require  a  highly  coordinated  European  approach  and  a  governance  and
accountability structure for the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) that is more
consistent with its status as a fully-fledged supervisory body.
Consider Facebook’s plan to launch a new global digital currency, the implications of which are
now being scrutinised by a G7 working group, which I chair. Such initiatives naturally require a
global response, including a harmonised pan-European position.
To put it simply, truly integrated European capital markets will ultimately require a single capital
markets supervisor, much in the same spirit as we have a single bank supervisor today.
Take the role of ESMA in the supervision of central counterparties (CCPs). Given that the brunt of
default  risk  in  EU  CCPs  is  borne  by  their  clearing  members,  most  of  whom  are  directly
supervised and resolved at the European level, the principle of aligning liability and responsibility
clearly implies European supervision of EU CCPs.
But despite significant legislative efforts, the recent revision of the European Market Infrastructure
Regulation (EMIR 2) is a lost opportunity to advance capital market union, as the competence for
CCP supervision will remain almost exclusively national.
What  EMIR  2  does  do,  however,  is  strengthen  the  EU  regulatory  framework  with  respect  to
clearing activities which are systemically important for the EU but take place in non-EU countries,
including  those  provided  from  London  after  Brexit.  This  debate  is  arguably  at  the  heart  of  the
current discussion on fragmentation.
Instead  of  being  based  only  on  equivalence  at  jurisdiction  level,  the  new  framework  will  also
subject systemically important non-EU CCPs to EMIR standards and supervision by ESMA. This
will ensure a level playing field with EU CCPs, limiting regulatory arbitrage, and enhance CCP
resilience.
One open issue is whether regulators should force swaps clearing to be relocated even if it risks
increasing spatial fragmentation. EMIR 2 clearly states that recognition can only be denied as a
last resort, and the ECB supports this approach.
Cooperation has, in fact, always been the ECB’s preferred approach to the oversight of financial
market  infrastructures,  as  per  Responsibility  E  of  the  CPMI-IOSCO  Principles  for  Financial
Market Infrastructures. In this respect, the existence of common regulatory standards for CCPs
has  been  playing  a  fundamental  role  for  underpinning  co-operation  arrangements,  including
mutual recognition.
We therefore also note with interest that the US Commodity Futures Trading Commission now
intends to move to a proportional approach similar to EMIR 2, and we look forward to learning
more about this new framework in the future.
I  would  only  note  that,  given  the  importance  of  clearing  for  the  stability  of  the  global  financial
system, our reliance on deference depends on the depth of cooperation and information-sharing
between  authorities.  There  is  still  much  progress  to  be  made  on  that  front,  and  the
implementation of international commitments is of the essence.
Diversifying external funding for the real economy
The third area of priority for CMU should focus on broadening and deepening the funding mix of
euro area firms and households. This is particularly important for the transmission of monetary
policy.
Today, firms in the euro area predominately rely on bank lending for their debt financing, although
the  importance  of  non-bank  financing  has  increased  over  the  past  ten  years.  The  latest  data
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
indicate that bank lending accounts, on average, for around 55% of debt financing of euro area
firms.  In the United States, by contrast, firms source around 70% of their debt financing directly
from non-banks, and only 30% from banks.
6
In principle, bank and market-based finance tend to support economic development and living
standards  in  similar  ways.   But  the  euro  area  sovereign  debt  crisis,  and  the  subsequent
impairment of the bank lending channel, underlined that what matters for resilience and growth is
that funding is diverse and avoids concentration risks.
7
Clearly, market financing is still too rare in the euro area and too restricted to large companies.
According  to  the  most  recent  survey  on  the  access  to  finance  of  enterprises  (SAFE),  for  the
period  from  October  2018  to  March  2019,  only  11%  of  small  and  medium-sized  companies
(SMEs) have considered taking on equity financing, and only 3% issued debt securities.
SMEs  have  therefore  increasingly  sought  to  raise  capital  outside  of  public  capital  markets.
Private equity investors, in particular, have partly filled the void left by financial markets. Their
investment has increased considerably in recent years and has also benefited many young and
small companies.
In  2018,  total  equity  invested  in  European  companies  increased  by  7%  to  €80.6  billion,  the
highest  level  recorded  to  date.   The  number  of  companies  receiving  equity  investment  also
reached its highest level, also increasing by 7% to over 7,800 companies. 86% of these were
SMEs.  Venture  capital  investment,  which  is  particularly  important  for  young  innovative  firms,
stood at a historical high of €8.2 billion, funding a record 4,400 companies.
8
But because the United Kingdom is home to around one-fifth of the EU’s private equity funds,
Brexit may disrupt private equity investment as non-EU private equity funds can only be marketed
in the EU under strict conditions.
In order to fill the gap left by the possible loss of UK private equity funds, we need to harmonise
the myriad of existing national requirements and ensure that EU-based funds and managers are
allowed to reap the full benefits of the single passport and market their products to all suitable EU
investors.
All this suggests that more needs to be done to further diversify external funding of euro area
firms, in particular for SMEs, which are typically the first to suffer from tightening credit conditions
when the tide turns and risk aversion rises. This relates to both market integration and market
development.
The role of market development
Market  development  entails  both  seizing  new  opportunities  and  making  sure  that  existing
frameworks are fit for purpose. Fintech, for example, opens up new sources of funding and new
opportunities for investors, such as crowdfunding. And the work by the EU technical expert group
on sustainable finance, published last week, will help deepen the market for “green” investments
9
by laying out a common taxonomy for sustainable financial instruments.
The  ECB  is  supporting  market  development  efforts  by  establishing  state-of-the-art  market
infrastructures. In November last year, for example, the ECB launched Target Instant Payment
Settlement (TIPS), which allows payment service providers to offer funds transfers to customers
in  real  time  and  around  the  clock  across  Europe.
  We  have  also  launched  a  market
consultation on a European mechanism for the issuance and initial distribution of debt securities
(EDDI), to which we expect comments before 9 July.
10
11
Cutting red tape also supports market development. I welcome the current work by the European
Commission  to  consider  ways  to  encourage  SMEs  to  tap  capital  markets  for  their  financing
12
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
12
needs more often.
 But incentives must be aligned, too. In particular, preferential tax treatment
contributes  to  pushing  firms  towards  debt  funding.  This  unequal  treatment  might  incentivise
excessive leverage and hinder effective private risk sharing.
The role of market integration
Market integration, in turn, leverages the potential of market development initiatives and enhances
market  depth.  Research  suggests  that  deeper  equity  markets  are  more  effective  in  bringing
economies closer to the technological frontier, as well as in “greening” the local economy.
13
On the retail side, the creation of a pan-European personal pension product would go a long way
towards integrating local capital markets and overcoming prevailing home biases. Unfortunately,
the initial proposal was watered down and the tax treatment has been fully left to the national
authorities’ discretion. Renewed impetus here is vital.
Pension  reforms  that  strengthen  private  retirement  savings,  and  also  contribute  to  the
diversification of such savings into equity, would support the process.
 In 2017, EU households
held just 21% of their financial assets in shares and equity, compared with 41% in the United
States.
14
15
A  second  important  lever  for  integration  and  diversification  is  to  build  on  the  newly  adopted
European covered bonds directive and to increase efforts to revive the European securitisation
market,  in  particular  SME  securitisation.  SME  deals  only  accounted  for  around  8%  of  overall
securitisation in 2016.
16
Early  on,  the  ECB  and  the  Bank  of  England  have  called  for  a  revitalisation  of  the  European
securitisation  market,  addressing  the  flaws  evidenced  by  the  crisis.
  The  new  European
Securitisation  Regulation  entered  into  force  at  the  start  of  this  year.  We  have  already  seen  it
bearing  fruit,  as  simple,  transparent  and  standardised  securitisations  have  started  to  pick  up,
with 16 such transactions published on ESMA’s central register between late March and early
June.
17
The development of covered bond-like structures backed by SME loans, such as the European
Secured Notes, could complement efforts to open up new financing sources for SMEs.
Benchmark rates and the need for fallback options
Before concluding, let me say a word on a matter that is very much related to the resilience of
European financial markets, namely the ongoing interest rate benchmark reform, where a lot of
progress has been made this year. Given ISDA’s work to implement more robust fallbacks for
derivatives  that  reference  key  interbank  offered  rates,  I  will  focus  on  the  role  of  fallbacks  for
EURIBOR.
EURIBOR plays an important role in the transmission of the ECB’s monetary policy. It is closely
linked to the interest rates that affect many businesses and households in the euro area. More
than 80% of new loans to non-financial corporations in the euro area are based on floating rates,
and more than 20% of new loans to households, including mortgages, are variable rate loans. In
many euro area countries this share is significantly higher.
It is therefore encouraging to see that the EURIBOR reform has entered its final stages. Last
month,  EURIBOR’s  administrator,  the  European  Money  Markets  Institute  (EMMI),  started  to
phase in the new hybrid methodology. The relevant supervisory authority, the Financial Services
and Markets Authority, is currently assessing its compliance with the EU Benchmarks Regulation
(BMR).
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  outcome  of  this  assessment  is  expected  to  be  positive,  allowing  users  to  continue  to
reference EURIBOR beyond the deadline given by the BMR, which is expected to be extended by
political agreement to the end of 2021.
Yet EURIBOR, also in its amended form, will ultimately rely on voluntary contributions by its panel
banks. The BMR includes the possibility of making these contributions mandatory for a period of
time, but eventually it will be up to the market, including users and panel banks, to see whether
EURIBOR can be sustained in the long run.
18
This means that we need to prepare for various eventualities. For this reason, it is important that
the working group on euro risk-free rates continues its ongoing work on identifying fallbacks for
EURIBOR,  based  on  the  ECB’s  euro  short-term  rate  (€STR)  that  will  be  published  as  of  2
October  this  year.
  As  a  first  step,  earlier  this  year  the  working  group  recommended  a
methodology for calculating forward-looking term rates based on the €STR.
19
20
However,  at  the  current  stage,  it  is  not  certain  whether  and  when  forward-looking  term  rates
based on €STR will become available, and for which use cases they would be suitable.
 For
this fallback solution to ultimately gain ground, we need the market to start preparing for the use
of €STR as soon as possible and to build up liquid derivatives markets.
Conclusion
21
In any event, and with this I would like to conclude, further analysis of the appropriate fallbacks for
EURIBOR,  and  the  ways  to  implement  them,  is  required.  This  includes  the  need  to  make
decisions  on  trade-offs  between  international  comparability,  consistency  across  products  and
availability for use. I am sure ISDA will continue to play a vital role in finding such solutions for the
euro area.
The  reform  of  interest  rate  benchmarks  comes  at  a  time  when  more  far-reaching  and
encompassing  reforms  to  European  capital  markets  are  needed  to  promote  integration,
strengthen investment and boost private risk sharing.
The  United  Kingdom’s  departure  from  the  EU  reinforces  the  urgency  with  which  we  should
pursue  policies  that  address  barriers  to  capital  market  integration  in  Europe  and  eliminate
opportunities  for  regulatory  arbitrage.  More  integrated  capital  markets  will  support  the
transmission  of  the  single  monetary  policy  and  increase  its  resilience  in  periods  of  stress.
Advancing  CMU  should  therefore  be  a  top  priority  for  the  new  European  Commission  and
Parliament.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
See FSB (2019), FSB Report on Market Fragmentation, 4 June.
See  Houston,  J.,  Lin,  C.  and  Ma,  Y.  (2012),  “Regulatory  arbitrage  and  international  bank  flows”, Journal  of
Finance, No 67, pp. 1845–1895; and Ongena, S., Popov, A. and Udell, G. (2013), “‘When the cat’s away the mice
will play’: Does regulation at home affect bank risk taking abroad?”, Journal of Financial Economics, No 108, pp.
727–750.
See  Cœuré,  B.  (2019),  “Heterogeneity  and  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy”,  speech  at  the  Banque  de  France
Symposium & 34th SUERF Colloquium on the occasion of the 20th anniversary of the euro on “The Euro Area:
Staying the Course through Uncertainties”, Paris, 29 March.
See also Cœuré, B. (2018), “The euro area’s three lines of defence”, speech at the conference “Deepening of
EMU”, Ljubljana, 2 February.
See Cœuré, B. (2019), “The euro’s global role in a changing world: a monetary policy perspective”, speech at the
Council on Foreign Relations, New York City, 15 February.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
See ECB (2016), “Trends in the external financing structure of euro area non-financial corporations”, Economic
Bulletin, Issue 5.
There is mounting evidence, however, that large banking systems are associated with more systemic risk and
lower economic growth, in particular as countries grow richer. See Langfield, S. and Pagano, M. (2016), “Bank
bias  in  Europe:  Effects  on  systemic  risk  and  growth”, Economic  Policy,  Vol.  31,  No  85,  pp.  51–106;  and
Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Feyen, E. and Levine, R. (2013), “The evolving importance of banks and securities markets”,
World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 27, No 3, pp. 476–490.
See Invest Europe (2019), 2018 European Private Equity Activity.
See EU Technical Expert Group on Sustainable Finance (2019), Taxonomy Technical Report, June.
For additional information, see the ECB’s webpage on What is TARGET Instant Payment Settlement (TIPS)?
See ECB (2019), Market consultation on a potential Eurosystem initiative regarding a European mechanism for
the issuance and initial distribution of debt securities in the European Union, 28 May.
See  the  European  Commission’s financing  programmes  for  SMEs;  and  Kremer,  M.  and  Popov, A.  (2018),
“Financial  development,  financial  structure  and  growth:  evidence  from  Europe”,  in Financial  integration  in
Europe, ECB.
See Hsu, P., Tian, X. and Xu, Y. (2014), “Financial development and innovation: Cross-country evidence”, Journal
of  Financial  Economics,  Vol.  112,  No  1,  pp.  116–135;  and  De  Haas,  R.,  and  Popov, A.  (2018),  “Financial
development and industrial pollution,” Tilburg University Discussion Paper 2018–024.
Such  efforts  need  to  go  hand-in-hand  with  programmes  targeted  at  increasing  financial  literacy,  starting  in
secondary  school.  See  Cœuré,  B.  (2018),  “Central  banking  in  times  of  complexity”,  panel  remarks  at  a
conference on the occasion of Sveriges Riksbank’s 350th anniversary, Stockholm, 25 May.
See Report of a CEPS-ECMI Task Force on Rebranding the Capital Markets Union.
See Kraemer-Eis, H. (2017), “SME securitisation in Europe – a short summary”, European Investment Fund.
See Bank of England and ECB (2014), “The case for a better functioning securitisation market in the European
Union”, Discussion Paper, May.
The politically agreed amendments to the BMR will allow for the competent authority to make contributions to
critical  benchmarks  mandatory  for  a  maximum  period  of  five  years,  in  the  event  it  considers  that  the
representativeness of EURIBOR is put at risk.
The timeline for the transition to €STR is now clear: the EMMI announced that, with the publication of the €STR,
the EONIA methodology will change to the €STR plus a fixed spread, and EONIA will be discontinued on 3
January 2022, reflecting transactions of end-2021. EMMI’s announcement follows the recommendations made
by the working group on euro risk-free rates.
See working group on euro risk-free rates (2019), Recommendations of the working group on euro risk-free
rates  on  the  transition  path  from  EONIA  to  the  €STR  and  on  a  €STR-based  forward-looking  term  structure
methodology, 14 March.
By  contrast,  backward-looking  rates  based  on  the  €STR  can  be  calculated  as  of  October  2019  and  used
immediately to improve legal documentation.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
