Yandraduth  Googoolye:  The 
safeguarding correspondent banking
Speech by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Correspondent
Banking Academy hosted by Standard Chartered Bank, Port Louis, 27 May 2019.
importance  of  promoting  and
 Distinguished Guests
Ladies and Gentlemen
Good morning
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  in  your  midst  today.  I  wish  to  thank  Standard  Chartered  Bank
(Mauritius) Ltd for having organized this Correspondent Banking Academy and for inviting me to
share my thoughts with you.  
I  understand  that  the  Academy  was  launched  in  2015.  The  Standard  Chartered  Group  has
already reached out to more than 1,000 banks in over 70 countries through such academies. As
an  internationally  active  bank  with  a  presence  in  more  than  60  markets  around  the  world,
Standard Chartered Bank is an excellent launch pad for this session on correspondent banking.
Events such as these offer valuable opportunities for stakeholders to engage and share ideas.
Respondent banks will be provided with unique insights on the expectations of a global player
offering correspondent banking services. I would, therefore, urge bankers to make the most of
this  initiative.  It  will  help  them  clear  out  any  doubts  they  may  have  on  correspondent  banking
facilities.  
Correspondent  banking  is  as  old  as  international  finance.  It  is  the  lifeblood  of  international
payments and financial flows, and provides vital support to economic growth and development.
Global trade, remittances, portfolio and direct investment flows, and even humanitarian financial
flows across countries are fundamentally dependent on correspondent banking services. Today,
more than ever, our financial system is inextricably linked with those of other countries.
As with any other products offered by banks, the provision of correspondent banking services
entails certain risks. These risks stem predominantly from AML/CFT. In the recent past, several
international  banks  have  been  fined  heftily  for  shortcomings  in  their  AML/CFT  controls  and
processes. As  this  line  of  business  carries  high  volume  but  a  thin  margin,  many  banks  have
reconsidered  their  involvement  in  correspondent  banking  services.  International  banks  have
indicated  that  the  cost  of  compliance  dwarfs  the  business  returns  from  smaller  territories,
particularly if these are classified as high-risk clients and deal with high-risk products.
The  Financial  Stability  Board  had  previously  highlighted  that  the  corridors  for  correspondent
banking services were shrinking on a global basis.  Fewer institutions are now providing such
services. However, given that the volume of transactions is not declining, this development is
increasing the concentration risks posed by the reliance on only a few institutions.
1
The strategy of many international banks to retreat from the provision of correspondent banking
services has resulted in unintended consequences. Many banks have even shunted jurisdictions
by closing down their operations or disposing of them to other local players. Emerging markets
and developing economies are most affected by such moves. I need not delve on the turmoil our
continent could face if deprived of access to correspondent banking services. The implications
would be on several fronts, including trade, economic prospects, education, health, and poverty.
Only two weeks ago, I had pointed out during the 2019 AACB Continental Seminar that Africa is
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
far  more  dependent  on  overseas  trade  than  any  other  economic  region  or  global  player.
Correspondent banking has therefore a particular resonance to the continent. In 2018, the World
Bank released a report on the decline in access to correspondent banking services in emerging
markets.   The  report  highlighted  that  de-risking  has  had  cross-border  spill  over  effects,
especially in the Southern African Development Community.
2
Pan-African  banks  have  been  under  pressure  from  their  correspondents  to  refrain  from
conducting certain businesses with neighbouring countries to preserve access to correspondent
banking  services.  Consequently,  USD  clearing  has  been  terminated  or  restricted  in  several
countries. This has in turn further weakened some local economies.
The report also stated that there are concerns that de-risking has resulted in the creation of new,
informal channels. Money is now flowing through these channels, driving financial transactions
outside regulated channels. This development could potentially undermine AML/CFT objectives.
One of the suggested avenues in the World Bank Report to address the issue is to establish or
maintain open channels of communication between correspondent and respondent banks. The
aim is to increase the awareness of both correspondent and respondent banks on the country
context and their respective AML/CFT concerns.  
The initiative of Standard Chartered Bank to host today’s event is indeed commendable. We all
share a common goal: that of safeguarding the financial system from abuse. The Correspondent
Banking Academy constitutes an excellent communication platform between Standard Chartered
Bank (Mauritius) Ltd with its respondent banks and vice versa. It facilitates fruitful exchange of
experience and action plans put in place to address the AML/CFT concerns in correspondent
banking relationships.
It is my hope that today’s engagement will cement more progress in this area. One of the key
takeaways for respondent banks should be the specific measures they can implement to reduce
both their perceived and actual risk profiles to the satisfaction of correspondent banks.
At the level of the Bank of Mauritius, our approach has been characterized by an open door and
open dialogue policy. We are ever ready to have an open dialogue with correspondent banks to
explain the supervisory framework in Mauritius and give reassurance on its robustness.
AML/CFT is one of the key priorities for Mauritius and the Bank of Mauritius. As you are certainly
aware,  the  Mutual  Evaluation  Report  (MER)  of  the  assessment  of  the AML/CFT  measures  of
Mauritius  was  published  by  the  Eastern  and  Southern  Africa  Anti-Money  Laundering  Group
(ESAAMLG) in September 2018. The MER revealed that Mauritius had not done enough to keep
up with the changes which the FATF brought in 2012 to the International Standards on combating
money laundering and the financing of terrorism and proliferation. 
Following the revision of the FATF Recommendations in 2012, the assessment of compliance
with  the  FATF  Recommendations  is  not  limited  to  technical  compliance  and  the  forty
recommendations  made.    It  also  involves  an  assessment  of  the  effectiveness  of  a  country’s
AML/CFT systems with a view to ascertaining whether the country’s “financial systems and the
broader  economy  are  protected  from  the  threats  of  money  laundering  and  the  financing  of
terrorism, thereby strengthening financial sector integrity and contributing to safety and security.”
I must say that even before the publication of the Mauritius MER in September 2018, Mauritius
had already started bringing legislative amendments to various pieces of legislation—including
the Financial Intelligence and Anti-Money Laundering Act and the Banking Laws—to address the
deficiencies.  New regulations were promulgated under the Financial Intelligence and Anti-Money
Laundering Act in October 2018, which mirrored the provisions of the FATF Recommendations.
  Following  these  legislative  changes,  Mauritius  submitted  an  application  for  Technical
Compliance Re-rating of 12 recommendations, among which 11 were successfully upgraded.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Just last week¹, two new pieces of legislations were voted at the National Assembly. These are
the United Nations (Financial Prohibitions, Arms Embargo and Travel Ban) Sanctions Bill, and
the  Anti-Money  Laundering  and  Combatting  the  Financing  of  Terrorism  and  Proliferation
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill. 
  ¹ Tuesday 21 May 2019
The legislation reinforces the arsenal of Mauritius in the fight against financial crimes. They will
support  the  country’s  second  application  for  Technical  Compliance  rerating  on  20  FATF
Recommendations.    These  are  clear  testament  of  the  progress  made  in  addressing  the
deficiencies  identified  in  the  MER.  Technical  compliance  with  the  FATF  Recommendations,
however,  is  not  sufficient.    Mauritius  must  also  demonstrate  that  its  AML/CFT  systems  and
measures are effective.
The  fight  against  financial  crime  and  AML/CFT  is  one  that  requires  the  involvement  of  all
stakeholders. As a means of fostering closer collaboration amongst local authorities, two new
MOUs were signed on 19 September 2018 among the Financial Services Commission (FSC),
Bank of Mauritius and Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) on the one hand, and the FSC, FIU and
Independent Commission Against Commission, on the other hand. These two tripartite MOUs
add to the gamut of existing bilateral and multilateral MOUs.  In terms of coordinated actions with
foreign  authorities,  we  have,  as  of  date,  signed  memoranda  of  understanding  with  some  17
supervisory authorities for sharing of information and collaborative actions.
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  also  enhanced  its  internal  supervisory  framework  on AML/CFT  by
setting  up  a  dedicated  AML/CFT  team.  We  have  upgraded  the  AML/CFT  off-site  monitoring
supervisory toolkit through a revision of reporting requirements by banks. Further, with technical
assistance from the World Bank, we are implementing a Risk-Based Supervisory Framework
which includes a separate module for ML/FT risk. Significant progress has been achieved and
we expect to conduct a series of pilot run exercises shortly to test the frameworks.
Banks,  on  their  part,  are  expected  to  migrate  to  risk-based  internal  audit  framework  to
complement  the  risk-based  supervisory  framework.  Concurrently,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  is
working towards implementing a Central KYC Registry to facilitate the KYC procedure of banks.
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  you  will  appreciate  that  no  matter  how  elaborate,  effective  and
comprehensive our regulatory and supervisory framework is, there will always be some element
of residual risk that has to be managed by banks.
Let me also underscore that the fight for a clean and attractive international financial centre like
ours  is  the  concern  of  one  and  all,  and  is  an  ongoing  process.  Your  input  is  and  will  remain
valuable  as  we  continue  to  modernize  our  regulatory  framework.  We  shall  continue  to  work
towards a financial system that is as safe as possible. You will remain a privileged partner in that
process as we cannot achieve anything of substance without your cooperation. We look forward
to continued collaboration with all of you as usual.
With this final thought, I hope that by the end of today’s academy, we will have learnt from each
other  ways  and  means  of  improving  our  approach  to  strengthening  the  risk  management
framework for AML/CFT risks associated with correspondent banking relationships.
On behalf of the Bank of Mauritius, and in my own name, I wish every success to this event.
Thank you.
1
2
The Financial Stability Board. “FSB Correspondent Banking Data Report – Update Nov 2018.”
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
  2
The  World  Bank.  2018.  “The  Decline  in Access  to  Correspondent  Banking  Services  in  Emerging  Markets:
Trends, Impacts, and Solutions.”
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
