SPEECH 
    DATE: 
SPEAKER: 
VENUE: 
 
  18 September 2019 
Governor Stefan Ingves 
Business Arena Stockholm 
 
 SVERIGES RIKSBANK 
SE-103 37 Stockholm 
(Brunkebergstorg 11) 
 
Tel +46 8 787 00 00 
Fax +46 8 21 05 31 
registratorn@riksbank.se 
www.riksbank.se 
Housing market challenges – weighing 
today against tomorrow 
Today, I am going to talk about something that affects all of us: the housing mar-
ket. Everybody needs somewhere to live, regardless of whether this need is tem-
porary or more permanent. When the housing market functions well, people can 
find a home for every phase of their lives and it is relatively easy to find the kind 
of home they want and can afford. In addition, the development of prices is such 
that the differences between a person owning their home and one renting one 
are minor. 
However, in Sweden, the housing market does not work well and has not for 
some time. This has contributed towards rising housing prices for an extended pe-
riod. And this, in turn, has led to what I consider to be an unsustainable increase 
in household debt and has made both Swedish households and, ultimately, Swe-
dish banks and Sweden’s economy vulnerable. This is something that the Riks-
bank1 and other actors2 have emphasised for many years.  
The prolonged, steep rise in housing prices is fundamentally due to the housing 
market being dysfunctional for several reasons. Housing construction has long 
been at a low level for several reasons, including weak competition in the con-
struction sector, a low supply of land to build on and complex planning pro-
cesses.3 Neither has the design of the taxation system promoted mobility on the 
housing market, as it benefits homeowners ahead of renters. This is probably also 
helping to make the housing market more sluggish: the costs of moving are high 
at present, as taxation from the sale of a home is high compared with the current 
taxation of the home.  
The policy being conducted has distribution policy effects and has created a sys-
tem of insiders and outsiders on the housing market, which benefits households 
                                                           
1 See Financial Stability Report, Sveriges Riksbank. Ingves, S (2006) and S Ingves (2007). 
2 See, among others, European Commission (2019), IMF (2016), OECD (2019) and European Systemic Risk Board 
(2016). 
3 Emanuelsson, R. (2015). 
  1 [13] 
   that own their homes but, simultaneously, disadvantages households who are 
outside the housing market and have not been able to make corresponding de-
ductions or take advantage of the rising prices.  
The failure of the housing market to function is not just leading to problems linked 
to indebtedness and the accumulation of risks this involves. A non-functioning 
housing market can also form a threat to the healthy development of society and 
can thereby create conflicts of interest between generations. 
It will take time for the measures introduced to affect all house-
holds with mortgages 
It is now important to take measures to improve the long-term functioning of the 
housing market, which will both reduce the risks we find worrying and also create 
the conditions for the healthy development of society. Measures within several 
policy areas will be needed to achieve this. 
One area where we have seen measures is macroprudential policy. Finansin-
spektionen (the Swedish financial supervisory authority) has taken measures to 
reduce the risks inherent in household indebtedness and to increase resilience 
against shocks. This is welcome and positive. However, the measures introduced, 
such as a loan-to-value limit and amortisation requirements, affect new loans 
only, and it will therefore take time before they affect all households with mort-
gages.  
Some of the macroprudential policy measures have also been criticised. Among 
other things, the amortisation requirements have been accused of making it diffi-
cult for some groups, such as first-time buyers, to enter the housing market, as 
the requirements restrict households’ scope for borrowing. This is, however, part 
of the aim of the amortisation requirements and, without these restrictions, 
household indebtedness would also risk continuing to increase at an excessively 
rapid rate. Without an effective macroprudential policy, borrowing households 
would choose to borrow more and demand more housing, without considering 
that, when all borrowers behave like this, housing prices are pushed upwards.4 
Higher housing prices mean that borrowers must cut back on other consumption 
and work more, which decreases their welfare over the long term.5  
Today, I would like to discuss how we can balance today's challenges against to-
morrow’s gains. In my opinion, we must adopt measures that can be seen as 
costly today to solve problems that could improve the housing market in the long 
term. And managing the problems on the housing market will require other/more 
measures than those falling within the framework of macroprudential policy. 
For the Riksbank, it is important to monitor the housing market: it is well docu-
mented by empirical studies that a rapid increase in debt increases the probability 
of financial crises and falling prices on the housing market. The economy can also 
become more sensitive to various shocks if households (and companies) are highly 
                                                           
4 See, for example, Bäckman, C, C Lutz (2018) and Cunliffe, J (2019). 
5 See Finocchario et al. (2016). 
  2 [13] 
   indebted. The studies also show that, if the banking system has large exposures to 
the housing market, financial stability can be threatened.6 In the Riksbank’s task 
of promoting financial stability7, it is therefore important to ensure that the banks 
and their borrowers have resilience to shocks that could threaten financial stabil-
ity. In addition, if financial stability should start to falter, there exists a risk that it 
would become more difficult to conduct monetary policy. 
I am well aware that both functional authority and tools lie beyond the Riksbank’s 
remit, but as household debt and problems on the housing market affect the way 
the economy works, this development is also a source of unease for the Riksbank.  
Housing prices have been rising for a long time 
To begin with, I would like to say a few words on how housing prices have devel-
oped in Sweden. Since 2005, they have more than doubled, but the price rise 
started before then. The fact that housing prices have risen so rapidly for such a 
long period of time and are now historically high can be explained by factors such 
as the imbalance between supply and demand for housing, rising real wages and 
lower taxes, which have increased households’ disposable incomes. 8 
Housing prices fell in the autumn of 2017, but have since then recovered slightly. 
The fall in prices has also affected housing construction, which, after increasing 
strongly in recent years, slowed down again in 2018 and 2019. Over time, the de-
velopment of housing prices has contributed towards increasing household in-
debtedness, even if the slightly weaker development in recent years has contrib-
uted towards lending for household mortgages now increasing more slowly than 
previously. All in all, this has led to household debt as a proportion of disposable 
income (the debt-to-income ratio) staying relatively unchanged over the last year, 
but being expected to continue to increase over the coming years.9 The debt-to-
income ratio for the entire household sector is currently over 186 per cent. This is 
a high level, not just from a historical perspective but from an international one 
too. The Riksbank’s credit data on the stock of mortgage borrowers shows that 
households with mortgages had an average debt-to-income ratio of 338 per cent 
in September 2017, which is an increase of 36 percentage points compared to 
2011.10 The same data also shows that 31 per cent of households with mortgages 
(640,000 households) have a debt-to-income ratio exceeding 400 per cent and 13 
per cent (260,000 households) have a debt-to-income ratio exceeding 600 per 
cent. Since 2011, debt-to-income ratios have increased in all income groups. This 
means that households are becoming more sensitive to several types of changed 
economic conditions, such as rising interest rates, falling housing prices and 
higher unemployment. Allowing this trend to continue is not compatible with tak-
ing responsibility for the Swedish economy. 
                                                           
6 See, for example, Alter et al. (2018), Lombardi et al. (2017), Mian and Sufi (2018) or Emanuelsson et al. (2015) 
for a review of the literature. 
7 See Sveriges Riksbank (2013). 
8 Dermani et al. (2016).  
9 Sveriges Riksbank (2019). 
10 Blom and van Santen (2017). 
  3 [13] 
   The development of the housing market can affect confidence in 
the banks 
Another aspect of the Swedish housing market is that the banks, via their lending 
to both households and companies, are exposed to the property sector. Loans 
with homes and other kinds of property as collateral make up about 80 per cent 
of the major banks’ loans to Swedish households and companies. Loans to house-
holds for mortgage purposes make up the very greatest part of this. This exposure 
has increased over the last decade. Therefore, as I have pointed out on a number 
of previous occasions, what has happened is that the major banks that are usually 
described as commercial banks, have, in fact, become ‘mortgage banks’. The in-
creased lending depends, among other factors, on rapidly rising housing prices 
and historically low interest rates, but also on the number of households and 
completed homes having increased over the period. 11 
The banks fund these mortgages to a high degree on the capital market, in partic-
ular with covered bonds, the collateral for which is made up of mortgages. As 
mortgages have grown, so have the volumes of covered bonds, some of which are 
issued in foreign currency. Developments on the housing market can thus also af-
fect confidence in the banks and, in a bad situation, their funding could also be-
come both more expensive and more difficult to obtain. The fact that the major 
banks also own one another’s covered bonds increases the risks still further.  
Housing policy benefits certain groups  
Apart from rising housing prices leading to increased indebtedness for house-
holds, there are also other aspects of the housing market that are problematic.  
In labour market economics, a system of insiders and outsiders is discussed, 
where insiders on the labour market benefit, to a far greater degree, from labour 
legislation that protects them from unemployment and gives them a more advan-
tageous negotiating position for wage-setting and so on. At the same time, this 
makes it more difficult for outsiders to become established on the labour mar-
ket.12 Applied to the housing market, this reasoning could concern two areas.  
The first area concerns the dividing line between households on the rental mar-
ket: the insiders, who have master leases for rented flats, and the outsiders, who 
lack such leases despite being willing to pay rents that are actually higher than 
those paid by the insiders.13 Insiders on the rental market thus have a strong in-
terest in maintaining the rent-setting system and have a strong shared voice to ar-
gue their case thanks to interest groups.  
The second area concerns the differences in a wider sense between the insiders 
who own their homes and who have, in theory, strong economic interests in 
maintaining their strong position, and the outsiders who have great difficulty in 
entering the ‘owned’ housing market. Here, I will focus on this latter example. Put 
                                                           
11 Emanuelsson et al. (2018). 
12 See, for example, Lindbeck and Snower (2001). 
13 See Lindbeck (2016). 
  4 [13] 
   simply, what insiders have in common is that, due to their strong position on each 
market, they can influence decision-makers to maintain their advantages.  
‘Climbing the property ladder’ has become a concept in metro-
politan areas 
The property market contributes to substantial distributional effects in society.14 
Those people who own or have owned their home, the insiders, have benefited 
from the rapid rise in prices on the housing market. In step with these price rises, 
they have been able to realise gains upon the sale of their homes, which has al-
lowed them to purchase increasingly expensive homes. This, in turn, has pushed 
up prices further. In addition, households that own their homes have benefited 
from the taxation system. The home can be seen as a low tax capital investment 
and, ultimately, also as a kind of pension saving. Similarly, the conversion of rental 
properties to tenant-owned properties has brought major profits for tenants able 
to buy their own homes. It is said that people can ‘climb the property ladder’, 
which is to say earn money on owning their home – a concept that has become 
common, particularly in metropolitan areas. 
Thus, there have always been major economic gains to be made by people who 
have owned their homes and been able to take advantage of price increases. For a 
large proportion of households, housing has contributed towards an increase of 
their capital assets, which is reflected in the distribution of wealth.15 Previous fluc-
tuations in inflation, real interest rates and tax rules have created redistributions 
that have benefited certain generations at the cost of others and that have cre-
ated an economic middle class of middle-aged and older people with relatively 
strong economic resources. 
Increasingly difficult to enter the housing market 
At the same time, those people outside the owned housing market, the outsiders, 
have not been able to take advantage of this development, and the high prices 
have made it increasingly difficult for them to be able to purchase a home at all. 
Particularly in metropolitan areas, it is difficult to save enough for a down pay-
ment without help. Without parents who can contribute to a down payment or 
stand as co-borrower for a mortgage, it has become more difficult for many first-
time buyers to purchase a home. The development of the housing market has 
therefore led to great differences in possibilities for people to enter the housing 
market.  
Another aspect of the problems on the owned housing market is that the lack of 
opportunities to purchase a home forces many young people to sublet. Subletting 
is often expensive and insecure for the subtenant, at the same time as their con-
sumer protection is weak. Difficulties in finding a home also lead to problems in 
                                                           
14 Långtidsutredningen [Long-Term Survey of the Swedish Economy] (2015) and Jahnson, D. and J Lundberg 
(2013).  
15 Långtidsutredningen [Long-Term Survey of the Swedish Economy] (2003). 
  5 [13] 
   skills supply.16 It becomes difficult to attract labour to the major cities when it is 
impossible to find a home for a reasonable price.17 
I am concerned about this social development, as it is creating problems for eco-
nomic growth and economic distribution, and is increasing the likelihood of finan-
cial crises. It is of great importance that reforms are carried out to slow this devel-
opment down.  
Measures affecting all mortgage borrowers are absent  
Like the Riksbank, Finansinspektionen has drawn attention to households’ high in-
debtedness and has taken measures to reduce the risks and increase resilience 
among households. This has also contributed towards slowing down price growth 
for housing, although this was not the primary purpose of the measures.18 How-
ever, these macroprudential policy measures, such as a loan-to-value limit and 
amortisation requirements, are only aimed at new borrowers. Consequently, they 
mainly affect the conditions for the people I refer to as outsiders and, to some ex-
tent, could make it more difficult for them to enter the housing market.19 On the 
other hand, there are few measures affecting the stock of already existing loans, 
which means that the new rules affect insiders and outsiders differently.  
In a study, the Riksbank has demonstrated that an amortisation requirement 
aimed at all borrowers could reduce household debt over the long run and that 
this would also mean a redistribution of resources from lenders to borrowers.20 
The debate often disregards this distributional effect, as macroprudential policy 
measures are often assumed to be negative for borrowers in the short term, 
something I will return to later. The macroprudential policy measures in place to-
day patch up the problems that have arisen but very little has been done to man-
age the fundamental reasons for why the housing market functions poorly. In 
some areas, regulatory amendments have been made, for example regarding sub-
letting, investment support and permissible noise pollution levels around newly 
built homes. Essentially, however, no politicians have been willing to address the 
bigger issues, concerning the rent-setting system, property tax, tax deductions for 
interest payments and sales taxation of property, for example. 
The housing stock is not being utilised effectively 
Let me now develop my reasoning a little over how the housing market and taxa-
tion system could be contributing to rising housing prices and increased indebted-
ness, and thus to increasing risks in the economy. For example, tax deductions for 
interest payments and low property taxes are contributing towards lower housing 
costs for homeowners, which is increasing the incentive for households to take on 
                                                           
16 Swedish Trade Union Confederation (LO) (2014). 
17 Swedish Union of Tenants (Hyresgästföreningen) (2013). 
18 Among other things, Finansinspektionen has introduced a loan-to-value limit of 85 per cent (2010) and amorti-
sation requirements for mortgages (2016), as well as tightening the first amortisation requirement (2018). For a 
summary, see, for example, Thedéen (2017). 
19 Insiders can also be affected if they choose to change their borrowing. 
20 See Finocchario et al. (2016). 
  6 [13] 
   debt. Long queues for rental housing, above all in larger cities, may be contrib-
uting towards households feeling forced to purchase homes, which almost always 
requires taking on debt.  
There are also factors that are contributing towards the housing stock not being 
utilised more efficiently and the supply of housing thereby being limited. The cur-
rent rent-setting system means low rents for existing tenants while reducing their 
incentive to move. Stamp duties, such as registration of title and mortgage deeds, 
and the taxation of capital gains on housing sales, make it more expensive to 
move house and therefore do not promote mobility on the housing market either. 
In addition, weak competition in the construction sector, an insufficient supply of 
land for new homes, and comprehensive and complicated planning processes 
have long impeded housing construction. Housing construction certainly in-
creased a couple of years ago but the fact that the supply of housing was limited 
for a longer period has presumably contributed to higher housing prices and 
thereby also to higher indebtedness among households. 
By way of a simple mathematical example, I would now like to demonstrate how 
the design of the taxation system can affect incentives to relocate. As the current 
taxation of detached houses is low21, at the same time as the taxation of capital 
gains on sales is relatively high22, lock-in effects are created when prices have in-
creased as much as they have. Let us say that a household owns a detached house 
that is worth 5 million kronor but which was purchased for 2.5 million kronor 10 
years ago. The house is taxed every year with a property charge of just under 
8,000 kronor. If the household wishes to sell the house, for example to move to a 
smaller home, this will mean it will have to pay 550,000 kronor in capital gains tax 
upon sale. In addition, the household will have to pay stamp duty if it decides to 
buy a new detached house. If we assume that the household purchases a smaller 
and cheaper detached house for 3 million kronor, this will mean that, in addition 
to the capital gains tax, it will have to pay 1.5 per cent or 45,000 kronor in stamp 
duty in conjunction with the purchase. To this, can often be added costs for mort-
gaging the house. This means that the total taxation for this example household 
to relocate corresponds to about 600,000 kronor, which is a lot compared to the 
annual current taxation of only 8,000 kronor. I certainly think it is reasonable to 
pay tax on the profit from the sale of a home, in the same way as it is reasonable 
to pay tax on the profit from an investment of capital. And this is something 
households need to consider in their calculations. But if the level of taxation is too 
high when a property is sold, it can affect households’ willingness to relocate. The 
circumstance that some households are willing to put off the payment of capital 
gains tax until the future could be a sign that the ongoing level of taxation is too 
low in comparison to the level of taxation from a sale.  
All of this makes it important to make structural reforms in housing and tax policy. 
Our politicians urgently need to address the problems that have arisen and take a 
long-term socio-economic view of the housing market. 
                                                           
21 0.75 per cent of the tax value with a ceiling of 7,812 kronor. 
22 22 per cent. 
  7 [13] 
   The macroprudential policy measures have had the intended ef-
fect 
I support the measures taken by Finansinspektionen to manage the risks inherent 
in household indebtedness. Amortising mortgages is not unusual internationally. 
After all, a mortgage is a loan and should therefore be repaid. Sweden has previ-
ously stood out in international comparisons concerning amortisation culture and 
the high proportion of interest-only loans.23 It is therefore reasonable that Fi-
nansinspektionen has introduced amortisation requirements.  
The amortisation requirements have, however, come in for some criticism. One of 
the arguments is that first-time buyers without high incomes and wealth are ex-
cluded from the market, which ultimately also affects new construction and the 
construction sector. Naturally, it is correct that the macroprudential policy 
measures affect the borrowing potential of mortgage borrowers. But this is also 
part of the actual point of the measures. All other factors being equal, amortisa-
tion requirements must also have a restraining effect on the development of 
prices.  
As far as we can see, these requirements have more or less had the effect that 
could have been expected: credit expansion has slowed down a bit and people 
who were previously taking very large loans are now taking smaller loans.24 Ac-
cording to the random sample from 2018 upon which Finansinspektionen’s latest 
mortgage survey is based, the average debt-to-income ratio among new mortgage 
borrowers is 398 per cent, which is slightly lower than in the previous year. The 
proportion of new mortgage borrowers with mortgages exceeding 450 per cent of 
their annual gross income also fell between 2017 and 2018. The fact that many 
new mortgage borrowers are choosing to borrow amounts just below the stricter 
amortisation requirement indicates that this has affected households’ propensity 
to take out very large loans in relation their incomes and, ultimately, the kinds of 
objects they are deciding to purchase.25 
If a household has previously wanted to purchase a one bedroom flat in a metro-
politan area at a price of just over 2,500,000 kronor, the macroprudential policy 
measures have made it more difficult for the household to purchase this object. 
However, it is important to use the terms correctly. Those households that have 
been affected by the amortisation requirements and that want to purchase a ten-
ant-owned apartment have not been excluded from the housing market, but only 
from purchasing that one-bedroom flat for 2,500,000 kronor. Such households 
can, instead, choose to purchase another one-bedroom flat for a lower price. It 
should also be remembered that households still have the possibility of borrowing 
large amounts to finance housing purchases. I consider that it is therefore some-
what misleading to claim that certain groups have been completely ‘excluded’ 
from the housing market due to the amortisation requirements.  
As far as newly built homes go, these are exempt from the amortisation require-
ments and it is up to individual banks to decide whether their customer’s credit 
                                                           
23 European Commission (2019). 
24 Finansinspektionen (2019). 
25 See also Cunliffe (2019) for similar results in the United Kingdom.  
  8 [13] 
   rating makes additional amortisation necessary. Consequently, the amortisation 
requirements, at present, should benefit newly built tenant-owned apartments. 
The aim of the macroprudential policy measures is to strengthen households’ 
long-term resilience in two ways: by ensuring that they do not borrow excessive 
amounts in relation to their incomes or the value of their homes, and to encour-
age households to create buffers by gradually amortising their loans. High stress 
rates in the calculations made by the banks to estimate households’ ability to re-
pay loans are, in turn, aimed at ensuring that the households will be able to cope 
with a significantly higher level of interest rates than prevails at present.26 If a 
household fails the credit assessment, it is conceivable that the household will 
have to increase the proportion of capital it invests, borrow less and/or purchase 
a cheaper home. The solution for improving the functioning of housing provision 
cannot be to force young households deep into debt with all the risks this entails. 
There are numerous historical examples of how such a development has created 
problems for both individual households and society as a whole. 
At an aggregated level, households have relatively high savings and substantial as-
sets. However, since 2007, there is no information on how assets and savings are 
distributed among households, and consequently neither on how much savings 
the most indebted households have. Nevertheless, there are signs that the most 
highly indebted households have significantly fewer liquid assets in relation to 
their income than households who are less indebted.27 Better information on 
household wealth is something that the Riksbank has been requesting for a long 
time.  
Structural reforms are needed to manage the challenges on the 
housing market 
I am well aware that it is not part of the Riksbank's mandate to manage problems 
on the housing market and that many of these issues are of a political nature. 
However, it cannot be disregarded that the housing market is part of Sweden’s 
economy and thereby affects how the economy functions. The economy becomes 
more sensitive to shocks if households (and companies) are highly indebted and, 
consequently, the housing market is of interest to the Riksbank. A poorly function-
ing housing market affects us all in the long term.  
If I had been free to wish for certain reforms to improve the housing market and 
slow indebtedness down, the amortisation requirements may not have been at 
the very top of my list, even if it is a good measure. However, the fundamental 
problems on the housing market and in household debt cannot be solved merely 
by introducing amortisation requirements. It would have been better to have 
measures to manage the basic problems: an undersized and unbalanced supply of 
housing, combined with a tax system that distorts both the choice of form of ten-
ure and the choice between investing in home ownership and in other assets. 
However, it is clear that it is difficult, politically, to make such reforms. 
                                                           
26 Banks are obliged to carry out credit checks to ensure that borrowers can fulfil their undertakings. As part of 
these checks, banks draw up so-called discretionary income calculations. 
27 Flodén et al. (2016).  
  9 [13] 
   Occasional reforms to certain parts of tax and housing policies will probably not 
be enough to create a reasonably efficient housing market. When you make loose 
adjustments in tax or credit rules, and thus affect housing prices, we get clear win-
ners and losers. A comprehensive review of these areas is instead needed, to-
gether with a broad reform package that creates a better balance between de-
mand and supply, so that we can avoid having to patch up problems as they occur. 
I would now like to examine the areas that I consider need to be reviewed first of 
all, but I would also like to repeat that it is not part of the Riksbank’s mandate to 
suggest optimal tax systems or give instructions for how housing policy should be 
designed. On the other hand, it seems reasonable that we should continue to 
highlight those factors that are contributing to the housing market functioning 
poorly and to the accumulation of imbalances in the financial system.  
Tax policy: As I mentioned earlier, the taxation system contributes to the imbal-
ances on the housing market. Tax reforms to reduce households’ incentives to 
take on debt could reduce these imbalances.  
Tax policy is not optimally designed either from the stability of financial stability 
and the Riksbank has previously pointed to tax relief on interest expenditure, 
property tax and capital gains tax as areas that need to be reviewed. This is not 
necessarily a matter of having to increase total taxation or adopt individual 
measures, but rather of reforming the entire taxation system in a way that creates 
incentives for increased mobility and makes it easier to utilise existing housing at 
the same time as it decreases incentives for indebtedness.  
With regard to tax regulations for homeowners, these could be designed in differ-
ent ways, either by regular taxation of the actual home or by taxing their purchase 
and sale. To reduce the lock-in effects and increase mobility in the housing stock, 
a review is needed of capital gains taxation when homes are sold, of property tax-
ation and of the current tax relief on interest expenditure.  
Housing policy: The fundamental causes of increasing indebtedness need to be 
addressed. The fact that the housing market is functioning poorly, among other 
reasons due to the construction of new homes not corresponding to the demand, 
is an important cause of the indebtedness. It is therefore necessary to introduce 
measures that create a better balance between supply and demand for housing.  
Another reason why the housing market is functioning poorly is that the rent-set-
ting system creates housing supply limits and lock-in effects that make it particu-
larly difficult to find housing, particularly for young people and for people who are 
not yet established on the housing market. More rented accommodation would 
probably improve the balance of supply and demand. In addition, it is important 
to have measures that lead to the existing housing stock being used more effi-
ciently. Suggestions in the area are not lacking either. See, for example, the re-
cently published special study on more flexible rent-setting and uniform taxation 
from Finanspolitiska rådet (the Swedish fiscal policy council). 28 If such reforms are 
adopted, complaints over the amortisation requirements will also decrease. 
                                                           
28 Finanspolitiska rådet (2019). 
  10 [13] 
   “My vision”  
As you see, I have a strong desire for the housing market to change from the way 
it is today. But achieving this will take political will and the courage to take diffi-
cult decisions. 
Earlier, I discussed the phenomenon of insiders and outsiders on the housing mar-
ket and the fact that the measures Finansinspektionen has adopted so far to re-
duce the risks inherent in household indebtedness mainly affect outsiders. The re-
forms I have discussed today would also affect the conditions for insiders on the 
housing market. They are in a strong position, which has probably contributed to 
the desired reforms having failed to materialise so far. These are difficult deci-
sions that must be taken, and they will affect many people. It is therefore im-
portant that reforms be implemented in stages, so that insiders gradually have 
time to adapt to new conditions. 
Having said this, I consider it important to look at the housing market from a long-
term socio-economic perspective. Is it reasonable for today’s housing market, 
with all its shortcomings, to be preserved so that the social group that owns its 
own housing can watch its wealth increase at the expense of those groups who 
are finding it increasingly difficult to buy housing at all? I consider it to be of socio-
economic interest to adopt the necessary measures now, for the sake of coming 
generations, so that they can have the opportunity to find housing that suits them 
in their current phase of life. In addition, there will hardly be a better occasion to 
introduce the various measures, as Swedish households are currently living in an 
economy with historically low interest rates and low inflation.  
In my opinion, to achieve a better situation for coming generations, we need to 
create a new, lower adjusted equilibrium on the housing market. This would also 
contribute towards reducing the differences between insiders and outsiders – the 
haves and the have-nots. Furthermore, household indebtedness would gradually 
decrease and would no longer create economic risks in the same way. I am aware 
that these measures would affect my generation’s housing assets today. But my 
opinion is that they need to be implemented so that the housing market in Swe-
den can function well tomorrow.  
 
 
   11 [13] 
   References 
Alter, A, Feng, A and N Valckx (2018), “Understanding the macro-financial effects 
of household debt: A global perspective”, IMF Working Papers No 18/76. 
Bäckman, C and C Lutz (2018), ”The impact of interest-only loans on affordability”, 
Regional Science and Urban Economics. 
Cunliffe, J (2019), “Housing tools revisited”, Bank of England.  
Dermani, E, Lindé, J, and K Walentin (2016),”Is a bubble forming in Swedish hous-
ing pices?”, Economic Review 2016:2. Sveriges riksbank. 
Emanuelsson, R (2015), ”Supply of housing in Sweden”. Economic Review 2015:2. 
Sveriges riksbank. 
Emanuelsson, R, Katinic, G and E Spector (2018), ”Developments in the housing 
market and their contribution to household debt”, Economic Commentary no. 14. 
Sveriges Riksbank. 
Emanuelsson, R, Melander, O and J Molin (2015), “Financial risks in the household 
sector”, Economic Commentary no. 6. Sveriges Riksbank. 
European Commission (2019), Country Report Sweden. 
European Systemic Risk Board (2016). ESRB/2016/11 on medium-term vulnerabili-
ties in the residential real estate sector of Sweden, September 2016.  
Flodén, M, Kilström, M, Sigurdsson, J and R Vestman (2016), Household debt and 
monetary policy: revealing the cash-flow channel. Swedish House of Finance Re-
search Paper No.  
Finansinspektionen (2019), The Swedish mortgage market. 
Finanspolitiska rådet (2019), ”Friare hyressättning och likformig bostadsbeskatt-
ning – Hur påverkas hushållen?” (“More flexible rent-setting and uniform taxation 
– How would households be affected?”), Särskilda studier från Finanspolitiska 
rådet (Special studies from the Swedish fiscal policy council). 
Finocchiaro, D, Jonsson, M, Nilsson, C and I Strid, (2016), “Macroeconomic effects 
of reducing household debt”, Economic Review 2016:2. Sveriges Riksbank. 
Swedish Union of Tenants (Hyresgästföreningen) (2013). “Hyresrättens betydelse 
för en dynamisk arbetsmarknad” (“The significance of rented accommodation for 
a dynamic labour market”).  
IMF (2016), Financial System Stability Assessment Sweden.  
Ingves, S (2006). “Introduction on monetary policy”, speech to Riksdag Committee 
on Finance. Sveriges Riksbank. 
Ingves, S (2007). “Housing and monetary policy - a view from an inflation targeting 
central bank”, speech at Jackson Hole. Sveriges Riksbank.  
Jahnson, D. and J Lundberg (2013). “Fördelningseffekter av utbudsrestriktioner på 
bostadsmarknaden” (“Distribution effects of supply restrictions in the housing 
market”), Reform Institute. 
  12 [13] 
   Swedish Trade Union Confederation (LO) (2014), “Bostadsbrist och arbetsmarknad 
– hur får vi en bostadsmarknad i balans?” (“Housing shortages and the labour 
market – how do we achieve a balanced housing market?”) 
Lindbeck, A and D Snower (2001), “Insiders vs outsiders”, Journal of Economic Per-
spectives, Vol. 15 No.  
Lindbeck, A (2016), “Hur avveckla hyreskontrollen?” (“How can rent controls be 
dismantled?”), Ekonomisk Debatt no. 7. 
Lombardi, M, Madhusudan, M and I Shim (2017),”The real effects of household 
debt in the short and long run”, BIS Working Papers No 607. 
Långtidsutredningen (Long-Term Survey of the Swedish Economy) (2003), 
Fördelningspolitikens mål och medel – Bilaga 8 (Distribution policy’s objectives and 
means – Annex 8). 
Långtidsutredningen (Long-Term Survey of the Swedish Economy) (2015), Bos-
tadsmarknaden och den ekonomiska utvecklingen – Bilaga 3 (The housing market 
and economic development – Annex 3). 
Mian, A and A Sufi (2018), “Finance and business cycles: The credit-driven house-
hold demand channel”, NBER Working Paper No 24322. 
OECD (2019). OECD Economic Surveys: Sweden, March 2019.  
Thedéen, E (2017),”Banking capital in times of stress”, speech at UBS Annual Nor-
dic Financial Services Conference. Finansinspektionen. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2013), The Riksbank and financial stability. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2019), Monetary Policy Report, July. 
  13 [13] 
