Yves Mersch: Necessity, proportionality and probity – central bank
independence in unconventional times
Speech by Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
conference “The ECB and its watchers XX”, Frankfurt am Main, 27 March 2019.
Introduction
 1
The benefits of central bank independence have been established and demonstrated time and
again. Inflation is costly.  History shows that governments lack the credibility to commit to time-
consistent  monetary  policy,  and  often  subordinate  it  to  other  priorities.   Faced  with  elections,
governments are tempted to boost short-term growth by stoking unexpected inflation. But in the
long  run,  this  just  raises  inflation  expectations  without  any  benefit  to  growth.  By  delegating
monetary policy to an independent, accountable central bank with a narrow mandate for price
stability, democracies have found a way to reduce costly inflation without incurring output losses
3
over the medium term.
2
Despite this successful track record – or perhaps because of it – central bank independence has
been  recently  questioned.  In  particular,  it  is  argued  that  central  bank  independence  is  only
justified  if  distributional  effects  are  comparatively  small.  Critics  claim  that  unconventional
measures  have  large  distributional  effects  across  households,  industrial  sectors  and  even
countries, and thus stray into the realms of economic and fiscal policy.
This debate has led to a wealth of academic literature being published on the ideal conditions for
delegating powers and coordination between policies.  To be clear from the outset: it is the task
of  safeguarding  the  purchasing  power  of  the  currency  that  requires  shelter  from  political
influence. The same degree of independence is not necessarily justified for other policy areas
5
entrusted to central banks that lie beyond this mandate.
4
That  is  why  I  have  repeatedly  encouraged  a  functional  approach  to  the  concept  of
6
independence.
Given  my  audience  today,  I  will  not  discuss  microprudential  supervision  or  financial  stability
considerations.  Instead,  I  will  focus  on  practical  advice  on  how  we  should  act  in  the  current
environment to best achieve our primary mandate and preserve independence – independence
that remains necessary to ensure long-run price stability.
In  this  vein,  I  believe  there  are  three  watchwords  that  should  guide  our  actions:  necessity,
proportionality and probity – as several judicial reviews have confirmed.
Necessity
To put these watchwords in context, let me recall the economic conditions at the time the ECB
decided to implement unconventional measures.
The euro area economy had undergone a double-dip recession. Inflation outcomes flirted with
deflation,  and  there  were  signs  that  inflation  expectations  were  becoming  de-anchored.  The
transmission of monetary policy across the whole euro area was impaired. Fiscal policy offered
little  by  way  of  countercyclical  stabilisation.  Traditional  monetary  policy  had  reached  its  limits,
with nominal interest rates close to zero and some contemporary measures of real equilibrium
interest rates below zero.
The choice for the ECB at the time was stark. We could either restrict ourselves to conventional
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
monetary  policy,  and  fail  to  fulfil  our  price  stability  mandate.  Or  we  could  implement
unconventional measures, and respect our mandate.
I would argue that there was no real choice.
The  Treaty  affords  us  broad  discretion  in  our  choice  of  tools  to  honour  our  price  stability
mandate.  But  it  offers  no  discretion  whatsoever  in  the  choice  of  whether  or  not  we  fulfil  that
mandate. These are the only conditions under which central bank independence is sustainable.
That is the essence of my first watchword – necessity. By carrying out monetary policy using a
range of additional tools that were legally available to us – and used successfully by other central
banks in advanced economies – the ECB supported the recovery and helped ensure a sustained
adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation.  We  would  not  have  managed  this  without  unconventional
measures.   I  do  not  believe  that  central  bank  independence  is  sustainable  if  unelected
bureaucrats refuse to take the actions necessary to honour their legal mandate.
7
It is true that some of these tools have been unpopular, but central banks are no strangers to
unpopularity. Indeed, if acting in the best interests of long-term prosperity were always popular,
monetary policy could safely be left in the hands of politicians.
Proportionality
But does necessity mean that all actions are justified when pursuing our price stability mandate?
The short answer is no.
Policymakers  need  to  take  into  account  not  just  the  impact  their  tools  have  for  their  primary
purpose, but also any potential side effects. Policy needs to maintain proportionality – my second
watchword for today.
Proportionality is one of the basic legal principles of the architecture of the European Union. It is
enshrined in the foundational Treaties and demands that the content and form of Union action
should not exceed what is necessary to achieve the objectives of the Treaties. For monetary
policy,  proportionality  implies  that  the  ECB’s  actions  must,  first,  be  suitable  to  address  the
identified risks to price  stability.  Second,  the  ECB’s  measures  must  be  necessary  to  achieve
their intended objective. In other words, alternative monetary policy measures that entail more
limited  action  would  not  enable  the  objective  to  be  achieved  as  effectively  and  rapidly.  Third,
proportionality stricto  sensu  implies  that  the  expected  benefits  of  the  ECB’s  actions  must
outweigh their costs.
These  principles  provide  for  a  hierarchy  of  tools,  where  unconventional  measures  should  be
used only once conventional measures have been exhausted.
Let  me  address,  then,  the  criticism  that  the  distributional  consequences  of  unconventional
monetary policy undermine central bank independence.
It is worth recalling that monetary policy always has distributional effects.
Cutting short-term interest rates tends to reduce the income of savers and boost the income of
debtors  and  the  wealth  of  asset  holders.  It  also  affects  incomes  through  the  macroeconomic
effects on employment and wages. In short, not only does conventional monetary policy have
distributional  effects,  it  partly  works through  causing  them.  In  normal  times,  these  effects  are
viewed as being of secondary importance to the aggregate welfare benefits of price stability. In
other words, they are proportionate.
Moreover, any distributional consequences of monetary policy action need to be set against the
distributional  consequences  of inaction.  Sudden,  unexpected  deflation  has  distributional
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
consequences.  Ten  million  more  people  are  now  employed  in  the  euro  area  than  when
unemployment  peaked  –  this  number  would  be  much  smaller  had  the  ECB  not  acted,  even
though  we  only  have  a  narrow  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability  that  does  not  cover
employment.
The ECB also attempted to minimise unwanted side effects by carefully designing our tools. For
example,  it  became  clear  that  our  asset  purchase  programme  (APP)  was  contributing  to
challenging  conditions  in  the  repo  market.   By  the  end  of  2016,  around  half  of  German
government  bonds  were  trading  “special”  –  that  is,  at  a  premium  to  general  collateral.  We
modified our securities lending programme, including by accepting cash as collateral, to mitigate
the impact of the APP on repo markets. Today, the share of specials is generally below 10%.
8
In  general,  prevention  is  better  than  cure.  That’s  why  we  established  many  safeguards  and
restrictions, particularly in our public sector purchase programme, to avoid interfering with fiscal
and economic policy and providing monetary financing to governments. The stringent eligibility
criteria and issue and issuer limits are examples of self-imposed restrictions which have been
vetted by the European Court of Justice.  Independence and the prohibition of monetary financing
prevent central banks from behaving as a fiscal substitute.
9
We have also increased transparency and enhanced accountability measures – the necessary
counterparts  of  independence.  Notably,  this  includes  publishing  the  accounts  of  the  monetary
policy discussion in the Governing Council.
The  takeover  of  banking  supervision  was  accompanied  by  additional  and  more  far-reaching
accountability obligations, such as the Interinstitutional Agreement with the European Parliament
and a number of memoranda of understanding with other institutions. A separation principle was
established; and supervision does not have broad regulatory powers like in monetary policy.
So while our unconventional measures undoubtedly have side effects, the essential point is that
these side effects are not manifestly disproportionate to the primary objective of the measures –
contributing to price stability. But we have to continuously monitor the ongoing appropriateness of
our  measures  in  order  to  preserve  the  balance  between  costs  and  benefits.  And  while  the
growing number of new tools and activities has moved the actions of the central bank closer to
other policy realms, the boundary was never crossed – as confirmed by the European Court of
Justice. Therefore, the use of such measures during the crisis does not represent a break with
the framework that justifies central bank independence.
But  we  continue  to  assess  the  impact  of  our  measures,  and  of  negative  interest  rates  in
particular,  on  areas  such  as  bank  profitability,  and  to  consider  whether  our  mix  of  policy
measures remains suitable and proportionate.
Probity
My final watchword refers not to how policymakers conduct policy, but to their personal conduct.
At a time of increased external pressure on central banks, it is important that policymakers act
with probity.
The  Treaty  affords  significant  personal  independence  to  members  of  the  ECB’s  Governing
Council. These provisions play a vital role in our unique institutional framework, since monetary
policy  must  be  appropriate  for  euro  area-wide  conditions,  which  may  be  different  from  the
conditions in a policymaker’s home country. By providing strong protections for sitting Governing
Council members, the Treaty aims to isolate them from political pressure.
These  protections  also  come  with  an  obligation  to  act  in  a  responsible  manner  at  all  times.
Inappropriate  behaviour  by  policymakers  can  damage  the  reputation  of  central  banks  and  be
used  by  politicians  to  build  a  narrative  against  independence.  This  is  why  we  publish  the
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
calendars of the members of the Executive Board, as well as their speaking points when talking
behind closed doors. In the long run, we can only remain isolated from political pressure if we
separate ourselves from political debate.
Conclusion
The multiple crises of recent years have forced the ECB to venture into unknown territory to fulfil
its primary mandate.
Undesirable but unavoidable side effects of monetary policy measures and the expansion of our
activities into the vicinity of other policy areas have led to attacks on the ECB’s independence.
Although the highest Court confirmed that the unconventional measures taken by the ECB were
legal, the subjective – albeit erroneous – impression of a breach of mandate has been enough to
trigger increased political pressure.
The best protection against – unjustified – attacks on the independence of monetary policy is
therefore  a  narrower  mandate  combined  with  a  high  degree  of  transparency  and  the  strict
interpretation of legal limits. In this respect, a broader mandate in some jurisdictions warrants a
clear distinction between government tasks and ancillary central bank tasks. As to supervision
operational autonomy is of the essence but of a nature that is functionally determined. Monetary
policy independence extends indeed to a broader regulation power and a role as “guardian of the
Treaty”.
For monetary policy this does not mean, however, that we will inevitably and over-hastily return to
the  limited  set  of  instruments  and  the  balance  sheet  size  of  the  pre-crisis  period.  Regulatory
changes and the enduring fragmentation of European financial markets may in the future require
some adjustments to our operational framework for monetary policy within our well-established
strategy. However, whatever a future monetary policy framework may look like, it must be based
exclusively on the price stability mandate and set up within legal limits.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Costs  of  inflation  include  the  sub-optimal  allocation  of  goods  and  activities,  so-called  shoe  leather  costs,
distortions  to  the  tax  system  and  costs  associated  with  the  de-anchoring  of  inflation  expectations.  For  a
summary, see ECB (2011), The monetary policy of the ECB.
See Kydland, F. and Prescott, E. (1977), “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans”,
Journal  of  Political  Economy,  Vol.  85,  No  3,  pp.  473–491;  and  Barro,  R.  and  Gordon,  D.  (1983),  “Rules,
discretion and reputation in a model of monetary policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 12, No 1, pp. 101–
121.
See,  among  many  others:  Alesina,  A.  and  Summers,  L.  (1993),  “Central  Bank  Independence  and
Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 25, No
2, pp. 151–162; Cukierman, A., Webb, S. and Neyapti, B. (1992), “Measuring the Independence of Central Banks
and Its Effect on Policy Outcomes”, The World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 6, No 3, pp. 353–398; and Berger,
H., de Haan, J. and Eijffinger, S. (2001), “Central Bank Independence: An Update of Theory and Evidence”,
Journal of Economic Surveys, Vol. 15, No 1, pp. 3-40.
See, for example, Tucker, P. (2018), “Pristine and Parsimonious Policy: Can Central Banks Ever Get Back to It
and Why They Should Try”, in Hartmann, P., Huang, H. and Schoenmaker, D. (eds.),  The Changing Fortunes of
Central Banking, Cambridge University Press. See also Summers, L. (2017), “Central Bank Independence”,
Bank of England: ‘Independence – 20 years on’ Conference.
There appear to be almost no limits to the ideas for new fields of activity to entrust to central banks, as our long
list  of  opinions  on  the  subject  shows.  See,  for  example,  the  ECB  opinions  mentioned  in  the  ECB’s 2018
Convergence Report, pp. 30–32.
Mersch, Y. (2017), “Central bank independence revisited”, keynote address at the Symposium on Building the
Financial System of the 21st Century: An Agenda for Europe and the United States.
There  is  a  wide  range  of  empirical  evidence  demonstrating  the  effectiveness  of  unconventional  measures
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
across a range of countries. See, for example: Joyce, M., Lasaosa, A., Stevens, I. and Tong, M. (2011), “The
Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdom”, International Journal of Central Banking,
Vol. 7, No 3, pp. 113–161; Wu J. and Xia, F. (2016), “Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy at
the Zero Lower Bound”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 48, No 2-3, pp. 253–291; and Eser, F. and
Schwaab, B. (2016), “Evaluating the impact of unconventional monetary policy measures: Empirical evidence
from the ECB’s Securities Markets Programme”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 119, No 1, pp. 147–167.
See  Hammermann,  F.,  Leonard,  K.,  Nardelli,  S.  and  von  Landesberger,  J.  (2019),  “Taking  stock  of  the
Eurosystem’s asset purchase programme after the end of net asset purchases”, Economic Bulletin, ECB, Issue
2.
See Judgment of 11 December 2018 in case C-493/17 (Weiss and Others).
8
9
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
