Yakiv  Smolii:  Opening  speech  "Central  Bank  Communications:
From Mystery to Transparency"
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Yakiv  Smolii,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Ukraine,  at  the  fourth
Annual Research Conference "Central Bank Communications: From Mystery to Transparency",
hosted by the National Bank of Ukraine in collaboration with the National Bank of Poland, Kyiv, 23
May 2019.
Dear participants,
 I  take  tremendous  pleasure  in  opening  the  fourth  Annual  Research  Conference,  which  the
National Bank of Ukraine is hosting in collaboration with Narodowy Bank Polski. Representatives
of the central banking community from over 30 countries are gathered here today. That includes
Europe,  North America,  Latin America, Asia,  and Africa.  I  am  glad  to  see  more  international
participants this year than in the past years. 
We are all different. We have different economic models. We face different problems and have
different ways of resolving them:
Advanced  economies  are  busy  fixing  the  problem  of  negative  interest  rates  and  their
normalization.
Emerging markets are worried about a potential capital outflow affecting their currencies.
Exporter countries are concerned that the global economy is cooling off.
Importer countries are keeping a close eye on commodity prices.
But what brings us all together is the need to answer one question: how to make ourselves heard
in  a  world  overwhelmed  with  information?  What  is  more,  how  are  independent  central  banks
supposed to survive in a world of post-truth, where emotions draw more attention than facts and
where populism spreads like a virus?
Gone are the days when central banks could afford to be closed technocratic institutions that
spoke in numbers and vague terms. In this day and age, central banking is, first and foremost,
about transparency, openness, and accountability. In the years to come, central banks will have
to be client-oriented and capable of maintaining direct dialogue with the public.
That is why not only central bankers have gathered in Kyiv today. Among those present here
today are journalists, analysts, financial market players, academicians, government officials, and
representatives of international institutions. All of them are clients of central banks. 
Last year, we developed and made public the first-ever medium-term Strategy of the National
Bank of Ukraine. To us, this is a milestone document since it identifies seven strategic goals that
the  NBU  as  an  institution  will  have  to  meet  in  the  next  few  years.  Thus,  the  medium-term
Strategy gives the public a simple outline of what the NBU expects to achieve. However, this is
not the Strategy’s only feature. Also for the first time ever, we have changed the philosophy of our
relationship with individuals and institutions as clients with which we interact and for which we
work every day.
Paraphrasing what President Kennedy said in his inauguration speech over 60 years ago, I would
say, “ask not what your stakeholders can do for your central bank – ask what your central bank
can do for its stakeholders.”
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The need to be client-oriented sets a new and, let’s be frank, a high bar for the ability of central
banks  to  build  and  maintain  dialogue.  It  goes  without  saying  that  central  banks  use
communications as an important policy tool. But it is important to remember that transparency
must be effective. It must help central bank pursue its mandate, which consists in ensuring price
and  financial  stability.  During  these  two  days,  we  will  discuss  this  aspect  of  central  bank
transparency on more than one occasion. But it’s time for us to admit that this passive, one-way
communication,  when  central  banks  used  to  make  everybody  listen  with  bated  breath  to
whatever scanty and vague words they had to offer, no longer works. Ultimately, this approach
undermines the effectiveness of central bank policy. 
“If you don’t understand us, it’s your problem” is the rhetoric that is outdated and obsolete. Today,
if  you  –  our  clients  –  have  difficulty  understanding  us,  it’s  our  problem.  Institutions  that  make
themselves heard and understood are the only ones that get public trust. Institutions that have
public trust are the only ones that receive support and commitment. Institutions that have public
support  are  the  only  ones  that  can  withstand  the  pressure  of  populism,  fake  news,
manipulations,  and  attempts  to  turn  these  institutions  into  instruments  for  certain  business
interests that run counter to the interests of the people.
Under these circumstances, the central bank should transform taking the corporate sector as an
example  and  begin  to  finally  listen  to  clients  and  seek  two-way  communication.  When
communicating with clients, the central bank should take an individual approach to every client,
choosing words that are intelligible and important and ones that interest the client. At the same
time, the central bank must choose communication platforms that are suitable for every party.
Long  story  short,  the  need  to  be  client-oriented  compels  banks  to  transition  to  targeted
communications. 
We at the NBU have been moving in that direction for five years running. The groundwork for
greater transparency was laid in 2015, when the NBU gained true institutional independence and
the mandate to pursue price and financial stability. As with every central bank, we started out with
a  classic  toolkit:  banks,  experts,  and  the  media  with  which  we  communicated  through  press
releases, press briefings, meetings, and interviews. However, the financial and economic crises,
which prompted the NBU to develop more rapidly, compelled us to take our communications to a
higher level of transparency.
Yes, strangely enough, it took a crisis to inspire that change!
With  a  large-scale  cleanup  of  the  banking  system  underway,  peaking  inflation,  noticeable
depreciation  of  the  hryvnia,  international  reserves  at  an  all-time  low,  and  the  prospect  of
significant  repayments  on  public  debt  looming  ahead,  Ukraine  was  going  through  a  severe
economic crisis. Add to this the fact that public confidence in government institutions was at its
lowest, government communications were in tatters, the media market was underwater, and the
expert community was stagnating.
Any institution would opt to become even more closed in those circumstances. But we made an
opposite decision. We adopted the new culture and values that are built around responsibility to
the  public.  We  decided  that  breaking  the  silence  was  the  only  way  to  fight  back  the  endless
attacks by oligarch bankers, manipulations by politicians, and a downpour of fake news.
Since then, we have strived to explain our actions to the public every step of the way. We have
expanded  our  audience  to  include  businesses,  nonbank  financial  institutions,  academia,
students, and – most important – the general public. We commit to be accountable before the
people  for  our  actions  and  our  words.  We  clearly  declare  the  opportunities  and  challenges
Ukraine faces.
We  not  only  communicate  with  clients  through  our  official  website  and  the  media,  but  also
gradually learn to be the media, communicating directly with the public on five social media. We
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
counter  fake  news  with  fact-checking  and  are  not  afraid  to  speak  up  when  we  see  a  storm
approaching that threatens to engulf the country.
Over time, we came to a conclusion that, when choosing with whom to communicate, central
banks must also address the questions of what, how, and where to say. And so, we realized
which direction we should take as evolved. This led us to adopt another milestone document last
year,  which  will  keep  us  from  abandoning  our  chosen  course.  I  am  talking  about  the  NBU’s
updated  Communication  Strategy.  Once  introduced,  the  Communication  Strategy  will  rebuild
trust  to  the  regulator,  maximize  the  influence  of  the  NBU’s  policy  on  the  behavior  of  target
audiences, and reduce economic uncertainty through provision of information required to make
informed decisions.
The  Central  Banking Awards  2019  for  Transparency,  which  the  NBU’s  team  had  an  honor  to
receive, recognizes our progress in moving in the right direction. The fact that the international
community  placed  the  NBU  on  a  par  with  the  central  banks  of  Sweden,  Canada,  Czech
Republic, Ireland, and Israel is undoubtedly a recognition of our achievements.
But the road ahead is long and winding. The world is changing by the day, and central banks
must keep abreast with it. The difficult time that the global economy in general and Ukraine in
particular  are  going  through  is  the  best  time  for  change.  Now  that  central  banks  have  found
themselves outside their comfort zones is the best time for change. The NBU is ready to evolve
alongside  you.  I  hope  that  this  conference  will  give  us  a  boost  and  inspire  us  as  we  evolve
together.
But before I give the floor to our honorable speakers, let me take the NBU one step closer to a
future  that  is  more  transparent.  Let  me  open  my  personal  Twitter  account  and  send  my  first
tweet as we speak! On second thought, let’s do it together! Here comes my first tweet!
Thank you for your attention! I wish you many interesting speeches and live discussions in the
following two days!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
