Denis Beau: Financial regulation and supervision issues raised by
the impact of Tech firms on financial services
Speech by Mr Denis Beau, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, at the ESSEC – Centre
d’excellence, Paris, 30 January 2019.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear students, 
 It is a pleasure to be at the ESSEC Centre d’excellence today to discuss the financial regulation
and supervision issues raised by the impact of Tech firms on financial services.
To date, in Europe, we have been accustomed to a bank-centric intermediation model. However
over the last decade we have witnessed the rise of Fintech start-ups and the entry of Bigtechs in
the financial sphere. Do they bring anything new to the way financial systems operate? According
to some commentators they should bring a structural shift and see the replacement of the “old
world”  of  bank-centric  financial  intermediation  with  disintermediated  peer-to-peer  systems.
Others consider that rather than eliminating intermediation, if left on their own these new comers
will more likely bring new intermediation models, in which Fintechs and Bigtechs intermediate
banks.
Hence I would like to focus the first part of my remarks on the possible impact of these new
competitors on the traditional bank-centric financial intermediation model (1). I will then highlight
some  of  the  risks  that  go  hand-in-hand  with  the  changes  underway  and  the  regulatory  and
supervisory challenges they raise (2). Finally, I would like to explain how at the Banque de France
we  address  them  in  order  to  strike  an  appropriate  balance  between,  on  the  one  hand,  the
objective of fostering innovation and the overall efficiency of financial services and, on the other
hand,  the  objective  of  ensuring  a  secure  and  level  playing  field  for  all  suppliers  and  their
customers (3).
1. From Fintechs to Bigtechs: a decade of digitalisation of the financial intermediation’s
value chain
Understanding  how  the  Fintech  sector  emerged  and  has  been  structured  (A)  is  critical  to
assessing its impact on the future of intermerdiation (B).
(A)  The  concept  of  Fintech,  contraction  of  Financial  Technology,  designates  both  a  structural
shift – the digitalisation of finance – and the main actors of this shift: the Tech firms.
The  digitalisation  of  finance  is  prospering  on  the  grounds  of  cutting-edge  technologies.  The
combination  of  big  data  analytics,  cloud  computing,  artificial  intelligence  and  blockchain  is
transforming  the  way  financial  products  are  designed,  processed  and  distributed.  For  its
advocates, this transformation promises:
better consumer experiences;
more diversified financing of the economy; and
greater efficiency of the financial system.
In  addition  to  these  promises,  cutting-edge  technologies  also  lower  the  entry  barriers  to  the
financial sector for early adopters: the Tech firms. This should not come as a surprise: internet
and  smartphones  have  lowered  the  distribution  costs,  big  data  technologies  have  lowered
production costs and the shrinkage of banks’ balance sheet in the wake of the Great Financial
Crisis has given space for new players to conquer market shares.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Balance-sheet-light payment services have so far been the main gateway to the financial sector
for Tech firms. From there, Tech firms have an avenue to expand their business further along the
value chain, from payment to retail and commercial banking, wealth management and insurance.
The Tech firms’ model is based on the unbundling of traditional universal banking into an array of
distinct  core  functions  (such  as  channelling  payments,  providing  financing,  sharing  risk  and
allocating capital), which are reassembled in an online platform. In this model, the control of the
platform is more strategic than the provision of financial services itself.
(B) Among these Tech firms, the Fintech start-ups (also known as simply “Fintechs” with an “s”)
and the Bigtechs are likely to have a different impact on financial intermediation.
Fintech start-ups have already been a game changer in the financial sector. They have imported
a  customer-centric  culture  from  the  internet  industry  into  the  financial  sector  and  they  have
targeted  and  called  into  question  many  of  the  long-standing  financial  rents.  However,  Fintech
start-ups do not have the capital resources to disrupt incumbent banks and their future role is
likely to be shaped by two main alternatives: to be acquired by an incumbent bank or to compete
on niche segments such as equity crowdfunding or market place lending.
It could be different with Bigtechs. The market capitalisation of the GAFA companies – Google,
Amazon,  Facebook  and Apple  –  is  25  times  higher  than  that  of  the  whole  Fintech  universe.
Bigtechs  already  have  a  material  footprint  in  financial  services,  and  not  least  in  payment
services: Amazon Pay operates in 10 countries, Google Pay in 22 countries and Apple Pay in 25
countries. Facebook Messenger allows peer-to-peer payments in 3 countries and a Facebook
wallet is reportedly in preparation.
Moreover,  Bigtechs  like  the  GAFA  companies  have  competitive  advantages  in  terms  of
expanding their activities further in this area, including massive financial resources, strong brand
recognition, a worldwide customer base and privileged access to cutting edge technologies.
Therefore, Bigtechs, more than Fintechs, have the potential to fundamentally redefine financial
intermediation  by  integrating  the  entire  landscape  of  financial  services  into  their  own  digital
ecosystems. This does not mean that banks will be disintermediated; but rather that banks may
be interfaced with Bigtechs’ platforms. Such a move is already gaining considerable traction in
China.
So,  digital  finance  driven  by  Tech  firms  may  not  lead  to  a  more  decentralised  system  as  the
centripetal  forces  of  network  effects  may  benefit  large  conglomerates  the  most.  Rather  than
eliminating intermediation, if left on its own, digital finance will more likely lead to reshuffling the
cards,  with  the  most  digitally-agile  incumbents  and  the  most  financially-able  challengers
becoming  the  new  dominant  (and  potentially  systemic)  intermediaries  in  a  landscape  where
there would be four coexisting intermediation models:
The traditional banking intermediation model for certain financial services, like mortgages;
A non-bank financial intermediation model (formerly known as “shadow banking”) performed
by the asset management industry, in particular financing the corporate sector;
A re-intermediated model, in which Fintechs and Bigtechs intermediate the banks, on the
retail segment in particular;
And a fully disintermediated model supported by blockchain and peer-to-peer economies.
2. The digital revolution forces public authorities with an interest in financial stability to
revisit a wide array of policy issues
This  move  from  a  bank-centric  intermediation  model  toward  new  unbundled  financial
intermediation  models  performed  by  multiple  players  does  not  eliminate  the  need  for  central
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
banks, regulators and supervisors. But it does force us to revisit old questions (A) and to address
new ones (B).
(A) I would like to highlight two old questions that we must revisit.
First, the activities to be covered by financial regulation. Just as an example, the use of the
public cloud to perform core banking operations is becoming mainstream. Fintechs and Bigtechs
have adopted an “all-in” strategy. Incumbents are also migrating, although more cautiously, to the
public  cloud.  However,  the  cloud  computing  market  is  highly  concentrated  and Amazon  Web
Services has built a dominant position. As the core financial functions lift and shift to the cloud,
the risk of a single point of failure will emerge, and yet cloud providers are unregulated and out of
the  direct  reach  of  financial  supervisors.  This  raises  questions  about  the  effectiveness  of  the
strategy followed so far by regulators vis-a-vis financial institutions’ third party service providers,
which  in  essence  consists  in  setting  requirements  on  financial  intermediaries  regarding  their
contractual relationships with their service providers. The evolving balance of power to the benefit
of dominant Bigtechs service providers may challenge the effectiveness of such a strategy going
forward.
Second,  the  question  of  conduct.  Our  regulation  deems  certain  practices  acceptable  and
others  not.  Technological  developments  are  making  it  possible  to  use  information  that  was
previously out of reach of a financial intermediary. This could potentially allow a more accurate
assessment of risk or a more “responsive” pricing of service. But what is possible may not be
(socially) acceptable – to take one example, the current development of “social network informed
credit  scores”  raises  questions  about  financial  intermediaries’  governance  and  risk  control
frameworks, when privacy concerns or discriminatory bias are at stake.
(B) Let me now turn to new risks, which are non-financial in nature but closely intertwined with
the digitalisation of finance. In my view, two in particular merit financial supervisory scrutiny.
First, the strategic independence of incumbent banks. If incumbents depend on Bigtechs for
key infrastructure such as cloud computing, if they rely on the same Bigtech to distribute their
products through their platforms and then compete with Bigtechs on certain segments, they will
see their strategic independence challenged in the same way as hotels and retailers did. This
process of commoditisation of incumbents may lower credit standards to compensate for higher
pressure on margins and exacerbate their funding gap because of lower customer stickiness.
Second, the development of cyber-risk. With greater interconnections between technologies
and  the  financial  system  and  the  opening  up  of  information  systems,  the  Banque  de  France
observed in its Financial Stability Report of December 2017 that cyber-risk is moving from an
idiosyncratic  risk  to  a  potential  source  of  systemic  risk  which  needs  to  be  addressed.  This
perspective is widely shared among public and private decision makers and it should not come
as a surprise that cyber-security will be one of the priorities of the French presidency of the G7
this year.
So, to conclude my second point, the completion of the regulatory decade to strengthen banking
financial intermediation is not the end of the story; it’s just the end of the beginning of a new era.
The  transformation  of  financial  intermediation  is  full  of  opportunities  but  it  also  highlights  the
limitations  of  sectoral  and  entity-based  regulations  and  the  need  to  adapt  regulation  and
supervision to a morphing financial intermediation.
This leads me to my last point.
3. The Banque de France’s approach to all these new trends in financial intermediation
is to harness the Fintech opportunities while preserving the financial safety nets and a
level playing field
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
(A) Managing the financial stability risks stemming from a more diversified intermediation model
pleads  for  advancing  sound  principles  and  for  tightening  the  links  between  financial  and  non-
financial regulation. In that respect, the Banque de France’s stance is threefold:
First, well-articulated and complementary regulation and supervision ranging from micro-
prudential  to  macro-prudential,  and  from  prudential  to  consumer  protection,  anti-money
laundering, data protection and anti-trust laws;
Secondly, a  technology-neutral  stance,  which  accommodates  Fintech  innovation  while
preserving financial stability. In this respect, finding the right balance implies an open-minded
approach and an in-depth understanding of innovation. That is why in 2016 we created a
specific Fintech-innovation hub at the ACPR to engage in a dialogue with innovators: around
400 of them contacted us through this dedicated channel;
Thirdly, an  activity-based  regulation  and  supervision,  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field
between  all  entities  pursuing  the  same  financial  activity.  The  current  multiplication  of
licensing categories to reflect the diversification of business models entails the risk of a loss
of regulatory clarity and regulatory arbitrage which needs to be addressed.
(B) Of course, the financial stability implications of the morphing of financial intermediation that is
underway are not limited to France, and cross-border challenges need to be answered. Doing so
requires the smooth articulation of national initiatives, European convergence and international
cooperation.
To  seize  the  opportunities  and  address  the  risks  stemming  from  highly  evolving  financial
technologies,  initiatives  often  start  at  the  national  level.  The  case  of  crowdfunding  is  a  good
example. In 2014 France was a pioneer in issuing a new bespoke regime for crowdfunding and
marketplace  lending  platforms.  This  new  regime  opened  a  playing  field  for  new  players  while
limiting the regulatory burden and strengthening the protection of consumers and investors. As a
result, although crowdfunding will  not  replace  traditional  lending  in  the  near  future,  the  French
market is today the biggest market in continental Europe for alternative financing for the fourth
consecutive year.  The latest figures for 2018, released by KPMG and Financement Participatif
France (FPF),  show that more than 33,000 projects, for a total amount of EUR 402 million, were
financed by crowdfunding platforms. Compared to 2016, the total amount financed has increased
by 20%. In the last three years, it has been multiplied by 2.4.
1
2
Further  to  national  initiatives,  European  convergence  is  always  the  ultimate  goal.  National
initiatives are beneficial because they can be swiftly implemented and tested. By contrast, the
European decision-making process is not known for its rapidity. But the size of the European
market  is  critical  for  allowing  our  Fintech  start ups  to  reach  an  appropriate  scale  for  their
activities. That is why the Banque de France advocates a European regulation of crowdfunding
platforms based on the French model.
Because forefront technologies are based on the World Wide Web, central banks, supervisors
and regulators will eventually  need  worldwide  cooperation  to  ensure  that  their  powers  are  still
effective. Let’s take the example of crypto-assets. Everyone in France can bet their money in
Bitcoin and the likes today (but think twice before doing so!). Yet, none of the Top 10 exchange
platforms are located in France. This is the reason why back in February 2018 the Governor of
the Banque de France and the French Minister of the Economy Bruno Le Maire, along with their
German counterparts, asked that the issue be escalated to the G20 level. Thanks to this initiative,
an  international  monitoring  of  the  financial  stability  risks  of  crypto-assets  is  now  in  place  and
many initiatives are taken by international bodies to address the most pressing issues such as
anti-money laundering, market integrity and consumer protection.
(C) Finally, financial technologies should not only be seen as opportunities for the provision of
new products and services or as a further threat to financial stability. Financial technologies can
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
also be an asset to enhance compliance with regulation or risk management practices: that’s
what we call “Regtech”. They can also help the supervisor to perform its task more efficiently: we
then speak about “Suptech” (supervisory technology).
In  both  areas,  the  prospects  are  promising.  Think  of  the  potential  gain  of  efficiency  for  a
supervisor if he could take advantage of big data and artificial intelligence, for example, to analyse
the huge amount of quantitative and qualitative data reported regularly to him as well as weak
signals collected in the market. Or if a supervisor could turn his backward looking monitoring
tools into predictive processes.
Of course, supervisors are just at the beginning of the learning curve and they will clearly face a
number of challenges: facing risks inherent to innovative projects, understanding the capabilities
and  limitations  of  new  technologies,  enhancing  a  modern  data  culture  in  supervision,  hiring
people with new and rare skills.
But  these  challenges  must  be  overcome  because  the  stakes  are  high.  And  it  is  not  only  a
question of efficiency: it also has to do with supervisory credibility. How can a supervisor be in a
position to supervise processes based on new technologies if he has no in-depth experience of
it? On the contrary, a supervisor who engages in the “suptech journey” gives a clear and positive
signal  to  market  players:  he  is  willing  to  accompany  an  evolving  sector  so  that  supervisory
methods can be adapted and remain relevant and consequently, the financial system can remain
safe and trustworthy. That is clearly the road that we, at the Banque de France and the ACPR,
want to take.
Conclusion
I would like to conclude my speech by quoting Bill Gates:
“We always overestimate the change that will occur in the next two years and underestimate the
3
change that will occur in the next ten. Don’t let yourself be lulled into inaction.”
The Banque de France tries to heed this warning. Although we do belong to the (very) “old world”
–  the  Banque  de  France  was  created  more  than  200  years  ago  by  Napoleon  –,  as  any
incumbent, we need to adjust and adapt to the “new world”. In order to do so:
We have adapted our organisation and governance with the creation of a Fintech hub within
our  supervisory  function,  the  appointments  of  a  Chief  Digital  Officer  and  a  Chief  Data
Officer, and the launch of a Lab to foster innovation within the Banque.
We experiment with new technologies: the Banque de France was the first central bank to
implement a full-scale project based on DLT which is fully operational  and we successfully
run eight artificial intelligence projects.
We  also  host  discussions  between  regulators,  academics  and  industry:  for  example,  the
ACPR task force on artificial intelligence delivered an issue paper last December for a two-
month consultation period (ending 28 February).
4
But this call for action is addressed to everyone, and especially to you, the new generation. As
students  at  the  ESSEC  business  school  and  as  future  economists,  bankers,  start-upers  and
researchers, you will have a big role to play to ensure that, irrespective of the big changes to
come  in  tomorrow’s  financial  intermediation,  our  compass  continues  to  point  toward  the
common good of financial stability.
Thank you for your attention.
 1
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance, 3rd European Alternative Finance Industry Benchmarking Report,
2018.
Baromètre 2018 du crowdfunding – KPMG/FPF (January 2019).
The Road ahead, 1995.
Madre.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
