Claudia  Buch:  Evidence-based  policy  –  potentials,  infrastructures
and the role of international organizations
Speech  by  Prof  Claudia  Buch,  Vice-President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  School  of
International Studies (ZIS), Dresden, 24 May 2019.
 The paper has been prepared for the symposium on the occasion of the 20th anniversary of the
studies  of  international  relations  at  the  University  of  Dresden.  It  has  benefited  greatly  from
comments and inputs by Edgar Vogel and Regina Riphahn. All errors and inconsistencies are
my own.
1 The Role of Evidence-Based Policy
Policy  decisions  in  today’s  world  have  to  be  taken  in  a  dichotomous  state  between  good
evidence and public distrust in expert opinion.
On  the  one  hand,  the  conditions  for  evidence-based  policy  have  seen  excellent  progress.
Availability  of  and  access  to  high-quality  data  have  improved,  academic  research  provides  a
range of methodologies to conduct causal impact assessments, academic curricula incorporate
these methods, and administrations are staffed with highly qualified personnel. Overall, trust in
scientists appears to be strong. Surveys for the US show that trust in scientists has been at a
fairly high and stable level since the 1970s . Surveys for the US and the UK reveal areas where
the public trusts scientific experts more than the government . Most importantly, trust is not only
inspired  by  the  perceived  quality  of  policy  outcomes:  rather,  citizens  want  a  transparent  and
3
objective decision-making process.
1
2
On  the  other  hand,  trust  in  governments  and  political  institutions  in  particular  seems  to  have
eroded  since  the  Global  Financial  Crisis.  Many  public  policy  debates  are  characterized  by
skepticism via-a-vis experts and expert knowledge.  Populism is on the rise in many countries.
83% of the respondents to a Eurobarometer poll see “fake news” and online disinformation as a
5
threat to democracy.
4
Against this background, evidence-based policy is an undogmatic concept. Rather than taking a
normative approach to policy, it adopts a positive perspective: Defining policy objectives remains
within  the  realm  of  the  democratic  policy  process.  But,  given  the  policy  objectives,  better
evidence can contribute to selecting the right policy instruments, assessing the impact of these
instruments, and potentially, revising them.
the 
The potential benefits of applying good analysis to problems facing today’s societies are in fact
large.  Historically, 
interaction  between  scientific  knowledge,  policy-making,  and
entrepreneurial activity catalysed by the Enlightenment has brought significant improvements in
human  well-being.   Notwithstanding  the  huge  challenges  facing  us  globally  in  terms  of
inequalities, environmental risks, climate change, and global tensions, societal conditions have
improved  across  many  dimensions.  Improving  information  on  which  to  base  policy  decisions
thus promises large potential gains.
6
However, putting evidence-based policy into practice is a challenging task and requires efforts
and contributions from several stakeholders. The remainder of this text presents examples of
evidence-based  policy,  discusses  the  role  of  international  institutions  in  facilitating  evidence-
based policy, and presents thoughts on how setting up the right infrastructures can reduce the
costs of evaluations and improve their quality.
2 Evidence-based policy can “work"
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
One way to promote an evidence-based agenda is to show that evidence-based policy in fact
works  and  that  its  challenges  are  common  to  many  fields.  Here  are  three  examples  from
financial regulation and supervision.
a) Evaluation of financial sector reforms
The  global  financial  crisis  has  exposed  the  fault  lines  in  the  regulatory  system  for  financial
markets. In 2011, G20 members thus agreed on reforms addressing the “systemic and moral
hazard risks associated with systemically important financial institutions”.  Policies have been
implemented in order to improve loss absorbency and resilience, recovery and resolution, and
supervision.  These  reforms  target  more  narrowly  defined  objectives  –  by  focusing  on  the
responses  of  individual  banks  –  and  more  broadly  defined  objectives  in  terms  of  aggregate
outcomes such as the functioning of financial markets.
7
Many  of  these  reforms  have  been  implemented  to  date,  and  a  first  evaluation  of  their  effects
becomes feasible. Such evaluations have to take a structured approach in order to balance an
assessment of costs and benefits, and to take a societal rather than private perspective. What
appears to be a cost of financial regulation to individual market participants may well be of benefit
to society overall by making the system more efficient and resilient.
8
As an instrument to operationalize such complex evaluation projects, the G20 leaders endorsed
a  framework  for  the  post-implementation  evaluation  of  G20  financial  regulatory  reforms  in
2017.   The  framework  provides  an  umbrella  for  the  Financial  Stability  Board’s  (FSB)  policy
evaluation projects and serves as an orientation for the practical conduct of post-implementation
evaluations.  It  rests  on  two  pillars.  First,  the  framework  contains  provisions  regarding  the
decision-making  process  and  the  interaction  of  relevant  stakeholders  such  as  regulators  or
market participants. This is an important element of transparency and accountability of the FSB.
Second, the framework provides guidance on analytical aspects of evaluations and engenders a
common understanding of what constitutes “good” evaluations and robust evidence.
Regarding analytical guidance, the framework stipulates that each FSB evaluation should answer
three key questions. First, did the reforms “cause” an outcome (“Attribution”)? Second, did the
reform  have  similar  effects  across  markets,  states  of  the  world,  or  jurisdictions  and  regions
(“Heterogeneity”)? Did the reform achieve its overall objective (“General equilibrium”)? In the spirit
of  the  undogmatic  concept  outlined  above,  the  answers  to  these  questions  should  provide
detailed  information  to  policymakers  on  the  impact  of  their  policies  on  observed  economic
outcomes.  They  should  enable  informed  policy  discussions  without  pre-empting  decisions
regarding adjustments of policies.
9
The first two evaluations under the framework were delivered to the G20-Summit in November
2018. The first project investigated to what extent post-crisis reforms incentivized central clearing
of  OTC-derivatives.  The  second  project  evaluated  the  effect  of  reforms  on  the  financing  of
infrastructure.  More projects are underway. An evaluation of reform effects on SME financing
will be delivered to the G20-Summit this year with a consultation report published soon – open to
comments  from  all  stakeholders.  Another  project  considering  the  FSB’s  reform  agenda  on
ending  Too-Big-To-Fail  (TBTF)  has  just  started.  This  evaluation  project  will  assess  whether
reforms  are  effective  in  reducing  the  systemic  and  moral  hazard  risks  associated  with
systemically important banks. It will also examine the broader effects of the TBTF-reforms on the
overall functioning of the financial system. The final report is scheduled for the G20-Presidency in
2020.
b) Macroprudential policy
10
Macroprudential policy  is a relatively new policy field. Its goal is to preserve financial stability
and to prevent the build-up of systemic risk that may have adverse effects for the functioning of
11
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  financial  system  and  for  the  real  economy.  New  institutions  have  been  tasked  with  the
implementation of macroprudential policies, and new policy instruments have been introduced.
Nonetheless,  uncertainty  about  the  state  of  the  financial  system  and  the  effects  and
effectiveness of these policy instruments is high. This uncertainty entails two risks: the risk of
acting too late (inaction bias) and the risk of choosing an inappropriate instrument or inadequate
calibration.
Both risks can be mitigated if macroprudential policy is embedded in a structured policy process.
Such  a  policy  process  involves  four  steps.  In  a  first  step,  the  policy  objective(s)  of
macroprudential policy need to be specified. Macroprudential authorities use different definitions
of  the  policy  objective,  but  all  aim  at  reducing  systemic  risk  arising  from  externalities  for  the
functioning  of  the  financial  system.  In  a  second  step,  intermediate  objectives  need  to  be
specified, and appropriate indicators need to be chosen. Intermediate objectives are linked to the
drivers of systemic risk such as leverage, risk-taking incentives, connectedness, or exposure to
common shocks. In a third step, the activation or recalibration of policy instruments that address
systemic risk externalities needs to be considered. The decision on whether and how to activate
policy measures should be based on a structured process of ex-ante policy evaluation. Such an
ex-ante evaluation provides information about the relative performance of different instruments in
contributing to reducing systemic risk. In a fourth step, and once sufficient time has elapsed, the
effects  of  the  instruments  need  to  be  assessed  in  an  ex-post  evaluation.  This  step  provides
information about the effectiveness of the measure(s) taken, about intended or unintended side
effects, and it also serves as an input into a possible recalibration of the policy instruments. In a
nutshell, this is what the FSB evaluations mentioned above is about.
12
The macroprudential regulation of residential real estate markets in Germany is a good example
for how the macroprudential policy cycle can be put into practice.
 Currently, macroprudential
instruments  for  the  real  estate  market  in  Germany  are  not  activated.  Before  activation  of  an
instrument,  authorities  are  required  to  perform  an  in-depth  ex-ante  evaluation.  The  analysis
should quantify the expected impact, for instance on the resilience of the financial system or on
credit markets. The output of such an analysis should inform the calibration process and provide
an  assessment  of  the  expected  costs  and  benefits.  After  activation  of  the  instrument,  a
compulsory  ex-post  evaluation  should  provide  not  only  information  on  the  instrument’s
effectiveness  but  also  on  potential  unintended  consequences.  The  results  from  this  step  can
then feed into a potential re-calibration of the instrument.
c) Learning from other policy areas
With initiatives such as the one by the FSB, evidence-based policy has become part of the policy
process  in  the  area  of  international  financial  regulation.  There  are  other  policy  areas  and
international  initiatives  which  can  inform  this  process  –  with  regard  to  potential  avenues  to
success  and  pitfalls  to  be  avoid.  In  order  to  promote  learning  from  other  policy  areas  and  to
facilitate  a  structured  dialogue  between  policymakers  and  academia,  the  German  National
Academy  of  Science  Leopoldina,  in  cooperation  with  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  organized  a
workshop in 2018.
 Here are examples of issues that were addressed in this workshop.
13
In Germany, the Federal Ministry of Finance has been conducting so-called “spending reviews”
since 2018; analysing revenues and spending decisions and scrutinizing their effectiveness and
efficiency.
  The  German  National  Regulatory  Control  Council  has  developed  a  concept  for
structuring ex-post impact assessments applying to all funds spend by the federal government
and, more recently, argued in the favor introducing quality standards for such evaluations.
14
15
An area in which policy evaluation in Germany has advanced most are labor market reforms. In
the  early  2000s,  the  German  government  embarked  on  comprehensive  labor  market  reforms
aimed at reducing unemployment, improving access to work, making new job relationships more
sustainable,  and  enhancing  the  efficiency  of  the  employment  agencies.  Public  interest  in  a
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
deeper  investigation  of  the  effects  of  these  reforms  was  sparked  by  persistently  high
unemployment rates and the perceived ineffectiveness of policy. There were a number of critical
factors that affected evaluations of these policies. First, the evaluation was designed with a view
to  providing  a  systematic  and  broad  overview.  Second,  academic  research  had  a  range  of
appropriate tools available, making it possible to provide robust results within a reasonably short
time-span.  Third,  a  mandatory  reform  evaluation  was  enshrined  in  law.  Finally,  a  common
concept  developed  by  participating  research  institutions  provided  guidance  on  practical  and
analytical aspects of the evaluation.
16
Another example of evidence-based policy is the “What Works” Network, an initiative launched by
the  British  government  in  2013.
  The  network  consists  of  independent  What  Works  Centres
and  affiliate  members.  The  What  Works  Centre  for  local  economic  growth,  for  instance,
analyses  which  policies  are  most  effective  in  supporting  local  economic  growth.  In  practical
terms,  it  reviews  and  summarizes  existing  evidence  in  meta  studies,  builds  databases  on
relevant work or provides guidance to practitioners on how to meaningfully approach evaluations,
for  example  by  providing  technical  training,  supporting  piloting  and  testing  local  economic
schemes or developing case studies which portray particularly useful evaluation techniques.
3 The role of international organizations
Evidence-based  policy  promises  huge  gains  –  better  policies  at  potentially  lower  costs.  But
evidenced-based policy is not a holy grail. It does not overturn the political dynamics that shape
policy  discussions.  However,  it  does  promise  a  better,  more  structured,  and  more  informed
policy debate.
At the national level, electoral cycles have a tendency to work against a structured evaluation of
policies. Good institutional design at the national level can thus serve to sustain policies and to
ensure bi-partisan support to evaluations. The advantage of entrusting independent institutions
with  evaluations  is  that  they  can  operate  outside  the  perimeter  of  day-to-day  pressure  from
political debates. At the same time, the further away responsibility for policy evaluation is placed
from the political discourse, the more political accountability becomes an issue. One mechanism
that  can  be  used  to  overcome  this  concern  is  enhanced  transparency:  public  consultations,
transparency with regard to evaluation methods, replicability of studies, and clear responsibilities
are mechanisms to ensure transparency and thus credibility.
International  organizations  have  an  important  role  to  play  as  well.  They  can  enhance
transparency about evaluations and institutional designs. Rather than getting involved in detailed
discussions  about  national  policy  design  –  where  national  constituencies  may  question  their
democratic  legitimacy  –  international  organizations  can  help  setting  up  evaluation  frameworks
and policy structures. This can be part of their surveillance work. For instance, the European
Commission’s  “Better  Regulation  Guidelines”
  provide  guidelines  on  how  the  impact  of  EU-
regulations  should  be  evaluated.  The  OECD  has  published  a  framework  for  regulatory  policy
evaluation.
17
18
Obviously, objective cross-country evaluations are challenging, if not infeasible. Can we compare
the effects of policies that have been implemented with very different objectives and under very
different institutional settings? Despite these hurdles, benchmarking and improving information
on  evaluations  is  a  low-hanging  fruit.  International  organizations  provide  a  range  of  indicators.
However,  information  on  the  share  of  the  underlying  policy  programs  that  are  subject  to
evaluation  is  not  easily  available.  A  survey  run  by  the  OECD  shows  that  members  have
progressed in making regulatory policy more fact-based. Ex-post evaluation has, however, not
always become second nature to institutions involved in the design of regulatory policies.
19
An  additional  important  task  for  international  organizations  can  be  the  establishment  and
maintenance of repositories of evaluation studies. Repositories provide a compact overview of
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
relevant  evaluation  work  in  a  certain  field.  Tailored  keywords  and  meta-information  allow
narrowing down the set of studies to be considered. In this way, repositories provide relevant
information  for  academics,  policymakers,  the  public,  journalists,  and  industry.  This  facilitates
more  efficient  evaluation  work  in  the  official  sector  (including  international  organizations),  for
academic researchers, and the industry.
20
Repositories are well-established in some fields such as medicine, where the Cochrane Library
or  the  McMaster  Health  Forum   provide  structured  evidence  on  medical  research,  also  by
compiling  meta-studies.  Similarly,  in  the  field  of  development  economics,  the  International
Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie) collects information on the effects of policies and programs in
development  economics.  The  J-PAL  initiative  does  the  same  in  the  case  of  poverty-reduction
projects. The OECD’s International Network on Financial Education (INFE)
 is a platform that
facilitates the exchange of experiences on policies promoting financial education. It does so by
collecting  data  and  developing  comparative  reports.  Finally,  the  Bank  for  International
Settlements  (BIS)  recently  launched  a  “Financial  Regulation  Assessment:  Meta  Exercise
(FRAME)”, which enhances the transparency of existing studies and improves efficiency in terms
of collecting relevant information.
4 Infrastructures supporting good evaluations
22
 
21
Many  projects  and  initiatives  show  that  policymaking  can  benefit  from  sound  evaluations  and
from making the best use of available knowledge. Evidence-based policy can help improve and
continue  successful  policies,  while  finding  negative  or  unintended  consequences  can  point  to
areas for improvement. But evidence-based policy comes at a price. Rigorous evaluations take
time, and they require input of human resources and data. Not least, evaluations require good
communication on how to interpret findings and how to put them into perspective.
These costs of evaluations can be reduced by setting up the right infrastructures:
Legal  mandates  and  administrative  procedures:  There  will  be  a  natural  tendency  of  policy
evaluations  to  be  in  a  time  and  resource  conflict  with  other  administrative  tasks.  Moreover,
unless  clear  procedures  for  evaluations  have  been  established,  political  considerations  may
dominate  the  administrative  agenda. Against  this  background,  establishing  and  strengthening
legal  mandates  for  mandatory  evaluations  can  overcome  political  biases  and  the  tendency
toward  inaction.  Clear  legal  mandates  can  help  to  identify  and  agree  on  policy  objectives,
indicators, and benchmarks upfront. And they help to embed procedures for policy evaluations
into mandates and day-to-day work of administrations, thus helping to avoid conflicts with other
tasks.
Repositories and information platforms: Generating, using, and adapting evaluation projects will
happen more easily if relevant information is readily available. One way to facilitate the flow and
exchange  of  information  are  repositories  of  evaluation  studies.  In  addition,  an  important
prerequisite for improving the dialogue between researchers and policymakers is that each side
should learn to “speak the language” of the other side, at least to some extent. This requires
clear communication of research results and methods, and the translation of high-level policy
objectives into measurable indicators.
Data infrastructures: Evaluations require good data, but data infrastructures can be costly. The
costs of acquiring data can be minimized if data are collected early on and, ideally, if data needs
are  considered  when  drafting  new  legislation.  Notwithstanding  the  key  importance  of  ensuring
strict  data  confidentiality,  broad  use  of  the  available  data  will  help  to  improve  the  quality  of
evaluations.
Managing  incentives:  Ultimately,  policy  evaluations  will  be  used  routinely  only  if  the  right
incentives  for  conducting  them  are  in  place.  Administrations  can  be  incentivized  to  conduct
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
evaluations  through  institutional  structures  which  are  conducive  to  evaluations  and  legal
mandates  to  evaluate  policies.  The  incentives  of  researchers  will  depend,  ultimately,  on  the
research community’s criteria for assessing the quality of academic work. Giving researchers
access to data can be an incentive to cooperate. But the academic community can do more:
rewarding replication studies can provide additional incentives to cooperate.
Bringing  more  and  better  evidence  into  political  decisions  is  beneficial  to  society.  To  make
progress, we need commitment from and an open and continuous dialogue with all stakeholders.
The more we can build on available infrastructures, the lower the costs of evaluations will be, and
the  better  we  can  learn  from  past  experience.  Good  policy  design  and  good  institutions  may,
ultimately, increase transparency and accountability, thus countering skepticism about “expert”
projects.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Funk, Cary (2017), “Real Numbers: Mixed Messages about Public Trust in Science Issues in Science and
Technology”, Volume XXXIV Issue 1, Fall 2017. 
Osman, Magda, Norman Fenton, Toby Pilditch, David Lagnado, and Martin Neil (2018), “Who do we trust on
social policy interventions”, Basic and Applied Social Psychology, Vol 40(5), p. 249–268. 
OECD (2017), “Trust and Public Policy: How Better Governance Can Help Rebuild Public Trust”, OECD Public
Governance Reviews, OECD Publishing, March 2017. 
Quoting Conservative MP Michael Gove ahead of the Brexit-referendum: “The people of this country have had
enough of experts”. 
ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/final-results-eurobarometer-fake-news-and-online-disinformation 
Pinker,  Steven  (2017),  “Enlightenment  Now:  The  Case  for  Reason,  Science,  Humanism,  and  Progress“;
Rosling, Hans, Ola Rosling, and Anna Rosling Rönnl (2018), “Factfulness: Ten Reasons We’re Wrong About
The World – And Why Things Are Better Than You Think”.
See Financial Stability Board (2011), “Policy measures to address systemically important financial institutions”,
November 2011. 
See Financial Stability Board (2017), “Framework for Post-Implementation Evaluation of the Effects of the G20
Financial Regulatory Reforms”, July 2017. 
Final documents on both projects are available on the FSB’s website. 
Financial Stability Board (2018), “FSB Chair’s letter to G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors”,
March 2018. 
This section is largely based on Buch, M. Claudia, Edgar Vogel, and Benjamin Weigert (2018), “Evaluating
macroprudential policies”, European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) Working Paper 76. 
The legal basis is §48u of the German Banking Law (Kreditwesengesetz) as published in Bundesgesetzblatt
(2017), Nr. 34, 9. June 2017. 
The findings from this workshop have been summarized in Buch, Claudia M. and Regina T. Riphahn (2019),
„Evaluierung von Finanzmarktreformen – Lehren aus den Politikfeldern Arbeitsmarkt, Gesundheit und Familie“,
Leopoldina Forum Nr. 1. 
www.bundesfinanzministerium.de/Content/EN/Standardartikel/Topics/Public-Finances/Articles/2017–06–14-
spending-reviews-im-bundeshaushalt.html 
Nationaler Normenkontrollrat (2018), “Germany: Less Bureaucracy, More Digital Services, Better Regulation.
Let’s get to it!”, Annual Report of the National Regulatory Control Council 2018, October 2018. 
www.gov.uk/guidance/what-works-network
ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/better-regulation-guidelines.pdf 
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
18
19
20
21
22
See OECD (2014), “OECD Framework for Regulatory Policy Evaluation”, OECD Publishing, June 2014. The
framework is a natural follow-up to the Recommendation of the Council of the OECD on Regulatory Policy and
Governance from 2012.
See OECD (2015), “OECD Regulatory Policy Outlook 2015”, OECD Publishing, May 2015.
www.mcmasterforum.org/ 
www.financial-education.org/join_INFE.html 
See stats.bis.org/frame/ and Boissay, Cantú, Claessens, and Villegas (2019),” Impact of financial regulations:
insights from an online repository of studies”, BIS Quarterly Review, March 2019.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
