REMARKS  BY  JAVIER  GUZMÁN  CALAFELL,  DEPUTY  GOVERNOR  AT  THE 
BANCO  DE  MÉXICO,  ON  “SOME  CONSIDERATIONS  ON  CENTRAL  BANK 
DIGITAL  CURRENCIES”.  THE  OMFIF  FOUNDATION–FEDERAL  RESERVE  BANK 
OF  ST.  LOUIS  SYMPOSIUM  “THE  NEXT  DECADE  OF  FINANCE:  ASSESSING 
PRIORITIES AND IMPLICATIONS FOR SOCIETY, POLITICS AND ECONOMICS”. 
Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri, July 9, 2019.1 
Before  starting,  I  would  like  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  towards  the 
organizers for their invitation to be part of this session’s panel. 
Historically, technological progress has been a major factor shaping the way in 
which  societies,  both  within  and  between,  interact  across  a  myriad  of 
dimensions. Of course, economic and financial relationships are among those 
more swiftly and deeply affected by the ensuing changes. The speed that this 
process has gathered in recent years, at the dawn of what some have dubbed 
the “Fourth Industrial Revolution”,2 has had remarkable implications for our 
financial  systems,  from  the  way  they  function  and  their  structural 
characteristics, to the nature of the partaking agents.  
Naturally, this has underlined the importance that central banks, both in their 
role  as  participants  and  authorities  in  financial  markets,  remain  aware  and 
vigilant  of  the  current  state,  as  well  as  foreseeable  trends,  of  relevant 
technologies. The objective should be to timely and orderly adapt to, and also 
benefit from, developments in this front. 
An element that has been receiving increasing attention recently relates to the 
possibility  of  officially  issuing  electronic  counterparts  to  (physical)  cash,  in 
                                                           
1 The  views and opinions  expressed in this document  are the sole responsibility of the  author  and do not 
necessarily represent the institutional position of the Banco de México or of its Board of Governors as a whole. 
2 An early reference to this term can be found in  Schwab, Klaus (2015): “The Fourth Industrial Revolution: 
What It Means and How to Respond”, Foreign Affairs, December. 
   1 
what have generically been termed “Central Bank Digital Currencies” (CBDCs).3 
Although still in a very early stage of development, and for the most part within 
an experimental framework, a few central banks have already taken material 
steps in this direction, exploring the potential viability of CBDCs with different 
attributes and characteristics. Among the noteworthy cases are those of the 
e-Krona  and  the  e-Peso  pilot  programs  developed  by  the  central  banks  of 
Sweden and Uruguay, respectively, as digital alternatives that would coexist 
with cash as legal tender in their corresponding jurisdictions.4  
Further to the desire to learn about CBDCs and their implications at this stage, 
central bank interest in these instruments has been kindled by a combination 
of  factors.  One  of  the  most  important,  particularly  among  some  advanced 
economies, is the protracted decline in the use of cash and the consequent 
need  to  adapt  to  this  situation.5  In  addition,  the  possibility  that  privately-
provided  electronic  means  of  payment  take  place  in  a  context  of  poor 
competition, has in some cases stimulated central banks’ interest in CBDCs. 
Further to the above, a number of other possible advantages of CBDCs have 
been identified. The potential to enhance the safety of the payments system 
through a back-up given mounting operational risks in some segments, or its 
cost effectiveness, by saving on the distribution of cash, are included among 
them.  In  other 
instances,  particularly  amongst  emerging  market  and 
                                                           
3  In  what  follows,  these  remarks  will  concentrate  on  the  case  of  general-purpose  CBDCs,  with  use  aimed 
primarily  at  retail  operations by  the public  at  large.  While  restricted-access  CBDCs  intended  for  wholesale 
payment and settlement transactions are also being explored, it should be noted that  they have yet to be 
proven as a superior alternative to existing technologies and infrastructures. 
4 Also worth mentioning is the case of Ecuador, whose CBDC was issued between 2015 and 2018, although 
with muted success due to low acceptance rates from users in a highly dollarized economy. 
5 See Khiaonarong, T. and D. Humphrey (2019): “Cash Use Across Countries and the Demand for Central Bank 
Digital Currency”, IMF Working Paper No. 19/46, March. 
   2 
developing economies, CBDCs are seen as a means to ameliorate outstanding 
gaps  in  financial  inclusion  of  important  segments  of  their  populations. 
Moreover, depending on their specific design, such as the level of transaction 
traceability  (or,  conversely,  anonymity),  CBDCs  could  also  help  counter  the 
proliferation of illegal activities. 
Notwithstanding the appeal that CBDCs may gather on the basis of these and 
other  favorable  attributes, 
important  negative 
implications  must  be 
acknowledged as well. In general, these relate to the potential effects on the 
role that central banks play in a wide array of activities, some of them closely 
related to their core functions in the economy. In particular, the issuance of 
CBDCs could lead these institutions to operate directly in the intermediation 
of financial resources with the public.  
Naturally,  such  abrupt  deviations  from  the  traditional  role  of  central  banks 
carry  important  risks.  At  the  center  of  these  concerns  lie  the  potential 
implications for the private financial sector.  
First, should CBDCs become entrenched as a close substitute of, or a superior 
alternative to, commercial deposit accounts (which would very likely be the 
case if they are designed as account-based and interest-bearing), the amount 
of resources effectively intermediated by the private financial sector could be 
curtailed. Adding to the contraction in the  supply of loanable funds derived 
from  retail  depositors  opting  to  hold  CBDCs  instead  of  bank  accounts,  loan 
demand  could  be  affected  too  as  a  result  of  banks’  attempts  to  preserve 
margins by increasing their lending rates. Moreover, as banks face a drop in 
the  relatively  stable  component  of  funding  represented  by  retail  deposits, 
   3 
regulatory requirements in place may force them to cut back on credit or hold 
a  higher  proportion  of  liquid  assets,  either  of  which  would  result  in  less 
resources available for lending. 
Secondly, the stability of the financial system may face important challenges. 
These  would  derive  partly  from  the  riskier  pool  of  debtors  and  investment 
projects that banks could be financing in scenarios of higher equilibrium rates 
as the one described above. Furthermore, in extreme cases, system-wide bank 
runs  triggered  by  episodes  of  stress  could  be  facilitated  by  the  swift  and 
frictionless convertibility of bank deposits into risk-free and liquid assets such 
as CBDCs. 
In other areas, the implications of CBDCs are uncertain:  
  In  regards  monetary  policy,  the  main  channels  of  the  transmission 
mechanism  may  strengthen  if,  for  instance,  CBDCs  enhance  financial 
inclusion or push further down the effective lower bound on interest rates.6 
However, the possibility of dislocations in the financial system as the ones 
described above, or the potential for changes in the characteristics of the 
demand for money as a result of the availability of CBDCs, poses risks to the 
efficacy (and efficiency) with which monetary policy transmits to the rest 
of the economy.  
  As for financial inclusion, even though in principle it should be favored by 
the  introduction  of  CBDCs,  there  may  be  instances  in  which  remaining 
                                                           
6 Monetary policy rates are bound below at zero  because  agents can circumvent  rates  lower than  that by 
holding  non-interest  bearing  cash.  In  economies  with  a  low  use  of  cash  and  an  unrestricted  utilization  of 
CBDCs,  interest-bearing  CBDCs  can  set  the  bound  on  monetary  policy  rates  lower.  For  a  more  detailed 
discussion, see Mancini-Griffoli, T. et al. (2018): “Casting Light on Central Bank Digital Currency”, IMF Staff 
Discussion Note No. 18/08, November. 
   4 
barriers  (such  as  a  lack  of  access  to  the  required  technologies,  a  strong 
resistance to adopt them or simply a strong preference for cash) may leave 
individuals out of the financial and payments system. 
  Although  carefully-designed  and  rightly-implemented  CBDCs  reduce  its 
likelihood, the materialization of operational risks remains a possibility. This 
could  translate  into  a  burden  for  the  reputation  (and  credibility)  of  the 
central bank. 
  Striking  a  right  balance  between  the  anonymity  and  traceability  of 
transactions  using  CBDCs  may  prove  elusive.  At  one  extreme,  full 
anonymity, while protecting user privacy, may facilitate the execution of 
illegal activities. At the other end, perfect traceability may hinder interest 
in CBDCs from users who, for personal and perhaps completely legitimate 
reasons, prefer to keep part of their transactions unrecorded. 
  Should the adoption of CBDCs be successful and not, at least to a significant 
extent, offset by a commensurate decline in physical coins and banknotes 
in  circulation,  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet  would  be  expanded.  This 
could  imply  additional  financial  risks  for  the  monetary  authority  as  its 
exposure to the banking system and other security issuers increases while, 
depending on the size of the expansion, distortions akin to those observed 
in financial markets linked to the quantitative easing programs of recent 
may not be ruled out.  
  The issuance of CBDCs is not free of legal uncertainties either. Further to 
the legislative reforms that would be required to equip central banks with 
the  authority  to  issue  this  sort  of  money  in  the  vast  majority  of 
   5 
jurisdictions,7  it  remains  unclear  how  much  of  a  burden  account-based 
CBDCs would imply for these institutions should they become bound by law 
to comply with existing regulations (such as those related to anti-money 
laundering  and  combating  the  financing  of  terrorism,  or  AML/CFT).  In 
addition, given CBDCs legal tender status, difficulties may arise regarding 
its enforcement, as not necessarily every agent in the economy will have 
available the means to accept it at all times. 
  Lastly, there is a broad consensus in the community regarding the need for 
further research on, and careful consideration of, the potential implications 
of  CBDCs  for  interest  rates,  exchange  rates  and  other  asset  prices  in 
general,  including  the  relative  price  between  the  digital  and  physical 
versions of a given currency.8  
Beyond the above-noted issues, there is an additional element that must be 
carefully taken into consideration to evaluate whether the adoption of CBDCs, 
in  any  of  its  plausible  variants,  is  recommendable  as  the  next  iteration  of 
official  fiat  money:  would  there  be  a  relevant  contribution  of  CBDCs  to  the 
existing payment infrastructure? In other words, is there a business case for a 
particular central bank to embark on this endeavor? Clearly, the answer to this 
question will depend crucially on the defining characteristics of the economy, 
                                                           
7  According  to  results  recently  reported  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  only  about  25%  of  the 
central banks surveyed are (or will soon be) legally allowed to issue CBDCs. See Barontini, Christian and Henry 
Holden (2019): “Proceeding with Caution – A Survey on Central Bank Digital Currency”, BIS Papers No. 101, 
January. 
8 See, for instance, ECB Crypto-Assets Task Force (2019): “Crypto-Assets: Implications for Financial Stability, 
Monetary Policy, and Payments and Market Infrastructures”, European Central Bank  Occasional Paper No. 
223, May. 
   6 
especially  the 
level  of  development  and  other  key  features  of  the 
corresponding payment systems.  
In Mexico’s case, electronic inter-bank payments are nowadays mainstream 
amongst significant segments of the population thanks in large to the success 
of SPEI, Banco de México’s flagship system launched in 2004, as it allows users 
to transfer funds in a safe, cost-effective and nearly-instant manner, on a 24/7 
basis.  SPEI  represents  today  the  most  important  element  of  the  financial 
market infrastructure in the country, in view of the volume and value of the 
transactions  it  executes,  both  at  the  retail  level  and  between  financial 
institutions,  firms  and  the  government,  as  well  as  its  importance  for  other 
components of the overall system.9 
One recent overhaul that is worth noting is the forthcoming launch of CoDi, a 
new request-to-pay functionality for electronic payments currently in a pilot 
stage,  developed  by  the  Banco  de  México  to  allow  for  cashless  retail 
transactions via mobile devices. As it runs on SPEI’s infrastructure, payments 
through  CoDi  will  be  safe,  quick  and  available  at  all  times,  with  the  added 
benefit of being free of any charge or fee. In addition, it is expected that CoDi 
will foster competition in the financial sector, increase financial inclusion and 
contribute to the combat of illicit transactions. CoDi is scheduled to be fully 
operational by the last quarter of this year. 
                                                           
9 The number of electronic transfers amongst final users via SPEI has grown substantially over the last decade, 
at an average pace of 31.7% per year since 2008. Noteworthy, low-value payments (i.e. for amounts up to 
MXN 8,000, the rough equivalent to USD 400) continue to dominate the scene, as they accounted for over 
two thirds of all final-user transfers through this system in 2018, while their growth rate that year was, by a 
wide margin, the highest among all payment methods other than cash. Further to the increasing presence of 
online banking services, whose users grew at an average annual clip of 19.3% during the same 10-year period, 
these figures clearly denote the system’s amenability to clear everyday transactions. 
   7 
Mexico’s  payments  system  also  features  other  options  provided  by  private 
sector institutions. Among these, and as in other economies, credit and debit 
cards  remain  the  most  widely  used  payment  method  other  than  cash  in 
Mexico, with nearly half of all retail electronic transactions cleared with these 
instruments.10  In  conjunction  with  the  above,  some  aspects  of  Mexico’s 
financial  regulatory  framework  have  been  adapted  to  the  new  landscape 
brought about by ongoing developments in the FinTech sector. Of particular 
relevance  for  the  payments  system  is  the  recently-issued  regulation  of 
electronic  payment  funds  institutions  (e-money  issuers),  as  they  are  now 
required  to  operate  in  a  financially  safer  and  more  transparent  manner, 
allowing them to serve in turn better-protected customers.  
In spite of the above-noted advances, electronic payment systems in Mexico 
face important challenges. Chief among them is the strong bias towards the 
use of cash for transaction purposes in the economy, explained to a significant 
extent by a high prevalence of illegal activities.11 Such a marked preference for 
this means of payment is illustrated, for example, by the fact that nearly two 
thirds of salaried workers receive their remunerations in cash, while virtually 
all purchases under MXN 500 (roughly equivalent to USD 25) are paid for with 
coins  and  banknotes.  Adding  to  the  above,  cash  use  in  Mexico  goes  well 
beyond what might be explained by existing gaps in terms of access to formally 
provided financial services as, for instance, over 60% of individuals who do not 
                                                           
10 It should be noted, however, that card usage appears to be on a declining trend, as the annual growth rate 
of the number of transactions settled with plastic went from an average of 15.1% in 2008-2017 to 8.0% in 
2018, with the corresponding figures based on the amounts settled (in nominal terms) being 14.8 and 9.4%, 
respectively. 
11 According to the most recent official statistics, Mexico’s informal economy accounted for slightly less than 
one quarter of the country’s GDP in 2017.  
   8 
use their debit cards cite simply preferring cash as the main reason not to do 
so.  
Under circumstances like these, the case for CDBCs is less obvious. First, the 
payments features of digital currencies are satisfactorily covered by systems 
already (and soon-to-be) in place. Second, thinking of a CBDC as a “back-up” 
does not make much sense either, as the main pieces of the payment systems 
are handled by the central bank. Third, a major decline in the demand for cash 
is unlikely to take place in the near future, and it is difficult to expect that the 
issuance  of  CBDCs  will  alter  ongoing  trends  in  a  significant  way.  The 
reputational risks embedded in an entirely anonymous CBDC, especially if it 
involves unidentified individuals setting up accounts at the central bank, make 
this  a  questionable  option.  But  a  CBDC  design  with  anything  less  than  full 
anonymity is likely to dent interest among the general public. 
Nonetheless,  it  is  important  to  stress  that  arriving  at  firm  conclusions  of 
general applicability regarding the merits of CBDCs is difficult, as expected and 
realized outcomes will depend, in a major way, on the specific design features 
of  the  CBDC  at  hand,12  as  well  as  on  the  characteristics  of  the  countries’ 
economies and in particular of their payment systems. Even though the subject 
has raised substantial attention from the part of central banks in recent years, 
the  above-noted  lack  of  clarity  is  reflected  in  the  fact  that  none  of  these 
institutions  has adopted such an instrument on a permanent  basis,  and the 
                                                           
12  In  general  design  terms,  CBDCs  can  be  either  token-  or  account-based,  and  intended  for  either  general 
purpose  (i.e.  retail  transactions)  or  for  wholesale  use  only,  with  access  possibly  restricted  to  financial 
institutions. In addition, it is technically feasible for any CBDC variant to pay (or not) interest. For greater detail 
on the taxonomy of money,  and CBDCs in particular, see, for instance: Bank  for International Settlements 
(2018): “Central Bank Digital Currencies”, Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures and Markets 
Committee joint report, March. 
   9 
prospects  for  an  important  number  of  them  doing  so  within  a  reasonable 
timeframe are bleak. 
This  is  not  to  say,  however,  that  the  subject  of  CBDCs  and  all  the  issues 
surrounding  it  should  be  disregarded.  Quite  the  contrary.  The  number  and 
nature of the pending question marks underlines the relevance of continued 
efforts  to  satisfactorily  understand  this  matter  as  well  as  its  potential 
consequences, even more so in the context of a rapidly evolving environment 
where  changing  circumstances  and  new 
technological  and  market 
developments may warrant further action in this direction. In any event, while 
we have to be open and attentive to new technologies, it is also true that we 
need to be cautious in adopting them, especially when, as in the case of CBDCs, 
we are dealing with an issue with potential major implications and still many 
unknowns.  
   10 
