Ariff Ali: Launch of the personal property securities registry as part
of economic reform plan
Opening  remarks  by  Mr Ariff Ali,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  launch  of  the
Personal Property Securities Registry, Suva, 31 May 2019.
 Mr Masayuki Tachiiri, Regional Director, Pacific Subregional Office, Asian Development Bank;
Your Excellency Mr John Feakes, Australian High Commissioner to Fiji;
Mr Jonathan Rowe, Counsellor (Development), New Zealand High Commission;
Representatives of Government, and Licensed Financial Institutions;
Invited Guests;
Members of the Media;
Ladies and Gentlemen;
Introductory Comments
Bula vinaka and a very good morning!
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to this very special occasion, as we acknowledge an
important milestone in our financial inclusion and development journey. I specifically thank our
donors and stakeholders for availing their time to be with us today.
I would first and foremost, seek to offer our sincere gratitude to some key stakeholders, who
through their foresight and tireless efforts have enabled us to be launch this Personal Property
Securities Registry today. 
I therefore acknowledge the vision of our former Governor, Mr Barry Whiteside for initiating and
driving the establishment of a framework to look at reforming our secured transaction framework.
His  vision  was  supported  by  the  willingness  and  assistance  of  the  offices  of  the ADB  Pacific
Private Sector Development Initiative (PSDI), the Solicitor General’s Office, and our hard working
team here at the RBF.
I therefore sincerely thank all subject matter experts and technical officers who contributed to this
initiative.  In  particular,  I  would  like  to  convey  my  special  thanks  to  Peter  Dirou,  Terry  Reid,
Anthony Frazer, and Simon Thompson from the ADB PSDI team, John Kimbler from Paradigm
Applications (software Vendor), DSG Ms Tracy Wong and Glenys Andrews (SGO).
However,  the  project  could  not  have  effectively  reached  this  stage  without  the  support  of  our
licensed  commercial  banks  and  credit  institutions,  so  the  “buy-in”  we  obtained  from  these
industries to embrace the initiative, and be willing partners in a larger agenda of unlocking the
potential of the SME sector in Fiji, is very much appreciated.
Our Journey
We embarked on this reform journey a little over five years ago to this day, in a bid to enhance
access  to  finance  and  stimulate  economic  activity,  but  recognised  earlier  on  that  the  legal
framework and its related procedures were inhibitive for lenders to confidently provide finance
based on moveable property pledged as collateral.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  were  fortunate  that  the  ADB’s  Pacific  PSDI  came  to  our  assistance  with  the  generous
funding  of  the  Australian  and  New  Zealand  Governments,  who  worked  with  our  Secured
Transactions  Reform  Taskforce  comprising  of  industry  stakeholders  and  the  Office  of  the
Solicitor-General, in the drafting of a legal framework articulating clear rules around the priority,
and securing interest in moveable property. Particular attention was made to ensure that both
lenders’ and borrowers’ interests are adequately protected under this new framework.
In  September  2017,  the  Personal  Property  Securities  Act  came  into  effect  after  it  was
unanimously  passed  by  Parliament.  Soon  after,  work  commenced  in  putting  into  place  the
required Personal Property Securities Registry. It has been an interesting journey and we are
indeed very grateful for the opportunity to contribute to an important economic reform which will
benefit Fiji in the long run.
Highlights of the New Framework
With the law in effect and the Registry in place, there are some key information that lenders,
businesses and consumers will need to be aware:
(i) For Lenders
All  transactions  that  involve  moveable  property  standing  good  for  the  performance  of  an
obligation such as a repayment of a loan will now require a notice to be published on the online
Registry in order to have a legal effect of a security interest.
Lenders will no longer need to be physically present at the Titles Office or take debentures to the
Registrar of Companies or to file securities such as Bills of Sales and Crop Liens and they can
easily check the online Registry on whether the moveable property has already been pledged to
another lender.  　
(ii) For Businesses and Consumers
It is important for businesses and consumers to check if a moveable property, has an existing
security  interest  on  them  when  they  are  pledged  as  collateral.  Again,  this  search  feature  is
accessible through the online Registry, in a matter of minutes.
I  am  delighted  to  announce  at  this  juncture  that  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  has  committed  to
hosting the Registry in this initial stage and absorbing all necessary costs to ensure its smooth
operation.  We  see  this  development  as  significantly  important  to  growing  the  economy,  and
unlocking the potential of the MSME sector.
According  to  the  Fiji  Bureau  of  Statistics  Establishment  Surveys,  MSMEs  make  up  about  95
percent of businesses in Fiji and yet constitute less than 20 percent of the loan books of our
mainstream lending institutions. Improving access to credit for MSMEs will contribute to more
inclusive and sustainable economic growth.
The ability to search the registry by anyone is therefore free-of-charge for the first two years and
this arrangement will be reviewed in due time, as we monitor the effectiveness of the Registry.
(iii) Economic Reform Disguised as a Legal Reform
The online Registry we are launching today is only a part of the broader economic reform plan
underlying  the  commencement  of  the  PPSA.  Collectively,  the  legal  framework  and  the  online
Registry is intended to stimulate the development of new credit products and services and build
confidence among lenders in accepting valuable new forms of collateral. 
Conclusion
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
I wish to end with an important call-out to those who may have been sceptical about this whole
initiative and its expected benefits. We question the basis of such unconvinced sentiments when
similar  initiatives  with  regards  to  the  PPSA  and  the  secured  transaction  reform  agenda  have
been adopted by many countries in the region, in many parts of Africa, Asia and Middle East and
also by advanced economies, and have proven to significantly contribute to inclusive growth.
As a student of economics, I was reminded of what Adam Smith, the father of economics had
said, "Money makes money. When you have got a little, it is often easy to get more. The
great  difficulty  is  to  get  that  little".  There  is  enough  literature  and  evidence  available  from
many  of  these  country  experiences  that  confirm  that  secured  transaction  reform  assists  with
getting that little money.
Furthermore, we strongly believe that this project will have a positive impact on Fiji’s Ease of
Doing Business ranking, and should be supported by all those who are motivated to continue to
make Fiji, a preferred place of doing business.
To the ADB and the PSDI Team and the Australian and New Zealand High Commissions, the
Government  of  Fiji  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  are  very  appreciative  of  your  vital  role  as
technical advisors, and funders of this reform. Vinaka to you.
I  also  acknowledge  the  work  of  our  Secured  Transactions  Reform  Taskforce  that  was
instrumental  in  guiding  the  drafting  of  the  Act,  and  our  financial  service  providers  and  other
stakeholders for their collaboration. Let me also take this opportunity to thank Christina and her
team for their hard work and effort in working with all our stakeholders. 
We can now only look forward to realising the benefits of this very important initiative in the years
to come as this will provide our people with an opportunity economic empowerment.
Thank you very much and Vinaka.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
