September 25, 2019 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
 
 Economic Activity, Prices, 
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Mie 
Takako Masai 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
I. Developments in Economic Activity and Prices 
I would like to start my speech with a look at developments in economic activity and prices. 
 Following the discussion at the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held on  July 29 and 30, 
2019,  the  Bank  of  Japan  published  the  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices,  or  the 
Outlook  Report.  In  this  report,  the  Bank  presented  its  projections  for  Japan's  economic 
activity and prices through fiscal 2021. 
 I will explain developments in economic activity and prices by presenting the main content 
of the Outlook Report. 
 A. Overseas Economies 
Let  me  first  touch  on  developments  in  overseas  economies.  The  Bank  assesses  that, 
although overseas economies have been growing moderately on the whole, slowdowns have 
continued to be observed. 
 Private consumption has been firm on the whole, mainly due to the favorable employment 
and  income  situation.  However,  the  effects  of  trade  friction  are  becoming  evident  in  the 
form of deceleration in the pace of increase in the world trade volume, and it is confirmed 
that  this,  together  with  adjustments  in  the  cycle  for  IT-related  goods,  has  led  to  a 
deterioration  in  business  sentiment  and  a  decline  in  the  propensity  toward  investment, 
particularly  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  Indeed,  the  Global  Purchasing  Managers'  Index 
(PMI)  for manufacturing has been below the 50 mark and continued to decline since May 
2019  --  that  is,  four  consecutive  months  --  while  the  U.S.  ISM  Manufacturing  Index  also 
fell below 50 in August for the first time since August 2016 -- that is, about three years.   
 My  view  is  that  other  central  banks  and  international  organizations  have  been  sharing 
concerns about this situation. For instance, the G20 Osaka Leaders' Declaration adopted in 
June 2019 states that "[global economic] growth remains low and risks remain tilted to the 
downside." According to the World Economic Outlook (WEO) Update released in July 2019 
by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  the  growth  rate  of  the  global  economy  is 
projected to decelerate to 3.2 percent in 2019 but pick up to 3.5 percent  -- about the same 
1 
level  as  the  past  average  --  in  2020;  however,  these  projections  were  revised  downward 
from  the  previous  ones  made  in  the  April  2019  WEO,  marking  the  fourth  consecutive 
downward  revision.  Moreover,  it  was  indicated  by  the  IMF  itself  that  the  projections  are 
"precarious"  and  presume  that  progress  will  be  made  toward  resolving  trade  policy 
differences. 
 Looking  at  developments  by  major  region,  the  U.S.  economy  has  continued  to  be 
underpinned  by  the  household  sector against the backdrop  of  solid  growth  in  employment 
and  income.  Although  economic  growth  in  some  countries  --  such  as  France  --  is  being 
underpinned  by  consumption,  the  European  economy  as  a  whole,  in  contrast,  has  seen 
moves  to  defer  investment,  partly  against  the  backdrop  of  uncertainty  over  political 
developments,  and  there  are  no  signs  of  the  business  sentiment  of  manufacturing  firms  -- 
especially  those  in  Germany  --  bottoming  out.  With  regard  to  Germany  in  particular,  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank assessed that the growth rate of the economy for the July-September 
quarter  of  2019  could  be  negative  for  the  second  consecutive  quarter,  following  the 
April-June quarter. The Chinese economy has continued to see stable growth on the whole, 
but  weakness  has  been  observed  in  manufacturing,  as  suggested  by  such  indicators  as 
industrial output -- for which growth for July was at its lowest level in about ten and a half 
years  and  decelerated  further  in  August.  In  other  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies,  such  as  the  NIEs  and  ASEAN  economies,  effects  of  adjustments  in  IT-related 
goods, for example, have been observed. 
 In  terms  of  the  outlook  for  overseas  economies,  slowdowns  are  likely  to  continue  for  the 
time  being;  thereafter,  however,  such  economies  are  expected  to  grow  moderately  on  the 
whole, with the growth rates rising somewhat, partly due to the effects of  each economy's 
stimulus  measures  and  a  pick-up  in  manufacturing,  where  relatively  weak  developments 
have been observed mainly in IT-related and capital goods. Nevertheless, there are concerns 
that,  with  the  Brexit  deadline  approaching,  global  financial  market  conditions  might 
suddenly  change  depending  on  the  outcome  of  negotiations  on  the  United  Kingdom's  exit 
from  the  European  Union  (EU),  and  I  am  of  the  view  that  downside  risks  to  business 
activity remain significant, mainly  for manufacturing, with trade issues becoming chronic, 
2 
particularly  between  the  United  States  and  China.  Accordingly,  I  am  paying  particular 
attention to the timing and the pace of the pick-up in overseas economies. 
 B. Japan's Economy 
1. Current situation 
Now I would like to move on to developments in Japan's economy. 
 The  Bank  assesses  that  Japan's  economy  has  been  on  a  moderate  expanding  trend,  with a 
virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending  operating,  although  exports,  production,  and 
business  sentiment  have  been  affected  by  the  slowdown  in  overseas  economies.  The 
assessment  of  the  underlying  trend  as  a  whole  is  unchanged  from  the  previous  Outlook 
Report  released  in  April  2019,  but  the  slowdown  in  overseas  economies  seems  to  be 
affecting  not  only  exports  and  production,  as  has  been  seen  to  date,  but  also  the  business 
sentiment of some firms as well as manufacturers' machinery investment, among others. In 
the  meantime,  domestic  demand,  such  as  business  fixed  investment,  has  maintained  its 
firmness,  mainly  in  nonmanufacturing,  and  private  consumption  has  been  increasing 
moderately, albeit with fluctuations; thus, the output gap has remained positive and the real 
GDP growth rate for the April-June quarter of 2019, which was released in August, was 1.3 
percent on an annualized quarter-on-quarter basis, registering a positive figure for the third 
consecutive quarter. 
 Looking  at  developments  by  major  expenditure  item,  with  corporate  profits  staying  at 
relatively  high  levels  on  the  whole,  the  uptrend  in  business  fixed  investment  has  been 
maintained, mainly in investment intended for domestic capacity expansion, that aiming at 
saving labor in order to deal with labor shortage, and that in research and development for 
growth  areas.  Especially  in  nonmanufacturing,  an  increase  has  been  observed  in 
construction of logistics facilities, reflecting the expansion of e-commerce business, and of 
accommodation facilities to meet the demand of inbound visitors. Meanwhile, according to 
the  Financial  Statements  Statistics  of  Corporations  by  Industry,  Quarterly,  business  fixed 
investment  by  manufacturing  firms  for  the  April-June  quarter  of  2019  was  minus  6.9 
percent on a year-on-year basis, falling below the previous year's level for the first time in 
two years, due mainly to the effects of trade issues. Private consumption has maintained its 
3 
moderate  increasing  trend  with  labor  market  conditions  remaining  tight  and  the  income 
situation continuing to improve, albeit with fluctuations resulting from weather conditions. 
Exports  have  continued  to  show  some  weakness,  mainly  reflecting  the  effects  of  the 
slowdown  in  overseas  economies.  As  a  result  of  this  situation,  production  mainly  of 
export-related goods has exhibited some weak developments, but industrial production as a 
whole  has  been  more  or  less  flat.  In  these  circumstances,  business  sentiment  has  been 
weakening somewhat, mainly in manufacturing. 
 2. Baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity 
Japan's  economy  is  likely  to  continue  on  an  expanding  trend  throughout  the  projection 
period, which covers from fiscal 2019 through fiscal 2021. 
 In fiscal 2019, exports are projected to continue showing some weakness for the time being, 
reflecting the slowdown in overseas economies, and business fixed investment also is likely 
to  decelerate  somewhat,  mainly  for  manufacturing.  Thereafter,  exports  are  projected  to 
return to their moderate increasing trend, with the growth rates of overseas economies rising 
gradually.  The  rate  of  increase  in  business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to  rise  somewhat 
due to increases, for example, in labor-saving investment. Private consumption is likely to 
be pushed down for some time due to the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike, but 
is  expected  to  continue  increasing  as  the  employment  and  income  situation  continues  to 
improve.  Public  investment  also  is  likely  to  increase,  reflecting  Olympic  Games-related 
demand and expansion in expenditure such as for national resilience.   
 In  fiscal  2020,  the  pace  of  increase  in  exports  is  expected  to  accelerate,  with  the  growth 
rates of overseas economies rising, and government spending accompanying the hosting of 
the  Olympic  Games  is  expected  to  underpin  the  economy.  Business  fixed  investment  is 
likely  to  maintain  a  moderate  uptrend.  Private  consumption  and  housing  investment  are 
expected  to  head  gradually  toward  a  recovery  from  a  decline  after  the  scheduled 
consumption tax hike.   
 In  fiscal  2021,  private  consumption  and  housing  investment  are  projected  to  increase 
because  the  effects  of  the  reactionary  decline  to  the  scheduled  consumption  tax  hike  are 
4 
likely  to  dissipate,  although  Olympic  Games-related  expenditure  --  which  had  been 
increasing -- will have been completed. Exports and business fixed investment are likely to 
maintain their moderate uptrend. 
 In terms of the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts in the July Outlook Report, 
the real GDP growth rate is 0.7 percent for fiscal 2019, 0.9 percent for fiscal 2020, and 1.1 
percent for fiscal 2021. 
 3. Uncertainties regarding the baseline scenario for economic activity 
There  are  various  uncertainties  regarding  the  baseline  scenario  of  the  outlook  for  Japan's 
economic activity, and I would like to explain two points to which I currently pay particular 
attention. 
 First is the risk that the timing of the bottoming out of external demand will delay. Since the 
latter  half  of  2018,  I  have  assessed  that  risks  are tilted  to  the  downside,  particularly  those 
regarding  developments  in  overseas  economies.  Recently,  due  to  political  factors  such  as 
the strengthening of protectionist moves, downside risks seem to be increasing further. I am 
concerned that this could affect the timing of the bottoming out of external demand through 
various  channels  including  disruptions  in  financial  markets  and  a  reduction  in  firms' 
incentive to invest caused by developments in trade. 
 Second is the effects of the consumption tax hike scheduled to take place in October 2019. 
The planned increase in the tax rate is smaller than that at the time of the previous hike in 
April 2014, and the government plans to implement measures such as a reduced tax rate, a 
point reward program when using cashless payments, and more flexibly passing on the rise 
in the consumption tax to sales prices. Taking these into consideration, the baseline scenario 
is that the negative impact of the tax hike on the growth rates will be smaller than that of the 
previous  hike.  Nevertheless,  I  am  paying  attention  to  future  consumption,  together  with 
possible further heightening in the current geopolitical risks. 
 I would like to carefully examine the situation, including these two points, in the upcoming 
October Outlook Report. 
5 
C. Price Developments 
1. Current situation 
Next, I will turn to price developments in Japan. 
 The year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh 
food is currently at around 0.5 percent; it seems to have hit a lull somewhat in the uptrend, 
as the effects of energy price drops have started to appear. Nevertheless, the general public's 
gut feeling seems to be that prices are rising gradually. I believe that this is affected by the 
rise in prices of food products, which are staple purchases. Actually, the year-on-year rate of 
change  in  the  CPI  saw  an  acceleration  in  its  growth  for  an  increasing  number  of  food 
products since early spring; in addition, the Unit Value Price Index released by Hitotsubashi 
University (SRI-Hitotsubashi Consumer Purchase Index) and the Nikkei CPINow-T Index, 
both of which are calculated based on point-of-sales (POS) data collected at supermarkets, 
for example, maintained their high growth.   
 As  described  in  the  Comprehensive  Assessment:  Developments  in  Economic  Activity  and 
Prices  as  well  as  Policy  Effects  since  the  Introduction  of  Quantitative  and  Qualitative 
Monetary Easing (QQE), which was released by the Bank in September 2016, the adaptive 
component plays a considerably larger role in Japan than in other countries in the formation 
of inflation expectations, which means that inflation expectations tend to be influenced by 
past  inflation  rates.  A  similar  trend  has  been  confirmed  by  subsequent  studies.1  In  other 
words, it is important to make cumulative efforts to raise inflation rates; as Gertler pointed 
out, for an economy that barely has a history of inflation being anchored at a targeted rate, 
"they [individuals] have to see it to believe it."2  From this viewpoint, my understanding of 
                                                   
1  See,  for  example,  Toshitaka  Maruyama  and  Kenji  Suganuma,  "Inflation  Expectations  Curve  in 
Japan," 
Bank 
of 
Japan  Working 
Paper 
Series, 
no.19-E-6,  April 
2019, 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/research/wps_rev/wps_2019/data/wp19e06.pdf. 
2   Mark  Gertler,  "Rethinking  the  Power  of  Forward  Guidance:  Lessons  from  Japan,"  IMES 
Discussion Paper Series, No. 2017-E-8, Bank of Japan, Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies 
(IMES), October 2017, https://www.imes.boj.or.jp/research/papers/english/17-E-08.pdf. 
6 
the several signs of changes that recently have started to appear is that they are arising in a 
situation where we gradually are taking positive steps. 
 In fact, in contrast to the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items less fresh food 
that I mentioned earlier, that for all items less fresh food and energy has remained flat at a 
level around 0.5 percent since the beginning of this fiscal year. In addition, signs of changes 
--  albeit  slight  --  seem  to  have  appeared  in  view  of  the  fact  that  price  rises  by  firms  are 
beginning  to  spread  to  a  broader  range  of  products,  and  given  other  data,  such  as  the 
trimmed-mean  CPI,  which  excludes  extreme  relative  price  changes.  Turning  to  inflation 
expectations, the expected inflation rate for the next five years surpassed 1 percent for the 
first time since 2013, according to an estimation by the Bank's staff based on the results of 
the Opinion Survey on the General Public's Views and Behavior. 
 The fact that the adaptive component is playing a considerably large role can be explained 
by  people's  mindset  and  behavior  based  on  the  assumption  that  wages  and  prices  will  not 
increase  easily  having  been  deeply  entrenched.  I  assume  that  households  are  gaining 
cumulative  experiences  through  rises  in  base  pay  for  six  consecutive  years  and  in  the 
year-on-year rate of increase in employee income on a quarterly basis  for 26 quarters in a 
row, although the rates of increase are modest. As a matter of fact, households' tolerance of 
price  rises,  which  the  Bank's  staff  calculated,  seems  to  have  been  on  an  improving  trend, 
and I am of the view that these also are signs of positive changes. 
 As I have explained so far, I have the sense that, although we still have some distance to go 
to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  there  are  some  signs  that  the  momentum 
toward  achieving  the  target  could  strengthen  again.  In  other  words,  I  feel  that  we  are 
approaching an important phase where firms' and households' tolerance of price rises could 
                                                                                                                                                     
Based on empirical analysis, the following paper concludes that individuals' expectations 
of future inflation rates are influenced by the inflation rates that they actually have experienced. Jess 
Diamond,  Kota  Watanabe,  and  Tsutomu  Watanabe,  "The  Formation  of  Consumer  Inflation 
Expectations:  New  Evidence  From  Japan's  Deflation  Experience,"  Bank  of  Japan  Working  Paper 
Series,  no.19-E-13,  August  2019,  http://www.boj.or.jp/en/research/wps_rev/wps_2019/data/ 
wp19e13.pdf. 
7 
improve,  and  expected  inflation  rates  could  rise  further.  Therefore,  I  believe  that  it  is 
extremely important to encourage this development. 
 2. Baseline scenario of the outlook for prices 
With  regard  to  the  outlook  for  prices,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  for  all 
items less fresh food is likely to increase gradually toward 2 percent, mainly on the back of 
the  output  gap  remaining  positive  and  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  rising. 
The medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts of the year-on-year rate of change in 
the CPI for all items less fresh food presented in the July Outlook Report was 1.0 percent 
for fiscal 2019, 1.3 percent for fiscal 2020, and 1.6 percent for fiscal 2021. 
 3. Risks to prices 
Specific  risk  factors  to  prices  are  developments  in  firms'  and  households'  medium-  to 
long-term inflation expectations, the fact that the responsiveness of prices of some items to 
the  output  gap  is  low,  and  developments  in  foreign  exchange  rates  and  international 
commodity  prices  going  forward.  My  recent  concern  is  that,  amid  significant  downside 
risks  concerning  overseas  economies,  negative  effects  would  be exerted  on prices through 
the third risk factor in the case of disruptions in global financial markets.   
 II. The Bank's Monetary Policy 
Next, I will talk about the Bank's monetary policy. 
 A. Current Monetary Policy Framework 
The Bank has set the price stability target at 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of 
change  in  the  CPI  and  is  conducting  monetary  policy  to  achieve  this  target  at  the  earliest 
possible time. Specifically, under the framework of QQE with Yield Curve Control, it has 
supported  the  economic  activity  of  firms  and  households  by  maintaining  highly 
accommodative financial conditions. 
 This framework mainly consists of four components: yield curve control, purchases of risky 
assets,  an  inflation-overshooting  commitment,  and  forward  guidance  for  policy  rates.  The 
first component, yield curve control, is a policy under which the Bank aims to keep short- 
8 
and  long-term  interest  rates  stable  at  low  levels.  Namely,  in  the  guideline  for  market 
operations,  the  Bank  sets  the  short-term  policy  interest  rate  at  minus  0.1  percent  and  the 
target  level  of  10-year  Japanese  government  bond  (JGB)  yields  at  around  0  percent,  and 
conducts  JGB  purchases  so  as  to  achieve  this  target  level.  The  second  component  is 
purchases  of  risky  assets;  with  a  view  to  lowering  risk  premia  of  asset  prices,  the  Bank 
purchases  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and Japan  real estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs) 
so  that  their  amounts outstanding  will increase  at annual  paces  of  about  6  trillion  yen  and 
about  90  billion  yen,  respectively.  The  third  component,  the  inflation-overshooting 
commitment, is a policy  under which the Bank commits itself to continuing to expand the 
monetary  base  --  the  total  amount  of  money  the  Bank  directly  supplies  to  the  economy  -- 
until  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  observed  CPI  exceeds  2  percent  and  stays 
above  that  level  in  a  stable  manner.  The  fourth  component,  forward  guidance  for  policy 
rates,  presents  the  Bank's  stance  of  maintaining  the  current  extremely  low  levels  of  short- 
and long-term interest rates for an extended period of time, at least through around spring 
2020,  taking  into  account  uncertainties  regarding  economic  activity  and  prices  including 
developments in overseas economies and the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike. 
 B. Persistently Continuing with Powerful Monetary Easing 
The Bank introduced QQE in April 2013 and has continued with powerful monetary easing. 
However, as it gradually became clear that it likely would still take time to achieve the price 
stability  target  of  2  percent,  it  decided  to  strengthen  the  framework  for  QQE  with  Yield 
Curve  Control  in  July  2018.  Specifically,  it  decided  to  enhance  the  sustainability  of 
powerful  monetary  easing  by  (1)  strengthening  its  commitment  to  achieving  the  price 
stability target by introducing forward guidance for policy rates and (2) conducting market 
operations and asset purchases in a more flexible manner. To elaborate on the second point, 
the  Bank  announced  that,  in  purchasing  JGBs,  the  yields  might  move  upward  and 
downward  to  some  extent,  mainly  depending  on  developments  in  economic  activity  and 
prices. It also decided to conduct such purchases in a flexible manner so that their amount 
outstanding  would  increase  at  an  annual  pace  of  about  80  trillion  yen.  Furthermore,  it 
decided to purchase ETFs and J-REITs so that their amounts outstanding would increase at 
annual paces of about 6 trillion yen and about 90 billion yen, respectively. At the same time, 
with  a  view  to  lowering  risk  premia  of  asset  prices  in  an  appropriate  manner,  the  Bank 
9 
announced that it might increase or decrease the amount of purchases depending on market 
conditions. By allowing for some elasticity in the monetary policy framework, the Bank can 
respond flexibly to some extent to developments in financial markets. 
 Moreover,  in  April  2019,  the  Bank  made  clearer  its  policy  stance  to  persistently  continue 
with powerful monetary easing. Specifically, regarding its forward guidance for policy rates, 
the Bank added developments in overseas economies as a factor to consider when judging 
whether it would maintain the current extremely low levels of short- and long-term interest 
rates;  in  addition,  it  clearly  presented  a  point  of  reference  for  the  expression  "for  an 
extended  period  of  time" as  at  least  through  around  spring  2020.  Furthermore,  in  order  to 
contribute  to  smooth  implementation  of  fund-provisioning  and  asset  purchases  as  well  as 
secure market functioning, the Bank decided to take the following measures and initiative: 
(1) expand eligible collateral for the Bank's provision of credit; (2) improve the use of the 
Fund-Provisioning  Measure  to  Support  Strengthening  the  Foundations  for  Economic 
Growth;  (3)  relax  the  terms  and  conditions  for  the  Securities  Lending  Facility  (SLF);  and 
(4) consider introducing an ETF lending facility. 
 The Bank will persistently continue with powerful monetary easing in a sustainable manner 
under  the  framework  of  QQE  with  Yield  Curve  Control  by  devising  measures  considered 
necessary at the time and strengthening the framework.   
 C. Coping with Current Uncertainties 
My  understanding  is  that  global  financial  markets  as  a  whole  remain  risk  averse,  and  this 
development seems to be strengthening recently amid rapid alternation between pessimism 
and  optimism  due  to  factors  of  a  very  strong  political  nature.  For  example,  in  Germany, 
interest  rates  on  all  instruments  from  overnight  loans  to  30-year  government  bonds 
temporarily  became  negative,  and  in  Switzerland,  interest  rates  on  all  instruments  up  to 
50-year  government  bonds  were  negative  at  one  point.  In  the  United  States,  yields  on 
10-year  Treasuries  have  fallen  close  to  the  lowest  levels  marked  after  the  global  financial 
crisis;  market  participants  seem  to  have  various  interpretations  of  the  implication  of  an 
inverted  yield  curve,  which  has  been  observed  since  mid-August,  with  yields  on  10-year 
Treasuries declining below those on 2-year Treasuries. In the meantime, major economies' 
10 
central  banks,  such  as  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  have 
shifted to a more accommodative policy stance so as to prevent uncertainties over the global 
economy from affecting domestic and regional economic activity and prices. In this respect, 
the  Bank  considers  it  important  to  thoroughly  examine  risks  to  overseas  economies  and 
carefully assess how those risks could affect Japan's economic activity and prices. Based on 
such  examination,  the  Bank,  like  other  central  banks,  will  not  hesitate  to  take  additional 
easing  measures  if  there  is  a  greater  possibility  that  the  momentum  toward  achieving  the 
price stability target will be lost. 
 To clarify its intention, in the July 2019 Statement on Monetary Policy, the Bank presented 
its  stance  that  it  "will  not  hesitate  to  take  additional  easing  measures  if  there  is  a  greater 
possibility  that  the  momentum  toward  achieving  the  price  stability  target  will  be  lost." 
Moreover, in the statement released on September 19, the Bank judged that it was becoming 
necessary to pay closer attention to the possibility that the momentum toward achieving the 
price  stability  target  would  be  lost.  Based  on  this  judgment,  it  added  an  expression  that, 
taking this situation into account, it would reexamine economic and price developments at 
the next MPM, when it will discuss the October Outlook Report. 
 Actual  economic  conditions  faced  by  central  banks  are  extremely  complex  and  change 
dynamically in the course of time. On this point, at the Jackson Hole symposium in  2018, 
there  was  discussion  about  implications  for  monetary  policy  arising  from  various 
structural changes that have occurred in recent years, including digital innovation and an 
increase in types of non-tangible assets such as software, intellectual property, and brand 
equity.  Moreover,  at  the  Jackson  Hole  symposium  held  this  year,  Federal  Reserve 
Chairman Jerome Powell pointed to recent uncertainties as a new challenge for monetary 
policy  management.3  In  fact,  a  strengthening  of  protectionist  moves  recently  appears  to 
be one of the factors that makes the situation even more complicated.   
                                                   
3  This economic symposium, held annually at Jackson Hole, Wyoming, in August, is hosted by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Prominent central bankers, finance ministers, and academics 
from  around  the  world  convene  to  discuss  topics  such  as  on  the  global  economy  and  monetary 
policy. 
11 
I intend to continue to conduct monetary policy appropriately toward achieving the price 
stability target while considering all conceivable adverse effects and positive effects from 
every  angle  as  well  as  taking  full  consideration  of  these  notable  changes  in  the 
environment and risks on which to place emphasis. 
                                                                                                                                                      
See Jerome H. Powell, "Challenges for Monetary Policy: Remarks at a symposium hosted 
by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 2019, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/powell20190823a.pdf. 
12 
