Peter Praet: Market power - a complex reality
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
EIB/Compnet conference, Luxembourg, 18 March 2019.
 Diagnosing  and  quantifying  firms’  market  power – the ability of firms to maintain prices above
marginal 
industrial
organisation.  On the basis of detailed firm-level data, researchers analyse the market power of
firms in specific industries.
for  economists  studying 
long  been  a  central 
cost –  has 
1
topic 
For  a  long  time,  market  power  was  of  little  interest  to  macroeconomists,  including  central
bankers. It first entered the field of macroeconomics as a topic of interest in the mid-1980s, but
only with a narrow focus on the cyclical pattern of markups – the margin firms charge over the
marginal cost of output. In part, this is because macroeconomic models are generally founded
on  Kaldor’s  stylised  facts,  such  as  a  constant  labour  share,  constant  profits  and  a  constant
capital-to-output ratio. Such models implicitly assume that there are no trend changes in firms’
market power.
Recently, however, trend changes in market power have elicited interest from macroeconomists
following a number of US-based studies that challenge the underlying conventional assumption in
macroeconomic  models,  namely  that  firms  have  constant  market  power.  These  studies
document a rise in the market power of US firms over the past three decades, and especially
since  2000.  Such  changes  in  firms’  market  power  at  the  aggregate  level  can  have  important
macroeconomic implications. They could affect investment and the pricing behaviour of firms,
but also productivity growth and, therefore, the natural rate of interest.
For  a  central  banker,  it  is  thus  of  crucial  importance  to  understand  whether  and  how  the
prevailing level of firms’ market power is evolving. In theory, it is fairly straightforward to define
market power. In practice, however, it is difficult to pin down the level and evolution of market
power  empirically.  There  are  two  reasons  for  this.  First,  markups  are  not  directly  observable.
Second, there is no one-to-one mapping between firms’ market power and point-in-time markup
estimates. A firm with a small markup at any given moment can have significant market power
when its pricing strategy aims to build up an ever-larger market share. As a result, assessing the
level of firms’ market power requires a variety of approaches to measure markups and a broad
range of indicators (such as the evolution of firm concentration and firm dynamics).
In the United States, the observation of rising firm markups and concentration rates, combined
with a decline in business dynamics – in particular the entry of firms – has led to the consensus
that firms’ market power is on the rise in the economy as a whole.  At the same time, there is a
lively  debate  about  the  drivers  of  this  development.  Some  authors  suggest  that  firms’  market
power and concentration are driven by weakening antitrust enforcement, and link rising market
power to a number of welfare-reducing secular trends, such as the decline in productivity and the
rise in inequality. Others argue that market concentration and rising markups are a natural side
effect  of  the  rise  of  global  technology  giants,  and  see  such  developments  as  beneficial  for
growth, to the extent that they spur investment and innovation.
2
Today, let me review the euro area evidence.
The evolution of market power in the euro area
Recent work by ECB staff  shows that the euro area economy wide mark-up has remained fairly
stable over the past three decades, hovering around 10%. It has even declined marginally since
the late 1990s/early 2000s, in particular in the manufacturing sector. This clearly contrasts with
3
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the evidence for the United States (see Charts 1a and 1b).
Other indicators confirm the absence of any marked change in firms’ market power in the euro
area.  Concentration  ratios  have  remained  broadly  flat  over  the  last  ten  years  or  so ,  and
economic dynamism – the creation of new firms and jobs – has remained stable, albeit at a low
level.
4
Finally, there is no evidence of emerging euro area-based “superstar firms” – firms that have a
substantially greater share of sales than their peers, but a low labour share, and are pulling away
from  those  peers  over  time.  The  largest  euro  area  firms  have,  as  in  the  case  of  the  United
States, a low labour share – the share of these firms in total sales is notably above their share of
total  employment  in  a  sector.  However,  these  firms’  market  shares  have  not  grown  in  recent
years.  Moreover,  the  markups  of  these  largest  euro  area-based  firms  have  remained  broadly
stable over the past decade, implying they have also not become more profitable (see Chart 2).
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
At the same time, there are signs that some large and growing global firms are entering euro
area markets and steadily increasing their market shares. This may explain the diverging results
we find across a variety of studies on developments in the competitive landscape in the euro
5
area.
Studies  that  focus  exclusively  on  the  market  power  of  firms  located  in  the  euro  area  find  no
noticeable change in the euro area’s competitive landscape. By contrast, studies that consider all
firms that compete in the euro area suggest that there is declining competition in the euro area.
This declining competition is most likely being driven by these global firms.
Macroeconomic implications of market power
Market structure and market power have gone from being a field studied by microeconomists to
one studied by both micro- and macroeconomists. There are good reasons for this: a change in
market power could have important macroeconomic implications.
For the euro area, available evidence suggests that the market power of firms located within the
single currency area has remained broadly unchanged in recent years. The positive side of this
is that there is little evidence that the euro area has seen a rise in “bad” market power – market
power which results in productive and allocative inefficiencies. However, on the negative side, the
euro area has also not seen the emergence of superstar firms – highly productive large firms
with  rising  market  shares.  Instead,  the  euro  area  may  be  facing  increasing  competition  from
large global firms. Moreover, in an increasingly dynamic and digitised world, significant and rapid
changes in market structures across industries may occur at any point in time.
The digital transformation could change production and distribution methods and affect how firms
compete with each other. Digital technologies can reduce the costs of scaling up production and
entering certain markets, even across borders. And some digital products may be replicable at
close to zero marginal cost. This can allow innovative start-ups to grow and gain market share
rapidly once they bring a product to market, often with few employees, few tangible assets and a
6
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
limited geographical footprint.
At the same time, the development of digital technologies may entail high upfront research and
development costs.
In such an environment of high fixed costs but near zero marginal costs, it may be more natural
to  see  concentration  ratios  and  markups  rising.  Temporary  market  power  can,  in  these
conditions,  be  desirable  as  it  would  incentivise  innovation,  which  could  help  to  stimulate
productivity and potential growth in the economy. Devising structural policies in the euro area that
allow firms to adopt digital technologies and that foster innovation would therefore be important.
However,  these  massive  economies  of  scale  and  scope  could  also  present  challenges  to
maintaining competitive conditions. As firms gain market power, their capacity to exert political
7
pressure to protect and increase their market power also rises.
What started out as good market power could quickly become the bad market power creating
dynamic  inefficiencies.  This  could  limit  the  productivity  benefits  from  new  technologies  by
creating  obstacles  to  the  entry  and  innovation  of  new  players,  as  well  as  slowing  down  the
diffusion of innovations to potential competitors.
Conclusion
Firm-level data are essential to improve our understanding of macroeconomic trends that result
from  the  behaviour  of  heterogeneous  firms.  For  the  euro  area,  this  often  involves  comparing
cross-country  trends.  Such  analysis  tends,  however,  to  be  hindered  by  two  basic  data
constraints. First, existing indicators based on firm-level data are often not comparable across
countries and, therefore, analysis based on micro data often remains confined to the national
level. Second, firm-level data are usually confidential. CompNet plays a pivotal role in tackling
these two problems. Compnet’s dataset indeed relies on a research and statistical infrastructure
based on collaboration among country teams, which allows for cross-country comparability. The
confidentiality  constraint  is  addressed  through  the  “distributed  micro  data  approach”,  which
allows the different moments of the distribution of several indicators to be calculated.
1
2
3
4
5
I thank Isabel Vansteenkiste for her support in preparing this speech.
For  the  United  States,  a  number  of  studies  have  documented  a  rise  in  markups  using  a  variety  of
methodologies and approaches. See, for instance: De Loecker, J. and J. Eeckhout (2017), “The Rise of Market
Power and the Macroeconomic Implications”, NBER Working Paper 23687, Nekarda, C. and V. Ramey (2013),
“The  Cyclical  Behavior  of  the  Price-Cost  Markup”,  NBER  Working  paper  19099  and  Hall,  R.  (2018),  “New
Evidence on the Markup of Prices over Marginal Costs and the Role of Mega-Firms in the US Economy”, NBER
Working Paper 24574. Other authors have noted a rise in concentration rates, for example: Peltzman, S. (2014),
“Industrial Concentration under the Rule of Reason”, Journal of Law and Economics 57(4), Autor, D., D. Dorn, L.
Katz,  C.  Patterson  and  J.  Van  Reenen  (2017),  “Concentrating  on  the  Fall  of  the  Labor  Share”, American
Economic Review 107(5), 180–185. Business dynamics have also declined significantly in the United States, as
documented for instance by Decker, R., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin and J. Miranda (2018), “Changing Business
Dynamism and Productivity: Shocks vs. Responsiveness”, NBER Working Papers 24236.
See Cavalleri, M.-C., A. Eliet, P. McAdam, F. Petroulakis, A. Soares, and I. Vansteenkiste (2019). “Concentration,
Market Power and Dynamism in the Euro area”, forthcoming as ECB discussion paper.
For details, see Cavalleri et al. (2019). Similar results were also shown in Döttling, R., G. Gutiérrez and T.
Philippon (2017), “Is there an Investment Gap in Advanced Economies? If so, Why”, Proceedings from 2017
Sintra Forum on Central Banking, pp 129–193, Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), “Mark-ups of firms in selected
European countries”, Deutsche Bundesbank Monthly Report December 2017, pp 53–57 and T. Valetti, G. Koltay,
S. Lorincz and H. Zenger (2018), “Concentration Trends in Europe”, Mimeo, European Commission.
See,  for  instance,  Dıez,  F.,  D.  Leigh  and  S.  Tambunlertchai.  (2018),  “Global  Market  Power  and  its
Macroeconomic Implications”, IMF Working Paper 18/137 and De Loecker, J. and J. Eeckhout (2018), “Global
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Market Power”, NBER Working Paper 24768.
6
7
See OECD (2018), “ Maintaining competitive conditions in the era of digitalisation”, OECD report to G-20 Finance
Ministers and Central Bank Governors, July 2018.
See Zingales, L. (2017), “Towards a Political Theory of the Firm”, NBER Working Paper 23593.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
