“Fin-RegTech: Regulatory challenges with emphasis on Europe” 
Keynote speech 
by 
Professor John (Iannis) Mourmouras 
Senior Deputy Governor 
Bank of Greece 
Former Deputy Finance Minister 
Former Chief Economic Advisor to the Prime Minister 
  New York, Cornell University, 28 February 2019 
 Introduction 
It is a great pleasure for me to be in New York upon the invitation of Citigroup to speak at Cornell University’s 
“Tech Day”, at such a ground-breaking seminar, entitled “Big Data and FinTech Innovation”. As you know, the 
University  which  hosts  us  today  was  founded  150  years  ago  by  Ezra  Cornell,  the  inventor  of  the  electric 
telegraph and founder of Western Union. His motto – which became the University’s founding principle, “an 
institution  where  anyone  can  find  instruction  in  any  study”  –  has  formed  the  basis  for  Cornell  University’s 
countless contributions across all fields of knowledge, prioritising public engagement to help improve quality of 
life worldwide. At this University, founded by such a revolutionary spirit, I have the opportunity to share my 
thoughts and exchange views with you on what economists have called a major catalyst in the “fourth industrial 
revolution”, the FinTech industry, due to its significant transformative impact on financial services. And let me 
draw your attention to another parallel: the term FinTech first appeared in the public domain, introduced in the 
early 1990s by Citigroup, the main organiser of today’s event! 
 
My  speech  today  will  be  structured  as  follows:  After  offering  some  introductory  remarks  to  clarify  technical 
jargon  and  some  remarks  on  FinTech’s  current  landscape,  I  will  then  move  on  to  an  overview  of  FinTech’s 
current state-of-play in the European Union (EU), focusing on its potential impact on the established financial 
sector,  as  well  as  the  risks  and  challenges  ahead.  Finally,  I  will  take  a  look  into  the  regulation  gap  as  far  as 
FinTech activities are concerned and possible ways to fill this gap. 
 
2. The FinTech landscape today 
2.1  What is Fintech? 
Despite its widespread usage, FinTech does not have a broadly and formally accepted definition. In general terms, 
FinTech stands for Financial Technology and describes technologically enabled financial innovations that could 
result in new business models, applications, processes or products with an associated material effect on financial 
markets and institutions and the provision of financial services. 
A term associated with FinTech is RegTech, a commonly recognised term for technologies that can be used by 
market participants, to follow regulatory and compliance requirements more effectively and efficiently, and by 
competent authorities, for supervisory purposes. RegTech is not entirely new, but is rapidly developing (in line 
with other technological applications), fuelled by growing computing power, emerging technology’s diminishing 
  1 
cost and the data explosion. In 2018, RegTech investment reached the amount of US $2 billion and is forecasted 
to  exceed  $  76  billion  by  2022.  RegTech  provides  senior  executives  with  an  opportunity  to  introduce  new 
capabilities that are designed to leverage existing systems and data to produce regulatory data and reporting in a 
cost-effective, flexible and timely manner without taking the risk of replacing / updating legacy systems. Having 
said this, my intention today is to focus on the regulatory challenges surrounding FinTech and how to close the 
regulatory gap I mentioned earlier. 
2.2 FinTech landscape 
The  global  FinTech  landscape  can  be  mapped  across  eight  distinct  categories:  payments,  insurance,  financial 
planning, lending and crowdfunding, blockchain, trading and investment, data and analytics, and cybersecurity 
(see Chart 1). 
 
Chart 1 FinTech landscape used by IOSCO (International Organization of Securities Commissions) 
In more detail, blockchain, also known as distributed ledger technology or DLT, became widely known as the 
technology that underlies Bitcoin, which holds 60% of the cryptocurrency market. Of course, numerous potential 
applications of DLT to financial services other than digital currencies are lately becoming apparent such as robo-
advice and peer-to-peer insurance.  
 
Another category in the FinTech landscape is data & analytics.  As  you know, advances in digital technology 
such as Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Big Data have greatly increased the usability of advanced analytics in the 
financial services sector. This development can lead to better suited products and services, but it also poses the 
question whether a limit should be put on the profiling of individuals. In this respect, the expanded availability 
  2 
and broader use of consumer data raises issues relating to data ownership and data usage and their implications 
for consumer privacy. A small digression on AI may be in order here. It is said that the world’s most valuable 
resource is no longer oil, but data and AI has the capability to unlock and leverage data, transforming our lives. I 
don’t  have  to  mention  the  list  of  world  “firsts”  AI  has  already  achieved.  AI  ferryboats,  AI  hearing  aids,  aI 
toothbrush,  AI  ski  instructor,  financial  reports,  video  games,  etc.  and  in  the  near  future  autonomous  driving 
which e.g. could reshape the trucking industry, resulting in fewer accidents, smart cities with less pollution and 
energy usage, smart farms with better quality products and so on. 
A final category in the FinTech landscape is cybersecurity. While increased reliance on digital technology may 
heighten the risk of cybersecurity being compromised, digital technology also presents numerous opportunities to 
improve security of digital financial services. Data encryption to protect digitally stored data is improving with 
technological advances. Data analytics can be used to detect irregular patterns and fraud. DLT could increase the 
transparency of transactions, making them easier to track and control, improving Anti-Money Laundering (AML) 
regulations.  
 
3. A look into the rise of FinTech in the EU 
Over the last couple of years, global FinTech investment activity has been recording robust growth. While in 
2012  total  investment  in  this  sector  was  less  than  US  $12  billion,  in  2018  global  investment  in  FinTech 
companies reached approximately US $112 billion (with 2,200 deals), more than double its 2017 level of around 
US $51 billion (as you can see in Chart 2). Moreover, 2018 was a year in which Fintech investment, including 
Venture Capitals (VC), Mergers and Acquisitions (M&A) and Private Equities (PE), recorded a series of peaks. 
Emerging Fintech subsectors have seen the number of new startups rise rapidly, while highly mature sectors such 
as payments experienced a certain degree of consolidation. 
 
Chart 2 Global investment and banks’ activity in FinTech 
 The US and Silicon Valley remain the world's biggest hubs for FinTech companies and have the lion’s share in 
terms  of  financing.  In  2018,  US  FinTech  investment  reached  US  $55  billion  across  1,245  deals.  Europe’s 
FinTech sector has been catching up with US FinTech investment growth, with investment following an upward 
path since 2008, having reached US $34 billion with 536 deals in 2018, driven by big mergers and acquisitions 
  3 
(M&As) (see Chart 3). Venture Capital investment remains high in Europe and in 2018, it attracted the second 
largest amount ever of VC investment in FinTech. 
 
Chart 3 Total investment activity (VC, PE and M&A) in FinTech in Europe (2013–2018) 
  Despite concerns about Brexit, the UK remained a leader in FinTech in 2018 (see Chart  4 for the number of 
companies established in individual EU countries).  The UK accounts for half of the region’s top VC deals, with 
last  year’s  total  investment  activity  amounting  to  US  $21  billion.  Throughout  2018,  the  UK  government 
continued  to  build  FinTech  bridges  with  other  jurisdictions,  so  as  to  reduce  regulatory  barriers  and  support 
growth  in  a  post-Brexit  world.  Ireland  saw  increasing  interest  from  global  FinTech  companies  and  financial 
institutions,  spurred  by  Brexit-related  concerns.  More  precisely,  55  FinTech  or  financial  services  companies 
opted for establishment in Ireland last year, and their move is expected to bring more than 4,500 new jobs to the 
country (IDA, Ireland). Around 50 applications for authorization were submitted to the Central Bank of Ireland 
by  year-end  covering  almost  the  entire  spectrum  of  financial  services  including  banking,  insurance,  asset 
management  and  payments.  Multinational  companies  seem  to  be  concerned  about  a  no-deal  Brexit  and  these 
moves in 2018 suggest their efforts to mitigate its impact.  
   4 
Chart 4  Fintech sector development across European Union 
 Sources: Ernst and Young, Crunchbase, Digital Agenda Scoreboard, and European Central Bank. 
 
This year, we are expecting more FinTech consolidation driven both by FinTech companies looking to buy in 
order to  achieve  greater scale  and by  conventional banks looking to buy  FinTech in order to drive their own 
strategic objectives. Over the next few quarters, Fintech activity is expected to rise in terms of open banking, 
RegTech, the acquisition of FinTech by banks, insurance tech, and the creation of start-ups, given that Europe 
offers  a  start-up  friendly  regulatory  environment  that  encourages  young  entrepreneurs  to  experiment  with 
innovative FinTech services. 
 
4.  FinTech’s  impact  upon  and  interaction  with  the  conventional  financial  system  and  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism  
But what is FinTech’s estimated impact of and interaction with the conventional financial system? All the above 
developments  of  the  financial  technology  infrastructure  have  non-negligible  implications.  Therefore,  it  is 
interesting to briefly discuss the main effects of FinTech revolutions on customers, competition among market 
players and, overall, the financial industry’s operation and structure.  
Currently, five main drivers appear to be shaping and are expected to bring changes to the established financial 
sector: 
The first driver is reduction of information asymmetry. The ability of new technology to capture and process a 
high amount of data in real time is improving the price discovery mechanism in several areas of the financial 
system  such  as  the  credit  gap  between  borrowers  and  lenders,  to  the  extent  that  clients’  information  history 
becomes more transparent, improving borrower’s behaviour through competition and resilience.  
The second driver is improvement of Communication Efficacy and the third is supporting lending for small- and 
medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs).  The  fourth  is  supporting  a  sharing  economy:  Fintech  facilitates  sharing 
 5 
economy  through  digital  platforms  that  enable  the  matching  of  buyers  and  sellers.  Finally,  the  fifth  driver  is 
increasing financial inclusion. In other words, the sustainable provision of affordable financial services (mainly 
bank accounts) to more vulnerable people with limited economic means, as well as population groups living in 
underdeveloped areas and countries.  
Last  but  not  least,  in  terms  of  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  (this  is  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy to the real economy), FinTech has the potential to alter some of the transmission channels, thus 
affecting economic variables and inflation, mainly through two channels, firstly, the credit channel and secondly, 
the bank lending channel. On the one hand, an expansion of FinTech firms in the credit market could alter the 
functioning of the credit channel, mainly through softening information asymmetries in the credit market, when 
pricing borrower’s risk. On the other hand, FinTech companies have the potential to affect the pass-through of 
monetary policy to bank lending rates.  In 2018, in the US the overall loans originated via alternative lending 
platforms  reached  about  5%  of  the  value  of  newly  issued  consumer  credit.  Worldwide,  the  total  value  of 
transactions through alternative lending platforms climbed to an amount of US $196 billion, expected to grow by 
an annual rate of 10.7% in the period between 2019-2023, resulting in a total amount of $363 billion (Statista, 
2018). China, and, to a minor extent, the US and Europe, fuelled the expansion of alternative lending, accounting 
for around 93% of the total value of transactions in 2018. The increasing importance of FinTech firms could 
threaten  the  informational  content  of  money  aggregates  and  credit  supply,  lessening  potentially  the  ability  of 
central banks to gather reliable information for conducting monetary policy and also affecting the interest rate 
pass-through. 
 
5. Regulating FinTech 
5.1 Risks from a regulatory point of view 
Regulators  and  supervisors  need  to  follow  market  developments  to  understand  how  the  emergence  of  new 
players,  infrastructures,  products  and  distribution  channels  is  going  to  transform  the  financial  system.  In  this 
regard, a significant proportion of EU FinTech companies is not subject to any regulatory regime (31%) or is 
only subject to a national authorisation or registration regime (14%). From a prudential and regulatory point of 
view, I will try to briefly summarise the associated risks by order of importance:  
First, risks arise when automating customer and investment services as competition becomes stronger with the 
entrance  of  new  firms  into  the  financial  sector.  The  challenge  for  regulation  is  to  keep  a  level-playing  field 
between existing and new companies which promotes innovation and fosters competition, and, at the same time, 
preserves financial stability. In this context, since January 2018, the application of PSD21 and the related set of 
guidelines  and  technical  standards  for  the  security  of  payment  and  investment  services  in  the  EU  facilitate 
innovation, and efficiency preventing regulatory arbitrage and promoting equal competition. Furthermore, while 
a number of new propositions on automated investment recommendations have been launched in the recent years 
using  extensively  algorithms  not  many  have  been  identified  as  offering  automated  investment  advice  in  the 
context of MiFID/MiFID II. 
Second,  FinTech  growth  increases  the  financial  system’s  susceptibility  operational  and  cyber  risks.  Higher 
reliance on third-party provision of services – such as communications and cloud storing – could entail higher 
                                                           
1 Directive (EU) 2015/2366 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on payment services in the internal 
market, amending Directives 2002/65/EC, 2009/110/EC and 2013/36/EU and Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, and repealing Directive 
2007/64/EC.   
 6 
operational risks. As far as cyber risks are concerned, as the technological systems of financial institutions are 
more  interconnected,  there  are  more  possible  entry  points  for  potential  attacks  with  more  significant 
consequences. Finally, information use and storage by FinTechs raises important data privacy and security issues. 
Third, the issue of risk misallocation arises here, because micro-transactions provide a layer of diversification, 
credit risk from the borrower to the creditor still passes through under-regulated and under-controlled channels 
compared to conventional financial services. The first principle of risk management applies to all banks, but also 
to high-flying FinTech companies: “if you owe 1 dollar to your lender, it’s your debt, if you owe 1 million, then 
it’s the lender’s problem”! For example, Ye’e Bao (translated as ‘hidden treasure’), associated with the biggest 
Chinese  online  retailer,  is  in  practice  the  largest  money  market  fund  in  the  world,  whose  assets  under 
management are worth close to US $265 billion, but the regulations affecting dedicated money market funds are 
not entirely binding Ye’e Bao, as it is not owned by, and does not legally constitute, a financial institution.  
Fourth,  another  major  issue  in  the  debate  regarding  FinTech  revolves  around  the  risks  it  entails  in  terms  of 
increasing financial discrimination through the extensive use of algorithms based on consumers’ demographic 
and personal information available online (collected by big tech companies) and, as a result, having the potential 
to  give  rise  to  greater  income  inequality.  With  the  expansion  of  FinTech,  it  may  become  even  harder  for 
population groups of lower income, ethnic minority background, younger age, women or people with disabilities, 
etc. may be discriminated against in terms of consumer finance, so that only those financially better off, i.e. the 
richer ones, are chosen to have access to loans, investment products, etc. 
Unlike  regulated  banks,  FinTech  companies  are  not  subject  to  strict  rules  on  consumer  protection,  e.g.  to 
compensate  consumers,  offer  deposit  insurance  and  meet  standards  in  order  to  prevent  misleading  vulnerable 
consumers into buying unsuitable or harmful financial products. We, therefore, need to pay particular attention to 
the risk that those who trust FinTech products lacking such a safety net are currently running, by relying on big 
FinTech providers to regulate themselves. 
 5.2 Existing regulatory framework in the US and the EU  
Taking stock of the existing US and EU regulatory framework, it should be pointed out that there is no singular 
regulatory framework for FinTech companies. In the US, Fintech companies are generally regulated at the state 
level.  For  example,  many  states  have  enacted  legislation  governing  the  extension  of  credit  and  money 
transmission in their jurisdictions, combined with licensing requirements for such activities. Similarly, in the EU, 
Fintech  companies  operate  under  passportable  licenses.  In  the  EU,  certain  services  provided  by  FinTech 
companies,  such  as  retail  banking,  payment  services  and  financial  market  services,  are  subject  to  the  pan-
European ‘passporting’ regime: a company licensed in one EU Member State (home state) may  provide such 
services in another EU Member State (host state), e.g. via a local branch, using its home-state license as a sort of 
“European  passport”.  Moreover,  in  both  the  United  States  and  the  EU,  cybersecurity-related  regulations  and 
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorist Financing (AML/CFT) regulations apply to FinTech companies.   
We may argue that the EU has expanded the scope of its rules to include services that EU FinTech companies 
offer  to  consumers.  Moreover,  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  recognises  the  benefit  in  protecting 
consumers when they use financial services offered by firms outside the conventional financial services sector. It 
recommends  defining  consumers'  rights  in  the  FinTech  space,  creating  effective  procedures  for  processing 
consumer complaints, improving the quality of disclosures to consumers in a digital environment, and increasing 
 7 
consumer  financial  literacy.  In  light  of  the  potentially  inconsistent  regulatory  regimes  to  which  EU  FinTech 
companies are subject, the European Commission published last year an action plan for the implementation of an 
EU-wide framework dedicated to FinTech companies aimed at “a more  competitive and innovative European 
financial sector”. The Commission's Action Plan proposes 23 steps to enable innovative business models to scale 
up and support the uptake of new technologies, and to enhance cybersecurity and the integrity of the financial 
system,  including  an  EU  Fintech  Laboratory  where  European  and  national  authorities  will  engage  with 
technology providers and an EU Blockchain Observatory and Forum, which will report on the challenges and 
opportunities of crypto-assets. 
5.3 Filling in the regulatory gap 
 
From the  aforementioned regulatory  frameworks, we  all agree that  risks related to regulation and compliance 
arise from FinTech’s rapid growth and it is reasonable to expect that new or evolving risks will emerge for the 
system and for individual institutions. 
It appears that the main challenge is to implement legislation governing FinTech companies in order to protect 
users and markets, while offering an environment favourable to growth. In the context of financial regulation, it 
is of utmost importance to strike a balance between the following three fundamental elements: 
1.  Manage  the  trade-off  between  efficiency  gains  associated  with  technological  innovation  and  the 
protection  of  stakeholders  in  the  financial  industry.  On  the  one  hand,  regulation  must  not  be  too 
stringent  to  the  point  it  preempts  the  creation  and  development  of  new  technologies  that  generate 
efficiency and savings in transaction costs; on the other hand, regulation must not be too lax, so as to 
make sure that investors and users of financial services are adequately protected and that regulatory 
frameworks are continuously adapting to technological advances, rather than falling behind the curve.  
2.  Ensure  an  adequate  regulatory  level  playing  field  for  banks  and  FinTechs,  fundamental  to  achieve 
appropriate  competition.  First,  activities  involving  the  same  risks  in  terms  of  financial  stability, 
consumer  protection  and  the  integrity  of  the  financial  system  should  receive  the  same  regulatory 
treatment (this is the number one principle or regulation). Therefore, any difference in regulation and 
supervision  should  be  based  on  the  risks  posed  by  different  products  and  services.  Second,  there 
should  not  be  unnecessary  barriers  to  competition  in  the  market  beyond  those  justified  by  risk 
considerations.  In  relation  to  this,  authorities  should  further  assess  the  implications  of  prudential 
regulation, which often leaves banks in a situation of competitive disadvantage vis-a-vis other players, 
and work towards eliminating existing loopholes in regulatory frameworks.  
3.  Given the global dimension of most technological innovations and the increased interconnectedness 
of the financial system, regulatory frameworks need to be internationally co-ordinated and upgraded. 
The work of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and other international standard-setting bodies (SSBs) 
will be crucial in this endeavour. However, as  pointed out by the FSB, regulatory  and supervisory 
approaches  to  FinTech  are  becoming  increasingly  fragmented,  undermining  the  effectiveness  of 
financial  institutions'  efforts  to  address  the  ensuing  risks.  We,  first  of  all,  need  to  determine  the 
legitimate uses and purposes of FinTech innovations and then define guiding principles at global level 
that serve to avoid fragmentation across countries’ regulatory approaches. In other words, we do not 
want to overregulate. We must first see whether there is a fundamental economic case for regulating 
specific  products/functions  (which,  in  some  cases,  might  ultimately  be  proven  useless)  and  then 
regulate in a coordinated manner.  
 8 
 Epilogue  
In closing, we are at the beginning of the “fourth industrial revolution”, which is transforming the way we live, 
work  and  interact.  As  the  FinTech  sector  grows,  it  is  important  that  all  parties  involved  not  only  pay  close 
attention  to  technical,  regulatory,  policy,  and  legal  considerations,  but  also  monitor  its  growth  and  better 
understand its impact.  
Regulatory  trends  become  increasingly  complex  and  regulators  demand  ever  larger  amounts  of  granular  data 
from firms, as a result, there is substantial scope for big data analytics and machine learning to help both market 
participants follow regulatory and compliance requirements and supervisory authorities assess compliance and 
measure risk. One thing is for sure: no matter what, human intervention to provide a final arbitration will always 
be required!  
One  final  comment,  with  my  professorial  hat:  More  generally  and  in  more  philosophical  terms,  as  new 
technologies  evolve  and  become  more  accessible,  naturally  more  ethical  issues  will  arise,  but  I  believe  the 
foundation on which everything must be built is quite simple: putting humans and their needs first. Plato the 
famous ancient Greek philosopher who lived in Athens 2,500 years ago said: the purpose of humanity is to obtain 
knowledge. In today’s world this could be translated as follows: knowledge for innovation to improve the human 
condition. The symbiotic relationship between human creativity and computational creativity is still in its infancy. 
Ultimately, the question is not about what new technologies can create, but rather what humans can create with 
new technologies to empower the future of humanity. 
 
Thank you for your attention! 
 9 
