Luis  de  Guindos:  Measures 
transmission through banks
Welcome address by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, to the
Money Market Contact Group, Frankfurt am Main, 24 September 2019.
to  support  monetary  policy
 In its most recent  policy  meeting,  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  decided  on  a  comprehensive
easing  package  because  the  downward  revisions  in  the  projected  inflation  path  warranted  a
vigorous policy response.
The easing package comprised five measures: lowering the deposit facility rate, strengthening
the forward guidance on the likely path of policy rates, restarting the net asset purchases within
the asset purchase programme, changing the terms of the third series of targeted longer-term
refinancing operations (TLTRO III) and introducing a two-tier system for reserve remuneration.
We  believe  that  the  measures  announced  last  week  complement  each  other  and  together
constitute an effective response to the environment that the ECB currently faces.
These  decisions  were  taken  against  the  following  background.  First,  as  a  result  of  continued
global  uncertainties  and  their  impact  on  confidence,  our  latest  ECB  staff  macroeconomic
projections were revised down. We face a more protracted economic slowdown than previously
anticipated and see persistent downside risks to the growth outlook. Second, inflation continues
to fall short of expectations. Headline inflation remains well below our medium-term aim, while
core  inflation  has  been  hovering  around  1%  for  an  extended  period  of  time.  Market-based
indicators  of  future  inflation  outcomes  have  stagnated  at  historical  lows  and  the  profile  for
headline inflation has been revised down, leading to a further delay in the convergence of inflation
towards  our  aim.  The  case  for  a  monetary  policy  response  was  clear  and  a  comprehensive
package of measures was judged to be the most effective response.
I will take this opportunity to delve a little deeper into two of the measures that may be especially
relevant for the banking sector. The first is the changes to some of the parameters of the third
series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  –  TLTRO  III  –  and  the  second  is  the
implementation of a two-tier system for the remuneration of excess reserves.
Changes to the TLTRO III programme
You may recall that TLTRO III was announced in March to preserve the very favourable bank
lending  conditions  in  the  euro  area  and  to  ensure  the  smooth  transmission  of  our  highly
accommodative monetary policy stance. At the same time, indexing the TLTRO III rates to the
main refinancing operations rate and the deposit facility rate implies that, should the ECB adjust
these  key  interest  rates,  the  average  funding  conditions  under  the  programme  would  be
correspondingly  adjusted  for  banks,  thus  helping  to  align  this  programme  with  the  broader
monetary  policy  stance.  The  Governing  Council  made  clear  that  the  modalities  of  TLTRO  III
would  take  into  account  a  thorough  assessment  of  the  bank-based  transmission  channel  of
monetary policy, as well as developments in the economic outlook.
The recent deterioration in the economic outlook prompted us to ease several of the terms of the
new operations. The Governing Council decided to eliminate the 10 basis point spread over the
key  policy  rates  entailed  in  the  initial  pricing  of  the  operations.  In  addition,  the  maturity  of  the
operations was extended from two to three years, and an early repayment option after two years
was introduced. The adjustments to the TLTRO III parameters signal that the Governing Council
can act in an agile manner and fine-tune its monetary policy instruments, as needed, to ensure
that they are efficient, effective and proportionate to the risks to price stability.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  believe  that  these  changes  represent  a  significant  easing  of  banks’  medium-term  funding
conditions, which in turn should contribute to improving the lending conditions banks offer to the
real economy. The more accommodative pricing should strengthen support for bank funding, so
that banks continue to offer loans to firms and households on favourable terms. The extended
maturity  of  TLTRO  III  will  be  better  aligned  with  bank-based  financing  of  investment  projects,
thereby further supporting banks’ financing to the real economy. Finally, in view of the lengthened
maturity,  the  option  to  voluntarily  repay  the  amounts  borrowed  before  maturity  at  a  quarterly
frequency will provide greater flexibility for banks’ funding plans.
The two-tier system
Let me now turn to the second measure. Banks in the euro area continue to benefit from the
negative interest rate policy through the larger intermediation volumes and lower credit risk for
borrowers  associated  with  more  favourable  macroeconomic  developments.  This  has  helped
support bank profitability across the euro area since the deposit facility rate turned negative in
2014.  In  addition,  banks  have  been  able  to  generate  higher  non-interest  income  as  the
compression of yields is reflected in higher asset valuations. Banks’ funding costs in wholesale
markets have also decreased, mitigating the impact of lower rates on net interest income.
However, the negative interest rate policy also entails costs for banks, and these are likely to
increase the longer negative rates are in place, the lower policy rates are set and the larger the
amount of excess liquidity.
The Governing Council therefore decided to introduce a two-tier system for reserve remuneration
in order to ensure that the accommodative monetary policy stance continues to translate into
favourable lending conditions, which is particularly important given that the European economy is
largely bank-based.
Under the two-tier system, part of each bank’s holdings of excess liquidity will be exempt from
the negative deposit facility rate. The size of the exempted part of a bank’s reserve accounts will
initially  be  six  times  its  minimum  reserve  requirement.  This  strikes  a  balance  between  two
outcomes.  It  offsets  the  direct  cost  of  negative  interest  rates  on  banks’  profitability,  thereby
helping to sustain the pass-through of low policy rates to bank lending. And it also preserves the
positive contribution of negative rates to the accommodative stance of monetary policy and the
continued sustained convergence of inflation to our aim.
There are several reasons why the initial value chosen for the multiplier was six times a bank’s
minimum reserve requirement.
First, it provides banks with some relief from negative rates. Based on current holdings of
excess liquidity, the current calibration will entail annual savings for banks of about €4 billion.
Second, it leaves the volume of non-exempt excess liquidity which is still remunerated at the
deposit facility rate at a level which is sufficiently large to ensure that money market rates
remain anchored to the ECB deposit facility rate. Given that minimum reserves are currently
close to €130 billion, the exempt tier would amount to some €800 billion, implying that the
non-exempt amount of excess reserves still remunerated at the negative deposit facility rate
would be approximately €1 trillion, down from €1.8 trillion.
Third, it dampens the risk of money market rates becoming subject to upward pressure due
to the potential redistribution of excess liquidity among market participants to fill exemption
allowances. For example, the system may induce banks that have an unused exempt tier to
increase  the  amount  they  borrow  from  banks  that  hold  more  excess  liquidity  than  their
exempt tier. If such transactions were to occur at higher rates than before, then we may see
upward pressure on certain money market rates. At this stage, we see very little evidence of
this being priced in by the market, but the ECB will continue to actively monitor conditions in
the money market.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
Allow  me  to  conclude.  On  12  September  the  Governing  Council  decided  on  one  of  the  most
broad-based  packages  of  monetary  stimulus  measures  to  date.  Of  the  five  measures  in  the
overall  package,  the  two  that  I  have  discussed  today  may  be  particularly  relevant  for  banks.
These are the modification of the terms of TLTRO III and the introduction of a two-tier system for
reserve  remuneration  given  banks’  important  role  in  monetary  policy  transmission.  Both
measures  will  serve  to  mitigate  the  risk  that  the  possible  side  effects  of  the  ECB’s
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  on  bank-based  intermediation  could  undermine  the
sustained convergence of inflation to our aim. We are aiming to preserve favourable bank lending
conditions in the euro area to further support the accommodative stance of monetary policy and
ensure it is smoothly transmitted to the real economy.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
