Dimitar Radev: Positive trends in the banking sector are expected
to continue in 2019, however with possible increased challenges
Publication  by  Mr  Dimitar  Radev,  Governor  of  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank,  in  the  Quarterly
Bulletin of the Association of Banks in Bulgaria, issue 56, January 2019.
 In 2018 the banking sector continued to maintain high level of capital adequacy and liquidity, also
generating  historically  high  annual  profit.  Deposits  in  the  banking  system  increased,  lending
grew, and the share of nonperforming loans dropped. We expect these positive dynamics in the
sector to continue altogether through 2019.
Loan portfolios are a primary source of operating income for the banks in Bulgaria, but credit
growth is by definition associated with assumption of new risk. At this stage of credit expansion,
banks should continue making adequate efforts to manage the credit risk accumulating on their
balance sheets.
Large part of the central bank’s recent activities, in our capacity as a regulator and supervisor of
the banking system, is focused on the risk associated with bank lending. The BNB Governing
Council decided to activate the countercyclical capital buffer from this year. In December 2018,
the  National  Assembly  passed  new  legislative  amendments,  proposed  by  the  BNB,  which
provide  us  with  an  additional  macro-prudential  toolbox  of  measures  regarding  bank  lending.  It
includes for example BNB’s new powers to require enforcement of limiting the loan-to-value ratio
or the debt-to-borrower’s income ratio.
The probability of realization of credit risk would grow particularly in an economic slowdown or a
situation less favourable than the one observed in the recent years. Presently, we see growing
indications  of  possible  problems  and  increased  uncertainty  –  globally  and  in  the  euro  area  –
which could, through certain channels, bring negative effects domestically.
From the perspective of the sector, 2019 will also be dominated by the asset review and stress
test  in  several  banks.  We  are  at  the  stage  of  finalising  the  preparations  for  the  practical
implementation of these processes. They are under the lead of the European Central Bank, but
with the active cooperation of the BNB.
The  asset  review,  stress  test  and  synchronization  of  our  supervisory  practices  with  the
European  Central  Bank  are  a  very  important,  though  not  the  only,  element  of  the  efforts
associated with Bulgaria’s plans for entry of the Bulgarian Lev in the Exchange Rate Mechanism
(ERM II) and Bulgaria’s accession to the Single Supervisory Mechanism. These strategic steps
should  be  made  simultaneously,  according  to  the  plan  and  the  agreements  reached  with  our
European partners.
In 2019 we expect the positive trends in the banking sector to continue altogether, however with
possible increased challenges associated with the general economic environment banks operate
in.  Concurrently,  in  the  coming  months  we  will  evidence  processes  of  potentially  long-term
consequences directly impacting the sector, aimed at achieving a qualitatively higher degree of
integration of Bulgaria into the European financial and institutional infrastructure.
  1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
