Emilija  Nacevska:  Strengthening  the  capacities  of  the  system  for
fight against counterfeiting of the euro
Speech  by  Ms  Emilija  Nacevska,  Vice  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of
Macedonia, at the opening conference of the Twinning Light Project "Strengthening the capacities
of the system for fight against counterfeiting of the euro", Skopje, 15 January 2019.
 Dear Minister Oliver Spasovski, Your Excellencies Samuel Zbogar and Thomas Gerberich, dear
Project  Leaders  Biljana  Celeska  Anevska  and  Peter  Spicka,  dear  Mr  Damir  Bichanic,
distinguished  representatives  of  the  Delegation  of  the  European  Union  in  the  country  and
representatives of the Ministry of Interior, distinguished colleagues, dear guests,  
It is my honor and pleasure to greet you on the behalf of the National Bank and to welcome you to
today’s  event  held  in  our  institution,  marking  together  the  beginning  of  this  very  important
Twinning Light Project aimed  at  strengthening  the  capacities  of  the  institutions  involved  in  the
system for fight against counterfeiting of euro. 
At the very beginning of my speech, I would like to express the gratitude of the National Bank to
the  European  Union,  because  it  has  recognized  the  determination  of  our  key  institutions
responsible  for  fighting  money  counterfeit  to  put  their  maximum  in  establishing  a  strong  and
efficient  system  for  protection  of  the  national,  as  well  as  the  financial  interests  of  the  Union.
Thank you, because the allocation of funds from the pre-accession funds for the implementation
of this Project, means a trust that we are ready to work on strengthening the institutional capacity
and on the mutual cooperation in order to implement the recommendations that will arise from
the project activities. 
I am sure that we will justify the trust. Not only with the level of our commitment to the Project in
the  next  eight  months,  but  also  with  the  willingness  to  implement  all  necessary  activities  for
establishing a strong and efficient system for fight against counterfeiting of euro in the country.
These activities are already outlined in the strategic commitments of our institutions, because
our ultimate goal is to provide a system that, in all aspects, will be at the level of the system of a
European  Union  member  state.  Only  with  full  dedication,  readiness  and  professionalism,  the
trust will be fully justified and we will prove that the Project was indeed successful – that the
250,000 Euros intended for its implementation were channeled in the right direction. 
I am firmly convinced that the Ministry of Interior and the National Bank, as beneficiaries of this
Project, will jointly succeed in doing so. I am also convinced due to the successful cooperation
between  the  two  institutions  so  far,  which  was  proved  as  very  effective  in  preventing  the
occurrence and spreading of counterfeit money in the territory of our country, and because of our
readiness to continue to tackle the challenges in this segment of our work in future, as well. 
The commitment of the National Bank to move safely along the way to the European System of
Central  Banks,  constantly  following  European  standards  and  practices  and  promoting  all
segments of its operations, is one of the main strategic goals. That’s why I assure you that with
the  same  level  of  professionalism  and  commitment  that  we  approach  other  challenges,  we
approach  also  to  the  implementation  of  this  Project,  giving  our  maximum  contribution  in  the
implementation of the activities that will have to follow after it is finalized. 
We sincerely hope that soon after the country’s admission to the EU, the integrity of the euro will
be protected along with the integrity of the domestic currency. Actually, that is the reason that the
Law on the National Bank already incorporates provisions that regulate the tasks and powers of
our institution from the date of our country’s accession to the European Union, as well as the
tasks  and  powers  that  we  will  have  after  the  introduction  of  the  euro  as  a  national  currency.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Hence, this project and its success are perceived as a long-term key investment in a significant
segment of our operations. 
In the long run, this project will simultaneously be an investment for improving the operations not
only of the National Bank and the Ministry of Interior, but indirectly also of other institutions that
are actively involved in the system for fighting counterfeiting money: the Customs Administration,
the  Financial  Police  Office  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Public  Prosecution  Office  and  the
judicial  authorities.  I  believe  that  after  the  implementation  of  this  Project,  our  interinstitutional
cooperation in the field of monitoring and prevention of counterfeiting banknotes and coins will be
further developed. I believe that very soon after the completion of the project activities, we will
jointly state and announce that our national system for fighting counterfeit is at a higher level,
compatible with the systems of the EU member states.  
At the end of my speech, I would like to emphasize that I am pleased that our twinning partners in
this Project are two older EU member states – Germany and Austria. Having in mind that they
are direct participants in policy making, overcoming all the challenges associated with the euro
since its introduction twenty years ago, I believe that in communication and cooperation with their
experts we will gain knowledge that will be of great benefit for us in the process of strengthening
our capacities. In addition, I am also glad that the partner in this Project is the latest EU Member
State – Croatia, since for us, for the institutions of a candidate country, the experience that these
experts have in the process of harmonization of the national European regulation in the field of a
fight against counterfeiting is especially important. I believe that within the project activities these
experiences will be conveyed to us at the most professional level.      
Therefore, on behalf of the National Bank, I express my deep gratitude to the colleagues from the
Deutsche Bundesbank and the colleagues from the Croatian and Austrian central banks. With all
of  them,  as  well  as  with  most  central  banks  from  EU  member  states,  we  have  already
established  constructive  cooperation  in  many  areas,  which  is  important  for  strengthening  the
capacities of the National Bank for joining the European System of Central Banks. Today’s event
and this Twinning Light Project is the latest, but not the last. I hope that this event, where we all
take  part  in  the  preparation  of  our  country  for  accepting  the  euro  as  a  national  currency  and
accession of the National Bank in the Eurosystem, will complement this series. 
For the day when this event will not only be our dream, but also our reality, the National Bank will
continue to promote the fulfillment of its goals and tasks in accordance with European standards
and best practices, which is of exceptional importance for the future the process of admission of
the country into the membership of the European Union. Therefore, I assure you that we, the
management and the employees of the National Bank, will be committed to this Project, we will
openly and constructively cooperate during the implementation of all project activities, and use
this  opportunity  provided  by  the  European  Union  for  further  strengthening  the  capacity  and
credibility of our institution.  
At  the  end  of  my  speech,  let  me  wish  the  successful  work  of  the  project  leaders  and  all  the
experts participating in the Project. I believe that after eight months we will be able to summarize
a successfully completed Project, and in the period after that, after we have implemented the
recommendations, we will write one of the many historical pages about the contribution of our
institutions to the European integration processes of our country. 
Thank you!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
