Senad  Softić:  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  pursuing  sound  monetary
policy and a stable financial system to support economic growth
Speech by Mr Senad Softić, Governor of the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina, at the
regular annual Economic and Financial Dialogue between the European Union and the countries
of the Western Balkans and Turkey, Brussels, 17 May 2019.
Thank you Mr. Chairman,
Distinguished participants, first of all, good morning to everyone,
 It is nice to be again at the end of another round of Economic Dialogue between the EU and our
countries.  I  can’t  avoid  to  repeat  again  how  important  and  beneficial  this  process  is  for  our
economic governance and coordination with the EU counterparts. It is very visible we are making
good progress each year and the whole process becomes better coordinated.
The process is ongoing, but we need to keep in mind that we have to deal with many initiatives
and reforms at the same time, as well to harmonize with EU legislation and procedures.
The  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  has  undertaken  several  steps  to  implement
recommendations from previous Joint Conclusions. Those steps include:
 new statistics and development of analytical tools.
  we  have  recently  improved  analytical  framework  for  forecasting  and  impact  of  policy
measures.
Results  are  generally  in  line  with  previous  estimates,  where  we  expect  steady,  but  moderate
growth  with  some  acceleration  of  over  3%  in  the  next  three  years.  These  growth  rates  are
encouraging,  but  also  our  economic  performance  significantly  depends  on  external
developments. Private consumption remains the main growth driver, but we also have gradual
increase in investment rate.
There  is  an  obvious  need  for  increasing  of  growth  potential  in  order  to  create  more  jobs  and
faster real convergence with the EU. 2
Sound  monetary  policy  and  stable  financial  system  should  be  supportive  for  better
economic performance, and we are very committed to work in this direction.
Existing monetary arrangement works very well, and our financial system is getting stronger and
well capitalized. However, sound monetary and fiscal policies, are not enough. For faster growth
and better living standard, there is a great need to carry out structural measures. The dialogue
with the EU helped to identify those measures and implementing them will require more time and
external assistance.
The proposed topic about attractiveness of our region for FDIs is very well chosen and timely.
From the central bank perspective, FDIs provide reliable funding for current account deficit and
make  us  less  sensitive  to  external  shocks.  Our  banking  sector  clearly  demonstrates  positive
effects of FDI inflow.
We  worked  very  hard  on  several  domains  and  progress  is  visible.  Many  international
organizations provided technical assistance and funding.
Strengthening of private sector definitely would have positive signal to potential foreign investors,
who will be able to start business by using local comparative advantages.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Numerous examples show that foreign investors are still facing complex bureaucratic procedure
and inadequate legal framework. 3
However, after overcoming initial problems and period of adjustment to local conditions, foreign
investors  successfully  run  businesses  for  a  long  time  and  we  are  very  proud  that  most  of
investors are staying and reinvesting in the country.
Potential  of  our  country  has  been  recognized  during  the  recent  EBRD  Annual  Meeting  and
Business  Forum,  which  was  held  in  Sarajevo  and  which  produced  large  success  regarding
future investment in the country.
I  would  like  to  thank  EU  institutions,  ECB  and  the  ESCB  for  working  with  us  on  reforms.
Experience of these institutions is of very important for us in process of building of our system,
which should be aligned with EU regulations. Also, financial assistance from EU institutions and
member-states make possible to carry out and complete these essential reforms.
Thank you
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
