Olli Rehn: Challenges of monetary policy - past, present, future
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Olli  Rehn,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  Bank  of  Finland
Conference on Monetary Policy and Future of European Monetary Union, Helsinki, 1 July 2019.
Accompanying slides of the speech.
Dear Colleagues and Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  welcome  all  of  you  to  Helsinki  and  the  Bank  of  Finland,  and  to  our
Conference on Monetary Policy and the Future of European Monetary Union. I am delighted to
welcome  our  distinguished  speakers  from  different  continents,  many  of  them  straight  from
Basel-BIS.
I would also like to welcome you to the Presidency of the European Union. Today, as we meet,
Finland has just taken over the baton of EU Presidency for the next six months, now for the third
time already. This fits well with today’s theme, as monetary integration has been at the heart of
Finland’s relationship with Europe already for one and a half centuries.
The Bank of Finland, founded in 1811, is the fourth oldest existing central bank in the world. It is
closely linked to the history of nation-building and independence of Finland: for instance, during
the Winter War, the Finnish Government convened in the Bank and, during air raids, in its gold
vault,  partly  because  the  then  Governor  Risto  Ryti  served  as  Prime  Minister  and  later  as
President.
th
Since  the  mid-19   century,  the  Bank  of  Finland  has  striven  for  monetary  stability  through
international  integration,  which  was  the  way  to  attract  foreign  capital  to  boost  investment  and
growth in our capital-poor country. One might even find historical parallels to the euro, as the
Finnish  markka  was  from  the  1870s  until  the  First  World  War  pegged  to  the  Gold  Standard
through the Latin Monetary Union and its key currency, the French franc.
For 36 years, the markka was equal to the gold franc, one to one. The monetary stability provided
by this association was paramount to enable Finland to get the required capital, mainly through
the financial markets in Frankfurt and Paris, for the large investments in the railroad network and
rapid  industrialisation  in  the  last  decades  of  the  19   century.  This  development  was
consequential for the economic catching-up by Finland and her joining the democratic, inclusive
Nordic path of development.
th
Fast-forward to the late 20  century. Finland joined the European Union in the aftermath of the
Cold War in 1995. Just prior to that we experienced a deep recession. The cumulative decline in
real GDP from its peak in 1989 to the trough in 1993 was over 12%. The pre-crisis level of GDP
was reached only in 1996. The unemployment rate peaked at close to 20%.
th
The  crises  was  an  amalgam  of  an  overly  leveraged  banking  sector,  due  to  badly  managed
financial  deregulation,  and  of  overly  loose  and  pro-cyclical  fiscal  and  income  policies.  These
domestic policy failures were amplified by the virtually overnight collapse of the Finnish-Soviet
1
trade in 1991.
Our lessons of the booming 1980s and busting early 1990s underline the capacity of a small
open economy to adjust to both idiosyncratic and global shocks. They also underline the need for
economic renewal. These years saw large swings on interest rates and the external value of the
markka.
In her search for monetary stability, Finland joined the euro as of 1 January 1999, among the first
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
eleven countries. Over the past two decades, the euro has brought us price stability and a stable
currency. Its public support is very high. As many as 80% of the Finns support EMU and the
euro. 
After  joining  EMU,  unfavourable  demand  and  supply  shocks  have  tested  our  ability  to  adjust,
when the nominal exchange rate has no more been available to smooth out the ramifications to
the real economy.
As a case in point on how a small open economy can adjust in a monetary union, a social pact
was agreed in 2016 to correct the serious loss of cost-competitiveness. After concluding that the
rise of Finland’s labour costs had outpaced that of her peers, an agreement was reached with
the social partners to narrow the gap of cost competitiveness to our main competitors. Mostly
due to the Competitiveness Pact, relative unit labour costs were reduced by 6½% in the period of
2014–17. Supported by strong global demand and the ECB’s monetary stimulus, the pact was
essential for Finland’s rebound from zero growth to 2½ % growth in 2017–18.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Let me turn to the current and future challenges of monetary policy and the topics we will discuss
in-depth today in our conference.
SLIDE 2. Agenda of the BoF 2019 monetary policy conference
Right now, central banks must pay attention on the short term due to the current headwinds. The
Governing Council of the ECB recently responded to the prolonged uncertainty by amplifying the
accommodative monetary policy stance. With the symmetric approach underlined by President
Mario Draghi in Sintra, inflation may vary around 2% in the short-term, to reach our target in the
medium term. Looking ahead, the Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments,
as appropriate, so that inflation continues to converge towards our inflation aim in a sustained
2
manner.
But we must also take a longer perspective. The ECB – much like other central banks – operates
in a new environment where long-run trends, such as population aging, lower long-term interest
rates and climate change have become key policy issues. The central banking community needs
to better understand their implications for growth, employment and inflation dynamics, so that we
can deliver more effectively within our mandates. Several central banks, including the Federal
Reserve, are currently reviewing their monetary policy frameworks.
Would it be useful for the ECB to do a strategy review as well? We may find pertinent arguments
for  that.  Firstly,  monetary  policy  is  done  in  an  economic  environment  that  looks  very  different
from that of 16 years ago, when the ECB last reviewed its strategy. Secondly, monetary policy is
done with very different tools from those of 16 years ago. And thirdly, it is a good practice to
periodically  bring  the  brightest  minds  in  the  academic  community  together  with  practical
policymakers  to  evaluate  our  monetary  policy  strategies.  This  process  can,  once  successful,
enhance our common understanding of the goals and tools of monetary policy.
Some  of  these  questions  revolve  around  the  Phillips  curve,  which  describes  the  relationship
between inflation and economic slack. It seems that during and after the crisis, the behaviour of
the Phillips curve has diverged from its past. The rate of inflation has not picked up significantly
despite higher economic growth and employment.
SLIDE 3. Euro area Phillips curve in three periods in 1999–2017, as a correlation between core
inflation and unemployment
In  other  words,  the  Phillips  curve  may  have  ‘flattened’  –  a  possibility,  which  has  haunted
economists and central bankers throughout the post-crisis years. But we may also consider non-
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
linearity  of  the  Phillips  curve.  Below,  this  is  illustrated  through  the  relationship  between  wage
growth and the broad measure of unemployment (= U6).
SLIDE 4. Euro area Phillips curve 2005–17, as a correlation between the wage growth and broad
unemployment
In the graph a possibility of a non-linear empirical relationship between wage inflation and broad
3
unemployment is illustrated.
So, this is an example of the puzzles that merit to be analysed further. I am delighted we have
professor  and  Fed  Vice-Chair  Richard  Clarida  with  us  today,  to  share  the  Federal  Reserve
System’s insights of their strategy review. I am likewise delighted to have my close colleague and
now ECB chief economist Philip Lane to discuss the ECB’s various instruments of monetary
policy, and Governor Yi Gang to provide his take on the global economy and China’s monetary
policy.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Let me conclude my opening remarks with a few words on the future of Economic and Monetary
Union, the other subject of today’s conference.  
The sovereign debt crisis revealed serious design problems in EMU. Substantial reforms were
enacted to reinforce economic governance and thus resilience of the Eurozone, and its ability to
secure financial stability, sustainable growth and opportunities for employment. The European
Stability  Mechanism  was  established.  The  Banking  Union  was  launched,  and  the  euro  area
banking system is already much more resilient. During the economic recovery since 2013, over
11 million new jobs have been created, and the unemployment rate is down from 12% to around
8%.
But our Economic and Monetary Union is still very much unfinished business. Many questions
remain. How to complete the Banking Union? What kind of fiscal capacity will best serve strong,
sustained growth? How to make the fiscal rules more counter-cyclical? What kind of safe assets
could  fly  in  decision-making,  to  have  liquid  financial  markets  and  pave  the  way  for  the  euro’s
global role? – We will devote much of the afternoon, including the panel, to discuss these and
other challenges of EMU.  
With these words, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me welcome you again to Helsinki and the Bank of
Finland – and wish you a very intensive and productive day, by discussing the often complicated,
but  at  the  same  time  fascinating  issues  related  to  the  challenges  of  monetary  policy  and  the
future of European Monetary Union. – Thank you!
1
2
3
Gulan, A., Haavio, M. and Kilponen, J. (2019): Can large trade shocks cause crises? The case of the Finnish-
Soviet trade collapse, Bank of Finland Research Discussion Papers 9/2019
An empirical analysis of the ECB’s past reaction function can be found in Maritta Paloviita – Markus Haavio –
Pirkka  Jalasjoki  –  Juha  Kilponen, What does ”below, but close to, two percent mean? Assessing the ECB’s
reaction function with real-time data, Bank of Finland Research Discussion Papers, 29/2017.
For further discussion on the state of the Phillips curve, slack in the economy and inflation expectations, see e.g:
www.bofbulletin.fi/en/2018/1/reports-of-the-phillips-curve-s-death-are-greatly-exaggerated/
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
