John A Rolle: 45th Anniversary of the Central Bank of The Bahamas
Remarks  by  Mr  John  A  Rolle,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  The  Bahamas,  at  the  45th
Anniversary Celebration of the Central Bank of The Bahamas, Nassau, 5 July 2019.
 Acting Prime Minister and Minister of Finance, Governors, representatives of the Clearing Banks
Association,  representatives  of  the Association  of  International  Banks  and  Trust  Companies,
former central bank employees, other guests: good afternoon.
On behalf of the Board of Directors, Management and staff of the Central Bank, thank you all for
being here with us this afternoon to celebrate the 45th Anniversary of the Central Bank of The
Bahamas.
Today, we are particularly pleased to honour all of our past Governors and to thank them for their
service to the Bank and to The Bahamas.
As part of our civic responsibility, the Central Bank has taken a strong interest in promoting the
development of Bahamian art. On display today is a sample of our collection from throughout the
years, including a cross-section of celebrated talent, some of whom made their successful debut
in a Central Bank exhibition.
Through  art  we  tell  stories  of  our  culture  and  values.  We  also  etch  these  treasures  in  the
narratives  we  relate  on  our  currency:  the  beauty  of  the  physical  environment,  our  treasured
natural  resources;  the  nostalgia  surrounding  the  commerce  and  ways  of  the  past;  about
Junkanoo, Family Island regattas, bonefishing, pineapple growing, hand crafted straw work, the
horse and carriage, tourism, and so on.
When we reflect on the mission of the Central Bank, and strip away the technical terms that
often entrap us, our mission is simply put, to accomplish within the financial sector space all that
is within our legal authority, to preserve and improve upon this Bahamian way of life. That applies
equally as well to the outcomes we promote for residents in Elbow Cay, Alice Town, McCleans
Town, Spring Point, Old Bight, Barretarre, Majors, Sandy Port, or any settlement we choose to
name. It is a mission that you Governors took on successfully. You worked to ensure that the last
thing  any  resident  had  to  worry  about  was  how  much  imported  goods  or  services  they  could
purchase  with  their  Bahamian  dollars,  or  about  whether  the  dollars  they  deposited  in  a  bank
would  be  safe  in  such  bank.  You  worked  to  ensure  that  the  average  citizen  could  set  such
worries aside and concentrate on being productive and engaged with the other fulfilling aspects
of their lives.
As a Central Bank today, we want to promote the equal access of all persons within our country
to  the  conveniences  of  this  nature  that  the  financial  sector  provides.  It  comes  across,  for
example, in the ways that we endeavour promote modernised delivery channels for services that
do  not  impose  the  same  product  constraints  as  a  physical  banking  network.  It  also  comes
across  in  simplified  regulations  to  make  it  easier  for  all  persons  inside  our  borders  to  have
access to legitimate banking services—whether they are employed or not; and whether they are
Bahamians or not.
Also,  recognising  that  a  focus,  rightly,  is  to  keep  illicit  activities  from  infiltrating  our  financial
services it comes across in being more attentive to those who could pose such risk, rather than
treating all users and their transactions with suspicion. We will continue to do more work in this
area.
Exchange  Controls  have  always  been  synonymous  with  the  important  tools  we  deploy  to
preserve  the  one-to-one  value  of  the  Bahamian  dollar  against  the  American  currency.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Successive  Central  Bank  governors  have  led  reforms  to  liberalise  these  administrative
processes. The constraint that you constantly faced on the speed of change was how swiftly the
financial  management  practices  and  reforms  on  the  Government’s  end  materialised,  to  leave
open a stable path for permanent change. Another constraint was the speed at which the Central
Banks’  own  capacity  increased  to  manage  foreign  reserves  usage  through  less  administrate
channels.
We  have  made  more  progress  in  these  areas  than  is  even  realised  or  acknowledged.The
Exchange Control Department has gone from being the largest operating units in the Bank to one
of the smallest. It is transforming more and more to data gathering and intelligence operation.
Today,  firms  in  the  private  sector  that  have  a  positive  nexus  to  foreign  exchange  earnings
activities or those that promote strategic national development priorities enjoy direct access to
capital raising in foreign currency. They operate within limits that would rarely constrain the small
and  medium-sized  operations  that  should  be  engines  of  growth  in  any  economy.  Now,  the
entrepreneurial set also has expanded access to establish businesses outside The Bahamas, or
to use such access to establish firms in international financial services sector. The examples of
those  who  have  taken  advantage  of  these  facilities  is  increasing,  although  not  as  fast  as  we
would like.
Going forward, the key word for the Central Bank is being “progressive". We are open to reforms
in our policies and administrative processes and to advocating when necessary, for pre-requisite
reforms elsewhere in the economy that would make our initiatives sustainable. Indeed there are
already areas in Exchange Control administration for example, in our payments system initiatives
and  in  our  financial  sector  development  push,  where  the  Government  has  committed  to
supportive reforms, not just in the legal system, but also in the Government’s own administrative
processes.
In  the  spirit  of  progressiveness,  we  also  want  the  engagement  with  stakeholders  to  be
constructive.  This  means  that  together,  we  are  able  to  identify  and  propose  how  beneficial
change can happen in ways that can be sustained. For the Central Bank, the energetic focus on
financial  literacy  is  one  of  the  ways  that  we  hope  to  ensure  constructive  input  and  enduring
embrace of change.
We  still  need  to  build  lasting  capacity  to  deliver  on  our  mandates.  The  Bank  will  therefore
intensify its effort to recruit, train and retain competent professionals. We have offered and stand
ready  to  work  with  the  University  of  The  Bahamas  to  develop  graduate  level  programs  that
produce  the  next  generation  of  economists  and  policy  analysts,  and  we  are  reprioritising  our
internal resources to build out more specialist training in core central banking competencies.
As of this year, a more calculated approach is also being taken to recruit new talent for the Bank.
Starting this summer, and as part of an annually timed exercise, the Central Bank will recruit a
select  number  of  bright  college  graduates  who  will  be  taken  through  a  two  to  three-year
structured preparation for long-term carers in central banking. Having little or no experience is
actually a prerequisite to apply. For those just completing a Bachelor’s degree, and who have
both the aptitude and aspiration to purse graduate studies, we will invite them to apply to our
Central Bank Apprentice Programme. For new graduates with Master’s Degree, our Executive
Professional Program will be open to admission.
Today,  we  have  every  right  to  celebrate  the  Central  Bank’s  accomplishment. Again,  I  want  to
congratulate each of our past Governors for the foundations laid and built upon: from Governor
Donaldson to Sir. William; and onwards to Governors Smith, Francis and Craigg. Thank you for
allowing us to honour you with these bronze busts. Sequentially and imminently this display will
be completed, with a bust of Governor Craigg also going on display.
We  are  equally  excited  about  what  is  ahead  of  us.  As  Governors  and  former  Ministers  of
Finance,  you  know  well  that  the  job  required  that  you  always  stayed  prepared  to  respond
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
effectively to the unexpected.
My colleagues in the Central Bank look forward to this continuing challenge and to perfecting our
responses to the unexpected. Also we look forward to being proactive and innovative in how we
inspire reforms for the benefit of The Bahamas.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
