Eddie  Yue:  How  Hong  Kong  is  prepared  for  macro-economic
challenges on the horizon in 2019
Opening remarks by Mr Eddie Yue, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority,
at the Hong Kong-Paris Financial Seminar, co-organised by the Hong Kong Monetary Authority
and Paris Europlace, Hong Kong, 16 January 2019.
Denis (Beau), Arnaud (de Bresson), distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
 1.  Good morning.  Let me extend a very warm welcome to you all for attending today’s Hong
Kong-Paris Financial Seminar, co-organised by the HKMA and Paris EUROPLACE.  And a
special welcome to our guests from France.
2.  Hong Kong and France have always had strong ties.  We are home to more than 20,000
French people and about 800 French companies.  Apart from food and beverage and luxury
goods that people are familiar with, French companies are also actively engaging in different
industries in Hong Kong, ranging from finance, construction and infrastructure.  About 170 of
the  French  companies  use  Hong  Kong  as  the  regional  headquarters.    Given  the  existing
strong ties, it is particularly good to have forums like today’s seminar to talk about how Hong
Kong and France can further strengthen their relationship through financial collaboration.
3.  Before I talk about the opportunities for further collaboration, let me spend a few minutes to
talk about the risks and the rather challenging macro environment that we are facing.  I am
sure  you  are  familiar  with  the  major  global  risk  areas:  China-US  trade  conflict,  Brexit,
tightening of global financial conditions and moderation in growth of the Mainland Chinese
economy.  They are likely to remain relevant in the coming year.  As a highly open economy,
Hong Kong is sensitive to these external risks. 
4.  If the past offered any lesson, it is that we must build a robust regulatory framework with very
strong  buffers,  so  that  whenever  these  shocks  strike,  we  will  be  able  to  come  through
smoothly.  The key is to keep your house in order and get ready for the shocks.  Let me
highlight three areas that Hong Kong has prepared well for the potential challenges.
5.  First is the strong confidence in our monetary system, which is the Linked Exchange Rate
System.  Second is the strong buffer in the banking system: our banks’ capital ratio of 15.8%
and liquidity ratio of 158% are well above the international standards.  Third is the strong
buffer provided by the high level of fiscal reserves, amounting to 40% of GDP, which should
rank among the highest in the world.
6.  We do spend a lot of our time monitoring risks and studying ways to manage them.  But on
the other hand, we are also acutely aware of the opportunities provided by the opening-up of
Mainland China’s financial sector, and we have been making efforts to enhance our role as a
bridge  between  Mainland  China  and  the  international  markets.    This  is  done  mostly  in
collaboration with other financial centres and overseas authorities, including the Banque de
France.    Back  in  2014,  the  HKMA  and  Banque  de  France  signed  a  memorandum  of
understanding  to  strengthen  cooperation  between  the  two  financial  centres.    To  me,  this
collaboration can go beyond China opportunities to cover other new market developments,
including Fintech and green finance.
th
7.  Let me start with the opportunities in Mainland China.  As you are aware, last year marked
the 40   anniversary  of  the  reform  and  opening-up  of  Mainland  China.    Throughout  these
years, Hong Kong remains as the gateway to Mainland China.  Today, as Mainland China
continues  to  open  up  its  capital  markets,  we  serve  as  a  major  platform  for  international
investors to access the world’s second largest stock market and third largest bond market.
  Take Bond Connect  as  an  example.    It  provides  a  convenient  channel  for  international
investors to access the Mainland’s bond market using international market practices such
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
as the nominee holding structure.  Similarly, Stock Connect provides access channel for
international  investors  to  invest  in  the  Mainland’s  stock  markets  by  engaging  brokers  and
custodians in Hong Kong through existing structure. 
8.  With the smooth inclusion of A-shares into MSCI Emerging Markets Index last year, more
global indices are planning to add RMB products into their constituent assets.  For example,
RMB bonds will be included in the Bloomberg-Barclays Global Aggregate Index starting this
April and FTSE’s Global Equity Index Series will also include A-shares from this June.  The
inclusion of RMB assets into global indices has driven up the demand for these assets and a
good part of the investment is done through Hong Kong.  At the same time, we are also
working  closely  with  the  Mainland  to  expand  and  enhance  these  Connect  schemes,
including  expanding  the  product  scope  to  cover  derivative  products  in  the  case  of  Bond
Connect and ETF in the case of Stock Connects.
9.  Talking  about  China  opportunities,  one  key  development  is  the Guangdong-Hong  Kong-
Macao Bay Area (the Greater Bay Area, or GBA).  The GBA combines Mainland China’s
wealthiest  and  economically  most  advanced  cities  along  the  Pearl  River  Delta  into  a
metropolitan cluster.  It covers a population of nearly 70 million and generates GDP of about
US$1.5 trillion, providing a unique stage for financial institutions to launch and expand their
business.  Besides, the depth of Hong Kong’s financial markets could help enterprises in the
GBA to access global capital.  At the initial phase, we are studying ways to facilitate capital
flows within the GBA at the individual level, such as cross-border use of mobile payment and
mutual  access  of  wealth  management  products  by  residents  in  Hong  Kong  and  in  the
Mainland part of the GBA.    
10.  Apart from being a major platform for capturing China opportunities, the HKMA is actively
moving towards the new era of Smart Banking.  We launched the Faster Payment System
(FPS)  last  September  –  a  round-the-clock  instant  payment  platform  that  achieves  full
connectivity between banks and stored value facilities.  In just over three months’ time, we
have got more than two million registrations for FPS.  Another important development is the
promotion of virtual banking.  We have received about 30 applications for our virtual banking
licences and we hope to begin granting the first batch of licences within this quarter.  In a
short span of a few years, we have gone through a very high speed journey into Fintech, and
I  am  sure  that  there  is  a  lot  that  we  can  share  and  discuss  in  the  later  panel  on  new
finances.
11.  Another  exciting  development  is green finance.  The French government issued the first
sovereign green bonds in 2017, which set an important market benchmark.  Hong Kong is
also actively promoting its green finance platform.  In fact, in the first three quarters in 2018,
28 green bonds were issued in Hong Kong, with an aggregate size of over US$8 billion.  The
HKSAR  Government  is  launching  a  HK$100  billion  Government  Green  Bond  Programme
and the first green bond will be issued later this year.  With France being a forerunner in
green finance and the third largest global issuer of green bonds, we look forward to sharing
experiences and collaborating with Paris in this area.       
12.  This is a quick overview of the recent developments in Hong Kong and the new opportunities
ahead.  I am sure the industry experts here today would have a lot more to share on these
topics in the panel sessions, and I hope you will have a very fruitful discussion. 
13.  Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
