Benoît Cœuré: Interview with the Association of German Pfandbrief
Banks
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
and the Association of German Pfandbrief Banks, published on 8 May 2019.
In what context did you first come across Pfandbriefe?
 Before joining the ECB, I spent five years managing France’s debt and cash at Agence France
Trésor,  the  French  equivalent  of  the  Finance  Agency  in  Germany.  That’s  when  I  first  came
across Pfandbriefe as an important building block of Europe’s fixed income market.
What  is  the  importance  of  Pfandbriefe  and  other  covered  bonds  in  monetary
transmission?
Covered bonds play an important role in the monetary policy transmission process, in particular
in  a  traditionally  bank-based  economy  like  the  euro  area.  The  covered  bond  purchase
programme,  for  example,  has  lowered  banks’  funding  costs  directly  and  thereby  encouraged
banks  to  extend  more  credit  to  firms  and  households  at  more  attractive  levels.  It  was  not  by
chance  that  covered  bonds  were  the  first  asset  class  to  be  purchased  outright  by  the
Eurosystem for monetary policy purposes in 2009. In addition, covered bonds make up a large
share of the collateral that banks use to borrow funds in Eurosystem monetary policy operations,
ensuring that banks have access to central bank funding.
Do you think the harmonisation of covered bonds will be a success?
The  ECB  supports  efforts  to  create  a  harmonised,  high-quality  and  transparent  covered  bond
market in the European Union. The legislative proposal on covered bonds made by the European
Commission in March 2018 is an important step in that direction, also with a view to promoting a
further  deepening  of  the  capital  markets  union.  The  ECB  also  sees  merit  in  the  proposed
directive serving as a basis for new national legislation on covered bonds. Finally, the importance
of  private  initiatives  to  achieve  harmonisation  should  also  be  emphasised,  in  particular  the
covered bond label created by the European Covered Bond Council in 2012. National differences
will of course not vanish overnight, but I am confident that practices will increasingly converge
across EU countries over time.
Will innovation, e.g. ”green” covered bonds transform the market and, if so, how?
Successful innovations, if managed prudently, have always been important drivers of financial
market developments. In the covered bond market, as in other market segments, I see “green”
covered bonds as a promising innovation and transformation for the future, given the growing
awareness among the general public that environmentally-friendly economic activities should be
supported.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
