    
 
Last Orders: Calling Time on LIBOR 
 
Speech given by 
Dave Ramsden, Deputy Governor for Markets & Banking 
 Bank of England “Last Orders: Calling Time on LIBOR” event  
5 June 2019 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
1 
    
 
Authorities, internationally, led by Andrew Bailey, have been calling time on Libor for a while.  Panel banks 
have agreed to continue to submit to Libor until end 2021 securing its future until then, but not beyond.  This 
event focusses on the transition to our future without Libor, and the critical point we find ourselves at today – 
what we refer to in the conference title as ‘last orders’ for new exposures to Libor.  
 This is a global issue – affecting multiple currencies. However, as you may expect and consistent with the 
UK origins of the phrase “last orders”, I’m going to choose to focus on sterling Libor and its successor, 
SONIA, in my remarks today.   
 First, before turning to that transition, a reminder of why, informed by our recent Dear CEO exercise and with 
30 months to go, time is being called on Libor. 
 Libor prices in fluctuations in the perceived credit quality of banks, whereas for many users, alternative risk 
free reference rates are better reflections of the general level of interest rates. 
 Beyond this, although Libor’s methodology and governance has been reformed and improved, an underlying 
issue remains – the way banks fund themselves has changed. There are very few transactions in the 
markets that Libor purports to measure. Data from the Bank’s sterling money market data collection showed 
that in the first quarter of this year there were on average only 9 deposits a day underpinning 6 month 
sterling Libor, with a total daily value of £81 million. 
 This lack of transactions means that panel banks have to use their expert judgement to make their 
submissions.  And this means they have become increasingly uncomfortable about doing so.  And if those 
panel banks stop submitting, there is no Libor benchmark. 
 Given the pervasive use of Libor historically, this creates a fragility at the heart of markets – that financial 
markets are reliant upon an unsustainable piece of infrastructure1.  This financial stability risk is something 
the Financial Policy Committee has therefore been closely monitoring.2 
 The FCA has secured a breathing space to enable the transition, but only until end-2021.  The best way to 
make the most of the timetable set for Libor to end is for markets to focus on transitioning away from it, to 
new risk free rates.  For sterling markets, to the new risk free rate is SONIA, an overnight benchmark 
provided by the Bank and underpinned by transactions worth about 40 billion pounds a day.   
 The need to transition is a critical one for all involved.  We impressed this upon firms in our Dear CEO 
exercise; a key objective of which was to ensure Board level responsibility for transition.  And it is key to the 
                                                      
1 www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/record/2017/financial-policy-committee-meeting-september-2017.pdf   
2 www.bankofengland.co.uk/financial-stability-report/2018/june-2018  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
2 
 
2 
   
 
Bank’s objectives – risk free rate transition is a core part of the Bank’s strategic goal to catalyse reforms in 
financial markets to make them fairer and more effective. 
 The good news is, transition is happening. There has been real progress in establishing SONIA as the 
successor to sterling Libor.  In the past 6 months there have been a number of positive developments in the 
sterling cash market. 
 From a zero base this time last year, SONIA linked floating rate note (‘FRN’) issuance now dominates 
sterling floating rate financials issuance and there is clear momentum towards using the compounded SONIA 
rate across bond markets. The first 5 months of 2019, have seen 21 different banks, sovereigns, and 
supranationals issue FRNs referencing compounded SONIA, with a total value of about £19bn.  
 We’ve also now seen the first move by a bond issuer to switch their outstanding Libor linked bond to 
reference compounded SONIA instead.  They are currently going through a bondholder Consent Solicitation 
process, with the deadline next week.  This is a development which is being closely watched. 
 We have also seen the first SONIA linked securitisations issued.  In other areas, we are seeing progress. 
One UK firm has announced it has switched the basis of its balance sheet over to SONIA. And in OTC 
derivatives, the notional value of cleared SONIA swaps is now only slightly less then cleared Libor 
referencing swaps, with SONIA starting to dominate at shorter maturities; but this hasn’t materially changed 
over the last six months.  SONIA futures as a share of the overall market have increased, but stand at only a 
small portion of the total.   
 However, we are yet to see a SONIA based loan. There is also a need for further progress in building 
required infrastructure, not just to issue, but to hold, value, and risk manage SONIA based instruments.   
This progress is a positive sign, but the pace of progress needs to accelerate.  There is much more to be 
done. 
 We have a positive, market-driven plan geared towards finding ways to overcome the barriers to further 
transition.  This is led by the Sterling Risk Free Rate Working Group, whose objective is to catalyse a  
broad-based transition to using SONIA. The authorities were delighted when Tushar Mozaria agreed to take 
on the chairing of this3 and today he will speak about the group’s recent initiatives and plan for the rest of the 
year.4 
 But the efforts of the UK’s working group, and those of the others’ currency groups, need to be supported by 
actions at individual firms.   If an issue is on the FPC agenda, given they are responsible for the financial 
                                                      
3 www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/news/2018/november/boe-and-fca-appoint-new-chair-of-the-sterling-risk-free-reference-
rates-working-group.pdf  
4 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/events/2019/june/last-orders-calling-time-on-libor 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
3 
 
3 
   
 
system as a whole, then we would generally assume it should also be on the agenda of the senior 
governance committees of the firms who make up that system.  To make sure this was the case, the UK 
regulators – the PRA and FCA – took a decision to send a “Dear CEO” letter to our largest banks and 
insurers requesting sight of their Board-approved plans for managing the risks around Libor cessation.   
 The Bank and FCA have already responded to the individual firms involved and, this morning, we published 
thematic findings from the exercise.  I encourage all Libor users whatever their size and position in the 
system - to look at this: the emerging themes from the exercise apply to a wide range of firms, not just those 
who received our letters.  I’ll make a few observations: 
 i.  The letter has achieved one of its original objectives of helping to focus senior minds on this topic.  
Each firm written to now has a dedicated Senior Manager under the Senior Managers regime with 
responsibility for overseeing the transition – I can see many are here this morning.  
 ii.  The responses to the Dear CEO letter highlighted much of the good work that is already underway; 
how some firms have mobilised themselves to meet this challenge.  But what was surprising was 
the very different states of readiness for dealing with the transition and associated risks 
demonstrated by the plans submitted.  Supervisors will be working closely with firms on this. 
  iii.  More generally, I only see the level of supervisory engagement on this topic intensifying to make 
sure firms are ready for end 2021.  The response to the Dear CEO letter provides a basis for this 
engagement to continue.  As well as publishing thematic findings, we are following up with each 
firm individually through the supervisory dialogue. 
 Having senior focus on achieving an orderly transition is necessary.  It is firms’ boards which will allocate the 
resources needed to get through the work.  While we appreciate there are a number of other large projects 
that firms are currently dealing with, transition from Libor is an issue that needs engagement from the most 
senior executives and committees in firms.   
 As such I was pleased to host the first meeting of a new Sterling Senior Advisory Group this morning.  
Tushar will speak about this group more, but it is the engagement of such senior leaders that will enable us – 
the authorities and industry – to work through the complex issues and make positive progress.   
 The Bank is committed to this transition being orderly and managed.  Ultimately transition needs to be 
market led, but will be enabled with the continued coordination and collaboration between the public and 
private sector.  Andrew will speak for the FCA, but speaking for the Bank, I can say we will:  
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
4 
 
4 
     I. 
Ensure a strong focus on the markets’ transition to SONIA through the RFR Working Group and 
its Senior Advisory Group; 
II. 
Continue and, if needed, intensify supervisory engagement on individual firms’ plans and  
 III. 
Continue to work together with other authorities internationally through the FSB; this is a global 
issue. 
To conclude, the time for ‘last orders’ is now.  Firms need to be focussed on what they need to do to be able 
to transact SONIA based products; and stop adding to their post 2021 Libor exposures.  There is a growing 
recognition across market participants of what transition entails. But we need to get the message to all Libor 
users – firms need to educate their customers. 
 There is much to welcome in sterling markets but progress needs to accelerate. The developments in the 
sterling FRN market have demonstrated that change can be rapid once the conditions are right. But firms 
should not leave it to the last moment, relying on the efforts of others.  Firms need to invest in the necessary 
changes now.  
     
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
5 
 
5 
 