Bank of Uganda 
  Remarks by 
 Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, 
 Governor, Bank of Uganda 
 Launch  of  Standard  Chartered  Bank  (U)  Limited’s  Client  Digital 
initiative 
 
 
 
 
 Kampala Serena Hotel 
  29 January 2019 
1 
Honourable Minister of Information, 
Communication Technology and National 
Guidance, Hon. Frank Tumwebaze 
 
The  Board  of  Directors,  Standard  Chartered  Bank 
Uganda Limited  
 
The  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Standard  Chartered 
Bank Uganda Limited 
 
Management  &  Staff  of  Standard  Chartered  Bank 
Uganda Limited 
 
Distinguished Guests in your respective capacities 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
  
It  is  my  distinct  pleasure  to  be  part  of  this  great 
evening  as  Standard  Chartered  Bank  yet  again 
unveils  an  innovative  and  revolutionary  digital 
banking initiative.  
 I  take  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  the  Board, 
Management  and  staff  of  Standard  Chartered 
Bank  Uganda  for  pioneering  many  innovative 
digital  banking  solutions  in  the  financial  services 
sector in Uganda, especially in the recent past.  
 2 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  Standard  Chartered  Bank 
is  the  oldest  bank  in  Uganda  and  its  adoption  of 
digitalization can be traced back to the mid-1990s, 
when  the  bank  was  the 
first  to 
introduce 
Automated Teller Machines.  
 The  digitalization  journey  has  since  seen  the  roll 
out  of  various 
technology  driven  business 
solutions,  as  the  Bank  pursued  its  strategic 
objectives.  If  you  have  been  following  closely, 
Standard  Chartered  Bank  over  the  past  half  a 
decade or more has been aggressively changing its 
business  model  fundamentally  to  be  ‘Digital  by 
Design’. As I recall, Standard Chartered committed 
to  invest  US$1.5bn  in  technology  globally.    It  is 
therefore  not  surprising 
that 
today  we  are 
convening  to witness  yet  another  key  milestone  in 
the  Standard  Chartered  Uganda  digitalization 
agenda.    
   3 
The 
theme 
today, 
“Digital 
transformation 
in 
banking,  future  trend  and  how  to  remain  buoyant” 
is not only very relevant to the banking sector, but 
represents  the  future  of  banking  and  evolution  of 
business  models  in  this  sector.  It  is  cognizant  of 
the  increasing  convergence  between  banking  and 
technology, and the disruption of existing business 
models therein.  
 But  how  will  the  digitalization  which  is  taking 
center  stage  in  the  banking  today,  transform 
banking tomorrow? 
   Banking  service  delivery  is  increasingly  reliant 
on  technology.  The  type  and  application  of 
technology 
determines 
how 
Financial 
Institutions  appropriately  respond  to  consumer 
expectations  and  needs.  Technology  is  also  an 
essential  in  the  toolkit  Supervised  Financial 
Institutions 
(SFIs)  use 
to  manage 
the 
competitive  pressures  that  are  increasingly 
defining the banking sector.  
 4 
By  focusing  efforts  and  resources  on  the 
digitization of core business processes, financial 
institutions  enhance  their  ability  to  respond  to 
the 
inherent  dynamism  associated  with 
technology,  and  to  the  competitive  pressures 
that 
increasingly  manifest 
in  the  banking 
sector, both today and tomorrow.   
   The  evolution  and  increasing  sophistication  of 
customer  tastes  and  preferences  must  be  met 
by  anytime-anywhere  functionality.  In  order  to 
respond  appropriately  to  these  needs,  financial 
Institutions  must  design 
financial  service 
products and solutions that contain these same 
features.      Currently,  digitalization  provides 
financial 
institutions  the  ability  to  collect 
customer  centric  information,  apply  advanced 
data analytics thereto, and subsequently design 
and make available relevant financial products.       
   5 
  With  the  development  and  roll  out  of  digital 
banking solutions like Mobile Banking, Internet 
Banking  etc.,  Financial  Institutions  operate  as 
virtual  agents  on  behalf  of  their  consumers, 
enabling  flexibility  in  the  conducting  of  bank 
transactions.    And  with  digitalization,  comes 
increased  speed  of  transaction  processing  and 
turn-around time.     
 
It is therefore self-evident that new digital banking 
innovations  will  continue  to  emerge,  and  gain 
prominence in customer service delivery.  
 I  am  glad  that  Standard  Chartered  Bank  has 
recognized 
this 
trend  and  has 
embedded 
digitalization  in  its  strategy  as  reflected  by  the 
continued  implementation  of  innovative  banking 
solutions.  
    6 
Indeed,  Standard  Chartered  Bank  was  awarded 
the  best  “Digital  Bank  for  Africa”  by  the  “Digital 
Impact  Awards  for  Africa”  in  2017,  an  attestation 
that  the  bank  is  determined  to  offer  the  best  in 
class banking solutions through digital platforms. 
 I  wish  to  reiterate  that  while  innovations  such  as 
the  one  being  launched  today  accrue  benefits  to 
the Financial Institutions and customers, they also 
present  associated  risks,  which 
if  not  well 
managed  have  the  potential  to  outweigh  the 
benefits.    It  is  my  prayer,  and  part  of  their 
prudential  obligation,  that  Supervised  Financial 
institutions  including  Standard  Chartered  Bank 
Uganda  Ltd,  continuously  review,  enhance  and 
improve 
their 
risk  management  programs; 
especially  with  respect  to  the  emergent  risks 
inherent in digital banking business solutions.   
    7 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  wish  to  remind  you  that 
the  Bank  of  Uganda  through  its  Monetary  Policy 
mandate 
is  committed  to 
fostering  a  stable 
macroeconomic  environment 
to  enhance 
the 
stability  and  soundness  of  Uganda’s  financial 
sector.  As  was  highlighted  in  the  Monetary  Policy 
Statement  for  December  2018,  the  economy  is 
projected  to  grow  by  6.5%  in  the  Financial  Year 
2018/2019,  an  indication  of  a  brighter  economic 
outlook  for  business.  I  therefore  urge  Standard 
Chartered  Bank  that  in  the  pursuit  of  your 
strategies, keep in mind the opportunities that will 
accrue from the promising economic prospects.   
 The  Central  Bank  as  a  Regulator,  will  continue  to 
enhance  its  supervisory  capacity  and  abilities  in 
order  to  facilitate  and  maintain  financial  sector 
stability.    The  Financial  Institutions  Act  2004 
empowers  Bank  of  Uganda  to  enforce  licensing 
requirements  and  good  corporate  governance 
practices,  as  well  as  to  evaluate  the  efficacy  of 
existing  risk  management 
frameworks  of  the 
 8 
supervised  financial  institutions.  The  Bank  of 
Uganda shall continue to execute this mandate.  
 As  I  conclude,  I  would 
like  once  again  to 
congratulate  Standard  Chartered  Bank  on 
unveiling this revolutionary digital initiative. 
 Thank  you  all  for  listening  to  me  and  wish  you  a 
great evening 
    Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile 
Governor, Bank of Uganda 
 9 
