Carolyn Wilkins: The age of leverage
Remarks by Ms Carolyn A Wilkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the UBC
Vancouver School of Economics and CFA Society Vancouver, Vancouver, British Columbia, 14
March 2019.
 Good afternoon. Let me thank the UBC Vancouver School of Economics and the Vancouver CFA
Society for the invitation.
Vancouver is truly a global city. More than 70 countries have consular services here to support
foreign-based firms doing business in the region. International students flock to the universities
here. And, people from all over the world have decided to invest in housing in the region.
What’s happening in the global arena has got to be top of mind for people in this room: the trade
war between the United States and China, growing geopolitical unrest in many quarters. These
issues are top of mind for us at the Bank of Canada too.
The global development that concerns me the most, though, is rising debt. Global debt now totals
around  US$240  trillion—that’s  US$100  trillion  higher  than  just  before  the  financial  crisis,  and
more  than  three  times  current  global  gross  domestic  product  (GDP).   Here  I’m  referring  to
borrowing  by  governments,  businesses  and  households.  Whether  you’re  a  homeowner  or  a
businessperson, you know first-hand that high leverage can leave you in a vulnerable financial
position.
1
It’s  no  different  for  economies.  The  world  has  learned  this  lesson  the  hard  way  on  many
occasions in my lifetime alone. The budget deficits that the United States incurred in the 1960s—
and the excessively loose monetary policy that went along with them—laid the foundation for the
“great  inflation”  of  the  1970s  and  the  breakdown  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  of  pegged
exchange rates. The recession that followed destroyed many businesses and put many people
out of work.
By the 1990s, it appeared we had learned our lesson. Many central banks were adopting some
form of inflation-control regime. This not only helped restrain the temptation to inflate away debts,
but also contributed to a decade and a half of economic stability.
Yet 2007 saw the beginnings of what would become a global financial crisis. Excess leverage
was once again at the root, although this time it was in financial institutions and households. The
Great Recession that began that year and lasted into 2009 saw governments, companies and
people from all walks of life suffer consequences. Even though Canada was spared the worst of
it, we were reminded of how quickly the fallout can spread across borders.
We’re now almost 10 years into the global expansion. Many of those who lost their jobs have
found work again, asset values have risen, and monetary policy in some countries is no longer at
emergency settings. Still, the road that we took to recovery has led us into an era of even higher
leverage across many major economies.   
Does that mean that the global economy is headed for another period of financial instability? The
global financial system is in a better place than it was in 2007 in many ways that reduce risks.
There are nonetheless uncertainties that could throw us off track, such as how trade tensions
might evolve. In any case, when downturns occur, high leverage is usually an amplifying factor.
Let me tell you where I see the trouble spots and what’s required to manage them.
Leverage is creating vulnerabilities in many places
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
So, how did we end up here again?
An important piece of the story is the highly accommodative monetary policies that were needed
to clean up the mess and get global growth back on track after the crisis. This, combined with an
abundance of global savings, has kept interest rates low.  On top of that, many governments
implemented large fiscal stimulus programs.
2
The  downturn  would  have  been  even  deeper  and  more  painful  without  these  decisive  policy
responses. What strikes me though is how much overall leverage has grown globally, even as
the financial sector has repaired its books. Government debt has skyrocketed over the past 10
years, to close to 90 per cent of global GDP. The debt of non-financial corporations has doubled
in nominal terms over the same period.  
Of course, not all borrowing is bad. Borrowing makes sound business sense if the funds are
spent on productive pursuits.  That said, not all leverage is created equal in terms of risk. The
creditworthiness  of  the  borrower  and  the  quality  of  the  instrument  are  also  important
considerations. I’ll focus on three areas that are of particular concern to me.
3
Let me start with the type of debt that is most relevant for Canada—household leverage. The
Bank has been clear that high household debt, currently at around 178 per cent of disposable
income,  is  our  number  one  domestic  financial  vulnerability.  Historically  low  borrowing  costs
obviously  contributed.  At  the  same  time,  other  factors—housing  supply  constraints,  strong
interest  among  offshore  investors—contributed  to  higher  house  prices  and  bigger  mortgages.
People here in Vancouver can relate to that. Canada doesn’t have the same issues around the
quality of debt that the United States had before the crisis. It is still a worry, though, because debt
can  put  people  in  a  tough  spot  if  interest  rates  go  up  or  their  incomes  fall.  We  take  this  into
account when we set monetary policy. Canada is not alone in this. Sweden and Australia, for
4
instance, are facing similar household vulnerabilities.
Now let me turn to public sector debt. There are good reasons for governments to finance some
spending  through  debt.  However,  debt  can  create  vulnerabilities  if  it  is  not  sustainable,  or  if  it
prevents  fiscal  policy  from  responding  to  unexpected  needs.  We  saw  this  in  the  euro  area
following the financial crisis. Limited fiscal space in some countries meant that monetary policy
had  to  bear  the  burden  of  reviving  the  economy.  Substantial  progress  has  been  made  since
Europe faced a debt crisis around eight years ago. Still, public debt in certain countries remains
a concern. This is partly because membership in the euro area prevents economic adjustment
through exchange rate movements. Plus, there’s no system of fiscal transfers to help smooth
country-specific needs. This makes the euro area countries that have weak fundamentals more
5
prone to distress.  
The United States and Japan make up the largest share of public debt in advanced economies,
but their debt poses less of a worry. US debt instruments are used as reserve assets because of
their high credit quality and because the US government bond market is the world’s deepest and
most  liquid.  So  it’s  no  wonder  that  US  government  debt  benefits  from  strong  global  demand,
particularly from China. For Japan, most of its public debt is held domestically, which mitigates
the risk.
My  third  concern  is  about  corporate  leverage.  Growth  in  corporate  debt  can  be  a  good  thing,
especially when companies are borrowing to invest in new capacity. But it has exploded over the
past decade and has some risky qualities.
In  China  alone,  non-financial  corporate  debt  totals  about  US$21  trillion.  That’s  one  and  a  half
6
times China’s GDP and much higher than levels in most advanced or developing economies.
This was fuelled in part by very rapid growth in domestic non-bank financial institutions, or the
“shadow” banking sector, where there aren’t as many safeguards as in the traditional banking
7
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
sector.   All  that  debt  poses  a  financial  stability  risk  for  China—which  could  flow  to  Canada
through lower demand for our exports and prices for our commodities, and turbulence in global
financial markets. 
Non-financial corporate debt in other emerging markets amounts to about US$10 trillion. Around
one-third of it is denominated in US dollars. Foreign-currency debt can be riskier than domestic-
currency borrowing because it exposes firms to exchange rate risk if they don’t have hedges in
place.  We saw during the Asian crisis in the 1990s how sovereign debt that was denominated in
foreign currency led to financial instability that exchange rate devaluations only exacerbated. In
the same way, high levels of foreign-currency corporate debt could limit the scope for exchange
rate adjustments to play a stabilizing role.
8
Non-financial corporate debt is also a concern in some advanced economies. For instance, in
the  United  States  and  the  euro  area,  the  quality  of  corporate  debt  has  deteriorated.  We  have
9
seen substantial growth of BBB- and lower-rated bonds and a rapid increase in leveraged loans.
Non-bank financial institutions have played the biggest role in the buildup of all this corporate debt
since the crisis. That’s because global bank lending dropped off sharply as banks repaired their
balance sheets and complied with stricter regulatory requirements. The gap has been more than
filled  by  a  large  increase  in  bond  financing  as  the  investment  fund  industry  capitalized  on
opportunities created by the retreat in bank lending. The latest figures from the Financial Stability
Board (FSB) put total global assets under management for investment funds at US$45 trillion at
the end of 2017.
10
The growth of these funds means that portfolio flows into equity and debt are now the dominant
source of capital flows worldwide. There are two key reasons for this. First, the low interest rate
environment  in  advanced  economies  has  spurred  investors  to  seek  higher  returns  abroad.
Second,  the  rising  prominence  of  new  products  such  as  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  has
made  it  easy  for  a  broader  range  of  investors  to  gain  exposure  to  emerging-market  debt  and
high-yield bonds. The expansion of these products is a natural result of capital markets picking
up  the  slack  after  bank  lending  fell  off.  And  these  products  can  offer  investors  greater
diversification of risk.
What concerns me though is we don’t know how these funds will react when an adverse shock
hits, and how the associated portfolio flows will evolve. We’ve seen more uncertainty in markets
in recent months, but we haven’t seen a broad and sustained increase in risk aversion. If fund
managers were to suddenly shift their asset allocations, the moves could spark a sharp reversal
in  portfolio  debt  flows.  The  business  models  of  investment  funds  could  further  amplify  the
resulting stresses. For instance, the liquidity of ETF shares is widely thought to be higher than
that of the underlying assets.
 In a stress situation, herd behaviour among ETF investors could
amplify changes in asset prices and lead to widespread contagion.
What will help keep us on track?
11
All of this is pretty sobering. But let’s remind ourselves what is in place to help keep us on track.
First, the global financial system is more resilient than it was 10 years ago.
Under the Basel III reforms, institutions that are active globally—including Canadian banks—are
better  capitalized.  We  shouldn’t  underestimate  the  importance  of  this.  These  institutions  are
holding over US$2 trillion more capital than they were at the beginning of 2011 when the reforms
started to be phased in. They’re also holding more liquid assets and running their businesses
with less leverage. It’s critical to be well prepared for rainy days. In fact, in December, Canada’s
Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions  (OSFI)  increased  the  capital  buffer
requirement  for  Canadian  banks  by  25  basis  points,  to  1.75  per  cent  of  total  risk-weighted
12
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
assets.
12
Stress tests of the Canadian banks are a useful way to assess how much pressure could be
placed on their capital in very tough but plausible scenarios. Last autumn, we published results
from  a  hypothetical  scenario  that  involved  falling  house  prices.  The  exercise  showed  that  our
banks could handle such a shock.
 We’ll show more of this kind of work in the next Financial
System Review, to be published in May.
13
OSFI’s B-20 mortgage underwriting guidelines are also adding to resilience. The guidelines have
improved  the  quality  of  new  lending  by  limiting  the  number  of  new  mortgage  holders  that  are
highly indebted. Along with higher interest rates, the new guidelines have also limited growth in
credit. As a result, we’re finally seeing the ratio of household debt to income stabilize.
Second, China is deleveraging, which is critical for its economy and for the world.
China  has  taken  meaningful  action,  including  more  stringent  regulation  and  supervision  of  the
financial sector. This strategy has helped to slow credit growth. It’s also shrinking certain parts of
the non-bank financial sector. This is a good thing because that sector is less capitalized, less
liquid and much more opaque than traditional banks. All of this is contributing to slower growth in
China, but it’s the right path to more sustainable growth in the future. Unfortunately, the trade
conflict  is  making  what  was  already  a  delicate  balancing  act  for  the  Chinese  authorities  even
tougher.
Finally, economic growth will make public debt more sustainable—if we play our cards right.
Research has found that the costs of public debt are low when a country’s economic growth rate
is higher than the inflation-adjusted interest rate on its public debt.
 It’s just arithmetic. In this
situation, growth will keep debt as a percentage of GDP on a stable or declining path, even if a
country is running a limited budget deficit. If new borrowing follows the golden rule of fiscal policy
—borrowing to make investments that support stronger long-term growth, such as infrastructure
—then there is even more scope for debt to grow while remaining sustainable. According to Bank
estimates, many countries could grow over the medium term at a rate that exceeds the interest
rate  on  their  debt.  Should  countries  stay  on  this  growth  path  and  governments  limit  new
borrowing, current public debt loads could be more sustainable.  
14
framework 
It’s important to remember that a stable debt-to-GDP ratio does not guarantee sustainability. A
credible  macroeconomic 
in  a  government’s
creditworthiness, achieving growth and avoiding instability. Sound fiscal and monetary policies
are  at  the  core  of  this.  That  includes  maintaining  or  building  some  fiscal  space  for  when  it’s
needed. This was the case in Canada when fiscal stimulus was used to respond to the global
financial crisis and to the oil price shock a few years ago. This helps central banks achieve their
inflation objectives, which is our part in supporting strong and sustainable growth.
to  maintaining 
is  critical 
faith 
15
We also saw the importance of sound policy frameworks late last year as capital flowed out of
emerging-market economies. Investors clearly differentiated between countries that had sound
frameworks and those that didn’t, which limited the spillovers.
What else still needs to happen?
We’re  in  a  better  place  than  you  might  glean  from  the  news.  But  that  doesn’t  mean  there  is
nothing left to do—there certainly is.
High leverage will always be an important vulnerability because of its hooks into the rest of the
global financial system. We need to better understand these linkages to determine if additional
safeguards are needed.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The best way is to keep running stress tests on different aspects of the financial system. The
auto industry has tested air bags in cars for a long time for how they perform in different types of
collisions. “Crash-testing” for banks only became standard practice relatively recently.
More needs to be done to extend this type of analysis to newer players in the system, such as
asset managers and other non-bank financial institutions. This is quite challenging because their
activity often crosses borders, and the ecosystem that needs to be modelled is very complex.
The Bank of Canada and the FSB are both looking at how to model these interlinkages.
 I find
work to stress-test the system particularly worthwhile because it helps identify where safeguards
should be maintained or strengthened.
16
Regulators around the world also need to continue to make good use of macroprudential policies
to  address  localized  vulnerabilities  as  they  emerge.  Even  if  these  types  of  policies  slow
economic growth in the short term, they’ll help avoid more painful adjustments in the long run.
This is important for both advanced and emerging-market economies.
Individuals play a role as well. As I said at the beginning, high leverage can leave any of us in a
vulnerable financial position. I’m hoping that prospective homeowners and other borrowers do
their own stress tests so that they can be confident that the debt they take on will be manageable
over time.
Before I conclude, let me take a minute to say what we should absolutely not do: have a trade
war. Advocates of protectionist measures say that imposing barriers like tariffs on countries with
trade  surpluses  will  help  reduce  disparities  in  international  trade  and  lead  to  more  domestic
production and jobs. This logic may be seductive, but it’s misguided. In a trade war, no one gains
and  everyone  loses.  Tariffs  lower  GDP  for  everyone  because  they  harm  investment  and
productivity.
 That’s why it would be good for everyone if the United States and China resolved
their dispute. An end to US tariffs on steel and aluminum would also be a welcome relief to many
businesses and workers in Canada and other affected countries. And, of course, the Canada-
United States-Mexico Agreement still needs to be ratified.
17
Even with these steps, getting over the general malaise around trade policies will require some
tangible  commitment  and  a  plan  to  modernize  the  World  Trade  Organization’s  trade  rules—
including for intellectual property—and its dispute settlement mechanism. This would pave the
way for higher global growth and a more sustainable debt burden.
Conclusion
It’s time for me to conclude.
Global debt is now more than three times global GDP. That is a headwind to growth and makes
us vulnerable to another period of financial instability. The good news for Canadian businesses
and households is that the financial system—globally and here at home—is safer than it was a
decade  ago  thanks  to  much  stronger  safeguards.  And,  the  global  expansion  is  expected  to
continue even though it has slowed in recent quarters. For Canada, the economy is likely to be
weaker  in  the  first  half  of  this  year  than  we  had  forecast  in  January,  but  we  still  expect  GDP
growth to pick up later in the year.
That said, more needs to be done to further reduce the downside risks. A long-lasting resolution
to the current trade war is at the top of my list because the conflict is threatening growth around
the  world  right  now.  Credible  fiscal  and  monetary  policies,  and  nimble  financial  system
safeguards, are at the core of limiting vulnerabilities and promoting longer-term resilience for all
countries. 
What’s at stake is the future prosperity of many people, at a time when stability is sorely needed.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
I  would  like  to  thank  Rhys  Mendes,  Gitanjali  Kumar  and  Grahame  Johnson  for  their  help  in
preparing this speech.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
See the Institute of International Finance’s latest Global Debt Monitor (January 2019).
Abundant global savings and factors such as population aging have contributed to lower “neutral” interest rates
in advanced economies, including Canada. For more detail, see X. S. Chen and J. Dorich, “The Neutral Rate in
Canada:  2018  Estimates,”  Bank  of  Canada  Staff Analytical  Note  No.  2018–22  (July  2018).  This  is  in  part
because emerging-market economies have less developed financial systems that may not be able to generate
enough financial assets to absorb domestic savings, so capital flows from these countries into others where
the  financial  systems  are  more  advanced.  See  E.  G.  Mendoza,  V.  Quadrini  and  J.-V.  Ríos-Rull,  “Financial
Integration, Financial Deepness and Global Imbalances,” Journal of Political Economy 117, no. 3 (June 2009):
371–410.
See M. Carney, “Growth in the Age of Deleveraging” (remarks to the Empire Club of Canada and the Canadian
Club of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, December 12, 2011).
Specifically, none of these countries saw a large drop in house prices during the crisis. In addition, in all three
economies the usual financing channels continued to work; government support encouraged further lending;
and as house prices rose following the crisis, debt levels did too.
Public debt has also been on the rise in some emerging-market economies. As of August 2018, more than 45
per  cent  of  low-income  countries  were  at  high  risk  of,  or  already  in,  debt  distress  as  measured  by  the
International Monetary Fund (IMF)’s debt-sustainability ratings. See the IMF’s Global Financial Stability Report
(October 2018).
According to the IMF, about 25 percentage points of this debt is incurred by local government financing vehicles.
For more detail, see J. Bowman, M. Hack and M. Waring, “Non-Bank Financing in China,” Reserve Bank of
Australia Bulletin (March 2018).
An example of this exchange rate risk is when the US dollar rises because of normalization of monetary policy
by the US Federal Reserve.
Leveraged  loans  are  loans  provided  to  highly  indebted  non-financial  corporates.  Non-bank  institutional
investors typically invest in these loans, including through collateralized loan obligations.
See the FSB’s Global Monitoring Report on Non-Bank Financial Intermediation 2018 (February 2019).
Liquidity and maturity transformation are key vulnerabilities that could lead to runs by investors in the absence of
prudential regulation. See B. Y. Chang, M. Januska, G. Kumar and A. Usche, “ Monitoring Shadow Banking in
Canada: A Hybrid Approach,” Bank of Canada Financial System Review (December 2016): 23–37.
For more detail, see OSFI’s December announcement.
See  T.  Duprey,  X.  Liu,  C.  MacDonald,  M.  van  Oordt,  S.  Priazhkina,  X.  Shen  and  J.  Slive,  “Modelling  the
Macrofinancial Effects of a House Price Correction in Canada,” Bank of Canada Staff Analytical Note No. 2018–
36 (November 2018).
See O. Blanchard, “Public Debt and Low Interest Rates” (AEA Presidential Lecture, January 2019).
See  S.  S.  Poloz,  “Toward  2021:  The  Power—and  Limitations—of  Policy”  (remarks  to  The  Chamber  of
Commerce of Metropolitan Montreal, Montréal, Quebec, February 21, 2019).
For  more  detail,  see  the  FSB’s Policy  Recommendations  to  Address  Structural  Vulnerabilities  from  Asset
Management Activities (January 2017).
See A. Barattieri, M. Cacciatore and F. Ghironi, “Protectionism and the Business Cycle,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 24353 (2018) and K. B. Charbonneau and A. Landry, “The Trade War in
Numbers,” Bank of Canada Staff Working Paper No. 2018–57 (November 2018).
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
