Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Financial System Review
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press
conference following the release of the Financial System Review, Ottawa, Ontario, 16 May 2019.
 Good morning, and thank you for being here today. Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I are
pleased to be with you to talk about the latest issue of the Bank of Canada’s Financial System
Review (FSR), which we published today.
Let me quickly remind everyone about the purpose of the FSR—to identify key vulnerabilities in
the  financial  system  that  can  interact  with  and  magnify  economic  shocks.  We  monitor  the
evolution  of  these  vulnerabilities  and  apply  extreme  risk  scenarios  to  look  at  the  potential
implications for the financial system and the economy should such a shock occur.
The main vulnerabilities that we see today are the same as those in the 2018 FSR—elevated
levels of household debt and imbalances in housing markets. Both vulnerabilities have declined
modestly over the past year.
With respect to household indebtedness, the mortgage stress tests introduced last year have
improved the quality of new mortgage lending. As a result, the share of new mortgages going to
highly  indebted  households—those  that  owe  more  than  450  per  cent  of  their  income—has
declined  significantly.  Also,  the  number  of  Canadians  falling  behind  on  their  debt  payments
remains low. The combination of the revised mortgage guidelines and past increases in interest
rates have helped to slow the pace of household borrowing and stabilize the overall household
debt-to-income ratio in Canada.
These  are  encouraging  signs,  but  there  are  important  reasons  for  continued  vigilance.  First,
because the total amount of debt carried by Canadian households is so large, we know that it will
be with us for a long time. Second, a large share of this debt is with highly indebted households.
And third, the decline in global bond yields since the beginning of the year has lowered Canadian
mortgage  rates,  so  household  borrowing  is  likely  to  pick  up  again.  The  Bank  is  also  closely
monitoring the risk that stricter mortgage guidelines are shifting consumers away from federally
regulated  institutions  and  toward  private  lenders  and  credit  unions,  some  of  which  are  not
following the federal guidelines.
Let me now turn to imbalances in the housing market, which have diminished overall since our
last report. We continue to follow three different housing stories here in Canada—the previously
frothy markets in Toronto and Vancouver, the markets that are still adjusting to lower oil prices in
Alberta  and  Saskatchewan,  and  the  markets  that  are  functioning  normally  almost  everywhere
else. After slowing sharply beginning in 2017, the Toronto area market appears to be stabilizing,
while resales and prices continue to fall in the Vancouver area. Prices in both areas remain 40 to
60 per cent higher than they were four years ago, suggesting that housing imbalances remain an
important macrofinancial vulnerability. The housing market as a whole continues to benefit from
solid fundamentals, including population growth and strong job creation.
One more main vulnerability from the last FSR that we continue to watch is the possibility of a
major  cyber  attack  on  a  financial  institution  or  market  infrastructure,  such  as  the  payment
systems that we all rely on every day. Cyber threats remain a key structural vulnerability, and the
number  of  incidents  that  have  or  could  have  resulted  in  substantial  financial  losses  has
increased steadily over the past decade. Financial system participants are particularly concerned
about cyber incidents at  third-party  service  providers.  The  Bank  has  been  working  with  major
banks  and  financial  market  infrastructures  to  improve  coordination  and  information  sharing,
which is crucial for improving resilience.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
In this FSR, we have placed more focus on two other vulnerabilities. One relates to corporate
debt  funding.  The  level  of  non-financial  corporate  debt  in  Canada  is  well  above  its  historical
average.  While  the  average  firm  has  enough  liquid  assets  to  manage  an  increase  in  interest
rates or a decline in income, some companies have relatively few liquid assets and less capacity
to service their debts. In this context, lower-rated firms are relying more on US high-yield bonds
and leveraged loans, and borrowers in these markets are more vulnerable to sudden swings in
investor sentiment. We will be monitoring the situation.
We are also putting more emphasis on the vulnerability related to crypto assets. These continue
to pose little threat to the financial system. But crypto markets and the uses of the underlying
technology  are  changing  quickly.  So,  implications  for  financial  stability  might  arise  suddenly.  I
would  add  that  recent  swings  in  prices  for  crypto  assets  and  losses  at  crypto  companies
underline the need for investors to understand all the risks before they enter these markets.
We have also added a new vulnerability: climate change. There is a broad range of authorities
that are tasked with assessing and mitigating the impacts of climate change. For central banks,
the  focus  is  on  the  risks  that  climate  change  poses  to  both  the  economy  and  the  financial
system. These include physical risks from disruptive weather events and transition risks from
adapting to a lower-carbon global economy. The Bank is incorporating this risk into its analysis of
the Canadian economy and financial system. We are also working to improve our understanding
of climate risks as they relate to our mandate.
Turning  from  vulnerabilities  to  risks,  I  will  conclude  by  saying  the  overall  risk  to  the  Canadian
financial system has increased slightly since our last assessment nearly a year ago. This is due
to the recent slowdown in economic growth in Canada and abroad. However, as we said in our
recent Monetary Policy Report, we expect economic growth to pick up later this year. As for the
risk of a severe house price correction, we judge that to be moderate and declining, with froth
having decreased in the Toronto and Vancouver areas. Meanwhile, the risk of a sharp increase in
long-term interest rates driven by higher global risk premiums is moderate, but increasing.
With that, Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I would be happy to answer your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
