Benjamin  E  Diokno:  Philippines  -  weaving  an  unprecedented
growth story
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Ayala Economic and Treasury Summit, Manila, 6 August 2019.
 Jaime, Fernando, other senior Ayala officials, guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. I am
very  pleased  to  be  the  keynote  speaker  in  your  annual  corporate  planning  and  budgeting
conference.
As  former  Budget  Secretary,  I  understand  the  importance  of  planning  and  budgeting  to  the
continued growth of an institution. As head of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas—a hat I’ve been
wearing for five months now—I remain mindful of how vital forward-looking policies are to the
achievement of our respective organizations’ objectives and targets.
In the next few minutes, I will be discussing the current state of the Philippine economy, followed
by some points on why we believe our economic growth will be sustained in the years ahead.
Finally, I will also briefly talk about the BSP’s role in supporting this growth narrative and some of
the challenges that we may face going forward.
Let me begin with our growth story thus far in the Philippines. Our economy has experienced
uninterrupted growth for over 20 years since 1999 despite challenges such as the 2004 fiscal
crisis and the 2007 global financial crisis—that is 81 consecutive quarters of continuous growth,
with annual growth averaging 6.4 percent in the past five years (2014–2018).
Growth in recent years has become more broad-based.
On the demand side,  private consumption remained robust in the first quarter of 2019, as in the
previous  quarters  through  the  years.  This  is  further  supported  by  rising  contribution  from
investments from 2010 up to present.
On the supply side, services remain the main driver of growth—but the industry sector has also
stepped up in recent years.
Meanwhile, the government’s economic managers remain optimistic about achieving our GDP
growth target of 6 to 7 percent this year despite the lower than expected 5.6 percent growth in the
first quarter of this 2019.
Private consumption is expected to remain robust, aided by remittance inflows and sustained
“cooling” inflation. Private capital formation, on the other hand, should likewise contribute more
significantly  to  economic  growth,  with  construction  and  investments  in  durable  equipment
expected to remain solid in light of the government’s projects and other infrastructure programs.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank (WB), and Asian Development Bank (ADB)
share  these  expectations.  In  fact,  all  three  forecast  that  the  Philippine  economy  will  grow  by
about 6.2 to 6.5 percent this year.
The  bold  reforms  and  initiatives  in  the  past  three  years  have  prompted  the  government  to
capitalize on and sustain these gains. It is because of this that we believe the Philippine growth
momentum will be sustained moving forward.
First is the government’s ambitious infrastructure program—“Build, Build, Build” which aims to
boost the economy’s mobility and connectivity, enabling equitable growth and development. At
present,  there  are  75  high-impact  national  government  infrastructure,  with  46  projects  (61
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
percent) already in the implementation stage. 
The government is expected to invest over PhP 4.6 trillion (or US$90 billion at PhP52:USD1) in
public infrastructure from 2019 to 2022.
Second, is the recent passage of reforms aimed at strengthening our investment climate. The
Ease of Doing Business and Efficient Government Service Delivery Act, the revised Corporation
Code,  and  the  Philippine  Innovation  Act  support  the  government’s  agenda  of  improving
competitiveness and ease of doing business in the country, promoting transparency and cutting
red tape in the government for a more conducive business environment.
At  present,  the  Philippines’  current  standing  has  improved  based  on  different  third-party
assessors. For instance, the Philippines’ ranking rose from 68th to 56th place under the 2018
Global Competitiveness Report.
It also received an upgrade in its sovereign credit rating from Standard & Poor’s to “BBB+” from
“BBB.” These favorable standings are also boosted by the improved business sentiment and the
stable consumer outlook based on the BSP’s latest round of expectations surveys.  
Finally, the continued demand for Philippine skills locally and abroad are evident in the growth of
our  BPO  industry  and  strong  remittance  inflows.  This  further  highlights  the  importance  of  our
country’s most prized resource—our labor force. Based on our estimates, production efficiency
has improved over the years with the incremental capital-output ratio (ICOR) declining steadily.
As you know, the higher the ICOR, the less efficient the production process is.
Recognizing the skills of our workforce, the government has invested heavily in various social
programs such as the Universal Health Care Act and the Access to Quality Tertiary Education
Act (RA No. 10931).
You may not know this but 40% of our budget goes to social services.
Our growth story has been supported by structural and policy reforms in the economy for around
three  decades.  These  reforms  enable  growth  by  expanding  the  role  of  market  forces  in  key
sectors  of  the  economy;  encouraging  investments  and  private  sector  activity;  removing
bottlenecks to doing business and investments in the country; and strengthening the country’s
fiscal position and the financial sector. These, and other structural reforms in the pipeline, will
continue to play a significant role in propelling the economy toward a balanced, sustainable, and
inclusive growth.
In  addition,  recently  approved  legislation—such  as  the  BSP  Charter Amendments,  Philippine
Identification System (PhilSys) Act, National Payment Systems Act and the Gold Law—allow us
to pursue our mandate with more vigor and in effect, enable us to espouse the interests and uplift
the lives of all Filipinos.
So what is the role of BSP in the Philippines’ growth narrative?
Our mandate is clear: “maintain price stability conducive to a balanced and sustainable growth of
the economy and employment.” Our objective in the BSP is to protect the real purchasing power
of  the  peso  to  support  conditions  for  long-term  economic  growth.  With  your  presence  in  this
annual  corporate  planning  and  budgeting  process  summit,  I  know  you  are  fully  aware  of  the
importance of efficient allocation of resources.
As a central banker, I would argue that price stability is closely linked with financial efficiency. If
the prices are low and stable, financial planners are better equipped to allocate resources to their
most  efficient  use.  Lesser  price  volatilities  would  also  enable  us  to  anticipate  risks  and  plan
better. And with our amended BSP Charter, we are now in a better position to implement sound
policies to promote and maintain price stability, a strong financial system, and a safe and efficient
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
payments and settlements system.  
In terms of price developments, we are on track to achieving our inflation target of 2 to 4 percent
for 2019.
To give you some context, our June inflation declined to 2.7 percent from 3.2 percent in May, the
lowest inflation recorded in more than 20 months since August 2017.
Later  this  morning,  the  Philippine  Statistics  Authority  (PSA)  will  announce  the  average
percentage  of  inflation  for  July.  My  forecast  is  that  it  will  settle  within  the  range  of    2.2  –  2.8
percent.
This sits comfortably within the government’s target band, in line with our forecasts.
This is a stark contrast from 2018 when inflation was pushed beyond the target range to average
at 5.2 percent. 
Looking  ahead,  we  expect  inflation  to  remain  on  a  target-consistent  path  for  2019  and  2020.
BSP’s latest baseline forecasts indicate that inflation is projected to average 2.6 percent this year
and 2.9 percent next year and 2021.
The risks to the inflation outlook appear to be broadly balanced for 2019 and 2020. The main
upward  risks  are  the  petitions  for  electricity  rates  and  transport  fare  adjustments,  and  the
proposed  increase  in  the  excise  taxes  of  alcoholic  beverages  and  cigarettes.  The  risk  of  a
prolonged El Niño episode has gone down. On the external front, the global economic slowdown
due to protectionist policies in advanced economies, as well as geopolitical tensions continue to
be the main downside risks to inflation.
Inflation expectations are also starting to converge with the government’s target range. Based on
the BSP’s latest round of expectations surveys, businesses and consumers expect inflation to
remain within the 2 to 4 percent target for 2019.
Similarly, BSP’s survey of private sector economists for June 2019 showed lower mean inflation
forecasts for 2019 and 2021. Likewise, institutions such as the ADB and the IMF are projecting
that inflation for 2019 and 2020 will be within the government’s target range for this year and the
next.
On June 20, the Monetary Board deemed it appropriate to maintain its monetary policy settings
unchanged following the 25-basis point cut in the BSP policy rate in May 2019.
With  better-behaved  inflation  dynamics,  the  Monetary  Board  also  decided  to  cut  the  reserve
requirement ratio by 200 bps phased within 3 months beginning in May up to July. This is to help
ease some of the tightness in domestic liquidity.
Moving  forward,  monetary  policy  has  been  and  always  will  be  data-dependent.  To  determine
whether  further  monetary  easing  is  warranted,  we  will  first  have  to  see  how  macroeconomic
conditions will unfold.
Two days from now (8 August 2019), the Monetary Board will be conducting its regular review of
the  monetary  policy  stance.  Until  then,  we  will  continue  to  look  at  the  widest  possible  set  of
available  economic  and  financial  variables.  These  include  the  recent  inflation  numbers  to  be
announced today—if not yet announced, and the second quarter (Q2 2019)  GDP growth set to
be released on Thursday.
Meanwhile,  the  credit-liquidity  dynamics  in  the  country  remain  consistent  with  expanding
economic activity.  Bank lending continues to post double-digit, reflecting sustained demand for
loans from various production sectors of the economy.  Liquidity conditions, while growing at a
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
moderate pace, remain sufficient to support economic growth requirements, with the latest ratio
at 64.2 percent for Q1 2019.
The continued soundness and stability of the Philippine banking system also lend strong support
to economic growth. Philippine banks remain robust, well-funded, and adequately-capitalized.
As of end-March 2019, the Philippine banking system assets expanded by 11.0 percent year-on-
year  (YoY)  to  P17.0  trillion  which  approximates  the  size  of  the  domestic  economy.  The
expansion in the banking system’s assets was primarily due to increased lending activities.
The  observed  robust  asset  growth  was  supported  by  expansion  in  bank  branch  network  to
11,933 as of end-June 2019.
Deposit  liabilities  continue  to  be  the  primary  funding  source  of  the  banking  system.  These
deposits  are  mostly  peso-denominated  and  sourced  from  resident  individuals  and  private
corporations.
Meanwhile, banks’ annualized net profit grew by 8.8 percent to P189.0 billion for the period ended
March 2019. Annualized interest income primarily kept the bottomline robust, growing strongly by
27.7 percent for the first quarter of the year. 
With respect to banks’ capitalization level, the capital adequacy ratios (CARs) of U/KBs on solo
and consolidated bases improved to 15.1 percent and 15.8 percent, respectively. As you know,
these ratios are well-above the minimum threshold set by the BSP and BIS of 10 percent and 8
percent, respectively.
The  increase  is  due  to  the  capital  build-up  being  undertaken  by  the  industry  in  anticipation  of
further expansion of the credit portfolio and investment activities.
Liquidity remains sufficient as banks maintain adequate high-quality liquid assets.
This favorable confluence of strong growth and a manageable inflation environment allows us to
be optimistic. Nevertheless, there are still challenges that need to be considered.
There is the risk of sluggish global growth. In its July 2019 World Economic Outlook (WEO), the
IMF revised its global growth forecast for 2019 from 3.3 percent last April to 3.2 percent. Trade
tensions between the US and China continue to be at the forefront with both countries raising
tariffs on different imported goods. At the same time, Brexit-related issues continue to be another
source of risk.
The  intensified  uncertainties  surrounding  the  external  environment  have  led  to  weaker  global
trade.  As  a  result,  the  IMF  revised  its  growth  projections  for  emerging  and  development
economies downward—by 0.3 percentage point for 2019 and by 0.1 percentage point for 2020.
While the Philippines is not directly affected with the tariff impositions, the continued trade friction
could take its toll on the country’s external sector.
Despite  these  risks,  we  have  sufficient  buffers  to  help  cushion  the  country  against  external
shocks. For example, we continue to maintain a market-driven foreign exchange (FX) rate, which
we complement with FX liberalization measures to facilitate structural FX flows.
We continue to have sizeable gross international reserves, built from sustained remittances from
overseas Filipinos, robust receipts from business process outsourcing and tourism, and steady
foreign investment in the Philippines. As of end-June 2019, gross international reserves (GIR)
stood at 85.4 billion dollars, equivalent to 7.4 months’ worth of imports of goods, services and
primary income. The recent passage of the Gold Bill will lower the cost of both funding for the
country, as well as doing business for the private sector.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Meanwhile,  remittances  from  overseas  remained  robust  in  the  first  five  months  of  the  year,
increasing  by  4.5  percent,  which  is  equivalent  to  US$12.3  billion.  We  also  continue  to  take  a
more cautious assessment of the narrowing current account balance.
Here,  I  should  emphasize  that  this  does  not  mean  that  all  current  account  deficits  should  be
taken  adversely.  In  our  case,  strong  economic  expansion  has  fueled  the  need  for  imports,
particularly  of  capital  goods  as  well  as  raw  materials  and  intermediate  goods.  Over  time,  as
investment-led economic activities result in the expansion of the economy’s potential capacity,
there  can  be  subsequent  rise  in  goods  exports,  which  would  eventually  mitigate  the  current
account deficit.
We  will  also  continue  to  initiate  reforms  in  the  financial  sector.    We  wish  to  reiterate  our
commitment to implement measures designed to enhance and develop the domestic money and
capital  markets.  We  will  continue  to  promote  greater  market  efficiency  and  price  discovery
through further refinements to our interest rate corridor framework and monetary operations. We
will also lower friction costs in the banking sector to foster more efficient financial intermediation,
which will be further enhanced by the availability of alternatives offered by FinTech and digital
innovation. 
Likewise,  the  BSP  has  recently  put  in  place  various  enhancements  in  its  arsenal  of
macroprudential tools to ensure the stability of the financial system. These tools will allow the
BSP to manage the build-up of systemic risk in the financial system by requiring banks to set
aside additional capital as reserves during good times and as buffer for bad times.
All  of  these  initiatives  would  be  meaningless  if  they  are  not  felt  by  all  Filipinos.  Thus,  we
emphasize the importance of financial inclusion in the country. We have set our sights on digital
technology as a catalyst and strategic enabler to ensure that everyone has access to financial
services. Ensuring that no one is left behind is critical for achieving inclusive growth.
Let me now highlight the priority legislative measures that the BSP will pursue under the 18th
Congress. These bills seek to further enhance access to quality financial products and espouse
the interests of the general public.
These include:  the Amendments to the Bank Deposit Secrecy laws; the Financial Consumer
Protection bill; and reforms to Agricultural Financing which seeks to amend the Agri-Agra Reform
Credit Act of 2009 (Republic Act No. 10000) and allow banks to merge their loan allocation to the
farm sector as a measure to improve banks’ compliance rate.
We will work closely with officials of both Houses of Congress and other concerned stakeholders
as we pursue the enactment of these important legislative measures.
Let me end my presentation with these key notes:
The  Philippine  economy  has  demonstrated  uninterrupted  economic  expansion  for  over  two
decades.  This  growth  is  expected  to  be  sustained  going  forward  with  sound  macroeconomic
fundamentals complemented by the government’s “game-changing” reforms aimed at bridging
infrastructure  gaps,  strengthening  our  investment  profile,  and  supporting  the  future  of,  as  the
World Bank called it, our “globally recognized competitive workforce.”
However,  the  external  environment  has  become  more  uncertain  in  recent  months  given  trade
and  geopolitical  tensions.  Nevertheless,  we  have  a  resilient  external  payments  position  as
cushion against global headwinds.
The BSP will remain watchful and vigilant, ready and willing to utilize any and all its analytical and
surveillance  tools  at  its  discretion  for  any  potential  risks  to  its  monetary  and  financial  stability
objectives.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
As we continue to support the government in its measures to sustain growth, create jobs, and
reduce poverty, the BSP will continue to focus on fulfilling its mandate of price stability conducive
to a balanced and sustainable growth of the economy.
Thank  you  for  your  attention.  I  hope  that  this  presentation  has  given  you  all  an  additional
perspective that you can use in your future corporate planning process going forward.
I look forward to an engaging discussion with you this morning.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
