Benjamin  E  Diokno:  Welcome  remarks  to  the  GRIPS  Academic
Conference
Welcome remarks by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the
central bank of the Philippines), to the GRIPS Academic Conference, Manila, 21 June 2019.
 Mr. Takehiko Nakao, President and Chair of the Board of Directors of the Asian Development
Bank (ADB), Dr. Akihiko Tanaka, President of the National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies
(GRIPS),  distinguished  session  presenters  and  discussants,  GRIPS  alumni,  faculty  members
and staff, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
Welcome to the first ever BSP-GRIPS Academic Conference. With the theme “Public Policy for
Sustainable Development Goals,” this conference is a special one as it is, in fact, a triple event.
Not only is this conference being held as part of the 70 years’ celebration of central banking in the
Philippines,  it  also  commemorates  the  20th  year  anniversary  of  GRIPS  and  the  40th  year
anniversary of its predecessor, the Graduate School of Policy Science (GSPS). 
For this, let us give ourselves a round of applause (Gov. leads everyone to applause).
As  the  samurai,  Yamamoto  Tsunetomo,  said  over  300  years  ago  in  the  book   Hagakure:  The
Book of the Samurai, “Wisdom comes from paying attention to wise people.”
And this, I believe, is what GRIPS—and its predecessor GSPS—has been doing over the last 40
years.  That  is  helping  us  achieve  wisdom  by  creating  a  venue  where  we  can  listen  to  wise
people and hone the skills of policymakers worldwide, acquire valuable and innovative ideas to
strengthen their knowledge, and formulate research-based studies to support worthwhile policy-
making.
All  this  using  a  comparative  perspective  and  practical  approach,  with  due  consideration  to
Japan’s  wide-ranging  experience  and  utmost  consideration  of  country-specific  issues  and
circumstances.
Needless to say, there are many wise people in this conference. Browsing through the line-up of
the paper presentations, I could also see many timely, relevant, and innovative policy ideas that
may emanate from such discussions. From the impact of innovation in achieving inclusiveness;
the BSP’s role in the process of state building in the Philippines; to the relationship of financial
literacy  to  achieving  financial  inclusion—these  are  rich  subject  matters  worthy  of  much
discussion.
I leave this up to all of you to discuss policy and its practical implications in the ensuing sessions.
But it is not enough that we discuss and become wise for ourselves.
I  urge  everyone  to  turn  these  discussions  into  actions  that  would  lead  to  public  policy  for
sustainable development goals of our country, just as our conference theme reflects. Let us use
our wisdom to help not just ourselves but others as well.
After  this  conference,  I  look  forward  to  being  with  everyone  at  the  alumni  homecoming  this
evening. But I will not keep you any longer. I hope for everyone to have fruitful discussions and
meaningful exchanges at this conference. Once again, thank you very much and I wish you all a
productive day ahead.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
