Dear journalists and media representatives, 
I feel honoured to meet you today to jointly mark the end of a successful year for 
the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Kosovo  and  the  country's  financial  system, 
which  with  its  activity  has  continued  to  be  a  very  important  contributor  to  the 
support of development and stability of the country's economy. 
Effective  communication  with  the  media  on  a  continuous  basis  has,  without  a 
doubt,  been  part  of  this  success.  CBK  has  continuously  paid  special  attention  to 
public transparency, by being open to media regarding all public interest issues. In 
order to further advance our cooperation, during this year, we have also organized 
a  workshop  with  journalists  where  we  had  the  opportunity  to  talk  closely  about 
important topics related to the work of CBK and the financial system of Kosovo. In 
addition,  in  order  to  facilitate  access  to  information  for  journalists,  we  have 
appointed  a  CBK  spokesman  who  greatly  facilitated  communication  between  the 
CBK  and  the  media.  These  all  indicate  that  we  are  continuing  to  advance  our 
transparency  towards  the  public  and  we  remain  committed to continue this  in the 
future.    
 Now,  please  allow  me  present  to  you  a  summary  of  the  developments  that 
characterized the country's economy and the financial system during 2018, taking 
into account the latest available data. 
 Preliminary  estimates  suggest  that  the country's  economy  during 2018  recorded a 
real  growth  rate  of  about  4%,  mainly  supported  by  the  increase  in  domestic 
demand, while the deepening of trade deficit had a negative impact on the growth 
 Page 1 of 6 
rate.  The  factors  with  the  most  significant  impact  on  the  financing  of  economic 
growth  included  the  acceleration  of  credit  growth  for  the  private  sector,  the 
increase  of  public  expenditures  and  the  increase  of  remittances,  which  by 
September amounted to euro 587,9 million, which is 6.1 % higher compared to the 
same period last year. 
Kosovo's economy, as estimated by CBK, is expected to have the similar economic 
growth rate next year, when the real growth rate is expected to be around 4.2%. 
As regards developments at the general price level, the average inflation rate by the 
end of 2018 is expected to be around 1%. 
 Banking  activity  during  this  year  was  characterized  by  credit  growth,  improved 
conditions  for  private  sector  access  to  loans,  and  further  strengthening  of  the 
sustainability  situation.  Banking  sector  loans  amounted  to  EUR  2.7  billion  in 
October 2018, recording an annual growth of 11.6%. The main source of financing 
of banking sector activity remains deposits, the value of which during this period 
amounted to EUR 3.2 billion, which represents an annual growth of 6.9%. 
Interest rates on loans continued to decline which decreased to 6.6% from 6.8% in 
the  same  period  last  year,  indicating  the  continued  ease  of  access  to  bank 
financing.  Financial  health  indicators  continued  to  show  a  high  level  of 
sustainability of this sector in all respects. In particular, it is worth mentioning the 
very  good  quality  of  the loan portfolio  with  a  non-performing  loans  ratio  of  only 
2.7% in October 2018, which, compared to last year when it was 3.6%, marked a 
further decrease.  
  Page 2 of 6 
Other  sectors  of  the  financial  system  were  also  characterized  by  favourable 
developments.  The  value  of  assets  of  the  pension  sector  in  September  2018 
amounted  to  EUR  1.76  billion,  marking  an  annual  growth  of  11.2%.  Return  on 
pension  fund  investments  continued  to  be  positive,  indicating  an  increase  in  the 
value of pension savings of citizens. 
 The  insurance  sector  continued  to  increase  its  insurance  activity  as  well  as 
compensate  the  insured  against  damages.  The  total  written  premium  value  of 
insurance companies in September 2018 was EUR 69.1 million, which represents 
an  annual  growth  of  4.8%.  On  the  other  hand,  the  value  of  the  damages  paid 
amounted  to  EUR  31.5  million,  marking  an  annual  growth  of  8.2%.  Increased 
damages  paid,  in  addition  to  increasing  the  number  of  insurance  policies,  also 
reflect  the  more  responsible  behaviour  of  insurance  companies  against  insured 
persons.  
The insurance sector has continued to have positive financial performance for the 
second  consecutive  year,  which  represents  a  very  important  development  for  the 
sustainability of this sector.   
 Another  important  sector  of  the  financial  system  is  the  microfinance  institutions 
sector, which is continuing to accelerate the lending rate, becoming a sector that is 
increasingly  contributing  to  the  growth  of  competition  in  the  credit  market.  The 
total value of this sector's loans in October 2018 amounted to EUR 177.7 million, 
marking  an  annual  growth  of  29.1%.  However,  a  falling  interest  rate  from  the 
current average level of 23.1% would make this sector even more competitive and 
with greater role in supporting the domestic economy. 
 Page 3 of 6 
 The Central Bank of the Republic of Kosovo with all its capacities has continued 
to  supporti  the  sustainable  development  of  the  financial  system,  providing  all  the 
necessary infrastructure to support the development of financial institutions and at 
the  same 
time  ensuring 
that 
their  activity  provides  financial  stability. 
Harmonization  of  the  regulatory  framework  with  the  recent  international 
developments in this area, more specifically in the European Union, has continued 
to be an important priority of the CBK during this year, which caused the drafting 
of  various  regulations  which  advance  different  aspects  of  the  banking  regulation, 
such  as:  the  Regulation  of  IFRS  9  Financial  Instruments,  and  the  Regulation  on 
Non-performing  Loans and  Restructurings.  The application of  Regulation  IFRS 9 
Financial Instruments will result in lower reserves for credit losses at the banking 
sector level and will reduce the cost of preparing and auditing the banks' financial 
statements since banks will only report under the international financial reporting 
framework  -  IFRS.  The  Regulation on  Non-Performing  Loans and  Restructurings 
will  enable  the  application  of  the  same  criteria  for  the  identification  of  Non-
performing Loans and Restructuring and it fully complies with the criteria applied 
in the EU.  
In  recent  years,  the  CBK  has  increased  its  engagement  towards  the  protection  of 
the rights of financial services consumers, thus directly serving to the protection of 
the public interest. Such engagement, either through financial education programs 
or  through  corrective  measures  to  financial  institutions,  will  continue  to  increase 
during the upcoming periods. 
During 2018, the CBK, in addition to the advancement of internal capacities, has 
been very active in the field of international cooperation. As regards this, I would 
 Page 4 of 6 
like  to  emphasize  the  signing  of  the  memorandum  of  understanding  with  the 
European  Central  Bank, which  paves  the way  for  increased  cooperation  with  this 
institution.  Also,  ensuring  an  LEI  international  code  for  the  Republic  of  Kosovo 
was of a special importance. Through this code, the Central Bank of the Republic 
of Kosovo is treated equally with other central banks in the execution of financial 
transactions. 
A more detailed disclosure of the economic and financial developments and CBK 
activities  during  2018  can  be  found  in  the  CBK  Annual  Report,  which  will  be 
published in the first half of the next year. 
 Before we move on to your questions, I would like to inform you that the CBK has 
continued  even  this  year  with  the  announcement  of  the  already  traditional 
competition  for  the  "Young  Economist"  award,  and  I  would  like  to  thank  and 
congratulate all the candidates for their papers submitted for this competition. This 
activity  aims  to  stimulate  research  activity  in  the  field  of  economy  among  young 
people. 
Based on the evaluation of the professional commission for the evaluation of these 
papers, I  am  pleased  to  announce  today  the  three  winning  research papers  of  this 
award, hoping that this will motivate the authors of these research papers and other 
young people to continue and advance even further their research work. 
The  author  Jeton  Zogjani  is  awarded  the  first  place  with  the  paper  “The 
efficiency and impact of banking electronic services: evidence for Kosovo” 
 Page 5 of 6 
The  author  Venera  Ratkoceri  is  awarded  the  second  place  with  the  paper  “The 
impact of Remittances and Foreign Direct Investments on Economic Growth - 
Evidence from Albania”. 
The  author  Bedri  Hasanaj  is  awarded  the  third  place  with  the  paper 
“Characteristics of Kosovo's economic growth in the last decade” 
 Finally, let me wholeheartedly thank you for the cooperation, professionalism and 
correctness you have shown in covering the financial and economic developments 
this year and let me wish you and your family great health, happiness and success 
for 2018. 
You are now welcome to ask questions. 
  Page 6 of 6 
