Luis de Guindos: The evolution of stress-testing in Europe
Keynote speech by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the
annual  US-EU  Symposium  organised  by  the  Program  on  International  Financial  Systems,
Frankfurt am Main, 4 September 2019.
Introduction
 During  the  financial  crisis,  stress  tests  were  primarily  used  to  identify  capital  shortfalls  in  the
banking sector and to enhance market discipline. This was achieved through the publication of
consistent and granular data on a bank by bank basis, with banks judged to have either “passed”
or “failed” the test.
Since the crisis, the way in which stress tests are used has evolved, both in Europe and abroad.
They have become a key part of the supervisory and financial stability toolkit for assessing risk
profiles and performance under adverse macroeconomic conditions.
In the United States, the regular Dodd-Frank Act stress tests and the Comprehensive Capital
Analysis  and  Review  are  now  an  integral  part  of  the  process  for  determining  the  capital
requirements  of  large  US  banks,  influencing  their  capital  plans  and  their  dividend  distribution
policies.
1
In  Europe,  the  biennial  EU-wide  stress  tests  coordinated  by  the  European  Banking Authority
(EBA)  are  important  inputs  for  the  ECB’s  Supervisory  Review  and  Evaluation  Process
(SREP).  In other words, rather than finishing with a pass or fail assessment, stress tests now
provide  a  starting  point,  both  for  discussions  between  banks  and  supervisors  and  for
macroprudential policymakers. The ECB also conducts a parallel exercise covering the banks
under its supervision that are not included in the EBA exercise.
While this evolution in stress tests has occurred on both sides of the Atlantic – albeit with a few
remaining differences in respective approaches – in my remarks today I will take a European
perspective. In particular, I will focus on two key facets of this evolution – the more integral use of
the top-down review process and the advantages of adding a macroprudential perspective.
Current stress test methodology in Europe
The  EU-wide  stress  tests  involve  significant  input  from  the  banks,  following  a  so-called
constrained  bottom-up  approach.  Under  this  approach,  banks  generate  their  stress  test
projections using their own models. These projections are based on a macro-financial scenario
that is the same for all banks and are subject to a predefined methodology prescribed by the
EBA.
The constrained bottom-up approach has several advantages. By treating all participating banks
equally, it ensures a level playing field and provides results that are comparable across banks.
This is an important element in fostering transparency and market discipline.
Ideally,  a  bottom-up  approach  should  also  support  banks’  own  risk  management  capacity  by
forcing them to consider how severe adverse circumstances may affect their solvency. It should
strengthen their ability to detect vulnerabilities and encourage them to develop their own internal
stress-testing models.
But the constrained bottom-up approach is not without drawbacks.
The static balance sheet assumption limits the realism of the exercise as it does not account for
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
how banks would respond under stressful situations. Certain caps and floors in the stress test
methodology may compromise the realism of the stress test outcome.
The  approach  also  provides  banks  with  substantial  leeway  to  materially  underestimate  their
2
vulnerability to adverse circumstances, to “game” the exercise, in other words.
Using top-down models to benchmark results
As  a  consequence,  European  supervisors  conduct  a  thorough  quality  assurance  of  banks’
bottom-up  stress  test  results  to  ensure  their  outcomes  are  credible.  Notably,  this  includes
confronting  banks  with  independent  model-based  estimates  –  a  so-called  top-down  model
challenge. This process generally leads to individual banks revising their stress test outcomes
before publication.
We believe there is substantial value in this extensive supervisory scrutiny  and in the improved
market discipline stemming from the European stress test framework.
3
Indeed, discussions about the long-term strategy for the stress tests in Europe are underway at
both the ECB/SSM and EBA levels.  Proposed changes aim to improve the realism of stress
test outcomes while retaining their reliability and credibility.
4
I do not want to pre-empt those discussions. But let me focus on one key aspect, namely the
importance of top-down models in the context of the European prudential stress tests.
I believe the top-down model challenge, which has so far taken the form of a dialogue between
supervisors and banks, could play a greater role in disciplining banks and reducing the incentives
for  them  to  systematically  underestimate  their  vulnerabilities.  This  could  be  achieved  by
publishing the top-down view of supervisory stress tests.
The mere possibility of this information being made public should by itself encourage banks to
produce more credible and sufficiently prudent stress test projections. In fact, doing so would
provide  market  participants  with  a  benchmark  against  which  to  judge  each  individual  bank’s
result.
The  exact  form  of  publication  would  need  to  be  considered.  For  example  results  could  be
published in aggregate form. Alternatively, results could be published individually or in ranges,
such as grouping banks into solvency categories that could be compared with bottom-up, bank-
by-bank results.
There is also a range of model-based results that could be produced and published. A simple
exercise would be the equivalent of the bottom-up view using a static balance sheet assumption.
At the other end of the spectrum, more comprehensive exercises could inform macroprudential
analysis and incorporate amplification effects caused by interbank contagion or feedback loops
between the real economy and the financial sector.
Macroprudential stress testing
This leads me to the second point I would like to emphasise today, the advantages of taking a
macroprudential perspective with stress testing.
The  exercises  coordinated  by  the  EBA,  using  the  constrained  bottom-up  approach,  are
microprudential in nature. They aim to assess individual banks’ resilience to adverse financial
and  economic  circumstances.  They 
inform  and  help  determine  bank-specific  capital
requirements, in particular the components of Pillar 2 capital.
But  it  is  also  possible  to  carry  out  a  macroprudential  exercise  that  instead  focuses  on  the
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
system-wide  impact  of  adverse  shocks  on  the  banking  sector  as  a  whole.  Macroprudential
stress testing is characterised by a number of key elements.
First, it applies a top-down perspective to model the impact of a stress scenario on banks and
the wider economy. A top-down approach helps ensure that all banks in the system are treated
impartially and consistently. This approach is necessary in macroprudential stress tests to be
able to model the aggregate implications of banks’ dynamic responses to stress.
Second, macroprudential stress tests operate under the assumption of dynamic balance sheets.
This enables the model to account for any amplification effects that banks’ reactions to the initial
shock may entail at the aggregate level. As an example, we estimate that the responses of banks
to the adverse scenario in the 2018 stress test would exacerbate the fall in GDP by a further
1.6%  beyond  the  initial  shock.  That  deeper  economic  contraction  would  itself  further  deplete
banks’  capital,  something  that  would  not  be  picked  up  under  the  static  assumptions  of  the
5
microprudential exercise.
Third, macroprudential stress testing typically aims to capture a comprehensive view of systemic
risks affecting the banking sector and beyond.
Just  as  microprudential  stress  tests  can  help  banks  improve  their  internal  risk  management
processes,  macroprudential  exercises  provide  benefits 
to  supervisors  and  regulators.
Developing the models and infrastructure for these tests enables supervisors and regulators to
analyse a range of scenarios, helping them to better understand the links between banks, other
parts of the financial sector and the wider economy. This also means that they are able to see
how the banking sector reacts to a number of alternative macroprudential policy paths, helping
them  to  ensure  that  the  macroprudential  measures  currently  in  place  remain  appropriate  and
adequate.
There are benefits, too, from carrying out both microprudential and macroprudential exercises
simultaneously. A combined exercise would help banks, market participants and regulators to
assess the system-wide consequences of banks’ reactions to situations of stress, which would
complement the information retrieved from the microprudential stress tests.
6
With  that  in  mind,  it  may  well  be  worth  regularly  publishing  the  results  of  the  top-down
macroprudential  stress 
the  microprudential
exercise.  This simultaneous publication would provide all stakeholders with a more solid and
comprehensive overview of the banking sector’s resilience.
Conclusion
tests,  possibly  alongside 
results  of 
the 
Let me conclude.
Over the past decade, system-wide stress tests have been established as an important tool for
monitoring financial stability. They promote transparency in the banking sector, improve market
discipline,  foster  banks’  own  risk  management  capacity  and,  importantly,  inform  prudential
decisions of both a microprudential and macroprudential nature.
The way stress tests are implemented has evolved since the financial crisis, and we continue to
discuss the long-term strategy for their use with stakeholders. Our experiences have shown the
additional  benefits  of  supervisors  including  a  top-down  view  in  their  discussions,  and  of
considering the wider, macroprudential dimensions of stress testing.
1
2
ECB Banking Supervision uses both the qualitative results (quality and timeliness of banks’ submissions) and
the quantitative results (capital depletion and banks’ resilience under the adverse scenario) as input for the
SREP, to inform the setting of Pillar 2 capital requirements and Pillar 2 capital guidance, respectively.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
3
4
5
6
For empirical evidence of the “gaming” behaviour of banks participating in the stress test, see: Philippon, T.,
Pessarossi, P. and Camara, B. (2017), “Backtesting European Stress Tests”,  Working Paper Series, No 23083,
National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  January;  Niepmann,  F.  and  Stebunovs,  V.  (2018),  “Modeling  Your
Stress Away”, International Finance Discussion Papers, No 1232, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, July; Quagliariello, M. (2019), “Are stress tests beauty contests? (And what we can do about it)”, Staff
Paper Series, No 4, European Banking Authority, July; and Kok, C., Müller, C. and Pancaro, C. (2019a), “The
disciplinary  effect  of  supervisory  scrutiny  on  bank  risk  taking:  evidence  from  the  EU-wide  stress  test”,
Macroprudential Bulletin, No 9, European Central Bank, forthcoming.
In fact, recent empirical evidence suggests that the comprehensive intrusion associated with the ECB stress
test quality assurance process has a disciplinary effect on banks’ risk taking after the stress tests (see Kok et
al. (2019a), ibid.; and Kok, C., Müller, C. and Pancaro, C. (2019b), “The disciplinary effect of supervisory scrutiny
in the EU-wide stress test”, Working Paper Series, European Central Bank, forthcoming). For related evidence in
a US context, see: Acharya, V.V., Berger, A.N. and Roman, R.A. (2018), “Lending implications of U.S. bank stress
tests: Costs or benefits?”, Journal of Financial Intermediation, Vol. 34(C), pp. 58–90; and Hirtle, B., Kovner, A.
and  Plosser,  M.  (2019),  “The  Impact  of  Supervision  on  Bank  Performance”, Staff Reports,  No  768,  Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.
See also Enria, A. (2018), “What have we learnt from EU-wide stress tests”, speech delivered at the Banca
Naţională a României, 15 November.
See Budnik, K. (2019), “A bird’s-eye view of the resilience of the European banking system: results from the new
macroprudential stress test framework”, Macroprudential Bulletin, Issue 7, European Central Bank, March.
In addition to both the 2016 and 2018 EU-wide stress test exercises, albeit not in parallel with them, the ECB
published  macroprudential  stress  test  analyses  for  euro  area  banks,  see  Dees,  S.  et  al.  (2016),
“Macroprudential effects of systemic bank stress”, Macroprudential Bulletin, Issue 2, European Central Bank,
October; and Budnik, K. (2019), ibid.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
