 Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Progress on the resolvability of GSIBs – the FSB 
perspective 
 
Speech by Klaas Knot at the 2nd SRM-EBF Boardroom 
Dialogue 
Brussels, 5 July 2019 
   
 
   At the second SRM-EBF boardroom dialogue, Klaas Knot gave a speech in which he described the 
efforts in making banks resolvable. He also mentioned areas of concern for the coming years: trends 
and priorities for achieving resolvability. 
  1 
 
 Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap. 
Let me start by saying that I am here in two capacities, wearing two hats as it were. I am here both as 
vice-Chair of the Financial Stability Board, the FSB, and as president of the Dutch Central Bank. For 
this speech I will be wearing my FSB-hat.  
 
As you may know, the FSB has actually been the instigator of many of the reforms and policy 
initiatives  on bank resolution, including the topics being discussed today. With the development of the 
Key Attributes for effective resolution regimes in 2011, the FSB created the blueprint for the European 
resolution framework. This was followed by the TLAC standard for setting loss absorbing capacity for 
G-SIBs. So far, this is the only international standard developed by the FSB. Other guidance developed 
by the FSB covers topics such as bail-in, funding in resolution and operational continuity. 
 
In this speech I will be taking the view of an FSB representative with a keen interest in making banks 
resolvable. This view should provide insight into the trends and priorities for achieving resolvability. 
Hopefully it will also guide your own efforts, as you work together with the SRB on topics such as: 
completing resolution plans, implementing TLAC and modelling funding in resolution. And even though 
the FSB focuses on policy development for G-SIBs, I think these topics are equally relevant for other 
banks. 
 
Resolution planning and achieving resolvability 
I will start with resolution planning and achieving resolvability, the topic you discussed before lunch. In 
my view resolution planning has always been a means to an end. It is about getting a deep 
understanding of how a bank is organized and functions. It is about asking fundamental questions on 
what functions need to be continued and how to achieve this. Resolution planning forces authorities to 
consider all these aspects and it focuses the mind. Through resolution planning, the authorities can 
form an informed view on what is needed to ensure a bank is resolvable. 
 
The FSB monitors progress in resolution planning, in its annual Resolvability Assessment Process and 
reports on this to the G20. The good news is that significant progress has been made, especially in the 
area of resolution planning. All G-SIBs have a resolution plan that sets out a resolution strategy. The 
plans have also been discussed between the various relevant resolution authorities involved with the 
bank in the crisis management groups. However, this in itself does not make banks resolvable. 
Resolvability means readiness at both the level of the bank and the authorities, to implement the 
resolution strategy if necessary. At the FSB, we observe that this reality has now also dawned on both 
authorities and banks. 
 
We see the positive trend that authorities are increasingly focussing on banks and their own 
capabilities to execute resolution strategies. This will take time and effort and requires the allocation of 
sufficient resources to this task across the board. 
 
 
A lot of the proverbial low-hanging fruit has already been picked by the banks. For instance, identifying 
and mapping critical services. At the FSB we are finding out more and more that the devil is in the 
detail. The Resolvability Assessment Process in this context has identified areas in the context of 
operational continuity where banks and authorities should increase their capabilities.  
 
In my view there are three areas of priority when it comes to ensuring banks are ready to implement 
the resolution strategy. It is perhaps not surprising that two of those are in the domain of data 
availability in resolution. I am referring to centralizing contract management for critical service 
contracts in the context of operational continuity, and ensuring good quality data for valuation 
purposes. If this data is not quickly and easily accessible, implementing resolution in a short timeframe 
is extremely difficult.  
 
The other priority area is understanding how financial market infrastructure will react if the bank is in 
resolution. If banks in resolution cannot conduct market operations, any effort by any authority is 
likely to fail. All of the three topics I mentioned require a deep-dive into the DNA of a bank - and then 
I have not even started on TLAC. 
 
TLAC 
This morning, you also discussed the setting of MREL in order to achieve resolvability. MREL was 
developed almost simultaneously with TLAC and there are of course a lot of similarities between the 
two. The TLAC term sheet developed by the FSB determines the minimum amount of loss-absorbing 
2 
 
 Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap. 
capacity G-SIBs should have. Last month, the TLAC principles were implemented in European 
legislation through the banking package. 
 
This means that, as of last Friday, all G-SIBs in Europe are required to have a minimum loss absorbing 
capacity of at least 16% of Risk Weighted Assets, plus the combined buffer requirement. The European 
legislation on some aspects goes beyond the TLAC term sheet, for example by requiring MREL targets 
for all banks instead of only G-SIBs. Also, the new BRRD2 introduces binding minimum subordination 
requirements for banks with over 100 billion Euro on their balance sheet. This will ensure that 
sufficient loss-absorbing capacity is available for bail-in during resolution. 
 
The FSB has been monitoring the progress G-SIBs are making in building up loss absorbing capacity.  
We see that progress has been steady and significant, both in the setting of TLAC requirements by 
authorities and in the issuance of TLAC instruments by banks. This has been instrumental in enhancing 
resolvability and boosting market confidence in authorities’ capabilities to address “too-big-to-fail” 
risks. 
 
However, despite all this, we are not at the end of the road yet. The TLAC review that the FSB recently 
finalized, has shown that additional steps relating to loss-absorbing capacity are necessary.  
 
I will address three topics where I believe progress is required. First, it is clear that there will be less 
issues when bailing-in a subordinated liability compared to bailing in a senior instrument.  
No Creditor Worse Off issues come to mind in this context. The TLAC term sheet, by way of exception, 
allows for senior instruments to be counted towards TLAC. In my view, more analysis is required as to 
how these exceptions influence the resolvability of banks. 
 
Second, we have to make sure that adequately distributing loss-absorbing capacity within the group, 
needs to be prioritized. This means making sure losses in subsidiaries can be upstreamed to the parent 
company, and capital generated through bail-in can be downstreamed from parent to subsidiary. 
Without an efficient internal mechanism, bail-in simply will not work. It is good to know: this topic also 
has the attention of the SRB. 
 
Third, further work is needed on bail-in execution. This has also been recognized within the FSB. Both 
banks and resolution authorities should consider how they can ensure that the execution of bail-in is 
effective.  
Executing bail-in is a complex process that involves many actors and actions by both banks and 
authorities. Bail-in also has distinct cross-border elements, as many banks have issued bail-inable 
instruments in other jurisdictions. This is an area the FSB will be focusing on this year. I am glad that 
the SRB and the banks are also making progress with the development of bail-in playbooks. 
 
Funding in resolution 
I will now turn to the topic, that will be discussed this afternoon: “funding in resolution”. This topic, 
which has often been referred to as the elephant in the room, is now firmly on the radar screen of 
banks and authorities alike. Within the FSB we have observed that work has slowly started to ensure 
that funding and liquidity will not be the constraining factor for an orderly resolution.  
 
Resolution funding strategies and plans are being prepared. Banks have started building up core 
capabilities, by developing automated scenario modelling and forecasting to address funding in 
resolution, in line with the FSB’s guidance on Funding Strategy Elements for an Implementable 
Resolution Plan. However, this takes time and it requires a different mindset from bankers.  
So here we encounter a third area of recommendations, after those on operational continuity and 
TLAC. The area of bank’s capabilities on funding in resolution.  
 
Preparing for a resolution scenario goes beyond normal liquidity stress testing and contingency 
planning in going concern. Banks must be able to estimate and address potential funding needs in a 
variety of stressed situations and resolution scenarios, by applying even more conservative 
assumptions than in normal stress tests. In addition, banks need to identify and monitor the collateral 
that can be mobilized in a resolution scenario. So, I would like to urge everyone around the table to 
dedicate sufficient resources to this topic tasks and not to consider this as something already covered 
by recovery planning. 
 
3 
 
 Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap. 
Despite efforts undertaken, liquidity gaps may eventually arise when an institution is put into 
resolution. In particular in a slow-burning crisis situation, there is a risk that in the run-up to 
resolution, more and more assets are being encumbered or disposed, as part of the recovery strategy. 
A consequence of this, inevitably is that when the institution is declared failing or likely to fail, there is 
insufficient collateral left for the institution to fund itself.  
 
And here we encounter the fourth and final area of concern: the authorities. Authorities should 
therefore work in parallel in two directions, to avoid institutions being unable to be resolved because of 
a lack of funding. First, to avoid ending up in such a situation where all collateral is gone, it is 
important that the bank is placed in resolution at a sufficiently early stage. In line with the FSB Key 
Attributes of Effective Resolution regimes, liquidity indicators should be an important element in when 
authorities determine that an institution is failing or likely to fail. Second, private and public funding 
mechanisms should be put in place to close any potential liquidity gaps. In line with the FSB Guiding 
principles, private sources of funding should be relied upon as a first-choice source of funding, to the 
degree that such funding is available. In addition, an effective public sector backstop funding 
mechanism should be available as last resort. 
 
In several jurisdictions such mechanisms have been put in place in recent years: in countries like the 
United States and the United Kingdom, through a combination of a resolution fund and a central bank 
resolution liquidity facility. At the level of the Banking Union, the public backstop funding mechanism is 
still very much a work in progress. 
 
I understand the SRB has been exploring how the Single Resolution Fund can best be used for funding 
in resolution. There are quite a few challenges that need to be overcome, like the form in which 
liquidity will be provided and obtaining a rating for the Fund. I am sure the SRB will rise to the 
occasion on these topics. 
 
What has been achieved, is that the ESM will become the common backstop to the SRB’s Single 
Resolution Fund. This backstop can be used in case the Single Resolution Fund has been depleted. It is 
therefore also available to provide liquidity support to resolved banks. Yet, we all know this may not be 
sufficient to cover the liquidity needs of a GSIB 
 
This leaves the question of the role of the Eurosystem, with regards to funding for banks in resolution. 
At the moment, the technical work within the Euro Working Group focuses on ways to access ordinary 
central bank liquidity facilities. The recent letter from Eurogroup President Centeno mentions further 
work on proposals on SRB guarantees to the Eurosystem, and on the capacity of the SRB to provide 
collateral to banks in resolution. You can imagine that, with my central bank hat on, I can only support 
these initiatives.  
 
Whatever the outcome of the technical work, the instrument should be designed in line with the FSB 
Guiding Principles. This means: it should only be available on a temporary basis, when private funding 
sources are insufficient, on conditions that minimize moral hazard. 
 
Concluding remarks 
When looking at the progress made on bank resolvability, I can say that from an FSB perspective the 
glass is half full and that I remain optimistic. Much progress has been made on resolution planning, 
TLAC and funding in resolution. This has helped to increase the resolvability of the banks and the 
preparedness of the authorities. 
 
The challenge will be to keep up the good work. This means banks should invest in improving their 
capabilities to execute the resolution strategy. Authorities need to continue to provide the banks with 
guidance and make sure they are operationally ready for a resolution case. 
 
I hope I can count on your efforts in this endeavour of making your banks resolvable, especially in the 
areas of operational continuity, TLAC and funding in resolution. 
 
Thank you! 
 
4 
 
