Benoît  Cœuré:  Exchange  of  views  with  members  of  the  French
Parliament
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central Bank, prior to an informal exchange of views with the Finance Committee of the National
Assembly, Paris, 15 May 2019.
Mr Chairman,
Ladies and gentlemen of the National Assembly,
 Thank you for inviting me here today. It is a pleasure to engage in an informal exchange of views
with you today on the ECB’s monetary policy, and on policies to raise the economic potential of
the euro area.
Allow me to start by briefly discussing the economic situation of the euro area.
The euro area economic outlook
In 2018 the euro area economy grew by 1.9%, compared with 2.4% in the previous year. This
moderation  in  economic  growth  was  mainly  due  to  weaker  global  trade,  as  well  as  some
temporary factors at both the domestic and global levels. 
While  there  are  signs  that  some  of  the  idiosyncratic  domestic  factors  dampening  growth  are
fading, global headwinds continue to weigh on euro area growth developments. Moreover, the
persistence  of  uncertainties  related  to  geopolitical  factors,  the  threat  of  protectionism  and
vulnerabilities  in  emerging  markets  is  leaving  marks  on  economic  sentiment. As  a  result,  the
slower growth momentum has extended into the current year.
At the same time, the euro area economy continues to exhibit a high level of capacity utilisation,
and  the  unemployment  rate  has  continued  its  downward  trend.  In  March  it  stood  at  7.7%,  its
lowest level since September 2008. Employment gains and rising wages continue to underpin
the resilience of the domestic economy.
Looking ahead, the latest ECB staff projections from March 2019 put euro area annual real GDP
growth at 1.1% in 2019, 1.6% in 2020 and 1.5% in 2021. At the same time, the persistence of
uncertainties, mainly stemming from the global environment, continues to pose downside risks to
the growth outlook.
Looking at inflation developments, euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.7% in April 2019. While
measures of underlying inflation remain generally muted, the ongoing economic expansion, with
tightening labour markets and rising wages, will support the further build-up of price pressures.
The  latest  ECB  staff  projections  foresee  annual  euro  area  headline  inflation  of  1.2%  in  2019,
1.5% in 2020 and 1.6% in 2021.
The ECB’s monetary policy and its impact on the euro area economy
At its last monetary policy meeting on 10 April, the ECB Governing Council confirmed that an
ample degree of monetary accommodation remains necessary to safeguard favourable financing
conditions  and  support  the  economic  expansion.  This  will  ensure  that  inflation  remains  on  a
sustained path towards levels that are consistent with our inflation aim – a rate of inflation which
is below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
We  continue  to  expect  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  to  remain  at  their  present  levels  at  least
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
through  the  end  of  2019,  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary  to  ensure  the  continued
sustained convergence of inflation consistent with our inflation aim.
The Governing Council also confirmed its intention to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal
payments from maturing securities purchased under the asset purchase programme. This will
continue for an extended period of time past the date when we start raising the key ECB interest
rates, and in any case for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an
ample degree of monetary accommodation.
To preserve favourable bank lending conditions and the smooth transmission of monetary policy,
and  to  support  access  to  financing,  in  particular  for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  the
Governing  Council  decided  in  March  to  launch  a  new  series  of  quarterly  targeted  longer-term
refinancing operations (TLTRO-III). They will start in September 2019 and end in March 2021. 
Significant monetary policy stimulus is thus being provided by our forward guidance on the key
ECB interest rates, reinforced by the reinvestments of the sizeable stock of acquired assets and
the new series of TLTROs. The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments,
as appropriate, to ensure that inflation continues to move towards our inflation aim in a sustained
manner.
The benefits of our monetary policy measures have been sizeable and tangible. Lending rates for
euro area firms and households have declined to historic lows and converged across the region,
and  growth  in  bank  lending  volumes  has  significantly  recovered  since  the  beginning  of  2014,
thereby supporting investment and job creation.
According  to  today’s  preliminary  flash  data  release  provided  by  Eurostat,  there  are  now  9.2
million  more  people  in  employment  in  the  euro  area  than  there  were  at  the  end  of  2014,  just
before the ECB announced its expanded asset purchase programme, and 10.8 million more than
in the second quarter of 2013, when the number of people in work fell to its lowest point during
the crisis.
Completing Economic and Monetary Union
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute decisively to raising the longer-term growth potential of the euro area and reducing its
vulnerabilities.
Sound fiscal and economic policies at the national level are the first line of defence to make the
euro area stronger.
Economic  reform  needs  to  be  substantially  stepped  up  in  euro  area  countries  to  increase
resilience, reduce unemployment in a lasting way and boost productivity. The country-specific
recommendations that the European Commission will publish next month will lay down the main
reform priorities to be implemented.
On the fiscal side, the mildly expansionary euro area fiscal stance and the operation of automatic
stabilisers are providing support to economic activity. Countries which have fiscal space should
use it in a way that makes their economies stronger and more resilient for the future. At the same
time,  countries  where  government  debt  is  high,  including  France,  need  to  continue  rebuilding
fiscal  buffers. All  countries  can  and  should  reinforce  their  efforts  to  achieve  a  more  growth-
friendly composition of public finances.
The euro’s benefits, however, will not fully materialise for as long as the architecture of Economic
and Monetary Union (EMU) remains incomplete.
Material  progress  has  been  achieved  in  recent  years.  The  European  Stability  Mechanism  has
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
become established as an important safeguard and the reforms currently being discussed will
provide it with new instruments to better protect Member States, keeping in mind the longer-term
objective of making it a Community institution accountable to the European Parliament.
The creation of banking union, meanwhile, has considerably strengthened the resilience of the
euro area financial sector and, together with the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, has
created instruments to combat banking crises in a way that is swifter and fairer than in the past.
Banks directly supervised by the ECB have built up strong capital positions in recent years, with
a Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratio of 14.3% at the end of 2018 compared with 11.3% at the
end  of  2014,  and  have  substantially  reduced  non-performing  loan  ratios.  These  are  important
steps forward as euro area firms rely to a very large extent on bank credit to finance growth and
investment.  Let  us  also  keep  in  mind  that  these  measures  build  on  the  achievements  of  ten
years of financial regulatory reform, which should not be reversed.
So what more should be done at the European level?
First, we need to further strengthen the ability of the financial sector to contribute to economic
stabilisation.  Increased  financial  integration  is  the  key  competitive  advantage  the  euro  area
should  leverage  here.  During  the  crisis,  integration  in  the  euro  area  reversed  and  it  has  only
gradually recovered over the past years. The creditworthiness of banks remains linked to that of
national  governments.  Cross-border  investment  is  not  a  significant  buffer  against  economic
shocks, as it is across US states. The euro area still lacks genuinely integrated capital markets,
which hinders the efficient investment of European savings as well as the use of the euro as an
international currency.
Recent legislative steps are commendable but they do not measure up to the initial ambition of
the capital markets union project. Brexit will further accentuate the need to develop and integrate
the EU’s capital markets to prepare for the likelihood that the City of London will play a more
reduced role in the future as a hub of European savings.
Second,  we  need  to  ensure  that  the  EU  fiscal  framework  delivers  on  its  main  objective:
preserving  fiscal  sustainability  while  allowing  room  for  automatic  fiscal  stabilisation.  This  is
essential  to  help  stabilise  the  euro  area  in  the  face  of  large  shocks  without  having  to  rely
excessively on the ECB’s policies.
Sound national fiscal policies should remain the basis. Simpler and more credible fiscal rules
would help ensure that euro area countries build adequate fiscal buffers in good times so that
fiscal  policy  can  be  used  in  bad  times.  The  euro  area  budgetary  instrument  currently  under
discussion  is  a  welcome  step  to  support  competitiveness  and  convergence,  but  it  is  not
designed to fulfil a stabilisation function. In order to play that role, it would therefore have to evolve
further in the future.
In the longer term, the creation of a common euro area safe asset, if done in a way that does not
undermine  incentives  for  sound  national  fiscal  policies,  could  have  a  beneficial  impact  on  the
conduct  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy,  help  strengthen  the  international  role  of  the  euro  and
contribute to completing EMU.
Conclusions
Let me conclude.
The euro, as it marks its 20th anniversary, enjoys broad support among European citizens, with
three in four people in the euro area in favour of the single currency. Its growing popularity is
testimony to the fact that people have trust in the currency and in the ECB’s strong commitment
to price stability, which supports investment and job creation.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
To preserve this trust, and to deliver on the promise we made when the euro was introduced,
namely that it would bring prosperity and opportunities, we need to step up our efforts at both
national and euro area level to strengthen the architecture of the single currency. Many of the
failings that caused and perpetuated the crisis remain unresolved.
At  a  time  of  heightened  global  uncertainty,  completing  the  euro  area’s  architecture  is  also
necessary  for  Europe  to  be  able  to  achieve  its  other  objectives.  Europeans  won’t  be  able  to
foster cooperation on security and defence, or to speak with one voice on international affairs, or
to complete the Single Market if they repeatedly have to tackle economic crises which are largely
of their own making. A sound and sustainable euro area will help redirect political capital where it
is most needed.
Ensuring the political relevance and legitimacy of this process is in the hands of the European
Parliament and national parliaments. I very much look forward to today’s discussion.
Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
