  Národná banka Slovenska 
Communication Section 
 
 OPENING REMARKS 
by Mr Jozef Makúch, Governor of Národná banka Slovenska 
 at the conference 
 10 YEARS OF THE €URO IN SLOVAKIA 
International Conference to Mark the 10th Anniversary  
of the Introduction of the Euro in Slovakia  
 Bratislava, 11 January 2019  
   Dear Deputy Prime Minister Kažimír,  
Dear Mr Mersch, our honoured guest from the ECB Executive Board,  
Dear Governors,  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 It is my great pleasure to welcome so many distinguished guests to this conference, organised 
to mark the 10th anniversary of euro adoption in Slovakia. Ten years ago, when we were just 
switching  to  the  euro,  or  even  15  years  ago,  when  we  started  preparing  for  euro  accession,  
we  believed  this  would  be  the  pinnacle  of  our  integration  process.  We  were  coming  
from  a  small  emerging  market  economy  with  volatile  capital  flows  and  unexpected  foreign 
exchange pressures. We were looking forward to becoming part of the world’s largest economy 
and the second most important global currency.  
It turns out we have got both more and less than we expected. On the one hand, we got not only 
a monetary union, but also a banking union, soon a capital markets union, and to some degree 
also a fiscal union. Ten years after our euro area entry, and ten years after the outbreak of the 
global financial crisis, the European monetary union is more complete than ever but still needs 
a lot of work. I am sure many of our distinguished speakers will be discussing what needs to be 
done to bring it to completion.  
Národná banka Slovenska, Imricha Karvaša 1, 813 25 Bratislava, Slovak Republic 
www.nbs.sk 
 On the other hand, we also got less from the changeover than we hoped. No matter how happy 
the wedding, there will always be rough patches in the marriage: every union requires constant 
efforts from the partners to function well. The debt crisis in some euro area countries has shown 
us that the euro is still vulnerable to shocks. From a domestic perspective, not all the expected 
benefits of the euro have fully materialised. One reason is that the crisis slowed our convergence 
towards the most developed economies. Another reason is that the global slowdown in trade 
weighed  on  the  most  important  channels  of  monetary  union  benefits.  A  third  reason  is  that  
our  domestic  policies  have  not  always  been  optimal:  the  reform  momentum  stalled  and  
long-term growth was not always a priority. Certainly some of our panellists will be exploring 
these aspects further.  
At  this  point,  I  would  like  to  recall  Slovakia’s  successful  preparations  for  the  euro.  
While the euro was, and still is, a political project – both in the EU and in Slovakia – it is also 
based  on  sound  economic  fundamentals.  From  a  political  economy  point  of  view,  our  euro 
adoption  process  was  a  role  model  of  economic  policymaking.  We  analysed  the  costs  and 
benefits very deeply – and given the information set we had at the time, most of the analyses 
are still valid. All the analyses were openly published. We discussed the project with all relevant 
stakeholders  and  tried  to  make  sure  no  one  was  left  behind.  We  set  a  target  date  
for  euro  adoption  and  ended  up  being  one  of  the  very  few  countries  that  never  shifted  
the  target  adoption  date.  And  today,  ten  years  on,  we  are  looking  back  with  an  open  mind  
to see which of the expectations were fulfilled and which were not.  
As  you  well  know,  the  final  decision  on  our  euro  accession  was  made  in  July  2008,  
just  before  the  global  financial  crisis  broke  out  in  September.  We  could  not  have  hoped  
for better timing. The euro shielded us from the initial hit of the crisis, while in other emerging 
markets, exchange rates plummeted. The drop in demand and in oil and food prices at the end 
of  2008  meant  there  were  no  price  pressures  in  early  2009.  Thus,  we  were  maybe  the  first 
country in which the euro was adopted without consumers perceiving any price increases. Had 
we  not  adopted 
to  meet  
the  Maastricht  criteria  for  the  next  4  to  5  years,  as  the  government  deficit  increased 
substantially. You might say we were lucky, but I would rather concur with the great biologist 
and chemist Louis Pasteur that fortune favours the prepared.  
in  2009,  we  would  not  have  been  able 
the  euro 
Shortly after our entry, Slovakia and the rest of the euro area were faced with the most severe 
financial crisis in European history. The measures taken by the Eurosystem were unprecedented 
and the easing cycle that started in 2008 is only now coming to an end. Outside of Japan, this 
is probably the longest easing cycle in the history of central banking.  
The euro, now twenty years old, can certainly be described as a mature currency. It has survived 
some very hard times and is now much more resilient. It must be said  – especially    in this 
country  –  that  many  of  the  institutional  arrangements  developed  in  the  euro  area  
in  the  past  decade  are  making  the  common  currency  stronger.  Perhaps  we  were  not  aware  
we needed the new arrangements, or perhaps we did not like the costs and effort needed, but 
these costs should be seen as a form of insurance against future crises. It is better to be insured 
Národná banka Slovenska, Imricha Karvaša 1, 813 25 Bratislava, Slovak Republic 
www.nbs.sk 
 than not to be – and it is even better to be paying just the insurance premium than to be forced 
to draw the insurance benefits.  
I am sure the future will bring further important challenges. I will be keeping my fingers crossed 
that all my colleagues and future governors at the National Bank of Slovakia manage to meet 
them.  Perhaps  there  will  be  another  gathering  here  ten  years  from  now  to  discuss  
how views have changed after using the euro for 20 years. One person who knows a thing or 
two about what 20 years of the euro is like is Mr Yves Mersch, who will be taking the floor 
shortly.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I hope you enjoy the conference and contribute to a fruitful discussion. 
I am very happy to see all of you here. Thank you for your attention. 
Národná banka Slovenska, Imricha Karvaša 1, 813 25 Bratislava, Slovak Republic 
www.nbs.sk 
 