Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before the
Hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European  Parliament,
Brussels, 23 February 2019.
 Introduction
Madam Chair,
Honourable members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee,
Ladies and gentlemen,
I would like to start by congratulating all of you on your election, and you, Madam Chair, on your
recent appointment as Chair of this Committee.
It is a pleasure to appear before this Committee in this new legislative term and before my term
as ECB President comes to an end.
The legitimacy of the ECB’s independence, as enshrined in the EU Treaties, crucially relies on
our accountability. And the Treaties have conferred this Parliament with a central role in holding
the ECB accountable.
Hearings before this Committee play an essential role here. In my time as President, I have found
them to be extremely beneficial.
When I appeared before the ECON Committee for the first time, in December 2011, the euro
area was rife with financial instability; it was falling into a second recession, which eventually led
to sustained disinflation and, at times, heightened risks of outright deflation.  The euro area has
come a long way since the crisis, in part thanks to the support provided by the ECB’s monetary
policy. The unemployment rate in the euro area was 7.5% in July this year, the lowest level since
July 2008.
1
Over the past years, the ECB has repeatedly and clearly shown its readiness and determination
to  fulfil  the  primary  objective  of  achieving  price  stability,  as  laid  down  in  the  Treaties.  This
readiness  and  determination  has  been  critical  in  addressing  the  economic  crisis  and  the
downside risks to our objective.
It was with this same determination that, two weeks ago, the ECB’s Governing Council decided
to act in response to the continued shortfall of inflation with respect to its aim.
I  am  happy  to  be  able  to  discuss  these  decisions  with  you  today.  I  will  first  review  the  main
developments in the euro area economy since my last appearance before this Committee. I will
then present the monetary policy decisions that were taken by the Governing Council in the light
of  the  economic  outlook. As  requested  by  this  Committee,  I  will  conclude  by  drawing  some
lessons from the past eight years that could be relevant when discussing the policy responses to
the challenges that lie ahead of us.
The euro area economic outlook
Since my last hearing before this Committee earlier in the year, euro area growth momentum
has  slowed  markedly,  more  than  we  had  previously  anticipated.  Real  GDP  growth  is  now
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
projected  to  be  1.1%  in  2019,  down  by  0.6  percentage  points  from  the  December  2018  staff
projections, and 1.2% in 2020, down by 0.5 percentage points from the December projections.
This  slowdown  is  mainly  due  to  the  weakness  of  international  trade  in  an  environment  of
persistent  uncertainties  related  to  protectionist  policies  and  geopolitical  factors.  These  factors
are increasingly weighing on economic sentiment and, in particular, on the manufacturing sector,
which is more trade-oriented and exposed to foreign influences.
Of course, countries which have a relatively large manufacturing sector are more vulnerable to
any turn in the global economic cycle. Germany, for example, accounts for 28% of euro area
GDP, but for as much as 39% of euro area manufacturing value added. Accordingly, Germany is
today one of the euro area members most affected by the slowdown.
While the euro area services sector continues to be resilient, we should not be complacent about
its capacity to remain robust to negative spillovers. The longer the weakness in manufacturing
persists,  the  greater  the  risks  that  other  sectors  of  the  economy  will  be  affected  by  the
slowdown.
Looking  ahead,  recent  data  and  forward-looking  indicators  –  such  as  new  export  orders  in
manufacturing – do not show convincing signs of a rebound in growth in the near future and the
balance of risks to the growth outlook remains tilted to the downside.
In the context of this more protracted weakness of the euro area economy, both realised and
projected inflation have been persistently below levels that are in line with the ECB Governing
Council’s medium-term aim.
Headline  inflation  remains  well  below  2%,  while  inflation  excluding  the  more  volatile  food  and
energy components has been hovering around 1% for an extended period of time. Underlying
inflation remains muted, as the weaker economic outlook may imply a delay in the pass-through
of  wages  to  prices.  In  particular,  firms  are  absorbing  increases  in  labour  costs  in  their  profit
margins  rather  than  passing  them  on  to  customers.  Meanwhile,  indicators  of  inflation
expectations  stand  at  low  levels.  Although  the  likelihood  of  deflation  remains  limited,  market
expectations of inflation over the medium term are settling around values that are not consistent
with our inflation aim.
Since my last hearing here, we have revised down the inflation outlook over the entire projection
horizon, first in the March 2019 staff projections and then again in September, reflecting weaker
economic  activity  and  lower  energy  prices.  Inflation  is  currently  expected  to  average  1.2%  in
2019, 1.0% in 2020 and 1.5% in 2021, which is well below the Governing Council’s medium-term
aim of below, but close to, 2%.
The ECB’s response to the current outlook
So when the Governing Council met two weeks ago, it was confronted with a more rapid and
extended slowdown than previously anticipated, persistent and prominent downside risks to the
growth  outlook,  and  a  further  delay  in  the  convergence  of  inflation  towards  our  aim. A  strong
monetary policy response was therefore essential.
In pursuit of our mandate, we decided on a comprehensive package of measures to ensure that
inflation moves towards our aim in a sustained manner.
We lowered the interest rate on the deposit facility from –0.40% to –0.50%. This rate provides an
anchor  for  short-term  market  interest  rates,  which  serve  as  the  reference  for  many  types  of
loans and financial instruments.  Lowering  the  deposit  facility  rate  helps  to  further  improve  the
borrowing  conditions  of  households  and  businesses.  Negative  rates  also  encourage  banks  to
lend to the real economy instead of holding onto liquidity, thus supporting the portfolio rebalancing
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
channel of the asset purchase programme (APP).
The  impact  of  the  cut  in  the  deposit  facility  rate  is  reinforced  by  our  strengthened  forward
guidance on the likely direction of our monetary policy in the future. Specifically, we clarified that
we expect our policy rates to stay “at their present or lower levels until we have seen the inflation
outlook  robustly  converge  to  a  level  sufficiently  close  to,  but  below,  2%  within  our  projection
horizon, and such convergence has been consistently reflected in underlying inflation dynamics”.
This enhanced guidance provides a clear signpost for rate expectations by linking our policy to
more stringent conditions for the inflation outlook.
The  Governing  Council’s  statement  that  we  want  to  see  inflation  rising  to  a  level  that  is
sufficiently  close  to,  but  below,  2%  reasserts  what  we  said  after  the  July  monetary  policy
meeting: that the values of realised and projected inflation seen in recent times are too low and
inconsistent with the Governing Council’s medium-term inflation aim. While the new formulation
of forward guidance reflects the characteristic forward-looking orientation of the ECB’s monetary
policy framework, we have added two safeguards to ensure that policy rate normalisation only
begins  once  inflation  is  sustainably  on  course  to  reach  our  medium-term  aim.  The  phrase
“robustly converge”  means  that  the  Governing  Council  wants  to  be  sure  that  the  process  of
convergence is sufficiently mature and realistic before starting to lift policy rates. The reference
to the inflation outlook being “consistently reflected in underlying inflation dynamics” means that
the path of realised inflation should underpin our inflation outlook.
Our enhanced guidance helps to reduce uncertainty about the expected path of interest rates in
the  short  to  medium  term  and  will  ensure  that  financial  conditions  adjust  in  line  with  inflation
dynamics.  Moreover,  by  maintaining  the  easing  bias  on  rates,  we  indicate  that  we  still  have
space to cut rates further, if needed.
We also decided to restart net asset purchases at a monthly pace of €20 billion from November
onwards.  These  purchases  are  expected  to  run  for  as  long  as  necessary  to  reinforce  the
accommodative  impact  of  our  policy  rates,  and  to  end  shortly  before  we  start  raising  the  key
ECB  interest  rates.  In  addition,  we  reiterated  our  intention  to  continue  reinvesting,  in  full,  the
principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the APP for an extended period of
time  past  the  date  when  we  start  increasing  interest  rates,  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as
necessary  to  maintain  favourable  liquidity  conditions  and  an  ample  degree  of  monetary
accommodation.
The net purchases and longer reinvestment horizon reinforce the accommodative impact of our
other measures, thereby further easing the funding costs for businesses and households in the
euro area. In addition, these measures help keep down longer-term interest rates by mitigating
the undue tightening that would otherwise mechanically arise from the reduction in the average
maturity of our portfolio. Finally, net purchases also signal our commitment to use all instruments
in pursuit of our price stability objective, which can have a powerful effect on the formation of
inflation expectations.
As  a  complement  to  the  policy  measures  I  just  outlined,  we  also  decided  to  change  the
modalities of the new series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III) that we
announced in June. Banks can now obtain this long-term funding at lower rates with a longer
maturity. This will also help to ensure that our accommodative policies pass through entirely to
the funding costs of households and firms.
Finally, we also announced a two-tier system for reserve remuneration, in which part of banks’
excess  reserves  will  be  exempt  from  our  negative  rates.  The  two-tier  system  is  designed  to
strike a balance between two outcomes: it seeks to preserve the incentives for banks to pass
through the stimulus generated by the negative interest rate on their reserves, while mitigating
the adverse effects that these negative rates might have on banks’ lending behaviour by affecting
their profitability. The euro area needs financial intermediaries to remain engaged and active in
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
monetary transmission, and the new two-tier system will make sure that the ability of banks to
extend loans to their customers at favourable terms remains unimpaired.
The different elements of this comprehensive package will be mutually reinforcing in supporting
favourable  financing  conditions  for  businesses  and  households,  which  will  sustain  investment
and  consumption.  Greater  business  and  household  expenditure,  in  turn,  will  support  inflation
dynamics and make sure that they durably converge to our aim.
Overall, in view of the outlook and uncertainties we are facing, monetary policy needs to remain
highly accommodative for a prolonged period of time. The measures we took at our last meeting
underscore  our  determination  and  readiness  to  provide  the  necessary  monetary  stimulus  in
pursuit of our price stability objective. We continue to stand ready to adjust all of our instruments
if warranted by the inflation outlook.
Looking  back,  looking  forwards:  achievements  and  future  direction  of  Economic  and
Monetary Union
The conventional and unconventional measures the ECB has taken over the past decade have
been successful in addressing the deflationary risks, restoring the functioning of the monetary
policy transmission mechanism and providing vital support to the euro area economy.
But the ECB does not operate in a vacuum and other economic policies matter too. Allow me to
recall my first appearance before this Committee in 2011. At that time, half of my introductory
remarks were about the functioning of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) and the need for
other European policymakers to act.
So I will conclude my final statement to you by highlighting some lessons that have emerged
from these eight years, which I hope can help in addressing the challenges ahead.
When comparing the crisis response of the euro area with that of other advanced economies, it
is evident that the latter were able to achieve a better macroeconomic policy mix at the time,
thanks to more decisive actions in both the fiscal and financial domains.
The  Governing  Council  has  reiterated  that  we  are  determined  to  ensure  that  inflation  moves
towards our aim in a sustained manner, and that we continue to stand ready to adjust all of our
instruments. At the same time, a better policy mix, including fiscal policy, structural reforms and
prudential measures, can help achieve this objective faster and with fewer side effects.
We will continue to carefully monitor – as we always have done – the possible side effects of
accommodative  monetary  conditions.  It  is  crucial  to  remain  vigilant  and  to  use  the  available
micro- and macroprudential policy tools as necessary. I will say more on this during the hearing
in my capacity as Chair of the European Systemic Risk Board.
The low yield environment needs to be understood in the context of the protracted decline in real
yields we have witnessed since the 1980s. And this trend is not unique to the euro area. It largely
reflects  more  structural  factors  such  as  a  slowdown  in  productivity  growth,  which  can  be
reversed through an ambitious structural reforms agenda.
In other words, we need a coherent economic strategy in the euro area that complements and
enhances the effectiveness of monetary policy.
This is why there was unanimous consensus in the Governing Council that fiscal policy must
make a more decisive contribution. In view of the weakening economic outlook and the continued
prominence of downside risks, governments with fiscal space that are facing a slowdown should
act  in  an  effective  and  timely  manner.  Where  fiscal  sustainability  is  ensured,  the  potential
effectiveness of countercyclical fiscal policy is reinforced in the current environment, given that
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
fiscal multipliers are higher in a low interest rate environment. At the same time, governments in
countries with high public debt should pursue prudent policies and deliver on structural balance
targets.
Another key difference compared with other advanced monetary unions like the United States is
the lack of a central fiscal instrument to act countercyclically at the federal level.
I fully acknowledge the political difficulties in building such an instrument in the euro area. Similar
difficulties also exist when discussing the completion of the banking union and the establishment
of a genuine capital markets union.
At the same time, we should remain fully committed to the goal of achieving a genuine Economic
and  Monetary  Union.  Ignoring  the  need  to  fix  the  remaining  institutional  weaknesses  of  EMU
would  seriously  damage  what  has  already  been  achieved  through  the  commitment  and  hard
work of everyone involved. As I argued in this Committee eight years ago, we need to show “a
clear trajectory for the future evolution” of EMU and thus frame the “expectations of both citizens
and financial markets”.
Allow me to take a longer-term perspective to draw the last lesson. While the euro area did not
have  a  fiscal  policy  response  comparable  with  that  of  other  advanced  economies,  the  ECB’s
response was fully comparable with that of the other major central banks.
Thanks to its independence, the ECB has been able to adapt its policy response and reaction
function.  Preserving  this  key  asset  will  allow  the  ECB  to  adapt  to  future  circumstances  and
ensure  the  effectiveness  of  its  measures.  This  is  all  the  more  important  considering  that  the
desirability and relevance of central bank independence are increasingly being challenged around
the world.
As I argued in my introduction, the best way to preserve the ECB’s independence is to ensure a
commensurate  degree  of  central  bank  accountability.  During  the  past  eight  years,  our
accountability practices have evolved and intensified in response to the quest for scrutiny that
emerged  from  the  crisis.   I  have  always  appreciated  the  ability  of  this  Parliament  to  react  to
citizens’  demands,  support,  concerns  and  channel  them  in  a  constructive  manner  during  our
discussions here. And I would like to personally thank you for this.
2
I am confident that this Parliament – and this Committee in particular – will continue the good
work  it  has  done  during  my  term  as  ECB  President.  This,  in  turn,  will  further  strengthen  the
effectiveness of the ECB’s actions and citizens’ trust in the EU project.
Thank you for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions.
1
2
See  Draghi,  M.  (2011),  “Hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European
Parliament”, Brussels, 19 December.
See Fraccaroli, N., Giovannini, A. and Jamet, J.- F. (2018), “The evolution of the ECB’s accountability practices
during the crisis”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 5, ECB.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
