Luis de Guindos: Macroprudential policy ten years after the crisis
Keynote speech by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the
CIRSF Annual International Conference 2019 "Financial Supervision and Financial Stability Ten
Years after the Crisis: Achievements and Next Steps", Lisbon, 4 July 2019.
 Since the financial crisis, the euro area’s institutional architecture has evolved significantly. Back
in  2010,  in  the  midst  of  the  crisis,  we  created  the  predecessor  of  today’s  European  Stability
Mechanism (ESM) to provide assistance to euro area countries experiencing or threatened by
1
severe financing problems.
At  the  same  time,  the  European  System  of  Financial  Supervision  was  introduced,  aimed  at
ensuring consistency and appropriate financial supervision in the EU. It includes the European
Banking Authority (EBA), which provides harmonised prudential rules for financial institutions in
the  EU,  the  European  Insurance  and  Occupational  Pensions  Authority  and  the  European
Securities and Markets Authority. Since 2010, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) brings
these institutions together with the national supervisory authorities and central banks to share
their assessments on the financial system and devise consistent supervisory responses for the
entire EU.
Since the establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism in 2014, the ECB is the European
banking supervisor and closely cooperates with the three European Supervisory Authorities, and
especially  with  the  EBA.  Should  banks  fail,  the  Single  Resolution  Board  ensures  their  orderly
resolution with as little impact as possible on the real economy and public finances thanks also
to the funds available from the Single Resolution Fund. Only last month, the Eurogroup agreed to
equip the Single Resolution Fund with a backstop financed by the ESM to further strengthen the
2
European financial architecture.
Looking beyond microprudential supervision, we have built up the macroprudential policy toolkit
over the past ten years, to address risks of a systemic nature. National authorities and the ECB
can deploy pre-emptive macroprudential tools to mitigate risk-taking and enhance the resilience
of the financial system, while the ESRB can issue warnings and recommendations.
In my remarks today, I will discuss the financial stability challenges facing the euro area and will
focus  on  the  relevance  of  countercyclical  macroprudential  policy  to  safeguarding  financial
stability and supporting prudent lending, by banks and non-banks, throughout the cycle. So far,
macroprudential policies have focused on the banking sector. But the financial system is broader
than  that.  Non-bank  financial  entities  such  as  investment  funds,  insurance  companies  and
pension  funds  also  take  on  risks  and  can  amplify  the  wider  financial  cycle.  So  it  is  more
important  than  ever  that  macroprudential  policies  are  broadened  to  cover  these  non-bank
financial entities as well.
Financial stability and macroprudential policy in the Economic and Monetary Union
The euro area’s ongoing economic recovery faces renewed global headwinds that are weighing
on  the  economic  outlook.  Uncertainties  related  to  the  rising  threat  of  trade  protectionism,
vulnerabilities  in  emerging  markets  and  geopolitical  factors,  including  those  related  to  Brexit,
3
make the economic environment more challenging.
In  this  environment,  the  ECB’s  accommodative  monetary  policy  is  necessary  for  inflation  to
remain on a sustained path towards levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium
term.  At the same time, the environment indicates that risks to economic growth are tilted to the
downside.
4
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
This reinforces the need to strengthen the balance sheets of our financial and non-financial firms
to withstand any shocks that may occur. Fortunately, banks have done exactly that over the last
decade. Capital ratios of euro area systemic banks increased from 10.4% at the end of 2010 to
14.3%  by  the  end  of  last  year  (in  terms  of  common  equity  tier  1).  This  increase  has  been
facilitated by the general recovery, supported by the ECB’s accommodative monetary policy, and
is a reaction to increased market pressures and additional macroprudential requirements.
Indeed,  macroprudential  policy  aims  to  maintain  a  strong  and  stable  financial  system.  It  has
become a crucial complement to the ECB’s monetary policy which is geared towards achieving
price  stability.  While  the  current  accommodative  monetary  policy  is  supporting  the  economic
recovery,  it  may  generate  undesired  side  effects  in  the  form  of  excessive  risk-taking.
Macroprudential  policy  can  counter  these  excesses  with  its  targeted  toolkit.  By  imposing
additional  requirements,  it  can  restrain  lending  to  excessively  risky  borrowers  or  create  the
necessary loss absorption capacity in specific sectors or countries.
Institutional set-up of macroprudential policy within European banking supervision
This more targeted application of macroprudential policy to individual countries is also reflected in
its institutional set-up. National authorities are first in line to counter emerging systemic risk in a
timely  manner  by  deploying  the  available  instruments.  They  have  detailed  knowledge  of  their
domestic banking systems and financial structures. The ECB, in turn, complements the national
authorities with its cross-country perspective. It can identify regulatory differences and counter
potential inaction bias by the national authorities. To operate this two-tier set-up effectively, the
SSM  Regulation  provides  that  national  authorities  must  notify  the  ECB  of  macroprudential
measures  they  intend  to  implement.  The  ECB’s  Governing  Council  may  object  to  these
measures and, if deemed necessary, set higher macroprudential requirements than those set by
5
national authorities, commonly known as “top-up”.
The  “top-up”  option  is  considered  a  last  resort.  There  are  two  main  reasons  for  this.  First,
national  authorities  being  responsible  for  addressing  financial  imbalances  creates  a  clear
expectation that they do so in a timely manner. If national macroprudential authorities can act
with  a  complete  macroprudential  toolkit  to  fulfil  their  mandates,  the  scope  for  the  ECB  to  set
higher requirements is more focussed to address risks from cross-country spillovers to secure a
consistent application across countries. Second, macroprudential policy authorities, represented
by  national  central  banks  and  supervisors,  come  together  at  the  ECB’s  Financial  Stability
Committee (FSC). The FSC serves as the central platform of exchange at the technical level for
authorities  to  share  their  experience  in  financial  stability  and  macroprudential  policy.  The
Committee  has  achieved  important  milestones  in  increasing  data  coverage  and  quality,
assessing systemic risk and developing calibration strategies for macroprudential instruments.
This holds also true for those instruments that are not fully harmonised at EU level. For example,
borrower-based measures such as loan-to-value, loan-to-income or debt service-to-income can
limit the leverage of households and non-financial corporations. These instruments are thought to
be  the  most  effective  macroprudential  instruments  for  curtailing  excessively  risky  credit
origination.  Indeed,  because  of  their  effectiveness,  13  countries  have  already  implemented
measures targeting the specificities of their real estate markets.
6
Nevertheless,  some  euro  area  countries  do  not  have  the  full  legislation  in  place  to  deploy  all
borrower-based measures.  And even if they do, the institution that decides on borrower-based
instruments is not always the central bank or the supervisory authority. This creates an additional
hurdle 
the  best  macroprudential  policy  responses.  As  a  result,  some
macroprudential authorities use recommendations to the financial institutions as a second-best
option.
to  deploying 
Beyond the possibility of using borrower-based measures to address real estate risks, Belgium
 2 / 6
7
BIS central bankers' speeches
and Finland have increased the risk weights on banks’ mortgage exposures.  These measures
focus on banks’ resilience to potential losses on their outstanding stock of mortgage loans.
7
9
8
Systemic  risks  may  also  arise  from  sources  other  than  real  estate.  Therefore,  national
authorities have increased the combined buffer requirements, which include five different buffer
types.  First, the capital conservation buffer of 2.5% is applied to all banks to maintain capital in
the  banking  system.   Second,  to  mitigate  the  “too-big-to-fail”  problem,  the  buffer  for  global
systemically  important  institutions  is  currently  applied,  in  the  range  of  1-2%,  to  eight  globally
important banks in France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and Spain. Third, buffers of up to 2%
have  been  applied  to  more  than  100  other  (or  domestic)  systemically  important  institutions
across  the  euro  area.  Fourth,  four  countries  are  addressing  structural  risks  by  applying  the
systemic risk buffer either to individual institutions, in the case of Austria, the Netherlands and
Slovakia, or at the country level in the case of Estonia.
The  fifth  buffer  is  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  (CCyB).  It  is  central  to  a  countercyclical
macroprudential  policy  as  it  helps  ensure  financial  stability  throughout  the  cycle.  By  raising
capital requirements as imbalances are building up, it increases bank resilience well ahead of
potential shocks. In a downturn, the CCyB can be released to give banks the necessary capital
space  to  support  lending  to  the  real  economy.
  So  far,  seven  euro  area  countries  have
announced that they will activate or increase CCyB rates of up to 1.5%.
10
11
The ECB’s view is that banks’ overall capital levels are currently appropriate. Nevertheless, the
current buffer calibrations prevent them from being used countercyclically throughout the cycle.
The limited size of the CCyB calibrations restricts the possibility for releasing it to support lending
to  the  real  economy  if  the  cycle  turns.  As  macroprudential  authorities,  we  are  therefore
continuing to review the implementation and scope of the available instruments. In this respect,
we  very  much  welcome  last  month’s  publication  of  the  new  Capital  Requirements  Directive
(CRD  V)  and  Capital  Requirements  Regulation  (CRR  II)  to  strengthen  the  macroprudential
toolkit.
Role of the non-bank financial sector and macroprudential policy
12
Despite  the  many  achievements  in  the  regulatory  reform  process  since  the  crisis,  there  are
areas where more work needs to be done. In my view, the regulatory framework for the non-bank
financial sector is one of these areas. First of all, the sector has grown significantly in size and
importance. Second, it is accumulating ever more risks on its balance sheet. And third, work on
the macroprudential framework for this sector is still in its infancy.
Let me start with the growing size of the sector. In the euro area, total assets held by non-banks
have almost doubled over the last ten years, growing from €23 trillion in 2008 to €42 trillion in
2018.  While  the  size  of  the  banking  sector  stagnated  over  this  period,  non-banks  currently
account for around 55% of the euro area financial sector.
 The fast growth of non-banks reflects
their increasing role in financing the euro area real economy. Whereas ten years ago, non-banks
accounted for 14% of the euro area financial sector’s loans to non-financial corporations, they
now account for twice that share. Moreover, non-banks provide a steady net flow of financing to
non-financial corporations through the purchase of debt securities. In the ten years prior to the
crisis,  euro  area  non-financial  corporations  obtained  only  10%  of  their  credit  by  issuing  debt
securities, while this share increased to more than 50% in the decade after the crisis.
13
By diversifying the financing sources of the real economy, the non-bank financial sector plays an
important role in financial intermediation. It provides an additional source of financing and can
ultimately  help  to  smooth  shocks  in  the  euro  area.  The  growing  relevance  of  non-bank
intermediation can, however, create potential new vulnerabilities.
In  their  search  for  higher  yields,  non-banks  have  accumulated  more  risks  in  their  investment
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
portfolios in recent years. For instance, more than half of the bonds held by euro area investment
funds are BBB-rated or lower. For euro area insurers this share is somewhat smaller, at around
40%, but it has increased by more than 5 percentage points over the last five years. Insurers
have also been venturing into alternative asset classes such as alternative, infrastructure and
private equity funds, loans and real estate holdings. Their exposure to these assets has reached
almost 10% of total investment and is expected to rise further.
14
As  some  of  these  assets  are  highly  illiquid,  the  portfolio  shift  towards  these  assets  may  also
increase insurers’ liquidity risk beyond credit risk. But this is only one example, where the credit
risk on non-banks’ balance sheets is coupled with liquidity risk. In fact, liquidity risk is particularly
an issue for some bond and equity funds that invest in less liquid assets, while offering short-
term redemptions to their investors. These funds are vulnerable to sudden changes in investor
sentiment, so-called “run risks”. Some recent cases were a reminder that investors in less liquid
funds  might  indeed  run  if  they  fear  deterioration  in  asset  quality  or  liquidity.
  While  recent
instances  happened  in  a  generally  stable  market  environment  and  did  not  have  systemic
repercussions, liquidity problems might have been larger in an adverse market environment and
with many funds affected simultaneously. If anything, the liquidity mismatches observed in bond
and  equity  funds  call  for  greater  scrutiny  of  market  practices  and  a  possible  review  of  the
regulatory framework to ensure the sector’s resilience also in stressed market conditions.
15
More  generally,  through  increased  risk-taking  and  leverage,  non-banks  may  currently  be
contributing to the cyclical under-pricing of risks and the amplification of asset prices. If these
risks were to unwind in a disorderly manner, this could lead to funding flows drying up and affect
the  funding  conditions  of  the  real  economy  more  broadly.  Moreover,  distress  in  the  non-bank
sector could spread to the banking sector as well, due to the strong links between the two. For
instance, euro area non-banks hold over one quarter of bonds and shares issued by euro area
banks.
I have argued in the past that, from a regulatory perspective, we need to establish at least two
lines of defence for evolving risks. First and foremost, the non-bank financial sector needs to
have solid prudential standards. But this will not be sufficient if risks evolve more broadly and
across institutions. We will also need an extension of the macroprudential toolkit to the non-bank
financial sector, in order to provide the authorities with the means to address risks at system
level. While the macroprudential framework for banks is relatively well developed and provides
authorities with tools to address cyclical and structural systemic risks, the framework for non-
banks is still in its infancy and needs to be further developed.
There  are  substantial  differences  between  banks  and  non-banks.  When  we  look  at  financial
stability concerns in non-banks, we are looking less at the risk-bearing capacity of the individual
institution’s  balance  sheet  and  more  at  the  potential  for  contagion  and  shock  amplification
through the system and amplification of the broader financial cycle. So the key risks that we look
at  relate  to  liquidity,  leverage,  procyclicality  and  interconnectedness.  A  macroprudential
framework for non-banks would need to identify and address the key fragilities and externalities
stemming from the non-bank sector, and provide the appropriate tools for authorities to achieve
this in an efficient and effective manner.
Such  a  framework  should  support  the  beneficial  role  that  non-banks  play  in  financial
intermediation  and  ensure  the  sustainable  development  of  non-bank  financing.  On  a  note  of
particular relevance in a monetary union, it would thereby help reap the full benefits of a deep and
integrated  European  capital  market.  In  this  respect,  the  ECB  continues  to  support  the  further
development and deepening of EU capital markets through the capital markets union (CMU), not
least in the light of the approaching exit of the United Kingdom.
The United Kingdom’s departure from the EU’s Single Market will, by its very nature, affect the
shape  of  Europe’s  future  financial  market  architecture.  Non-bank  financing  of  the  euro  area
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
economy is no exception to this, particularly given the substantial role played by London as a
financial hub for European capital markets. Planning by the financial industry suggests that Brexit
may  result  in  a  substantial  relocation  of  activity  to  a  number  of  different  euro  area  countries,
which may lead to a multi-centric European financial system. In a financial system with a number
of  increasingly  important  hubs  rather  than  one  dominant  centre  in  London,  it  will  be  more
important  than  ever  that  these  hubs  can  interact  with  one  another  efficiently.  This  will  require
policies that foster the integration of EU capital markets by addressing barriers to integration and
encouraging  supervisory  convergence.  So  Brexit  is  both  a  challenge  and  an  impetus  to  our
pursuit of the ambitious plans laid out under the CMU.
Conclusions
Let me conclude.
The institutional architecture of the euro area has markedly strengthened in the last decade. With
important new institutions, we have seen more robust supervision of financial institutions and the
deployment of macroprudential instruments. This has contributed to strengthening our financial
system. But we still need to enhance the countercyclical use of our macroprudential instruments
by providing adequate macroprudential space to support robust lending and the real economy
throughout the cycle. Equally, we urgently need to develop and, where appropriate, deploy the
necessary macroprudential instruments for non-banks as well. Finally, we must also pursue the
ambitious plans laid out under the CMU to create a deep and integrated European capital market.
All of this will allow us to improve financial stability across the wide array of financial institutions
and markets that make up the financial system.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
See the history of the construction of the ESM in: European Stability Mechanism (2019), Safeguarding the euro in
times of crisis: The inside story of the ESM.
Klaus  Regling  at  press  conference  after  Eurogroup  meeting,  Luxembourg,  14  June  2019:
www.esm.europa.eu/press-releases/klaus-regling-eurogroup-press-conference-19
For additional details on the risks, see ECB (2019), Financial Stability Review, May.
See Draghi, M. (2019), “Twenty Years of the ECB’s monetary policy”, speech at the ECB Forum on Central
Banking, Sintra, 18 June.
See Decision of the European Central Bank of 22 January 2014 amending Decision ECB/2004/2 adopting the
Rules of Procedure of the European Central Bank (ECB/2014/1).
In  December  2016,  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  issued  a statement  calling  for  the  implementation  of
legislative frameworks for borrower-based measures in all euro area countries.
On the basis of Article 458 of the CRR, Belgium has implemented a 5 percentage point add-on and a 1.33 risk
weight multiplier for exposures secured by domestic real estate assets, Finland has implemented a risk weight
floor of 15% on domestic real estate exposures, and Luxembourg has recommended a 15% floor on the same
exposure.
For a detailed overview of macroprudential measures, see the ECB’s website (updated quarterly).
The CCoB is based on Article 129 and 160 CRD IV, transposed in national legislation. Exemptions for small
and medium-sized investment firms are possible. The CCoB is part of the combined buffer requirements to
which G-SII, O-SII, Systemic risk buffer and countercyclical capital buffer pertain.
See Darracq-Pariès, M., Fahr, S. and Kok, C. (2019), “Macroprudential space and current policy trade-offs in the
euro area”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, May.
As  of  30  June  2019,  seven  countries  have  announced  the  following  rates:  Belgium  (0.5%),  France  (0.5%),
Germany  (0.25%),  Ireland  (1.0%),  Lithuania  (1.0%),  Luxembourg  (0.25%)  and  Slovakia  (1.5%).  Buffer
requirements are implemented with a 12-month lag.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
12
13
14
15
See Regulation (EU/2019/876) of 20 May 2019 amending Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 as regards the leverage
ratio, the net stable funding ratio, requirements for own funds and eligible liabilities, counterparty credit risk,
market  risk,  exposures  to  central  counterparties,  exposures  to  collective  investment  undertakings,  large
exposures, report and disclosure requirements, and Regulation (EU/648/2012) (CRR II).
Excluding central banks.
See Fache Rousová, L and Giuzio, M. (2019), “Insurers’ investment in alternative assets”, box 9 of Financial
Stability Review, ECB, May.
For instance, Neil Woodford’s Equity Income Fund, an equity UCITS fund which invests in supposedly liquid
assets, had to suspend withdrawals after large outflows. In other recent case, following concerns over asset
illiquidity,  outflows  accelerated  from  bond  funds  managed  by  Natixis-owned  asset  manager  H2O  affecting
Natixis’ stock price.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
