Jerome  H  Powell:  Semiannual  Monetary  Policy  Report  to  the
Congress
Testimony by Mr Jerome H Powell, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, Washington
DC, 26 February 2019.
 Good  morning.  Chairman  Crapo,  Ranking  Member  Brown,  and  other  members  of  the
Committee, I am happy to present the Federal Reserve’s semiannual Monetary Policy Report to
the Congress.
Let me start by saying that my colleagues and I strongly support the goals Congress has set for
monetary  policy—maximum  employment  and  price  stability.  We  are  committed  to  providing
transparency about the Federal Reserve’s policies and programs. Congress has entrusted us
with an important degree of independence so that we can pursue our mandate without concern
for short-term political considerations. We appreciate that our independence brings with it the
need  to  provide  transparency  so  that  Americans  and  their  representatives  in  Congress
understand  our  policy  actions  and  can  hold  us  accountable.  We  are  always  grateful  for
opportunities,  such  as  today’s  hearing,  to  demonstrate  the  Fed’s  deep  commitment  to
transparency and accountability.
Today I will review the current economic situation and outlook before turning to monetary policy. I
will also describe several recent improvements to our communications practices to enhance our
transparency.
Current Economic Situation and Outlook
The economy grew at a strong pace, on balance, last year, and employment and inflation remain
close to the Federal Reserve’s statutory goals of maximum employment and stable prices our
dual mandate.
Based on the available data, we estimate that gross domestic product (GDP) rose a little less
than 3 percent last year following a 2.5 percent increase in 2017. Last year’s growth was led by
strong  gains  in  consumer  spending  and  increases  in  business  investment.  Growth  was
supported  by  increases  in  employment  and  wages,  optimism  among  households  and
businesses, and fiscal policy actions. In the last couple of months, some data have softened but
still  point  to  spending  gains  this  quarter.  While  the  partial  government  shutdown  created
significant  hardship  for  government  workers  and  many  others,  the  negative  effects  on  the
economy are expected to be fairly modest and to largely unwind over the next several months.
The  job  market  remains  strong.  Monthly  job  gains  averaged  223,000  in  2018,  and  payrolls
increased  an  additional  304,000  in  January.  The  unemployment  rate  stood  at  4  percent  in
January, a very low level by historical standards, and job openings remain abundant. Moreover,
the ample availability of job opportunities appears to have encouraged some people to join the
workforce and some who otherwise might have left to remain in it. As a result, the labor force
participation rate for people in their prime working years the share of people ages 25 to 54 who
are either working or looking for work has continued to increase over the past year. In another
welcome development, we are seeing signs of stronger wage growth.
The job market gains in recent years have benefited a wide range of families and individuals.
Indeed, recent wage gains have been strongest for lower-skilled workers. That said, disparities
persist  across  various  groups  of  workers  and  different  parts  of  the  country.  For  example,
unemployment rates for African Americans and Hispanics are still well above the jobless rates
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
for whites and Asians. Likewise, the percentage of the population with a job is noticeably lower in
rural communities than in urban areas, and that gap has widened over the past decade. The
February Monetary  Policy  Report  provides  additional  information  on  employment  disparities
between rural and urban areas.
Overall  consumer  price  inflation,  as  measured  by  the  12-month  change  in  the  price  index  for
personal consumption expenditures (PCE), is estimated to have been 1.7 percent in December,
held  down  by  recent  declines  in  energy  prices.  Core  PCE  inflation,  which  excludes  food  and
energy prices and tends to be a better indicator of future inflation, is estimated at 1.9 percent. At
our January meeting, my colleagues and I generally expected economic activity to expand at a
solid pace, albeit somewhat slower than in 2018, and the job market to remain strong. Recent
declines in energy prices will likely push headline inflation further below the Federal Open Market
Committee’s  (FOMC)  longer-run  goal  of  2  percent  for  a  time,  but  aside  from  those  transitory
effects, we expect that inflation will run close to 2 percent.
While we view current economic conditions as healthy and the economic outlook as favorable,
over the past few months we have seen some crosscurrents and conflicting signals. Financial
markets became more volatile toward year-end, and financial conditions are now less supportive
of growth than they were earlier last year. Growth has slowed in some major foreign economies,
particularly  China  and  Europe.  And  uncertainty  is  elevated  around  several  unresolved
government  policy  issues,  including  Brexit  and  ongoing  trade  negotiations.  We  will  carefully
monitor these issues as they evolve.
In addition, our nation faces important longer-run challenges. For example, productivity growth,
which is what drives rising real wages and living standards over the longer term, has been too
low. Likewise, in contrast to 25 years ago, labor force participation among prime-age men and
women is now lower in the United States than in most other advanced economies. Other longer-
run  trends,  such  as  relatively  stagnant  incomes  for  many  families  and  a  lack  of  upward
economic mobility among people with lower incomes, also remain important challenges. And it is
widely agreed that federal government debt is on an unsustainable path. As a nation, addressing
these  pressing  issues  could  contribute  greatly  to  the  longer-run  health  and  vitality  of  the  U.S.
economy.
Monetary Policy
Over  the  second  half  of  2018,  as  the  labor  market  kept  strengthening  and  economic  activity
continued to expand strongly, the FOMC gradually moved interest rates toward levels that are
more normal for a healthy economy. Specifically, at our September and December meetings we
decided  to  raise  the  target  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate  by  1/4  percentage  point  at  each,
putting the current range at 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent.
At our December meeting, we stressed that the extent and timing of any further rate increases
would depend on incoming data and the evolving outlook. We also noted that we would be paying
close attention to global economic and financial developments and assessing their implications
for  the  outlook.  In  January,  with  inflation  pressures  muted,  the  FOMC  determined  that  the
cumulative  effects  of  these  developments,  along  with  ongoing  government  policy  uncertainty,
warranted  taking  a  patient  approach  with  regard  to  future  policy  changes.  Going  forward,  our
policy decisions will continue to be data dependent and will take into account new information as
economic conditions and the outlook evolve.
For  guideposts  on  appropriate  policy,  the  FOMC  routinely  looks  at  monetary  policy  rules  that
recommend a level for the federal funds rate based on measures of inflation and the cyclical
position  of  the  U.S.  economy.  The  February Monetary  Policy  Report  gives  an  update  on
monetary policy rules. I continue to find these rules to be helpful benchmarks, but, of course, no
simple  rule  can  adequately  capture  the  full  range  of  factors  the  Committee  must  assess  in
conducting policy. We do, however, conduct monetary policy in a systematic manner to promote
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
our  long-run  goals  of  maximum  employment  and  stable  prices. As  part  of  this  approach,  we
strive to communicate clearly about our monetary policy decisions.
We  have  also  continued  to  gradually  shrink  the  size  of  our  balance  sheet  by  reducing  our
holdings of Treasury and agency securities. The Federal Reserve’s total assets declined about
$310 billion since the middle of last year and currently stand at close to $4.0 trillion. Relative to
their  peak  level  in  2014,  banks’  reserve  balances  with  the  Federal  Reserve  have  declined  by
around $1.2 trillion, a drop of more than 40 percent.
In  light  of  the  substantial  progress  we  have  made  in  reducing  reserves,  and  after  extensive
deliberations, the Committee decided at our January meeting to continue over the longer run to
implement  policy  with  our  current  operating  procedure.  That  is,  we  will  continue  to  use  our
administered  rates  to  control  the  policy  rate,  with  an  ample  supply  of  reserves  so  that  active
management of reserves is not required. Having made this decision, the Committee can now
evaluate the appropriate timing and approach for the end of balance sheet runoff. I would note
that we are prepared to adjust any of the details for completing balance sheet normalization in
light of economic and financial developments. In the longer run, the size of the balance sheet will
be  determined  by  the  demand  for  Federal  Reserve  liabilities  such  as  currency  and  bank
reserves.  The  February Monetary  Policy  Report  describes  these  liabilities  and  reviews  the
factors that influence their size over the longer run.
I will conclude by mentioning some further progress we have made in improving transparency.
Late last year we launched two new publications: The first, Financial Stability Report, shares our
assessment  of  the  resilience  of  the  U.S.  financial  system,  and  the  second, Supervision  and
Regulation Report, provides information about our activities as a bank supervisor and regulator.
Last month we began conducting press conferences after every FOMC meeting instead of every
other one. The change will allow me to more fully and more frequently explain the Committee’s
thinking.  Last  November  we  announced  a  plan  to  conduct  a  comprehensive  review  of  the
strategies, tools, and communications practices we use to pursue our congressionally assigned
goals  for  monetary  policy.  This  review  will  include  outreach  to  a  broad  range  of  stakeholders
across the country. The February Monetary Policy Report provides further discussion of these
initiatives.
Thank you. I am happy to respond to questions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
