Guo Shuqing: Opening remarks - 11th Lujiazui Forum
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Guo  Shuqing,  Party  Secretary  and  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s
Bank of China, at the 11th Lujiazui Forum, Shanghai, 14 June 2019.
 Honorable  Vice  Premier  Liu  He,  Secretary  Li  Qiang,  Chairman  Zhou  Xiaochuan,  Executive
Deputy  Secretary-General  Ding  Xuedong,  Mayor  Ying  Yong,  Governor  Yi  Gang,  Chairman  Yi
Huiman, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Good morning!
As  the  rotating  co-chair  of  this  forum,  on  behalf  of  the  host,  I  would  like  to  extend  a  warm
welcome to all of our friends old and new. The annual Lujiazui Forum has been held successfully
ten times. We are glad to see that, Shanghai has been accelerating its steps in establishing an
international financial center, amazing the world with its great achievements. In the future, the
central  financial  regulator  will  continue  with  its  support  for  the  opening-up  and  reform  of
Shanghai,  trying  the  upmost  to  do  whatever  we  can  do.  Yesterday,  the  Shanghai  municipal
leaders criticized me for not coming here very often. I regret that it’s true. But, as long as our Vice
Premier Liu grants an approval, as soon as tomorrow I would move my office to Pudong.
Currently, the financial system of China operates soundly, and thus provides solid guarantee for
the  comprehensive  deepening  of  reforms  and  the  high-quality  development  of  the  Chinese
economy. Under the leadership of the Party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at the
core,  and  in  line  with  the  overall  arrangements  of  the  Financial  Stability  and  Development
Committee under the State Council, the financial system firmly implements the new development
philosophy,  vigorously  promotes  the  supply-side  structural  reform,  continuously  optimizes  the
institutional system, market system and product system, and strives to provide the real economy
and  our  people  with  more  effective  financial  services  of  a  better  quality.  In  this  process,  the
following aspects need to be highlighted.
First, financial institutions must remain committed to the customer-oriented operating philosophy.
In 1978, China had aggregate financial assets of less than RMB200 billion, and saw an acute
shortage of financial products. Today, the aggregate financial assets have exceeded RMB400
trillion.  Despite  this,  financial  institutions  still  have  a  long  way  to  go  in  customer  service  and
market segmentation. Fifteen years ago when we started introducing the shareholding system in
large-sized  state-owned  banks,  the  hardest  task  was  to  eliminate  the  “bureaucratic  way  of
handling commerce”. In 2005, some experts from American banks came to help us reform bank
outlets. For weeks, they went to the same savings agency, patiently asked every customer about
the services they received, and put down every detail of the transactions. Our colleagues were
confused, with some even mocking the Americans for being unwise and rigid. However, when
the experts presented their accurate analysis reports, everyone was astonished. After that, our
colleagues not only consult their American counterparts, but think about improvements on their
own initiative. As a result, the business processes of Chinese banks gradually approach the Six
Sigma method, and their productivity got close to or even surpassed that of the world’s top-notch
banks.  Today,  availing  ourselves  of  such  information  technologies  as  the  Internet,  artificial
intelligence,  and  big  data,  China’s  financial  institutions  continuously  witness  revolutionary
changes  in  their  technological  capabilities,  and  product  development  is  conducted  at  a  pace
increasingly closer to that of the world’s leading institutions. However, to offer effective financial
services and to build Shanghai into a world financial center, most crucially, financial institutions
must put the interests and concerns of customers in the first place.
Second, more efforts should be made to develop more specialized and personalized financial
institutions.  China  has  over  5,000  licensed  financial  institutions,  and  tens  of  thousands  of
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
unlicensed  institutions  engaging  in  quasi-financial  businesses.  However,  compared  with
developed  countries,  the  penetration  rate  of  banks,  the  depth  and  density  of  insurance
businesses,  and  the  influence  of  the  capital  market  in  China  all  remain  at  a  very  low  level.
Financial  institutions  are  less  diversified  in  classification,  unreasonable  in  distribution,  and
indistinct in characteristics. Moreover, the phenomena of “excessive competition” and “service
blank” coexist. With the new developments of Fintech, it is by no means feasible to simply copy
the  development  path  of  other  countries  in  terms  of  industrial  pattern,  profitability  model,  and
corporate structure. Instead, we should work to both increase the number of financial institutions
and improve the level of their quality. We should support small and medium-sized institutions
serving communities and small and micro businesses (SMBs), and encourage the practice of
the spirits of “collecting data street by street” and “walking into villages and households”; support
specialized and dedicated financial enterprises, and encourage them to form distinct corporate
culture  appropriate  for  their  main  businesses;  and  support  all  kinds  of  distinctive  financial
institutions that can closely integrate offline and online businesses and combine traditional and
modern  features.  In  this  process,  we  warmly  welcome  the  involvement  of  overseas  financial
institutions with a further opening-up of China’s banking, insurance, securities, and trust sectors.
We  especially  welcome  experienced  asset  management  institutions,  along  with  domestic
counterparts, to raise RMB capital and invest in the RMB-denominated securities market.
Third,  the  financing  market  system  must  be  better  suited  to  the  life  cycle  of  enterprises.
Enterprises in different development stages have financing needs different in nature and feature.
Venture  capital  suits  the  financing  feature  of  startups;  bank  credit  is  more  favorable  for
enterprises at the growth stage; and bonds, stocks, and other direct financing tools are of great
importance to relatively mature businesses. By structure, bank credit accounts for over 80% of
the aggregate financing, while equity financing makes up no more than 10%. Basically speaking,
the bond market is a quasi-credit market with a lack of depth where commercial banks are major
players, bond products are characterized by poor variety and the transaction scenario remains
less lively. Meanwhile, due to excessive reliance on banks, enterprises cannot well match their
life cycle with production cycle. As a result, the large and medium-sized enterprises are likely to
squeeze others out and excessively occupy credit resources, whereas SMBs and innovation-
driven enterprises may have difficulties in securing necessary financial support in the hatching
stage. Therefore, on the basis of a strong consensus, financial regulators and enterprises must
work  concertedly  to  develop  China’s  capital  market  and  completely  change  the  imbalance
between direct financing and indirect financing.
Fourth, measures should be taken to establish and improve a corporate governance structure
with  Chinese  characteristics.  Unsound  corporate  governance  has  always  been  an  intrinsic
problem in China’s economy, as enormous losses have been caused by major shareholders’
manipulation in some institutions and insider control in some others. Since the vast majority of
financial  institutions  are,  by  nature,  strongly  correlated  with  public  interests,  the  financial
institutions should place more emphasis on corporate governance structure. We should make
continued efforts to establish a modern corporate system and enhance Party leadership, so as
to set up a mechanism of proactive cooperation and mutual restrictions between institutions of
corporate governance. We should also carry out the Hangzhou Summit Declaration to ensure
prior implementation of the G20-OECD corporate governance consensus in the financial sector.
Fifth,  sufficiently  harsh  punishment  should  be  promptly  imposed  on  violators  of  laws  and
regulations. For some time, some institutions have disclosed false information, manipulated the
quality categorization of assets, and even recklessly falsified accounts, which undermined the
credibility of the financial sector. These problems can be attributed to a number of reasons, yet
the  principal  ones  include  the  failure  in  implementing  capital  rules,  unsound  corporate
governance, feeble market control, and negligent oversight and law enforcement. The low cost of
violating rules and regulations can only result in further trampling on laws. Therefore, regulators
must have the courage to fight, to ensure strict enforcement of laws, and to resolutely safeguard
the sanctity of laws. For more than two years, the banking and insurance regulators have been
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
seriously  dealing  with  institutions  accountable  for  violating  laws  and  regulations,  imposing
penalties  of  more  than  8,000  person/times,  and  confiscating  more  than  RMB6  billion  from
relevant institutions. A series of stringent regulatory measures have been taken to crack down on
falsified asset categorization and accounting fraud, and more than RMB4 trillion of nonperforming
loans have been disposed of.
Sixth, we should be determined to change the distribution of financial assets. At present, China’s
bank savings deposits amount to over RMB78.7 trillion, and asset management products, which
are essentially similar to bank deposits, total more than RMB60 trillion. In addition, we have an
equally considerable sum of corporate deposits and enormous idle funds in the society. How to
transform  such  funds  into  long-term  stable  sources  of  investment  capital  through  institutional
investors,  is  an  important  yet  urgent  issue  that  must  be  addressed.  We  should  vigorously
develop  various  institutional  investors  including  publicly  offered  funds,  privately  offered  funds,
insurers, trusts, and wealth management companies. In this way, we can change the investor
composition dominated by retail investors and foster a market atmosphere favorable to long-term
investment and value investing, while raising the scale of stable funds in the market as well as
the  efficiency  of  investment  conversion.  In  terms  of  pension  funds,  we  can  draw  on  the
experience  of  other  countries  to  construct  three  pillars,  namely  basic  social  security  funds,
enterprise annuities, and commercial insurance, in a bid to raise the scale of China’s pension
funds in the capital market to the world average.
Seventh, we must firmly prevent the resurgence of structurally complex products. China boasts
the largest new capital inputs among all economies in the world, but it is a challenging task to
raise the efficiency of fund utilization. The key is to avoid the diversion of investment out of the
real  economy  and  to  continuously  clean  up  funds  which  circulate  solely  within  the  financial
sector.  For  more  than  two  years,  we  have  remained  committed  to  rectification  of  market
irregularities  and  dismantled  shadow  banks,  achieving  a  net  reduction  of  RMB13.74  trillion  of
high-risk  assets,  consequently  shortening  the  financing  chain  and  lowering  financing  costs.
Currently, there are signs of relaxed regulation in the world that promote resurgence of shadow
banks, which requires us to be ever vigilant. The diversion of investment out of the real economy
and multi-layer nested investment in China’s financial sector had been among the most severe of
the kind, so we must prevent a replay of the past.
Eighth, we must face up to the problem of the financialization of real estate in some parts of
China. In recent years, the leverage ratios of the household sector in some Chinese cities have
risen rapidly, and the debt ratios of a considerable proportion of households have reached an
unsustainable level. More seriously, around half of the new savings resources are invested into
the  real  estate  sector.  The  excessive  financing  of  the  real  estate  sector  not  only  crowds  out
credit resources of other industries, but also encourages investment speculation in the sector
and causes a bigger bubble. When you buy a house to live in, it means you will have an income
of  market  rent  and  an  equal  amount  of  expenditure  each  month,  which  also  means  that  your
house generates the equal amount of added value; when you buy another house to rent out, you
will  also  have  income  and  output;  however,  when  you  buy  a  house  solely  for  investment  or
speculation, rather than for rental income, it will be just a pile of unused cement, bars, and bricks.
Real estate is marked by regional differentials, and it is normal that housing prices rise and fall in
different regions. Nevertheless, “housing is for living in, not for speculation.” History has proved
that every country relying excessively on real estate for economic prosperity would eventually pay
a heavy price. All residents and enterprises relying on blind investment and speculation in real
estate to manage money will eventually find that it is really not cost-efficient.
At  present,  the  Chinese  economy  is  at  a  crucial  stage  of  transformation  and  upgrading  and
structural  reform,  and  the  transition  from  old  to  new  drivers  of  growth  keeps  accelerating. As
continuous improvement has been made to the financial sector’s capability in serving the real
economy, funds injected by the banking and insurance sector into businesses grew rapidly, and,
in  particular,  loans  issued  to  manufacturing  and  high-tech  industries  and  private  enterprises
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
rebounded significantly, relieving the difficulties that SMBs face in accessing affordable financing.
By  end-May,  inclusive  financial  loans  issued  by  the  five  major  banks  to  SMBs  grew  23.7%
compared to the end of last year, fulfilling the majority of their full-year plan. The average interest
rate was 4.79%, reporting a decline of 0.65 percentage point compared to the full year rate for
last year. Meanwhile, the banking and insurance sectors have been fully cooperating with local
governments  on  the  issuance  of  general  bonds  and  special  bonds,  earnestly  implementing
decisions  and  plans  made  by  the  state  to  provide  financing  support  for  projects  launched  to
bolster weak spots in infrastructure construction. We believe that, through the deepening supply-
side structural reform to expand effective domestic demand, the effects of various impediments
will  be  offset  for  certain.  The  Chinese  economy  and  financial  sector  is  surely  to  achieve
sustained, healthy, and steady growth!
These ideas are only presented for your reference.
To conclude, I wish this forum a complete success.
Thank you!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
