Sustainable development and climate risks: the role of central banks
Speech by Ignazio Visco  
Governor of the Bank of Italy
Sustainable Development Festival 2019 
‘Finance and financial system for sustainable development’
The Italian Alliance for Sustainable Development  
Rome, 21 May 2019
The  question  of  whether  natural  resources  and  the  development  objectives  of 
nations are compatible is an issue that has long been debated in the field of economics. 
It dates back to at least the end of the 18th century with the works of Thomas Malthus on 
food supply and population growth and has re-emerged a number of times since then 
in the public debate. 
For example, at the start of the 1970s, in the wake of the demographic explosion and 
the related exponential growth in consumption, the simulations produced for the project 
of the Club of Rome on the ‘Predicament of Mankind’ set off an alarm which resonated 
strongly at international level concerning the risks to the survival of our ecosystems and of 
the human race itself. It was then observed that the scarcity of natural resources envisioned 
in that analysis, largely based on a linear extrapolation of the trend under way, did not 
take sufficient account of two fundamental mechanisms that regulate the functioning of 
the economic system: the rebalancing capacity of prices and the endogenous nature of 
technological change. When the resources used in the production of goods and services 
become more scarce, an increase in their prices discourages demand and provides an 
incentive  to  invest  in  new  production  methods  that  utilize  fewer  of  those  resources. 
Although  these  mechanisms  make  it  particularly  difficult  to  make  reliable  long-term  
projections, the fears for ‘sustainability’ – that is, the ability to meet current needs without 
compromising future generations’ chances of doing the same – have not faded. 
Over  the  last  three  decades  the  biggest  concerns  have  been  in  relation  to  the 
effects of climate change, a factor for which there are no ‘natural’ market prices. In 1992, 
following the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, the United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change was born, giving rise to the Kyoto Protocol (in 1997) and the Paris 
Agreement (in 2015). In the autumn of that year, Robert Solow, winner of the Nobel Prize 
for  Economics  in  1997  for  his  contributions  to  modern  theories  of  economic  growth, 
spoke before an audience of environmentalists, stating that:
I do not have to remind you that ‘sustainability’ has become a hot topic in 
the last few years […] As far as I can tell, however, discussion of sustainability 
has  been  mainly  an  occasion  for  the  expression  of  emotions  and  attitudes. 
There has been very little analysis of sustainable paths for a modern industrial 
economy, so that we have little idea of what would be required in the way of 
policy and what sorts of outcomes could be expected.
Solow  feared  that  the  concept  of  sustainability  would  remain  a  slogan,  without 
materializing into policies to encourage the use of sustainable resources. Almost 30 years 
later, data on the trend in greenhouse gas concentration – the leading cause of global 
warming – are not encouraging. In fact, the growing use of fossil fuels has pushed the 
concentration of greenhouse gases to levels that are dangerously close to generating a 
temperature increase of more than 1.5°C, with potentially catastrophic consequences for 
our planet according to the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Some effects are already evident. At global level, the last four years have been the 
warmest since 1880. In Italy, 2018 was the warmest year in the past two centuries and 
2017 was already characterized by a strong intensification in weather conditions, with 
severe cases of drought over most of the country that caused serious repercussions on 
the water supply. 
Climate change and the risks to the financial sector
In  Europe,  southern  countries  like  Italy  will  be  most  affected  by  the  expected 
consequences of climate change, which pose new risks for the real economy and for the 
stability of the financial sector.
First,  there  is  the  ‘physical  risk’  stemming  from  progressive  climate  change,  in 
particular involving an increase in temperatures, greater irregularity in rainfall patterns 
and an increased probability of extreme weather events. According to all the main climate 
change  scenarios,  Italy  will  be  the  European  nation  that  is  most  exposed  to  damage 
caused by its rivers flooding. These phenomena could result in significant losses in terms 
of human life and costs in terms of the destruction of public and private infrastructure, 
forcing households, firms and the State to allocate a large amount of financial resources 
to  their  reconstruction.  The  steady  increase  in  temperatures  could  have  permanent 
effects on the country’s productive capacity.
The  effects  of  climate  change  on  the  real  economy  may  spread  to  the  financial 
sector through various channels. Natural disasters interrupt the productive functions of 
firms and households, increasing their financial vulnerability, reducing the value of the 
assets pledged as collateral for loans, and making it more difficult for them to repay 
loans. The increase in climate change-related risks could cause banks to tighten credit 
towards households and firms in high-risk areas, with possible negative repercussions on 
the transmission of monetary policy stimuli. If the scale of these effects were to become 
significant, the stability of the financial system itself could be affected. Analyses carried 
out by the Bank of Italy highlight the fact that, in our country, more than 20 per cent of 
loans to the productive sector are granted to residents in areas with a high risk of flooding; 
2
moreover, the flow of credit is negatively correlated with risk exposure, especially when 
the debtors are small and medium-sized firms. 
Another type of risk, ‘transaction risk’, derives from the possibility that the necessary 
transition towards a low-carbon economy may occur in a disorderly manner. During this 
transition,  the  prices  of  energy  products  may  increase  markedly:  climate  policies  are 
based on the use of alternative energy sources which are currently more expensive, and 
on  the  introduction  of  carbon-pricing  systems,  like  the  taxation  of  carbon  emissions. 
Since the short-term demand for energy is not very reactive to price variations due to the 
fixed costs associated with changing the sources and forms of supply, a possible increase 
in prices would heighten the financial vulnerability of firms and households owing to 
the higher cost of purchasing energy goods. A sharp drop in the value of assets and 
infrastructures linked to the mining, transformation and use of fossil fuels (coal, oil and 
gas) could also trigger a rush to sell the securities of the most exposed companies and 
may make it more difficult for them to cover their liabilities towards the banking system 
and the market, with consequences that could significantly affect the economic system 
and financial stability.
The role of the private and public sectors in the transition
The public sector cannot be solely responsible for creating stable, fair and inclusive 
economic growth that respects environmental balances. It is up to the public sector to 
create a stable and modern regulatory framework, and to define and implement effective 
economic,  environmental,  energy-related  and  social  policies  that  provide  incentives 
that will stimulate new investments. In order to achieve sustainable business practices, 
strategies must be adopted that take account of the environment, human rights, consumer 
rights, diversity and best practices in corporate governance, i.e. the Environmental, Social 
and Governance (ESG) profiles. In adapting to the objectives set by the public sector, the 
private sector can draw some advantages. In fact, ‘green’ sectors are steadily gaining 
importance in Italy too. According to Istat estimates, in 2017 the eco-industrial sector 
expanded markedly: it contributed 2.3 per cent to total value added and employed nearly 
400,000 full-time employees.
Given  its  critical  role  in  resource  allocation,  the  financial  sector  plays  a  key  part 
in influencing the scope, speed and fluidity of the transition. It can do so effectively if 
intermediaries also consider sustainability factors in their corporate governance systems 
and in their risk management and investment strategies. 
Today, central banks and supervisory authorities also pay close attention to these 
issues in carrying out their mandates. They are helping to raise awareness and nurture 
a better understanding of the risks related to the sustainability factors and the channels 
through which they are transmitted to the financial system. They can disseminate more 
data, help develop shared analysis methodologies, and facilitate cooperation and the 
sharing of best practices between the various stakeholders in the financial system. They 
are trying to provide a good example for all investors through their policies for managing 
financial resources and the related risks.
3
The Bank of Italy as an investor …
This year the Bank of Italy has decided to adopt an investment strategy that integrates 
ESG factors into the management of its equity portfolio, a move that it announced on 
its website last week. The principles of diversification and market neutrality, part of the 
previously used framework, have been maintained and two new assessment criteria have 
been added. The first excludes investments in shares issued by companies mainly operating 
in sectors that do not comply with the United Nations’ Global Compact, an agreement 
signed in 2004 that sets out the principles companies should follow regarding human 
rights, labour and environmental sustainability, and measures to prevent corruption. The 
second gives preference to the securities of companies with the highest ESG scores.
The new framework significantly improves the environmental footprint of our financial 
investments: the new shareholdings portfolio is characterized by lower greenhouse gas 
emissions (a reduction of 23 per cent), and lower energy and water consumption (by 
30 and 17 per cent respectively). It also follows that risk management becomes more 
effective: a comparison of various solutions shows that this approach provides the best 
risk-return profile and the greatest protection against particularly adverse market trends.
For the time being, this strategy is being applied to equity investment; an assessment 
is under way of the possibility of extending it to other asset classes, such as corporate 
bonds.  As  we  work  towards  further  improving  the  ESG  profiles  in  our  portfolio,  we 
will provide regular reports on the results achieved, so that our best practices and the 
methodology we use can serve as a reference for other investors.
Aside from ensuring less risk, sustainable investment does not penalize financial 
performance:  numerous  studies  show  that  it  leads  to  market  returns  that  are  not 
significantly  lower  than  those  achieved  using  traditional  financial  models.  Good  ESG 
practices enable firms to benefit from competitive advantages stemming from innovation, 
to mitigate operating, legal and reputational risks, and lead to more efficient resource 
allocation, all of which tend to lower the cost of capital and to achieve better operational 
and market performance. For example, some analyses carried out by the Bank of Italy 
have provided clear evidence of a return premium on the shares of European electricity 
utilities with lower carbon emissions. Experience has shown that reputational risks and the 
risk of serious losses for firms and their shareholders can instead arise from inappropriate 
business practices from an ESG point of view.
… and its cooperation with other institutions
The increasing concern about the possible consequences of climate change for the 
financial sector has  strengthened international cooperation in  the  field  of  sustainable 
finance, with several initiatives being provided by industry and the institutions. The Bank 
of Italy has contributed to these projects and will continue to do so.
In  recent  years,  in  our  role  as  members  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  we  have 
discussed  the  studies  of  the  Task  Force  on  Climate-related  Financial  Disclosure;  we 
participated  directly  in  those  of  the  G20  Green  Finance  Study  Group;  we  are  giving 
4
technical assistance to the Ministry of Economy and Finance  for the negotiations on the 
legislative proposals resulting from the European Commission’s Action Plan on sustainable 
finance. In this field we have contributed to drafting both the disclosure requirements 
as regards the sustainability of the financial products offered to customers by market 
operators – including banks, investment firms and fund managers – and the regulations on 
new low-carbon benchmarks.
Together with the supervisory authorities of the other EU countries, the  Bank of 
Italy  will  cooperate  with  the  European  Banking  Authority  in  carrying  out  the  tasks  of 
identifying the risks that sustainability factors pose to the stability of the financial system, 
drafting methodologies to correctly assess such risks, and selecting the most suitable 
prudential treatment. It will also take part in the analyses scheduled by the European 
Single Supervisory Mechanism, which has included climate change in its risk map for 
2019.
The Network for Greening the Financial System was founded In December 2017, 
on the initiative of a number of central banks and supervisory authorities. This forum, 
in which we participate, has a broad membership at international level, and analyses are 
conducted and best practices are shared within it regarding the management of financial 
risks  linked  to  the  environment  and  climate  change.  The  Network  aims  to  develop 
scenarios, methodologies and studies to integrate environmental and climate risks into 
microprudential  and  macroprudential supervision,  collect evidence of the existence of 
risk spreads between ‘green’ and ‘brown’ assets, and draw up common guidelines  for the 
adoption of ESG criteria for managing central banks’ financial portfolios.
As part of the activities of the Italian Observatory on Sustainable Finance, set up by 
the  Ministry of the Environment, we carried out a survey in 2018  of Italy’s main financial 
operators to evaluate their level of preparedness on climate-based risks. The results are 
mostly in line with those of other surveys  and indicate that awareness of the financial 
risks deriving from climate change remains limited. The issue of sustainability is mainly 
dealt with from a social responsibility point of view, yet it is generally neglected in the 
decision-making processes of administrative bodies  and in financial risk management 
systems. Greater effort is therefore required on everyone’s part in order to focus more 
on these topics.
Conclusions
The  transition  towards  an  economy  with  low  carbon  emissions  is  essential  if  we 
want  to  reduce  the  risks  that  climate  change  poses  for  our  well-being.  The  financial 
sector, central banks and supervisory authorities cannot stand in for those who make the 
policies necessary to decarbonize our energy systems, but they can play an important 
role in promoting this process.
It is in the interests of financial intermediaries to be more aware of how sustainability 
factors can affect their activities: it would make it easier for them to take into account 
the corresponding risks in their strategies and governance, thereby helping to improve 
performance. Central banks and supervisory authorities are working towards making the 
5
financial system ready to face this transition. The spreading of new financial instruments 
could be made easier by: the creation of an EU taxonomy of environmentally sustainable 
activities and the introduction of [product] labelling schemes (including the standards for 
green bonds); the wider uptake of the new low-carbon benchmarks; and the application 
of the new rules on disclosure.
Italian investors have expressed considerable interest in sustainable finance, but the 
supply of products is still not sufficient to satisfy demand: there is room for new projects 
to be financed, we need the right investment instruments, and it is vital that companies 
be able to provide the necessary information on the sustainability of their activities.
6
Bibliography
Bernardini E, Di Giampaolo J, Faiella I, Poli R, ‘The Impact of Carbon Risk on Stock 
Returns: Evidence from the European Electric Utilities’, Journal of Sustainable Finance & 
Investment, 2019.
Ciscar JC, Feyen L, Ibarreta D, Soria A (coordinators), ‘Climate Impacts in Europe: Final 
Report of the JRC PESETA III Project’, Joint Research Centre Science for Policy Report, 2018.
Clark  G,  Feiner  A,  Viehs  M,  From  the  Stockholder  to  the  Stakeholder:  How 
Sustainability Can Drive Financial Outperformance, Oxford University and Arabesque 
Partners, Oxford, 2015.
Doxa, ‘Il risparmiatore responsabile’, The Sustainable Investment Forum, Milan, 2017.
Faiella  I,  ‘The  demand  for  energy  of  Italian  households’,  Banca  d’Italia,  Temi  di 
Discussione (Working Papers), 822, 2011.
Faiella  I,  Cingano  F,  ‘La  tassazione  verde  in  Italia:  l’analisi  di  una  carbon  tax  sui 
trasporti’, Economia Pubblica, No. 2, 2015.
Faiella I, Natoli F, ‘Natural Catastrophes and Bank Lending: the Case of Flood Risk 
in Italy’, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), 457, 2018.
Friede G, Busch T, Bassen A, ‘ESG and Financial Performance: Aggregated Evidence 
from more than 2000 Empirical Studies’, Journal of Sustainable Finance & Investment, 
Vol. 5, 2015.
ISTAT, ‘Il conto dei beni e servizi ambientali’, Rome, 2019.
Levi M, Kjellstrom T, Baldasseroni A, ‘Impact of Climate Change on Occupational 
Health and Productivity: A Systematic Literature Review Focusing on Workplace Heat’, La 
Medicina del Lavoro (Journal of the Italian Society of Occupational Health), Vol. 109, 2018.
Meadows DH, Meadows DL, Randers J, Behrens III WW, The Limits to Growth: Report 
for the Club of Rome’s Project on the Predicament of Mankind, Universe Group, New York, 
1972 (tr. it., I limiti dello sviluppo. Rapporto del System Dynamics Group Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology (MIT) per il progetto del Club di Roma sui dilemmi dell’umanità, 
Mondadori, Milan, 1972).
NOAA, ‘2018 Was 4th Hottest Year on Record for the Globe’, 6 February 2019.
Osservatorio Italiano sulla Finanza Sostenibile, ‘Il rischio climatico per la finanza in 
Italia’, available on the website of the Ministry for Environment, Land and Sea Protection. 
Solow R, ‘An Almost Practical Step Toward Sustainability’, Resources Policy, Vol. 19, 1993. 
Visco I, Perché i tempi stanno cambiando, Il Mulino, Bologna, 2015.
7
