   Governor      
Title 
  
: Mr. Tariq Bajwa 
: Keynote address by Mr. Tariq Bajwa at launching ceremony of international remittance through block 
chain technology 
: January 8, 2019 
 : Launching Ceremony of International Remittance through Block Chain Technology 
 : Serena Hotel Islamabad 
Date 
Event 
Venue 
 
Mr. Yao Jing, Honorable Ambassador to the People’s Republic of China , Mr. Eric 
Jing, Chairman & CEO, ANT Financials, Mr. Roar Bjaerum, SVP, Head of Financial 
Services, Telenor Group & Chairman Valyou and Mr. Shahid Mustafa, President & 
CEO, Telenor Microfinance Bank,  
 Ladies and Gentlemen!   
Assalam o Alaikum and Good Evening! 
1.  It  is  indeed  very  exciting  for  me  to  launch  this  initiative  by  Telenor  Pakistan 
that  would  enable  the  transfer  of  cross  border  remittances  using  BlockChain 
technology in near real time. This would bring convenience and efficiency for 
both  remitters  and  their  beneficiaries.  For  this,  I  would  like  to  congratulate 
ANT Financial, Telenor Microfinance Bank and other key stakeholders such as 
Standard  Chartered  Bank  for  being  the  pioneers  in  the  adoption  of  new 
technologies  for  providing  a  payment  solution,  which  many  other  market 
 Page 1 of 10 
players  have  only  been  thinking  of.  This  puts  Pakistan  on  the  map  of  few 
countries  in  the  world  that  have  launched  International  Remittance  using 
Block Chain Technology. 
2.  Though  this  initiative,  Valyou  in  Malaysia  and  Easypaisa  in  Pakistan  will 
facilitate cross-border remittance service through e-wallet platforms, which is 
based  on  block  chain  technology  developed  by  Alipay,  a  subsidiary  of  ANT 
Financial.  This  block  chain  based  wallet-to-wallet  remittance  service  provides 
instant  and  secure  way  for  Pakistani  emigrants  to  transfer  money  from 
Malaysia to Pakistan and will significantly improve the current amount of USD 
1 billion received from Malaysia in home remittances.   
3.  Ladies and Gentlemen!  As you all know that remittances are considered a vital 
component in our economy since they play an important role in reducing the 
current account deficit and improve the level of our foreign exchange reserves. 
Pakistan  received  US$  19.6  billion  remittances  during  fiscal  year  2017-18, 
which  is  equal  to  over  6%  of  our  GDP,  equivalent  to  over  50%  of  our  trade 
deficit, 85% of exports and over one-third of imports. Home remittances from 
abroad therefore play an extremely important role in our economic and fiscal 
management. Pakistan is ranked among the top ten countries in the world in 
terms  of  receiving  remittances.    I  have  therefore  no  doubt  in  my  mind  that 
overseas  Pakistanis  are  the  silent  heroes  of  our  nation  as  their  hard  earned 
income  is  a  major  contributor  to  our  economy.  However,  there  is  still 
considerable movement of remittances through illegal/informal channels. The 
thrust  of  the  GOP  and  SBP  policies  is  to  divert  this  stream  to  the  formal 
channel. 
 Page 2 of 10 
4.  In the last few years, Government of Pakistan and State Bank of Pakistan have 
taken  a  number  of  initiatives  to  promote  the  transfer  of  home  remittances 
using  formal  financial  channels  and  it  is  showing  positive  results.  Since  the 
launch of Pakistan Remittance Initiative (PRI), there has been an upward trend 
of  receiving  remittances  using  formal  financial  channels  that  were  previously 
sent  through  informal  means  of  hawala  and  hundi.  The  Government  of 
Pakistan have also announced another scheme to promote remittances using 
m-wallets  where  if  the  beneficiary  choose  to  receive  remittances  in  their  m-
wallet,  they  will  receive  airtime  worth  of  Rs.  2  for  every  one  USD  equivalent 
remittance. Further, GoP and SBP have also introduced a performance based 
scheme  for  financial  institutions  in  order  to  encourage  them  to  make 
extraordinary  efforts  to  achieve  the  higher  targets  of  remittances.  I  am 
confident  that  such  initiatives  and  products  would  increase  remittances 
through formal channels and accelerate financial inclusion in the country.  
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
5.  Despite  all  these  efforts  it  remains  a  fact  that  we  are  still  competing  against 
very  efficient  and  effective  mode  of  remittance  transfers  such  as  hundi  and 
hawala  which  because  of  their  convenience  and  ease  have  remained  a 
preferred  choice  of people  especially  who  are  less literate  or  live  in  far  flung 
areas  of  the  country.  I  think,  one  of  the  main  reasons  for  this  is  that  formal 
channels  are  based  on  centralized  transaction  processing,  messaging  and 
reconciliation  systems,  which  inherently  makes  them  slow.    On  top  of  it,  if 
these  transfer  systems  are  paper  based,  they  become  even  slower.  This  is 
where  new  technologies  like  the  Distributed  Ledger  Technology  (DLT)  comes 
to our aid. Probably the biggest use case for these technologies is cross border 
 Page 3 of 10 
remittance  transactions,  including  not  just  remittances,  but  import,  exports 
and other services as well. It is noteworthy that a number of banks and non-
bank  entities  around  the  world  have  started  experimenting  with  the  block 
chain technology for such cross border transactions and transfers.   
6.  While  this  block  chain  based  wallet-to-wallet  remittance  service  will  likely 
provide  an  instantaneous  and  secure  way  for  Pakistani  migrants  to  transfer 
money from Malaysia to Pakistan, the success of this product will depend on 
the  implementation  of  an  effective  and  aggressive  marketing  and  awareness 
creation  strategy  for  customers  both  in  Malaysia  and  Pakistan.    Further,  I 
would  urge  ANT  Financials  to  launch  this  product  from  other  countries  to 
Pakistan  also.  I  have  been  told  that  ANT  Financials  is  already  offering  similar 
service for Hong Kong – Philippines corridor; and I would recommend starting 
this block chain based remittance services for Hong Kong - Pakistan as well. I 
am also confident that this Blockchain based arrangement will work well with 
our PRI system of tie-ups too.  
Ladies and Gentlemen!  
7.  Now,  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  share  few  of  my  thoughts  on 
emerging  technologies  and  how  these  could  reshape  the  financial  sector  and 
the  way  financial  services  are  delivered  to  ordinary  citizen.  Since  the  first 
decade  of  this  millennium,  emergence  of  new  technologies  especially  in  the 
domain  of  banking  and  payments  are  not  only  transforming  the  overall 
business  landscape  and  bringing  efficiency  in  the  business  models  but 
providing  convenience  to  the  consumers  as  well.  Technology  is  disrupting 
conventional models and methods of doing business; it is changing the way we 
 Page 4 of 10 
used  to  look  at  our  customers  and  the  manner  in  which  we  used  to  build 
businesses and deliver services. The ubiquitous proliferation of mobile devices 
and  enhancements  in  tele-density  is  now  enabling  customers  to  demand 
services not just on their doorsteps but from the comfort of their living rooms. 
Millennials who are teenagers have different attitudes; they are more at ease 
in  interacting  with  their  devices  rather  than  with  formally  dressed  officials 
sitting  in  their  bank  branches.  Unfortunately,  I  feel  that  traditional  banks  in 
Pakistan  are  not  taking  this  challenge  with  the  urgency  that  it  deserves  and 
have yet to come up with innovative solutions to satisfy their customer needs. 
And this is where I feel that innovative companies like AliPay can bring radical 
change to our industry.  
Ladies and Gentlemen!  
8.  Let  me  also  share  my  thoughts  on  few  disruptive  technological  trends  that  I 
believe  are  radically  disrupting  and  transforming  the  financial 
industry 
worldwide;  
i. 
First is the rise of open platforms that are enabling buyers and sellers of a 
core  service  to  come  together  without  the  help  of  any  intermediary 
institutions. E-commerce, ride hailing and food services companies are a 
few  examples  of  these  platforms.  On  one  hand  these  platforms  enable 
businesses  to  quickly  onboard  using  application  programing  interfaces 
commonly  known  as  APIs  and  on  the  other,  they  enable  customers  to 
quickly search and avail their desired services.  
ii.  Second,  cloud  based  hosting  services  are  enabling  quick  and  low  cost 
deployment  of  complex  systems  using  tools  that  are  open  source  and 
 Page 5 of 10 
easily  available  to  anyone.    These  cloud-based  arrangements  can  offer 
extremely cost effective fully managed solutions including hardware and 
software as a service. It is now very easy for any entity including Fintechs 
to  offer  innovative  products  to  their  customers  thus  putting  them  in 
direct competition with banks.  
iii.  Third,  advancements  in  artificial  intelligence  (AI)  and  machine  learning 
are  set  to  transform  the  financial  industry  in  many  ways  especially  in 
areas  of  intelligent  customer  relationship  management,  fraud  detection 
and  prevention,  e-commerce  and  detection  of  AML/CFT 
issues. 
Developments  in  big  data  analytics  combined  with  AI  and  Machine 
Learning  are  providing  deeper  insights  about  customer  behavior,  needs 
and wants and radically changing the way in which services are designed, 
delivered and consumed.  
iv.  However, the Distributed Ledger Technology is truly likely to disrupt the 
financial sector. Block chain, which is one implementation of Distributed 
Ledger Technology, will introduce a new era of disintermediation leading 
to  openness,  decentralization  and  global  inclusion  that  will  give  us 
unprecedented  capabilities  of  efficiently  creating  and  trading  value  in 
society.  The  block  chain  technology  will  play  a  major  role  in  the 
transformation of financial industry across all value chain in the economy 
especially where asset holding and transfers are concerned.  
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
9.  As  you  all  are  aware  that  financial  inclusion  is  one  of  the  two  cross  cutting 
themes  of  policy  initiatives  of  State  Bank  of  Pakistan.  Financial  inclusion 
 Page 6 of 10 
would lead to empowerment of these segments of society. We believe that 
technology could be a great enabler of financial inclusion and as a progressive 
regulator;  SBP  has  always  been  a  great  supporter  of  innovation  and 
technology.  I  am  sure  that  digitization  of  banking  and  payments  using  the 
technologies  mentioned  earlier  presents  a  huge  potential  for  us  to  provide 
service  delivery  to  those  who  are  at  the  bottom  of  the  pyramid.  For  me, 
financial  inclusion  is  not  just  about  account  opening;  rather  it  is  about 
enabling  people  to  conduct  their  day-to-day  transactions  through  digital 
means instead of relying on cash. You will appreciate that digitizing economic 
transactions carries the benefit of enhanced efficiency in the overall economy 
and has the potential to increase our GDP.  It is therefore imperative that we 
take  all  efforts  to  enable  our  people  to  use  formal  financial  services  using 
digital  means  so  that  their  productivity  is  enhanced  and  wastages  for  the 
economy are reduced.  
10. On the other hand, if adopted without giving due thought, technology is likely 
to  follow  the  law  of  unintended  consequences  and  has  the  potential  of 
becoming  a  cause  of  spreading  systemic  and  financial  instability.  We  have 
seen  how  social  media  can  spread  false  rumors  and  negative  news  like 
wildfire  thus  creating  panic  and  instability  in  financial  markets.  Further, 
technology also presents some very unconventional challenges that pertains 
to  electronic  identification,  data  privacy  and  cyber  security,  etc.  The  more 
financial  systems  depends  on  electronic  platforms  and  digital  records,  the 
more  susceptible  they  are  to  cyber-attacks,  which  can  disrupt  the  flow  of 
funds across the economy, cease economic activity and threaten the overall 
financial stability.  With this in mind, SBP has issued various regulations and 
 Page 7 of 10 
guidelines  including  the  frameworks  for  Enterprise  Technology  Governance 
and  Risk  Management,  Security  of  Internet  Banking  and  Payment  Cards, 
Prevention  against  Cyber-Attack,  and  Risk  Management  in  Outsourcing 
Arrangements by Financial Institutions.  
11. To  promote  the  adoption  of  technology,  SBP  has  continuously  been  taking 
initiatives on the infrastructure side, to promote the adoption of technology 
for facilitation of masses.  SBP has worked with FBR and customs and other 
provincial tax authorities like Sindh Revenue Board for collection of taxes and 
custom  duties  using  alternate  delivery  channels.    SBP  is  in  the  process  of 
launching a knowledge management system that will facilitate the interaction 
of  general  public  with  SBP.  We  are  also  working  with  Bill  &  Melinda  Gates 
Foundation  and  Karandaaz  Pakistan  to  build  a  micro  payment  gateway  that 
will  introduce  fully 
interoperable  faster  payments  for  consumers  and 
businesses  alike.   This  initiative  will  not  only  help  to  modernize  the  clearing 
and  settlement 
infrastructure  for  reducing  cost, 
improving  efficiency, 
enhancing security, but will also help in digital on-boarding of customer using 
open API based platforms and directory services.  
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
12. To  adopt  innovative  technologies  and  promote  the  digitization  of  economy, 
SBP has always encouraged the role of banks and non-banks in the financial 
sector of Pakistan. We believe that non-banks like Fintechs and Bigtechs can 
play a big role in transforming the economic landscape of Pakistan. China is a 
great  example  for  us  where  entities  like  Alibaba,  Tencent  and  JD.com  have 
innovatively used technology to provide efficient services to the masses. SBP 
 Page 8 of 10 
is  also  facilitating  the  entrance  of  non-banks  particularly  in  payments  and 
banking  and  in  the  past  have  issued  enabling  regulations  on  Branchless 
Banking and Payment System Operators and Service Providers. Right now, we 
are  in  the  final  stage  of  issuing  regulations  for  e-money  institutions.  SBP  is 
cognizant of the fact that Fintechs  may find certain regulations as inhibiting 
for  their  offering  so  we  are  in  the  process  of  establishing  a  regulatory 
sandbox  to  identify  such  issues  and  find  ways  of  supporting  and  facilitating 
innovative ideas.  
Ladies and Gentlemen!  
13. I am confident that the challenges that I have mentioned earlier will provide 
great  opportunity  and  space  to  banks  like  Telenor  and  companies  like  ANT 
Financials, who have great experience of transforming payments and banking 
landscape  in  China  thus  promoting  digitization  and  financial  inclusion.  I  am 
hopeful  that  based  on  its  experience,  ANT  Financial  will  provide  out  of  the 
box  solutions  for  challenges  being  faced  by  the  industry  and  consumers  in 
Pakistan. Especially I expect that ANT Financials will bring innovative ideas to 
Pakistan especially to assist SBP in areas like financial inclusion, digitization of 
payments, e-commerce, SME Finance, increasing access points, partnerships 
with  non-bank  FinTechs  and  using  innovative  technologies  further  to  bring 
efficiency in banking and payments.  
14. For  my  colleagues  from  banking  industry  in  Pakistan,  I  would  like  to  say  that 
we  have  to  adapt  to  the  changing  realities  of  times.  We  shall  take  the 
challenge and use the opportunities provided by technology to deliver the best 
of best to our citizens. I expect that the financial sector will take advantage of 
 Page 9 of 10 
current favorable market environment by investing in innovative technologies 
and  product  offerings  to  expand  services  and  broaden  access  to  financial 
services in the country. 
15. I  would  once  again  like  to  congratulate  Telenor  Microfinance  Bank  and  ANT 
Financial for launching this initiative to facilitate cross border remittances. I am 
confident that ANT Financials will play its role in the economic development of 
Pakistan  and  would  further  strengthen  Sino  Pak  ties  in  the  fields  of  Banking, 
Finance  and  payments.  I  shall  ensure  that  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  would 
continue to extend possible support to facilitate them. 
 Thank you for your attention! Pakistan Zindabad. 
   Page 10 of 10 
