Michael Held: The first line of defense and financial crime
Keynote address by Mr Michael Held, Executive Vice President of the Legal Group of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the 1LoD Summit, New York City, 2 April 2019.
As prepared for delivery
 Good morning.  It’s an honor to join you at the 1LoD Summit.  As always, the views I express
today are my own, not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal
1
Reserve System.
Introduction
I’m  very  grateful  for  the  return  invitation.    I  have  to  be  honest  with  you,  though.    When  Paul
approached me to speak again this year, I was wary.  What would you all think of having to listen
to me again?  The phrase “cruel and unusual punishment” came to mind.  Then I was reminded
of an old joke.  To paraphrase W.C. Fields:  First prize, one Held speech.  Second prize, two
Held  speeches.    That’s  a  much  more  pleasant  way  to  think  of  a  return  engagement.    So
congratulations on second prize.
I really do appreciate this opportunity for two reasons.  First, I want to express again my support
for risk managers in the first line of defense.  Supervisors and the industry are often on opposite
sides of the table—or opposite sides of the “v.,” as they say in my line of work.  But, in many
instances,  our  goals  are  shared.  “Safety  and  soundness”—the  guiding  principle  of
microprudential  supervision—is  a  shared  objective,  even  if  supervisors  and  the  industry
sometimes disagree how the concept applies to particular facts.  I think we can agree that your
work as first-line risk managers promotes safe and sound operations within your organizations. 
So let me begin with my thanks for your continuing efforts.
Second, there are some things that I would like to get off of my chest.  My topic this morning is
financial  crime—more  specifically,  crime  that  converts  and  corrupts  the  payment  system  to
achieve  its  ends.    This  includes  theft,  fraud,  money  laundering,  sanctions  evasion,  bribery,
kleptocracy, cyber-terrorism, and electronic sabotage.  Combatting financial crime should not be
an  issue  that  finds  supervisors  and  industry  on  opposite  sides  of  the  “v.”    It  is  in  everyone’s
interest—supervisors  and  their  public  constituents;  the  industry  and  its  customers—to  keep
crime and the proceeds of crime out of the payment system.  Of course, no one is perfect.  But
we must be honest with each other about what we’re doing, what we’re not doing, and how we
can improve. 
Let me highlight just one example to demonstrate why I am so focused on financial crime right
now.    As  I’m  sure  many  of  you  have  read,  in  February  2016  international  criminals  used
fraudulent  wire  transfer  instructions  to  steal  and  launder  many  millions  of  dollars  from
Bangladesh  Bank’s  account  at  the  New  York  Fed.    Bangladesh  Bank  is  the  central  bank  of
Bangladesh.  Some of those funds have been recovered, but Bangladesh Bank is still working to
recover most of its loss.  We at the New York Fed are still helping them to do so.  Simply put, it
was not just Bangladesh Bank that was wronged. The New York Fed—my client and employer of
more  than  20  years—was  wronged  as  well.    So  I  come  to  you  today  not  as  a  dispassionate
observer.  I come to you today bearing the scrapes and bruises and scars of our own experience
at the New York Fed.   
This morning, I will speak about where we are and where I think we should go from here.  My
message,  in  brief,  is  that  we  are  all  in  this  together.    The  integrity  of  the  payment  system  is
critical to the U.S. and global economy.  Financial institutions and the official sector must do their
utmost to protect the system from financial crime.
 
1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Where Are We Now?
The  payment  system  can  be  used  to  facilitate  many  types  of  crime.    Fraud  and  theft  have
accompanied money transfers for as long as there has been money.  The Romans considered
counterfeiting to be a form of falsum, which was a fraud against the public.   And, of course,
Willie Sutton provided the timeless, common-sense explanation for bank robbery.
2
Money  laundering  is,  by  contrast,  a  more  recent  development  in  criminal  law.    In  the  United
States,  anti-money  laundering  law  reflects  an  evolution  in  focus  from  banknote  tracking  to
combatting  narco-trafficking  to  counterterrorism.    Rather  than  take  you  through  the  legislative
history of this evolution, I want to refer you to the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network—or
“FinCEN,”  for  short.    Its  website  contains  short  and  accessible  histories  of  major  anti-money
laundering laws.  These summaries highlight the important public goals of the Bank Secrecy Act
and other anti-money laundering statutes—why they are more than just a compliance cost.  One
theme  that  emerges  is  the  increasing  reliance  on  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  to
safeguard the payment system.  Our laws and regulations increasingly bring the industry into
partnership with the government on combatting national security risks to the United States and
financial crime.   
3
Anti-money laundering is not just a matter of historical record.  Our rules continue to evolve.  For
example,  in  2016  the  Treasury  Department  updated  its  regulations  to  require  that  banks  and
other  financial  institutions  verify  the  identity  of  the  natural  persons—that  is,  the  “beneficial
owners”—who  own  or  control  companies  that  hold  accounts.   The  beneficial  owner  rule,  like
other “know your customer” rules, is a regulatory floor, not a ceiling.  Covered firms can take the
initiative  to  implement  more  stringent  internal  rules  based  on  their  risk.    Indeed,  in  December
2018, the federal banking agencies published guidance that encouraged innovation in anti-money
laundering  compliance—pilot  programs  that  exceed  the  legal  minima,  or  at  least  make
5
compliance more efficient.
4
7
Experiments in ratcheting up internal thresholds are welcome.  As I have said in other contexts,
one  challenge  in  a  rules-based  regime  is  that  the  pace  of  rulemaking  is  not  always
commensurate with the pace of rule breaking.  Complying with minimum legal thresholds may
not be sufficient in all circumstances to appropriately mitigate risk to your firm or the payment
system.   Technology  has  greatly  expanded  access  to  the  payment  system.    Many  of  us—
everyday  consumers,  that  is—effect  payments  not  only  directly  through  our  banks,  but  also
through various “fintech” intermediaries.  There is much good in this, but technology is not risk-
free.    The  creative  development  and  application  of  technology  can  create  opportunities  to
improve the payment system.  Technology also creates new opportunities to compromise that
system. 
6
Take, for example, the nascent challenge presented by the development of digital currencies. 
The New York State Attorney General’s office estimates that more than 1,800 virtual currencies
are exchanged around the world.  Many digital currencies use distributed ledger technologies,
which can help institutions achieve efficiencies in customer due diligence programs.  Distributed
ledgers also promote traceability, which in theory assists law enforcement.  That said, the use of
private exchanges for these digital currencies may facilitate anonymity, which tends to help the
bad guys.
8
My concerns, however, are less about the technological frontier, and more about well-established
risks  to  the  payment  system.      Recent  press  reports  about  financial  crimes  involving  1MDB,
Danske  Bank,  Swedbank,  and,  yes,  Bangladesh  Bank  make  no  mention  of  fancy  new  digital
currencies.  Rather, if press reports are to be believed, these cases are to varying degrees about
theft, fraud, greed, and corruption. 
Less covered in the press is trade-based money laundering—that is, using legitimate trade to
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
hide illicit sources of funds.  The United States is particularly vulnerable to trade-based money
laundering  because  more  than  half  of  the  world’s  trade  is  denominated  in  U.S.  dollars.   The
Department  of  Homeland  Security  and  the  Drug  Enforcement Administration  have  warned  for
years that a large amount of illicit narcotic payments occur through low-tech solutions like over-
or under-invoicing of goods, false documentation, or phantom shipping.
 These methods give
illegitimate transfers the appearance of ordinary transactions.  FinCEN has warned against the
use of “funnel accounts” to facilitate trade-based money laundering of narcotics proceeds, and
has provided the industry with a list of red flags associated with such activity.
  Trade-based
money  laundering  can  also  be  used  to  evade  sanctions  regimes,  sometimes  through  money
service businesses or general trading companies.
12
  
10
11
9
The extent of financial crime from a global perspective is simply staggering.  According to the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the amount of money laundered globally in one year
could  be  as  much  as  $2  trillion.
  That’s  five  percent  of  global  aggregate  gross  domestic
product.    
13
If the scale of global financial crime is too large to contemplate, let’s focus instead on segments
that are local.  A few years ago, the television show 60 Minutes covered an undercover operation
that captured on video fifteen out of sixteen Manhattan lawyers offering advice on how an African
official could secretly move funds into the country.
  The investigator posed as an adviser to an
African  minister  of  mining  who  managed  to  accumulate  millions  of  dollars  for  personal  use—
expensive real estate, a jet, and a yacht.  In the end, no firms actually took on the client.  These
were just preliminary meetings.  And they were a set-up.  No actual crimes were committed.
 Still, only one lawyer out of sixteen told the undercover investigator to get lost.  What an eye-
opener.  As a lawyer and a central banker—and as a New Yorker— I found this report deeply
troubling.     
Where Do We Go From Here?
14
So that’s where I see us today.  Where do we go from here?  Let me share some ideas, which
are not mutually exclusive.
Build Good Habits
For starters, let’s be honest about “looking the other way.”  Many financial institutions have, at
times,  turned  a  blind  eye  to  evidence  of  money  laundering,  sanctions  evasion,  corruption,
kleptocracy, and plain theft. Over time, some institutions become weak links in our system when
they  take  on  riskier  clients,  perhaps  in  order  to  chase  profit,  without  developing  the  ability  to
manage those relationships in a responsible way.  Often these relationships start small: one low-
value, ethically suspect transaction.  But it leads to another and another to the point where the
money is simply too good to turn away, no matter how many red flags there are.  There may be
less  pecuniary  explanations  too.    Regardless  of  the  profit  potential,  our  sensitivity  to  warning
signs can fade from lack of practice.  For every time we look the other way, it is incrementally
easier to ignore the next instance.  On the flip side, each time we intervene, the next intervention
is easier too.  Effective compliance gets better with practice.  Like ethics, it needs to be a habit. 
And don’t think that the bad guys don’t notice a firm’s reputation—or, dare I say, its culture.  Word
spreads quickly.  A law firm or accounting firm or auditing firm can quickly become known for
being “creative” in its approach to an internal investigation or issuing a tax or audit opinion. The
same goes for corporate reputations for strong and weak compliance programs, or high or low
tolerances for risk.  Clients may be attracted to firms with reputations aligned with their goals, for
good or ill.  So, my first word of advice on where to go from here is to safeguard your corporate
reputations by developing good habits.
Just Because It’s Legal, Doesn’t Make It Right
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
That’s very high-level, prudential advice—not legal advice.  A second point I’d like to emphasize is
to avoid cabined views of what’s permissible or impermissible.  Just because something is legal,
doesn’t make it right.
I’m a lawyer, and I like to say that legal expertise is what gets you into the room.  Knowing the law
is necessary for professional legitimacy.  But, in my view, it is not sufficient.  Lawyers also have
to consider the bigger picture—the purpose of relevant laws, the client’s needs, common sense,
and fairness.  Those same inquiries should be on the minds of other professionals—including
risk professionals in the first line of defense.
I  mentioned  earlier  the  recent  “beneficial  owner”  regulations.    Those  rules  are  part  of  the
customer due diligence regime for financial institutions.  The rules tell you the information firms
are required to gather and retain to help keep financial crime out of the banking and payment
systems.  They do not, however, directly answer the question, “Is this the type of customer we
want to do business with?”  That question requires judgment that is not the exclusive domain of
lawyers.  The answer will depend not on laws and regulations, but on your institution’s purpose
and principles.
Manage Account Relationships
One area where the difference between what’s legal and what’s right is immediately relevant is
the management of customer account relationships, including accounts for respondent banks.  I
know that this can be tricky.  Banks do not want to take on unnecessary legal and reputational
risk  for  the  weaknesses  and  failures  of  account  holders.    Nor  do  banks  want  to  needlessly
disrupt  or  impair  the  efficiency  and  speed  of  the  payment  system.    But  that  system  is  under
attack.  Perhaps we need to think differently about risks, benefits, and costs. 
An  especially  difficult  decision  is  whether  to  close  accounts  for  respondent  banks  with  a
demonstrable record of mismanaging their risks of money laundering and other financial crime.  I
suspect  that  many  firms  will  say  that  they  already  do  this.    But  they  may  not  do  it  enough,
frankly.  Or at the least, they may not ask enough questions when confronted with serious red
flags about a respondent bank’s activities.  It is a process that requires careful attention.  If a
particular bank, or other financial services provider, is unwilling, or even truly unable, to do their
part to protect the payment system, then perhaps they should not be part of it.  
To  be  crystal  clear:    I  do  not  support  the  large-scale,  regionally  focused  reduction  of  the
availability  of  correspondent  banking  services,  sometimes  referred  to  as  “de-risking.”    The
industry has been criticized for “de-risking” with a broad sword.  I am recommending a scalpel. 
My  concern  is  how  correspondent  banks  protect  themselves  and  the  payment  system  from
specific  institutions  that  have  a  demonstrated,  and  unremediated,  history  of  unfairly  exposing
others to their risks.    
15
Client-facing roles are critical to identifying customers that do not play by the rules.  The Federal
Financial Institutions Examination Council—or “FFIEC”—publishes examples of red flags in its
interagency  exam  manual.
    Many  of  these  examples  require  an  understanding  of  ordinary
customer behavior in order to spot unusual behavior.  Moreover, reasons for suspicion may not
be  apparent  from  transmittal  records,  and  can  be  outside  the  lens  of  automated  compliance
filters, despite their technological sophistication.  What makes one transmittal of funds different
from another is purpose. An understanding of purpose often comes from meeting a customer in
person and speaking with her about her business goals. 
Improve Communication
One final way forward is to improve communication and information sharing.  Here are some
questions you might consider.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Within your firms, how does the front office communicate with the control and audit functions
about  money  laundering  risk?    Is  there  a  frank  discussion  about  common  challenges?  Or  do
those discussions resemble depositions or some other defensive exercise?
Between and among firms, do you take advantage of inter-bank information sharing opportunities
pursuant to Section 314(b) of the USA PATRIOT Act?
 If you are a smaller, community-oriented
bank, how are you using recent federal guidance that encourages collaborative arrangements
that  pool  anti-money  laundering  resources?   Regardless  of  size,  does  your  firm  insist  that
customers use the proper SWIFT message type with all the required fields completed in the right
format?   And,  if  your  firm  processes  high-risk  activity  with  limited  transparency,  do  you  ask
respondent banks to supplement payment messages with additional information? 
16
17
When communicating with the government, how helpful are your suspicious activity reports—or
SARs, for short?  Are you filing them in the spirit in which they were intended, or for defensive
purposes?   Are  you  picking  up  the  phone  to  call  law  enforcement  when  you  file  a  SAR  that
presents heightened concerns and perhaps should not wait to run through the formal reporting
and referral process?  And, in response to a terrorist attack or other significant national security
event, is your bank proactively searching its payment activity to see if it has potentially relevant
information? 
One question that I get asked from time to time is if law enforcement can share more information
about  the  activity  reported  in  SARs.    I  believe  law  enforcement  is  always  looking  for  ways  to
enhance  the  effectiveness  of  its  information  sharing.    I  want  to  recognize  FinCEN’s  efforts  to
share more information via its public website and in its reports to Congress about the information
it collects from the industry through SARs.  The New York Fed also tries to do its part.  It hosts
three  major  conferences  every  year  in  which  the  FBI,  FinCEN,  local  law  enforcement,  and
financial  firms  discuss  financial  crime—especially  terrorist  financing,  money  laundering,  and
cyber-crime.  We do our best to act as a liaison between banks and law enforcement officials. 
We’ll keep at it.
Conclusion
Stepping back, I’d encourage you to consider as well what your firm’s response to financial crime
says about its purpose and culture.  What does it say about the role of the financial services
industry in society?  And, to get personal for a moment, how does that response make you feel
about where you work and how you make a living? 
From where I sit, gaps in AML and other payment system defenses make a terrible impression
because of the terrible things funded through illegal payments.  When criminals take advantage
of  your  firms  and  our  financial  system  to  make  use  of  their  ill-gotten  gains,  they  make  every
institution involved play the fool.  And here I am going to use the “M” word: morals.  Now I know
that whenever a lawyer starts talking about morals, eye rolling ensues—often justifiably.  But I do
think that detecting and deterring financial crime is not just a legal obligation.  It is a moral one.    
Thanks for letting me get all of that off of my chest.  I’m honored that you wanted me back this
morning.  Forums like this highlight important issues and choices.  Make the right choices, not
just the legal ones.  I wish you all a good conference.  Thank you.
1
2
3
4
Richard Charlton, Meghan McCurdy, Brett Phillips, Thomas Noone, Sean O’Malley, and Edward Silva assisted in
preparing these remarks.
See  Adolf  Berger, Encyclopedic  Dictionary  of  Roman  Law  467  (1953).  See  also Marcus  Tullius  Cicero, In
Verrem 2.1.108 (tracing the crime of counterfeiting to the Cornelian laws).    
FinCEN, History of Anti-Money Laundering Laws.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
31 C.F.R. § 1010.230.
SR 18–10: Joint Statement on Innovative Efforts to Combat Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing, Dec. 2,
2018.
See Michael Held, Reforming Culture and Conduct in the Financial Services Industry: How Can Lawyers Help?,
Remarks at Yale Law School’s Chirelstein Colloquium, Mar. 8, 2017.
Cf. Preet  Bharara, Criminal Accountability and Culture, Remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s
Conference: Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue, Oct.
20, 2016 (criticizing a “culture of minimalism,” in which firms “do the least amount possible to be in some kind
of compliance with rules”).
Virtual Markets Integrity Initiative Report, Sept. 18, 2018.
2018 National Money Laundering Risk Assessment 6. 
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, a division of the Department of Homeland Security, created its
Trade Transparency Unit in 2004. 
FinCEN Advisory: Update on U.S. Currency Restrictions in Mexico: Funnel Accounts and TBML, May 28, 2014.
Office of Foreign Assets Control, Advisory on the Use of Exchange Houses and Trading Companies to Evade
U.S. Economic Sanctions Against Iran, Jan. 10, 2013. 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Money Laundering and Globalization.
Debra  Cassens  Weiss, Group goes undercover at 13 law firms to show how US laws facilitate anonymous
investment, ABA Journal, Feb. 1, 2016. 
Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination  Council, Bank  Secrecy  Act  Anti-Money  Laundering  Examination
Manual, App’x F (“Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing ‘Red Flags’”).
Section 314(b) of the USA PATRIOT Act is not codified in the United States Code, but is available as a historical
note to 31 U.S.C. § 5311.  The operative rule appears in Department of Treasury regulations.  See 31 C.F.R. §
1010.540 (“Voluntary information sharing among financial institutions”).
SR 18–8: Interagency Statement on Sharing Bank Secrecy Act Resources, Oct. 2, 2018.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
