Luis de Guindos: Euro area banks - the profitability challenge
Keynote speech by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the ABI
annual conference "Banking Union and Basel III – risk and supervision 2019", Rome, 25 June
2019.
Euro area banks’ profitability remains weak
 The resilience of the euro area banking sector has continued to improve over the past few years,
supported by a sustained economic expansion. Banks’ aggregate Common Equity Tier 1 ratio, a
key measure of capital strength, stood at 14.3% at the end of 2018, up from 12.7% in mid-2015.
Cyclical factors have also helped banks’ profitability recover from its trough in the wake of the
sovereign debt crisis.
That said, banks’ return on equity (ROE), at around 6%, still falls short of their cost of capital,
which is estimated at around 8-10% for most banks.  Euro area banks’ ROE also remains below
that of some of their international peers, for instance US and Nordic banks. Recently, profitability
concerns have again come to the fore as the operating environment for banks has become more
challenging, with economic growth projected to slow down in 2019. Banks’ profitability prospects
could thus be dampened by deteriorating growth expectations, adding to structural weaknesses.
1
A number of banks continue to have depressed market valuations, with price-to-book ratios well
below one, mirroring their weak current and expected profitability. In other words, price-to-book
ratios  below  one  indicate  that  those  banks  are  not  earning  their  corresponding  cost  of  equity
(COE). However, it is important to stress that the situation of individual banks across the euro
area  varies  considerably  in  terms  of  both  ROE  and  COE.  There  is  still  a  large  gap  between
overperformers  and  underperformers;  in  the  past  few  years  around  one-quarter  of  significant
banks delivered an ROE of at least 8%, while the ROE of the worst-performing quartile remained
below 3%. The COE situation is also very mixed: over 20% of European banks surveyed by the
European Banking Authority estimate their COE to be above 10%, while around 10% of them
estimate it at below 8%.
Why is low profitability a concern from a financial stability perspective?
So  why  does  low  bank  profitability  matter  for  financial  stability?  Perhaps  most  importantly,
persistently low profitability can limit banks’ ability to generate capital organically. This makes it
harder for them to build up buffers against unexpected shocks and limits their capacity to fund
loan growth. At the same time, banks with weak profitability prospects and low market valuations
could  find  it  very  costly,  or  even  prohibitively  expensive,  to  raise  capital  from  market  sources
should the need arise.
In addition, banks with limited current earnings power may also be tempted to take on more risk.
Higher  risk-taking  by  banks  can  cause  financial  imbalances  to  build  up,  should  risks  be
correlated. In fact, in the banking sector, profitability which is (too) high may be as much of a
problem as profitability which is (too) low, as it may be an indication of excessive risk-taking of
the sort observed in the run-up to the global financial crisis.
Against  this  background,  today  I  will  focus  my  remarks  on  the  main  determinants  of  banks’
profitability outlook. I will cover both cyclical and structural factors, as well as possible ways for
banks to return to sustainable profitability.
Cyclical factors have helped improve bank profitability in recent years
Bank performance is closely linked to economic activity. In fact, bank profitability has improved in
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  past  few  years  on  the  back  of  continued  economic  growth,  with  euro  area  banks’  ROE
reaching  6%  in  2018,  up  from  3%  two  years  earlier.  Cyclical  factors  have  supported  these
profitability improvements via three channels. First, the broadening economic expansion, coupled
with low interest rates, has made it easier for borrowers to repay their loans, leading to better
credit quality and lower bank provisions. Second, increased lending volumes have helped offset
the  negative  impact  of  shrinking  net  interest  margins. And  third,  a  favourable  macroeconomic
environment  has  also  supported  NPL  work-outs  and  the  reduction  of  risk  premia,  leading  to
higher NPL sales, which have contributed to lower provisioning needs.
In  this  context,  it  is  important  to  recall  that  the  overall  effect  of  our  monetary  policy  on  bank
profitability has so far been broadly neutral. Nevertheless, the overall effects of negative rates on
the  banking  sector  need  to  be  carefully  monitored,  particularly  because  the  balance  of  their
effects will depend on how long rates remain in negative territory.
Progress in tackling structural challenges has clearly been insufficient
Notwithstanding the weakening economic prospects, banks’ profitability is mainly weighed down
by structural factors. Improving cost efficiency is one of their key challenges. Cost efficiency, as
measured  by  cost-to-asset  and  cost-to-income  ratios,  has  deteriorated  since  2010  as  cost
containment has not offset a marked decline in revenues and total assets. As a result, euro area
banks continue to underperform some of their international peers in terms of cost efficiency with
an average cost-to-income ratio of 66%, compared with 55–57% at Nordic and US banks. It is
important to keep in mind, however, that the picture is extremely varied at the level of individual
banks,  and  the  best-performing  banks  in  the  euro  area  have  shown  evidence  of  sustained
2
profitability improvements supported by efficiency gains.
Second, despite notable progress in reducing legacy NPL stocks, some banks continue to face
earnings  headwinds  due  to  low  returns  on  NPLs,  which  tie  up  capital,  absorb  operational
capacity and incur legal and administrative costs.
Third, excess capacity has been offered as an explanation for the euro area banking sector’s low
3
 And based on a
profitability, as it can reduce cost efficiency and erode banks’ pricing power.
composite  indicator  of  overcapacity  constructed  using  various  measures  of  size,  competition
and  efficiency,  euro  area  banks  indeed  score  relatively  poorly  compared  with  other  advanced
economies.
Finally, while market funding conditions remain favourable, the need to issue more bonds that are
eligible under the minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities, or MREL, may pose
challenges for some banks in the coming years, especially smaller banks  and those with lower
credit ratings. A possible increase in funding costs might complicate their efforts to build up the
necessary loss-absorption capacity and could weigh on their profitability.
Possible ways for banks to return to sustainable profitability
4
Let me now turn to discussing the possible solutions to the profitability problem. First, there is no
“one-size-fits-all” strategy for banks to return to sustainable profitability. Each bank’s preferred
strategy will likely depend on multiple factors.
Let’s  start  with  reducing  costs  and  improving  efficiency.  These  are  necessary  steps,  and
potential strategies to achieve them range from more traditional measures, such as downsizing
and  branch  closures,  to  adopting  new,  cost-saving  technologies  aimed  at  digitalising  financial
intermediation services, for example increasing reliance on internet-based banking.
It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  benefits  will  typically  accrue  only  gradually.  Reducing
overcapacity entails restructuring costs in the short run, with the benefits materialising later. And
for digitalisation, there are typically significant short-run costs involving severance payments and
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
IT  investment,  while  the  potential  profitability  gains  may  only  accrue  over  the  medium  to  long
5
term.
Digitalisation can be an important and permanent cost-saving strategy for banks, particularly in
countries  with  a  dense  branch  network.  But  it  needs  to  be  underpinned  by  certain  structural
requirements. Banks’ ability to cut costs will depend on factors such as labour laws, population
density and the overall level of digitalisation in society. The Scandinavian (and Benelux) countries
provide examples of successful cost optimisation strategies through digitalisation.
In  addition  to  cutting  costs,  many  banks  will  also  need  to  improve  their  income-generating
capacities.  One  possible  avenue  for  better  income  diversification  is  by  enhancing  fee  and
commission-based  activities.  However,  the  extent  to  which  banks  can  diversify  into  areas
generating  more  fee  and  commission  income  is  likely  to  depend  on  their  specific  business
models.  In  particular,  banks  that  rely  heavily  on  maturity  transformation  business  to  generate
income could benefit the most from increasing the amount of their total income accounted for by
fee and commission-based activities.
Consolidation can further bolster efficiency through cost-cutting synergies. Evidence suggests
that domestic mergers and acquisitions (M&As) tend to focus on achieving cost synergies, while
cross-border  M&As  appear  to  be  driven  more  by  expansion  opportunities.   This  is  mainly
because banks have greater scope to streamline overlapping distribution networks within their
domestic market.
6
So  domestic  consolidation  is  crucial.  Domestic  M&As  can  deliver  substantial  cost  savings,
particularly in less concentrated banking markets. This can be achieved through economies of
scale,  for  example,  lower  administrative  expenses  and  branch  rationalisation,  and  through
revenue synergies, such as lower funding costs for the merged unit.
However,  consolidation  across  countries  is  an  indispensable  complement  to  domestic  M&As.
Banks  that  are  more  geographically  diversified  have  tended  to  display  stronger  revenue
performance  in  recent  years.   Furthermore,  cross-border  holdings  of  deposits  and  loans  can
help  bolster  economic  resilience  within  the  euro  area  by  helping  to  smooth  shocks  through
income-sharing. These private sector risk-sharing channels play an important role in smoothing
shocks in the United States but are of a much smaller magnitude in the euro area.
7
There are still some significant obstacles preventing us from reaping the full benefits of cross-
border consolidation. In order to facilitate larger M&As within the euro area banking sector, we
must  make  further  progress  towards  completing  the  banking  union  and  the  capital  markets
union, and overcome prevailing regulatory and supervisory obstacles. Truly pan-European banks
need  to  conduct  liquidity  and  capital  management  at  the  consolidated  level  to  be  efficient.
Concrete steps in this direction involve establishing a European deposit insurance scheme and,
subsequently,  removing  national  options  and  discretions,  for  example  regarding  capital  and
liquidity,  as  well  as  harmonising  insolvency  laws  and  taxation  regimes.  Discrepancies  in
insolvency  and  judicial  systems  hamper  cross-border  activity  in  capital  markets. A  consistent
and  efficient  framework  for  pursuing  failed  contracts  is  vital  to  reduce  uncertainty  for  cross-
border investors.
Concluding remarks
Let me conclude.
The  persistently  weak  profitability  of  the  euro  area  banking  sector  remains  a  key  concern  for
financial stability, as it constrains banks’ ability to build up buffers against negative shocks. While
cyclical factors have helped improve bank profitability over the last few years, progress in tackling
structural challenges has clearly been insufficient.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Reducing  costs  and  improving  efficiency  are  necessary  steps,  and  digitalisation  can  be  an
important and permanent cost-saving strategy for banks, but it needs to be underpinned by the
structural requirements I mentioned earlier, such as a general environment that is conducive to
digitalisation. Many banks also need to improve their income-generating capacities, for example
by enhancing fee and commission-based activities.
In terms of the euro area banking sector as a whole, consolidation, both domestic and cross-
border, is vital if we want the sector to become more efficient. We need to facilitate this. And we
urgently need to make  further  progress  towards  completing  the  banking  union  and  the  capital
markets union.
The Single Market is still fragmented along national lines. National options and discretions in the
regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  reduce  the  economies  of  scale  for  banks  operating
across  borders.  Decisive  steps  to  overcome  these,  the  establishment  of  a  European  deposit
insurance scheme as well as the harmonisation of insolvency laws and judicial frameworks are
necessary bold steps to allow for the emergence of efficient pan-European banks and greater
private risk-sharing in the European Union.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
European Banking Authority (2018), Risk Assessment Questionnaire – Summary of the Results, December.
See Andersson,  M.,  Kok,  C.,  Mirza,  H.,  Móré,  C.  and  Mosthaf,  J.  (2018),  “How  can  euro  area  banks  reach
sustainable profitability in the future?”, Special Feature, Financial Stability Review, ECB, November.
See  Constâncio,  V.  (2017),  “Challenges  faced  by  the  European  banking  sector”,  speech  at  the  Risk  &
Supervision 2017 Conference organised by Associazione Bancaria Italiana, Rome, 14 June.
See Klaus, B. and Sotomayor, B. (2018), “Bond funding of euro area banks: progress in the issuance of loss-
absorbing instruments”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, November, Box 7.
See Huljak, I., Mikkonen, K., Móré, C. and Perales, C. (2018), “Digitalisation and its impact on banks’ costs and
profitability”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, November, Box A.
See  ECB  (2017), Financial  integration  in  Europe,  May.  The  report  also  provides  an  in-depth  review  of  the
literature studying the costs and benefits of bank consolidation.
See Andersson et al. (2018), op. cit.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
