Encik Adnan Zaylani Mohamad Zahid: Welcoming remarks - Islamic
Finance Rendezvous Series
Welcoming  remarks  by  Mr  Encik  Adnan  Zaylani  Mohamad  Zahid,  Assistant  Governor  of  the
Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Islamic Finance Rendezvous Series,
Bayan Lepas, 14 January 2019.
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning.  On  behalf  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  I  would  like  to
express our appreciation to the state government of Penang for hosting this inaugural Islamic
Finance Rendezvous Series; and to the Chief Minister of Penang, YAB Tuan Chow Kon Yeow
and  YB  Dato’  Haji  Abdul  Halim  bin  Haji  Hussain  for  gracing  this  event.  I  would  also  like  to
welcome the businessmen and entrepreneurs joining us this morning.
A recent survey we did revealed that almost 60% of SMEs were not aware of the availability of
Islamic business financing facilities. Indeed, most SMEs adopted conventional financing. Some
may  still  have  the  misconception  that  Islamic  finance  is  only  for  Muslims.  Today,  we  hope  to
dispel this and create more awareness about what Islamic finance is and has to offer. We have
assembled  a  number  of  industry  experts  and  leaders  for  this,  and  I  would  like  to  extend  our
thanks  to  the  Association  of  Islamic  Banking  and  Financial  Institutions  Malaysia  (AIBIM),  the
Malaysian  Takaful Association  (MTA)  and  other  partners  for  your  support  and  commitment  to
organise this programme. 
Islamic finance has evolved from a niche market into the mainstream
Allow  me  to  give  an  overview  of  where  we  are  in  Islamic  finance.  Islamic  finance  is  an
established industry in Malaysia. Islamic banking assets stood at RM874 billion or 30.4% of total
banking assets as at end September last year, with an annual growth of 10% over the past three
decades. The end of Q3 last year also saw takaful contributions amounting to RM1.7 billion with
market  penetration  at  15%.  Growth  of  Islamic  finance  in  Malaysia  has  been  resilient  and
supportive  of  social  and  economic  developments.  What  underlies  this  growth  is  the  robust
foundation and building blocks that the government and Bank Negara Malaysia, together with the
industry, have worked towards, namely in infrastructure development, institution building, robust
regulatory framework and product development. We are now at a stage where we view that the
foundations are solid and the industry is ready to deliver solutions to meet your needs.
Islamic finance as an enabler of growth
There  is  now  a  wide  ranging  spectrum  of  Islamic  financial  products  to  meet  the  needs  of
businesses. These include:
supply  chain  finance,  which  enables  businesses  particularly  SMEs,  to  leverage  on  the
creditworthiness  of  their  anchor  suppliers  or  buyers  who  are  mainly  MNCs,  to  obtain
financing at a more affordable rate which may not be possible through direct approach with
banks;
coverage in takaful products at competitive prices, which for example include coverage for
loss  or  damage  to  goods  shipped  on  all  types  of  conveyances  from  manufacturing  to
trading;
the  Investment Account  Platform  or  IAP,  established  by  six  Islamic  banks  in  2016  as  the
world’s  first  Islamic  bank-intermediated  fintech  platform  that  offers  more  competitive
financing  terms  and  variations  in  financing  structures  for  ventures.  To  date,  the  IAP  has
supported eight ventures worth RM161.3 million; and
sukuk  as  an  alternative  form  of  financing  for  businesses,  such  as  green  sukuk  for  green
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
businesses. To date, five green sukuk have been issued by Malaysian solar companies to
finance solar power projects, amounting to RM866.8 million since July 2017.
These are but a flavour of what Islamic finance can offer and I am sure you will hear about many
more today.
National policy for nurturing SMEs
At the national level, the government is indeed supportive of the role of Islamic finance as an
important tool to assist  businesses  and  SMEs  to  flourish.  Developing  Islamic  finance  and  the
growth of SMEs are key national strategies, as reflected in the recent 2019 Budget.  The SME
Shariah-Compliant Financing Scheme of RM1 billion was established to strengthen SMEs. SMEs
can enjoy lower financing costs offered by this scheme with a 2% reduction in financing rate.
Sukuk issuers also benefit from the three year extension of the double tax deduction for additional
expenditure incurred for sukuk issued under Ijarah and Wakalah principles. Other cost savings
for  sukuk  issuers  include  reduction  in  professional  fees  relating  to  due  diligence,  drafting  and
preparation  of  prospectus;  and  various  fees  charged  by  Securities  Commission  Malaysia  and
Bursa Malaysia.
Islamic finance is anchored on sustainable values beyond profit
The unique propositions of Islamic finance are drawn from its underlying Shariah principles that
have universal applications, which fundamentally advocate the prevention of harm or attainment
of benefits. All Islamic finance transactions must reflect Islamic values which are ethical and fair.
Any  financial  conduct  or  transaction  relating  to  goods  or  services  that  are  contrary  to  Islamic
principles are prohibited, thus promoting fairness, equality and justice. As such, Islamic finance
practitioners are duty-bound to observe the norms of high ethical conduct to uphold the values
and the sanctity of Shariah. Businesses can therefore take assurance that their financial needs
are well served, managed and protected. For the halal industry, players could benefit greatly from
appropriately  raised  funding  and  protection,  which  ultimately  nurture  an  end-to-end  halal
ecosystem.
Beyond  this,  the  Islamic  financial  system  also  promotes  Value-based  Intermediation  (VBI).
Through VBI, Islamic financial institutions are encouraged to adopt more structured frameworks
to  assess  how  they  create  value  and  impact,  particularly  in  response  to  changing  economic,
social and environmental conditions.  In going beyond profit, VBI is set to be one of the drivers for
Islamic financial institutions to assist entrepreneurs to grow their businesses. This would require
an  understanding  of 
to
recommending a particular product or service, rather than focusing on a predetermined range of
services. Islamic financial institutions are also expected to assist and guide businesses to adopt
sustainable  business  practices.  The  financing  model  for  businesses  and  SMEs  will  be  more
holistic;  including  provision  of  environmental-friendly  business  solutions,  entrepreneurship
training and consulting services. This model can better assist aspiring businesses to improve
efficiency and reduce costs, which will lead to greater sustainability.
the  entrepreneurs’  specific  needs  and  circumstances  prior 
Before I end my remarks, I would like to emphasise that the practice of Islamic finance is not and
should not be exclusive to Muslims. Many of its underlying ideas, the pursuit of economic justice
and  risk  sharing  align  with  traditional  and  conventional  economic  thinking.  Mutual  insurance
companies  which  derive  from  risk  sharing,  limited-purpose  banking  which  moves  away  from
interest-based  or  fractional  banking  and  equity  financing,  are  all  ideas  consistent  with  Islamic
finance  principles,  and  are  practised  across  the  world  without  any  reference  to  the  religion.
Indeed, Islamic finance is for all.
I  hope  that  today’s  programme  will  lead  us  to  a  step  closer  in  bridging  Islamic  finance  and
businesses.  There  is  an  exciting  line-up  of  events,  which  includes  a  panel  session  that  will
feature CEOs of Islamic banks and takaful operators, as well as corporate customers who will
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
share their experiences. This will be followed by a knowledge sharing session; industry dialogues
including  a  dialogue  with  Bank  Negara  Malaysia;  and  a  business  matching  session.  I  invite
everyone  present  today  to  actively  participate  in  the  programme  and  to  explore  what  Islamic
finance has to offer. Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
