Yannis Stournaras: A new European landscape towards a unified
credit market and the role of the credit bureau
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the ACCIS (Association of
Consumer  Credit  Information  Suppliers)  Conference  2019  "Enabling  Trust  through  the
Consumer Decision Journey", Athens, 14 June 2019.
 It is a great pleasure to be here today and have the opportunity to share with you my
thoughts on the importance of the European financial services ecosystem and the steps
we need to take in order to strengthen consumer trust.
Firstly, I will briefly outline the importance of credit bureaus in building such a trust by increasing
the efficiency of both lending and borrowing as well as by minimizing information asymmetries
and moral hazard.
Secondly, I will outline the social responsibility dimension of consumer-focused credit activities in
the  framework  of  a  well-functioning  EU  consumer  credit  market,  whereby  creditors  and
intermediaries should act accordingly.
Thirdly, I will touch upon the issues of smart and sound innovation in the credit bureau’s industry,
whereby  a  credit  bureau  should  act  beyond  the  traditional  boundaries  and  have  the  ability  to
connect new customers to all existing financial services.
Fourthly,  I  will  talk  about  the  necessity  of  ensuring  a  level-playing  field,  for  all  credit  bureau
participants by minimizing the monopolistic elements that exist in the credit bureau industry.
Finally,  I  will  argue  that  a  better  regulated  credit  industry  will  facilitate  an  efficient  and  cost
effective  credit  risk  assessment,  as  credit  bureaus  can  evaluate  credit  risk  accurately  and
consistently through the use of appropriate tools.
A. The importance of credit bureaus in building trust in the financial system
Building trust is equivalent to the fulfillment of expectations by market participants. Credit bureaus
have a very important role to play in building trust in the financial system, as they are responsible
for  managing  and  providing  credit  data  to  consumers,  while  at  the  same  time  simplifying  the
complexity of credit data usage in consumer financial markets. The benefits of credit bureaus
into building trust in the financial system are the following:
1.  They  improve  the  performance  of  the  financial  sector  and  stimulate  economic  growth  by
increasing the efficiency of lending and borrowing. Borrowers, having registered a positive
past credit history, may seek loans at better and more competitive terms and conditions.
Lenders, on the other hand, can utilize the collateral history – stored in centralized collateral
registries—to assess borrowers’ creditworthiness.
2.  They  address  the  problem  of  moral  hazard  that  is  the  behavioral  unwillingness  of  a
consumer  to  repay.  Credit  bureaus  support  borrower  discipline  since  a  failure  to  repay  a
creditor may result in penalties imposed by other creditors.
3.  They  address  the  problem  of  information  asymmetries,  as  borrowers  and  lenders  may
share the same information regarding risks and pricing. Increased transparency will result in
more informed credit decisions, which will ultimately increase the volume of credit.
4.  They enable the functioning of a competitive financial system, as loan processing becomes
simpler,  collateral  information  is  being  properly  utilized  and  streamlined  and,  in  the  end,
lenders are able to offer new products at competitive interest rates due to the availability of
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
information on customers’ credit risk profiles.
B. Social responsibility of consumer-focused credit activities
As  the  core  business  of  credit  reporting  involves  the  flow  of  information  through  a  network  of
stakeholders, credit reporting activities touch upon sensitive issues, such as the privacy rights of
consumers as well as their protection and security.
We should not forget that, due to the many functions and usages of credit data, sharing of credit
data from credit bureaus raises issues of social responsibility of the credit industry or private
credit bureaus.
It necessitates appropriate prudential supervision, and the need for well-functioning institutions,
which are to be entrusted with the exercise of such a social function. If credit data are not used
within a proper framework, they can result in dysfunctional markets, market abuse, lack of trust
and, in some cases, abuse of fundamental rights. All these can reduce the volume of credit.
Therefore  it  is  of  utmost  importance  to  set  the  policy  goals  correctly  both  in  terms  of  the
institutional or legal form of the organizations managing the data, as well as with regard to the
design and use of databases under the provisions of the law.
C. Challenges from smart and sound innovation
In many ways, the Open Source Credit & Big Data Bureaus that have recently emerged, connect
new customers to existing financial services at a lower cost. Innovative lenders are reshaping
business  models,  underwriting  criteria,  and  customer  experience.  Their  innovations  reflect  an
understanding  of  demographic  changes,  borrower  needs,  and  how  to  connect  to  borrowers
through new technological channels.
As  a  result,  the  transition  from  business-driven  to  data-driven  decision-making  should
revolutionize the way the credit bureaus operate. By relying more on Big Data, Neural Networks,
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, agencies will have the opportunity to approve loans
for consumers in markets whereby access to the banking sector has been limited so far. In this
way, a credit history will be created from scratch at a much lower cost compared to the credit
history  databases  that  exist  today.  At  the  same  time,  creditors  may  get  access  to  such
databases on a fee basis, allowing them to receive a list of customers that have already been
accessed. In order to get the borrower’s profile, no physical appearance may be needed nor any
documents that usually accompany a loan application. Credit scoring techniques may access
data even from the consumer’s smartphone and the system will be able to identify potential credit
risks with a significant level of accuracy.
As certain confidentiality issues may arise, all appropriate technical and legal safeguards should
be employed in order to assure all stakeholders of the confidentiality of the provided information.
D. Competition and level-playing field
The establishment of a level playing field, regarding the competition of financial institutions may
demand that they are equipped with similar tools, and no relevant restrictions or barriers exist
within the EU Member States. In turn, this means that credit-risk data may require a high degree
of standardization.
However, this is far from being the case today, as we are currently facing a fragmented system
of national credit data sharing. Apart from operating at a national level, a number of challenges
arise for calculating and comparing data coverage figures on customers across countries, as
each  credit  bureau  does  not  necessarily  collect  information  on  the  same  population  across
countries. The European Credit Research Institute has conducted a survey commissioned by
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
ACCIS(1) which provides a list of credit bureaus operating in European countries and underlies
the aforementioned challenges.
As a result, competition in the information industry within the EU is almost absent. The market for
credit data remains national and hence, commercial credit bureaus do not face competition.
The EU should have been the relevant market for credit data by ensuring a level-playing field for
all  credit  bureau  participants.  Conditions  may  improve  through  the  interlinkage  of  information
flows to the various credit bureau stakeholders. More specifically, as information flows between
suppliers  andand  users  of  information  increase,  the  interlinkage  between  the  national  credit
bureaus should increase as well, by incorporating more information from customers. In such an
interconnected network, all stakeholders would find it more attractive to join. The more sources
are connected to the network, the more detailed credit knowledge becomes the more useful it
become for risk-management purposes.
E. Regulatory and supervisory initiatives – policy actions
Given the dispersion of sources, the need for the integration of credit markets raises questions
on how to measure over-indebtedness and assess household creditworthiness in similar ways.
This  will  improve  micro  and  macro  financial  surveillance  and  enable  a  more  comprehensive
assessment of financial stability risks. In effect, this calls for a harmonized system of measuring
credit data in the EU.
Nevertheless,  regulatory  and  institutional  experience  vary  amongst  EU  member  states,  as
National Credit Registries do not exist in certain member-states, while various interests in the
credit  industry  have  dictated  how  the  data  centralization  systems  would  be  set  up  (i.e.  credit
bureaus, credit reference agencies, public credit registers etc).
The good news is that the European Central Bank has made significant steps for the setting-up
of a centralized infrastructure for the collection and sharing of granular credit-risk data within the
banking sector on a EU-wide scale, called “Analytical Credit Dataset” (‘AnaCredit’). Anacredit will
impose new reporting requirements for lenders and credit bureaus in the Euro Area, which will
enable the harmonization of credit data that credit bureaus have in their databases. In this vein,
all  stakeholders  (credit  bureaus,  lenders,  borrowers,  consumers)  may  be  obliged  to  use  the
same  set  of  indicators  and  harmonized  definitions  which,  eventually,  will  allow  for  a  pan-
European comparison of the levels of indebtedness levels.
Having said that, our problems will not disappear automatically with an integrated pan-European
Database. The relevant supervisory activities should be enhanced in order to ensure that credit
bureaus  implement  best  practices  in  data  collection  processing  and  submission.  Supervisors
should ensure that appropriate procedures are in place so that the rights of customers can be
protected, while the protection of security and confidentiality of data should remain high on the
agenda.
Best practices indicate that credit reporting systems should benefit from a legal and regulatory
framework that is transparent, predictable, proportionate and supportive of consumer rights. The
legal  and  regulatory  framework  should  allow  more  than  one  credit  bureau  license  in  order  to
avoid  the  creation  of  a  monopoly.  Credit  bureaus  should  be  allowed  to  operate  under  an
institutional  framework  that  could  regulate  its  specific  activities,  including  the  receipt  and
processing of consumer information, its database updates, as well as the means for compiling
information  and  assessing  consumers’  creditworthiness.  Since  the  level  of  information  is
expected  to  be  harmonized,  private  credit  bureaus  that  have  obtained  a  license  could  then
compete on the pricing and the quality of their services.
Finally, the most recent financial crisis unveiled a number of data gaps that hindered effective
supervision  and  regulation  of  the  financial  system.  Credit  bureaus,  as  suppliers  of  data,  can
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
partly bridge the gap, as long as they employ innovative technology and change their business
models by exploiting information from alternative data sources, so as to adapt to the new credit
usage behavior of customers.
Sources:
Marc Rothemund, Maria Gerhardt, “The European Credit Information Landscape: An analysis of a
survey of credit bureaus in Europe”, ECRI Industry Survey, (February 2011).
Federico  Ferrett,  “The  Never-Ending  European  Credit  Data  Mess”,  Study  commissioned  by
BEUC, Brunel University London (October 2017).
Olegario  R,  “Credit  Reporting Agencies: A  Historical  Perspective”,  in  Miller  M  (ed.),  Reporting
Systems and the International Economy (MIT Press, 2003), 115–159
Jappelli T. and M. Pagano (2003) “Public Credit information: A European Perspective.” In Credit
Reporting Systems and the International Economy ed. Margaret Miller. Boston: MIT Press.
Dan Khomenko, Australian Government Officer, MicroMoney’s advisor “MicroMoney: The Future
of the Credit Bureau’s industry” (October 2017)
Michael Turner For The Straits Times, “Credit bureau scene could do with more competition”
(October 2014)
Pagano  M.  and  Jappelli  T.,  “Information  Sharing  in  Credit  Markets",  48(5)  Journal  of  Finance
(1993), 1693–1718
Miller  MJ,  “Credit  Reporting  Systems  around  the  Globe:  The  State  of  the Art  in  Public  Credit
Registry  and  Private  Credit  Reporting  Firms”,  in  Miller  MJ  (ed.),  Reporting  Systems  and  the
International Economy (MIT Press 2003 b), 25–79
De  Almeida  AM  and  Damia  V,  “Challenges  and  prospects  for  setting-up  a  European  Union
shared system on credit”, IFC Bulletin No. 37 (January 2014)
Damia  V  and  Israel  JM,  “Standardised  granular  credit  and  credit  risk  data”,  Seventh  IFC
Conference  on  “Indicators  to  support  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability Analysis:  Data  Sources
and Statistical Methodologies” (Basel, 4 and 5 September 2014)
Regulation  (EU)  2016/867  of  the  European  Central  Bank  of  18  May  2016  on  the  collection  of
granular credit and credit risk data (ECB/2016/13), OJ L 144/44.
European Commission, Opinion of 7 August 2015 on the Draft Regulation of the ECB concerning
the collection of granular credit and credit risk data (2015/C 261/01).
Bank of England, “Should the availability of UK credit data be improved?”, Discussion Paper (May
2014)
Banque de France, Étude des Parcours Menant au Surendettement (September 2014)
Ferretti F and Livada C, “The over-indebtedness of European consumers under EU policy and
law”,  in  Ferretti  F  (ed.),  Comparative  perspectives  of  Consumer  Over-indebtedness  – A  view
from the UK, Germany, Greece and Italy (Eleven, 2016), 11–39
Andrew  Powell,  Nataliya  Mylenko,  Margaret  Miller,  and  Giovanni  Majnoni,  “Improving  Credit
Information,  Bank  Regulation  and  Supervision:  On  the  Role  and  Design  of  Public  Credit
Registries”,
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3443, November 2004.
International Committee on credit reporting: “The role of credit reporting in supporting financial
sector regulation and supervision”, World Bank Financial Infrastructure Series, Credit Reporting
Policy And Research, January 2016.
Almeida, A. and Damia V. (2014), “Challenges and prospects for setting-up a European Union
shared system on credit”, Bank for International Settlements, IFC Bulletin 37 – Proceedings of
the Porto Workshop, 20–22 June 2013.
Gutierrez, M. and J. Hwang (2011), “Public Credit Registries as a Tool for Bank Regulation and
Supervision”,  Policy  Brief,  Western  Hemisphere  Credit  and  Loan  Reporting  Initiative. Available
online at
www.whcri.org/PDF/PublicCreditRegistriesPolicyBrief.pdf
Min,  B.  (2014),  “Use  of  Consumer  Credit  Data  for  Statistical  Purposes:  Korean  Experience”,
preliminary draft distributed to participants to the IFC Biennial conference, September 2014.
Cf.  I.  Ramsay,  ‘Consumer  Credit  Regulation  after  the  Fall:  International  Dimensions’  (2012)  1
Journal of European Consumer and Market Law, p. 33; I. Ramsay, ‘Changing Policy Paradigms
of  EU  Consumer  Credit  and  Debt  Regulation’,  in  D.  Leczykiewicz  &  S.  Weatherill  (eds),  The
Images of the Consumer in EU Law: Legislation, Free Movement and Competition Law, (Oxford:
Hart Publishing), p. 159, 162.
Barron J., and M. Staten, (2003), “The Value of Comprehensive Credit Reports: Lessons from
the U.S. Experience.” In Credit Reporting Systems and the International Economy ed. Margaret
Miller. Boston: MIT Press.
Zhang  B  et  al,  Sustaining  Momentum,  the  2nd  European Alternative  Finance  Industry  Report,
Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance (Cambridge University, September 2016 a);
Zhang  B  et  al,  The  2015  UK  Alternative  Finance  Industry  Report,  Cambridge  Centre  for
Alternative Finance (Cambridge University, February 2016 b)
World Bank. 2011a. General Principles for Credit Reporting. Washington DC: World Bank.
www.worldbank.org/en/topic/financialsector/publication/general-principles-for-credit-reporting
International  Finance  Corporation  2012.  Credit  Reporting  Knowledge  Guide,  Washington  DC:
World Bank.
(1)Source: page 1 – “The European Credit Information Landscape: An analysis of a survey of
credit bureaus in Europe”  aei.pitt.edu/33375/
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
