Olli  Rehn:  Which  economic  and  financial  priorities  for  fostering
growth and innovation in the EU?
Opening remarks by Mr Olli Rehn, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Eurofi Financial Forum
2019, Helsinki, 11 September 2019.
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Colleagues and Friends,
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  Helsinki  and  to  the  Eurofi  Financial  Forum  2019.
Helsinki is a major Nordic financial centre and Finland is an active founding member of the EMU
and the Banking Union.
Moreover, central banking has a long history in Finland. Compared to the “youngsters”, like the
Fed and the ECB, the Bank of Finland is a “veteran”, having been founded in 1811, which makes
us  the  4th  oldest  cental  bank  in  the  world.  That  means,  if  you  don’t  count  Finland  being  an
organic  part  of  Sweden,  which  has  the  oldest  central  bank  in  the  world,  Sveriges  Riksbank,
founded in 1668.
The  Eurofi  on  its  part  has  been  providing  a  valuable  platform  for  the  exchange  of  ideas  and
information  between  the  public  authorities  and  the  financial  industry  for  two  decades.  I  am
confident  that  over  the  next  few  days  the  Eurofi  Helsinki  Forum  will  give  us  plenty  of  food  for
thought on topical issues in European economic and financial policy.
The theme of the morning sessions – the economic and financial priorities for fostering growth
and innovation in the EU – could not be more pertinent. Apart from managing immigration better
and reinforcing external and internal security, our key policy challenge in the coming years will be
no less than boosting an economic and industrial revival of Europe.
Let me share some thoughts with you on the priorities to this effect.
First, on macroeconomic policies. As we are on the ECB’s silent period, I will not comment on –
or even touch – monetary policy. I just note that the euro area economy has been on a path of
recovery  and  growth  since  2013.  But  prolonged  pervasive  uncertainty  stemming  from  the
escalating trade war and related to vulnerabilities in the emerging market economies, as well as
ongoing geopolitical tensions, have left their mark on the economic sentiment.
Europe’s labour markets have been resilient, so far, and that is supporting domestic demand.
However, the falling external demand is taking its toll, and having its effect also on the labour
market.
The Bank of Finland and other central banks in the Eurosystem are ready to do what is needed to
reach  our  price  stability  target  and  support  sustained  growth  and  job  creation.  But  monetary
policy cannot be the only active player in the field. Other policy areas should contribute more
decisively to raising the long-term growth potential and reducing vulnerabilities.
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa warned monetary policy makers not to confuse the independence of
the central bank with isolation. As he put it, “strong currency requires a strong economy and a
strong polity, not only a strong and credible central bank”.  There is much room for enhancing
coordination, each policy maker working within the perimeter of its mandate. With limited policy
spaces this is ever more important.
1
Sound fiscal and economic policies at the national level are the first line of defence to deal with
economic shocks. Implementation of structural reforms needs to be substantially stepped up to
increase  resilience,  boost  productivity,  and  reduce  unemployment  in  a  lasting  way. Automatic
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
stabilisers should play their full role. All countries can reinforce their efforts to achieve a more
growth-friendly composition of public finances.
Why  is  that  important?  Because  productivity  growth  is  critical  to  rising  living  standards.
Sustainable  growth  requires  more  investment,  research  and  innovation.  To  accomplish  this,
sufficient public sector contribution is necessary. We need to be able to secure investment in
public infrastructure, including digital infrastructure, not least in countries that are lagging behind
in 5G, or even more regrettably, sometimes even in 4G.
A large and integrated single market is the cornerstone of the EU, but the member states also
benefit  from  open  global  markets.  At  the  same  time,  the  transformation  brought  about  by
globalisation  and  the  digital  revolution  has  resulted  in  winners  and  losers.  This,  in  turn,  has
helped to promote populist policies promising easy answers to difficult questions.
Protectionism,  however,  is  not  an  answer.  Isolation  is  not  possible  without  great  losses  in
citizens’  living  standards.  We  should  continue  to  work  for  a  Europe  that  pursues  growth  also
from  beyond  its  own  borders  through  free-trade  agreements;  for  a  Europe  that  combines  a
strong entrepreneurial drive and a stability culture; and for a Europe that guarantees civil rights
and social justice in the digital age.
These are concrete goals for sustainable growth and job creation – and fundamentally for human
development  –  that  really  matter  to  the  citizens  in  Europe,  which  should  always  be  our  key
yardstick.
Next, let me turn to key policy priorities in the financial sector.
A well-functioning financial system is fundamental for growth. It is a well-known and regrettable
fact that we are still missing a genuine pan-European financial market. It is a fact that the post-
crisis trend of financial reintegration has been weak, which is partly explained by the initially slow
recovery of Europe after the crisis.
Yet, the key underlying factor is that there are still too many shortcomings in the EMU financial
architecture.  While  we  have  made  good  progress  in  reinforcing  economic  governance  and
strengthening  the  regulatory  framework,  there  still  remain  too  many  obstacles  for  further
integration.
That’s  why  the  completion  of  the  Banking  Union  and  enhanced  efforts  towards  the  Capital
Markets Union are critical building blocks of both the integrated single market and a more resilient
monetary union.
With regard to the Banking Union, we need to implement the remaining measures to ensure an
effective and credible resolution framework, set up the common deposit guarantee scheme, and
address remaining regulatory obstacles that unnecessarily penalise cross-border integration. To
accomplish this, we need to ensure that greater risk-reduction will go hand in hand with greater
risk-sharing.
The  Capital  Markets  Union  aims  to  break  down  barriers  that  block  cross-border  investments.
Although  we  have  had  successful  EU  initiatives  to  boost  investment  –  with  the  Juncker  Plan
having  triggered  some  EUR  400  billion  of  investments  –  we  need  significantly  more  private
financial risk sharing to support innovation and efficient allocation of capital.
There has been good progress in taking CMU-related EU legislation forward, but major further
steps are still needed to create a well-functioning CMU. Many initiatives will be discussed during
the Forum, including a more harmonised insolvency framework and enhanced transparency of
company financial data that is critical for investment decisions.
I  would  like  to  highlight  one  particular  issue  –  the  need  for  a  European  safe  asset.  We  have
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
frequently underlined this need within the Eurosystem. I am not taking any stand on any specific,
concrete proposal to this effect. But if well-designed, a European safe asset would contribute to
both financial integration and financial stability. Namely, the CMU would genuinely benefit from a
common safe asset against which newly issued securities can be priced, including in the green
bond markets. It would also offer financial stability benefits by lowering risks on banks’ balance
sheets.
The non-existence of a European safe asset also contributes to an excessively unipolar global
financial system and the vulnerabilities it creates. It would not be about challenging the dollar – it
would be about building a more stable global financial system. It would also be about providing an
additional channel for foreign investors to invest in Europe, including into sustainable finance and
the green bond markets.
There are major challenges involved in taking the CMU forward. For that, we need a clear vision
and persistence. We need to revitalise the action plan. With this in mind, in my view it would be
useful to reassess the narrative attached to the CMU. A new concept – “Growth and Investment
Union” for example – might put a more positive drive on the project.
Dear colleagues,
The  current  global  headwinds  underline  the  importance  of  boosting  the  economic  revival  of
Europe through structural reforms, public and private investment in research and innovation, and
a  revitalisation  of  the  Single  Market.  We  need  to  complete  the  EMU  financial  architecture  to
enhance capital allocation and improve private risk sharing. Only in this way can we reap full
benefits of the Single Market.
And, crucially, Europe’s economic revival needs to be combined with the greatest challenge of
our generation: tackling and mitigating climate change. It calls for a consistent strategy from the
EU on how to pursue economic and ecological transformation of our societies and enterprises. In
this challenging task, the financial system will need to play an important role in managing risks
and mobilising capital for green investments.
Let me wish you most productive discussions and enjoyable days in Helsinki! – Many thanks for
your attention.
1
See Padoa-Schioppa (2004)
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
