Sabine  Lautenschläger:  A 
European innovative retail payment solutions
Welcome  address  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  ECB  conference  "An  innovative  single  market  for  the  euro",
Frankfurt am Main, 6 May 2019.
future-oriented  approach 
to  pan-
Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  here  today  to  this  conference  on  an  innovative  single
market for the euro.
It is a great pleasure to see so many of you here today, and I can see that we have quite a lot of
new faces as well as many of the ECB’s regular counterparts in the payments and securities
world.  I’m  not  surprised  at  the  level  of  interest  in  this  conference,  since  we  are  going  to  be
discussing  topics  that  deal  with  nothing  less  than  the  future  of  the  European  payments  and
securities  market.  We  will  discuss  new  technologies,  new  competitors  and  new  payment
solutions – and the need for stakeholders to adapt to the challenges ahead.
Over  the  next  two  days,  we  will  be  discussing  the  interesting  and  important  issue  of  how  to
create a  viable,  future-proof  payment  market  for  us  and  for  our  single  currency  –  the
euro.
Having been born in 1999, the euro itself belongs to Generation Z, a group often characterised as
digital natives. Unlike the rest of us, they didn’t have to learn how to use technologies such as the
internet and smartphones because they have never known anything different.
Members of Generation Z often refer to themselves as innovative. Success in business now and
in the future requires an understanding of the important role innovation plays for Generation Z and
those that come after them.
How does this translate into the world of payments? What are the expectations for innovative
payments in Europe? What can we as a central bank do to facilitate payments innovation at a
pan-European level? These are some of the questions that will be tackled at this conference.
Our aim is to discuss and foster a joint understanding of the challenges ahead and the solutions
to work towards. This is why we have brought together both our more established counterparts
and new market actors from fintechs and start-up companies.
Running in parallel to the conference – and fitting to the theme of innovation – we have organised
the  ECB  instant  payments  challenge  and  a  hackathon.  The  ECB  instant  payments  challenge
offers  a  vibrant  marketplace  for  providers  to  present  prototypes  of  their  innovative  end-user
solutions for instant payments. At the hackathon, developers and experts have been invited to
team up and create open source mobile solutions for SEPA instant credit transfers within the
next  24  hours.  The  solutions  emerging  from  both  the  instant  payments  challenge  and  the
hackathon lab will be showcased at the conference and will no doubt provide further inspiration
for our discussion.
And I am pretty sure that our discussion will be a lively one. Before we get started, I would like to
make some brief general remarks on the European payments market, the Eurosystem’s market
infrastructure  as  the  basis  for  payments  integration  and  innovation,  and  our  vision  for  the
development of pan-European instant payments solutions.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The basis for innovation: a sound market infrastructure
A  domestic  European  payments  market  –  which  is  both  integrated  and  innovative  –  is
fundamental to the creation of a more integrated, competitive and innovative Europe. And in a
world  of  increasing  digitalisation  and  globalisation, such  an  integrated  and  competitive
payments market can only be achieved by exploiting the potential offered by ever more
sophisticated innovative technology. Both established and new market actors should be
able to benefit from the innovative space created.
The  Eurosystem  has  contributed  substantially  to  an  integrated  European  financial  market  by
providing the market infrastructure which enables the safe and efficient flow of payments and
financial  instruments  across  Europe.  But  the  work  is  by  no  means  complete.  The  European
financial market faces digitalisation challenges from both the regulatory and the technical side.
Let me give a few examples.
The revised Payment Services Directive (PSD2) was put in place to foster innovation and
enhance  competition  in  the  retail  payments  market.  Payment  service  providers  have  to
accommodate enhanced security requirements and provide account access to third-party
payment service providers.
On the technical side, the introduction of instant payments means that internal systems and
procedures need to be overhauled so that retail payments can move from batch processing
into the real-time universe.
The  Eurosystem,  too,  has  been  looking  for  ways  to  make  use  of  technical  progress  to
improve  the  efficiency  and  lower  the  costs  of  its  market  infrastructure  services  –  the
TARGET services.
Just think of the TARGET Instant Payment Settlement service, or TIPS.
TIPS is a new Eurosystem market infrastructure service that was launched in November 2018. It
is a truly domestic European market infrastructure settling in central bank money. TIPS enables
banks to provide customers with instant payment solutions that can potentially reach recipients
all across Europe.
Another  Eurosystem  market  infrastructure  initiative  is  the  upcoming  introduction  of  central
liquidity management within the new TARGET services, which will make the use of central bank
money even more efficient for market participants.
By enhancing a stable infrastructure and enabling pan-European harmonisation in the settlement
of payments and securities, we supply a core component for the provision of innovative products
and  services  at  the  domestic  euro  area  level.  And  we  also  support  the  aims  of  the  capital
markets union.
Impetus for the development of standardised pan-European instant payment solutions
With PSD2, the SEPA instant credit transfer scheme and TIPS, the retail payments market in
Europe has the building blocks it needs to provide innovative pan-European payment services.
However,  adopting  the  instant  credit  transfer  scheme  and  connecting  to  TIPS  as  a  passive
participant  or  reachable  party  so  that  customers  may  receive  instant  payments  is  just  a
preliminary step. It is also not enough just to provide the core SEPA instant credit transfer as a
faster alternative to the SEPA credit transfer.
Providers also need to tap into the potential of growing payment volumes, both at physical
points of sale/points of interaction in shops and in e-commerce and they need to offer
domestic pan-European solutions that are safe, efficient and easy to use.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
What we are seeing is that global providers are successfully tapping into this potential, using the
pan-European SEPA schemes – or cards – as the basis for end-user solutions that appeal to
customers.  There  is  nothing  wrong  with  that  –  as  long  as  our  regulatory  requirements  are
respected and there is competition and diversity in the payments market.
But will there be sufficient competition and diversity in the European payments market in the long
run if we continue as we are doing now? What is the biggest challenge for payment service
providers  in  Europe?  Is  it  the  harmonisation  and  integration  measures  introduced  by
central banks and regulators, or is it global competition?
Might it not be more future-oriented to aim to deliver strong and resilient domestic European
payment  services  in  general  and  truly  pan-European  instant  payment  solutions  in
particular, rather  than  defending  national  legacies  or  creating  new  regional  or  group-specific
solutions?
Conclusion
The Eurosystem wholeheartedly supports the creation of an innovative single payments market
for the euro through its market infrastructure projects and policy work. We invite actors in the
payment  service  industry  to  work  with  us  on  a  future-oriented  approach  to  pan-European
innovative retail payment solutions. This will enable us to safeguard a competitive and diversified
payments market –for the benefit not only of Generation Z, but of all individuals and businesses
making euro payments across Europe.
I wish you a fruitful discussion and an enjoyable conference.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
