Shaktikanta Das: Some thoughts on fiscal federalism
Speech by Mr Shaktikanta Das, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the launch of the book
"Indian Fiscal Federalism", Mumbai, 19 March 2019.
 I am honoured to be invited for the launch of the book “Indian Fiscal Federalism” authored by Dr.
Y.V. Reddy and Shri G.R. Reddy. This is the latest in a prolific body of work that draws from Dr.
Reddy’s  hands-on  experience  with  the  Indian  economy  and  public  policy.  These  insightful
expositions are interwoven with glimpses of Dr. Reddy’s professional life and his ‘insider’ views.
2.  As  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  during  2003–2008,  after  his  stint  as  Deputy
Governor during 1996–2002, Dr. Reddy’s journey was studded with many milestones. His tenure
as Governor can be best characterised by the words he used on assuming office in September
2003 to describe what his approach would be. He had said “continuity and change will be mixed
together appropriately.” Of course, it will be remiss of me if I do not to mention the response of
Dr. Bimal Jalan, the outgoing Governor, who said “Dr. Reddy will change whatever I did and will
continue where he left off [as Deputy Governor].”
3. For a Central bank, proactive action is of immense importance. When risks were brewing in
the  pre-2008  period,  Dr.  Reddy  sensed  them  pre-emptively.  Drawing  from  his  speeches,  the
word ‘overheating’ entered the lexicon of monetary policy in India. During the build-up of financial
excesses  in  advanced  economies  with  possible  knock-on  effects  on  bystanders  like  India,  he
resolutely set about preparing India’s defences – building investment fluctuation reserves in the
banking system; recalibrating risk weights for vulnerable asset classes; and setting prudential
limits on inter-bank liabilities. In short, when the world was behaving in a pro-cyclical manner, Dr.
Reddy had turned counter-cyclical ahead of the curve. As events later showed, these bulwarks
became critical in protecting the Indian economy from the ravages of the global financial crisis of
2008–09.
4. I have been an avid follower of Dr. Reddy’s work. Having worked for several years on fiscal
and economic issues, both at national and sub-national levels, I am emboldened by the occasion
provided by the theme of his book to share some of my own thoughts on the subject.
5. From a fiscal perspective, India’s federal system has three important components: (1) Article 1
of the Constitution states that India, that is Bharat, shall be a union of states; (2) the Seventh
Schedule of the Constitution allocates subjects to the Union and the States under different Lists,
with  overlapping  functions  contained  in  a  separate  Concurrent  List;  and  (3) Article  280  of  the
Constitution  mandates  formation  of  the  Finance  Commission  every  five  years  to  recommend
vertical and horizontal devolution of net central taxes and various other grants.
6. Over the past decades, the actual working of these constitutional provisions have generated
considerable  debate.  Successive  Finance  Commissions  have  made  efforts  to  address  the
emerging  issues  and  challenges,  but  in  a  vibrant  democracy  like  India  the  debate  goes  on.
Geopolitical risks have necessitated higher expenditure on defence and internal security. Natural
calamities and disasters have called for higher expenditure on relief and rehabilitation. In parallel,
aspirations of the people and the country as a whole have required that the government spends
more on developmental programmes.
7. The interplay between such developments in the real economy and certain features embedded
in our constitution have thrown up issues which need to be addressed. I would like to highlight
some of these issues. While doing so, I must hasten to stress that the points I am bringing out
do not represent the deliberations or the direction of thinking of the 15th Finance Commission
where I functioned as a Member for more than a year.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
(7.1) Over past several decades, Finance Commissions have adopted different approaches with
regard to principles of tax devolution, grants to be given to states and fiscal consolidation issues.
While at one level, there has to be a framework for fresh and innovative thinking by every Finance
Commission;  at  another  level,  there  is  a  need  to  ensure  broad  consistency  between  Finance
Commissions so that there is some degree of certainty in the flow of funds, especially to the
states. This has become even more critical in the post GST scenario. In other words, there has
to be continuity and change between Finance Commissions. Increasingly, therefore, it is felt that
there  is  a  need  to  give  permanent  status  to  the  Finance  Commission.  The  Commission  can
function as a leaner entity in the intervening period till the next Finance Commission is set up in a
full-fledged  manner.  During  the  intervening  period,  it  can  also  address  issues  arising  from
implementation of the recommendations of the Finance Commission.
(7.2)  The  principle  of  decentralisation  works  better  when  powers  and  functions  are  delegated
based on which tier of governance is best suited to fulfil that responsibility. The constitution has
already provided for delegation of certain functions to the urban and rural local bodies; but it is
seen that there is still good distance to traverse when it comes to devolution of funds to these
local bodies. It is, therefore, essential that the State Finance Commissions are constituted every
5 years as per the mandate in Article 243-I of the Constitution and arrangements are made for
their  robust  functioning. Although  the  provision  under Article  243-I  is  identical  to  the  provision
under Article 280, its implementation has fallen short. There could be reasons for the same, but
they need to be addressed on priority.
(7.3)  Recent  initiatives  in  fostering  co-operative  federalism  have  opened  new  chapters  of  co-
operation between Centre and States. The GST Council is functioning on the principle of shared
sovereignty. As Dr. Y.V. Reddy and Shri G.R. Reddy point out in their book, the sacrifice of fiscal
autonomy at both levels of government in favour of the Council needs to be seen as a ‘trade-off’
so as to reap the benefits of tax harmonisation. Indeed, the Indian model of GST preserves the
essence of Indian federalism. India is, however, a union of states in which both the union and the
states  have  to  be  fiscally  strong.  While  this  issue  has  to  be  addressed  by  the  Finance
Commission, the challenge for the GST Council now is to realise the full potential of GST for
enhancing  tax-GDP  ratio  and  work  on  other  areas  of  our  economy  to  enhance  its
competitiveness.  For  instance,  can  the  GST  Council  expand  its  scope  and  agree  to  work  on
other areas of reforms to generate national consensus?
(7.4)  Co-operative  federalism  should  not,  however,  breed  inertia.  Alongside  co-operative
federalism, there has to be competitive federalism. The ranking of states on the parameter of
‘ease  of  doing  business’  has  generated  very  healthy  competition  among  states.  Indices
developed by the NITI Aayog on health, water management, implementation of SDGs, etc. have
the  potential  to  generate  similar  healthy  competition.  The  program  of Aspirational  Districts  is
another such model for competition and development.
(7.5) There is now general agreement in the country about the importance of fiscal consolidation
roadmap both at national and sub-national levels. While adhering to fiscal deficit targets and debt
to  GDP  ratios,  it  is  equally  important  to  undertake  robust  expenditure  planning  based  on  a
‘commonly agreed expenditure code’ to address the socio-economic challenges without diluting
the goals of fiscal consolidation.
8.  These  are  some  thoughts  which  come  to  my  mind  while  participating  in  this  event  today.
Steps like these will go a long way in strengthening fiscal federalism and overall fiscal robustness
of  our  economy.  I  am  sure  the  book  authored  by  Dr.  Y.V.  Reddy  and  Shri  G.R.  Reddy  will
generate substantive debate and contribute to our understanding of issues connected with fiscal
federalism. I congratulate Dr. Y.V. Reddy and Shri G.R. Reddy on their new book and thank them
and the organisers of today’s event for giving me opportunity to be present here.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
