 J u n e   1 1 ,   2 0 1 9 
Bank  of 
Japan 
 
 Remarks at the Event to Commemorate  
30 Years of the Banca d'Italia in Tokyo 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
I am honored to be here today for the 30th Anniversary of the Banca d'Italia Representative 
Office in Tokyo. I would like to take this opportunity to extend my heartfelt congratulations 
to Governor Visco, Mr. Cicogna, Chief Representative of the Tokyo Representative Office, 
and  all  our  Italian  colleagues  on  this  happy  occasion.  I  am  deeply  grateful  for  the  Tokyo 
Representative Office's commitment over the years to nurturing and deepening the spirit of 
friendship and cooperation between Banca d'Italia and the Bank of Japan, as well as our two 
countries. 
 Looking back, the year 1989 -- in which this office was established -- marked the last year of 
the Showa Era and the first year of the Heisei Era in Japan. Fast forward 30 years to 2019, the 
Heisei Era has just drawn to a close and we have entered the Reiwa Era. In 1989, Japan was 
experiencing  the  last  of  its  bubble  years,  with  the  Nikkei  225  Stock  Average  hitting  its 
all-time high of 38,915 yen. This was followed by a severe financial crisis in the late 1990s 
and  persistent  deflation  since  1998.  Now,  Japan's  economy  is  no  longer  deflationary. 
Nevertheless,  due  mainly  to  the  experience  of  prolonged  deflation,  people's  deflationary 
mindset and behavior have been deeply entrenched based on the assumption that wages and 
prices will not increase easily. Changing this is taking time, and we have continued to pursue 
powerful  and  large-scale  monetary  easing  measures  to  achieve  the  2  percent  target.  Our 
Italian colleagues at the Tokyo Office have witnessed the evolution of our policy measures 
during the turbulent Heisei Era. 
 In the global sphere, 1989 also marked a sea change in global politics, with the collapse of the 
Berlin Wall and the declaration of the end of the Cold War at the historic Malta Summit. With 
the  dismantling  of  the  Cold  War  structure,  the  world  quickly  embraced  globalization. 
Economies  soon  became  more  and  more  interconnected  in  terms  of  trade  and  financial 
transactions.  Of  course,  while  globalization  has  brought  a  wealth  of  benefits  to  the  global 
economy, we should not forget that rapid globalization also might have brought a degree of 
economic  distortion  and  led  to  international  financial  crises,  such  as  the  Asian  Currency 
Crisis in the late 1990s and the Global Financial Crisis in the late 2000s. 
 After  these  30  years,  Italy  and  Japan  now  face  a  number  of  similar  problems.  Population 
aging is one of the most challenging issues our two societies face. When you look at the data, 
 1 
among the G20 countries, the average life expectancy in Japan is the highest, at 84.1 years, 
and that of Italy is the second highest, at 83.1 years. Italy and Japan also share the problem of 
a high debt-to-GDP ratio, partly due to increased social security spending. Such aging-related 
issues were discussed at the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting in 
Fukuoka  last  weekend,  in  which  Governor  Visco  and  I  took  part.  We  had  frank  and 
meaningful  discussions  to  share  the  experiences  of  each  country,  identify  common 
challenges,  and  exchange  views  on  possible  policy  responses  to  strengthen  economic 
fundamentals for sustainable and inclusive growth. To take advantage of the benefits of an 
aging  society,  policy  makers  of  the  G20  countries, including  Italy  and  Japan,  will  need  to 
tailor  their  policies  to  country-specific  circumstances  based  on  the  findings  of  these 
discussions. 
 Now,  I  would  like  to  touch  upon  the  relationship  between  Banca  d'Italia  and  the  Bank  of 
Japan. We take part in many international forums together, such as the G7 and the G20. As 
seating  arrangements  are  often  made  in  alphabetical  order,  I  usually  sit  next  to  Governor 
Visco and always enjoy his insights and wisdom, supported by the excellent economic and 
financial research of Banca d'Italia. Likewise, my old friend President Mario Draghi of the 
ECB was the Governor of Banca d'Italia from 2006 to 2011. He has worked together with the 
Bank of Japan and supported us in various ways. Looking further back, Dr. Paolo Baffi, who 
was your governor from 1975 to 1979, visited us in 1962. At that time, the Bank of Japan was 
beginning  to  enhance  its  relationships  with  other  central  banks  around  the  globe  in 
anticipation of the globalization of the Japanese economy. Dr. Baffi, who was then deputy 
governor, taught courses on monetary policy, reserve requirements, and financial cooperation 
at a 10-week central banking seminar hosted by the Bank of Japan. The participants at the 
seminar  were  senior  officials  from  16  central  banks.  Dr.  Baffi  contributed  to  building  the 
foundations  of  cooperation  between  the  Bank  of  Japan  and  other  central  banks.  All  these 
deep-rooted  relationships  explain  how  Banca  d'Italia  has  supported  us  in  our  international 
activities throughout these years. We do indeed enjoy a strong connection. 
 Lastly,  I  would  like  to  briefly  comment  on the  relationship  of  our  two  countries.  Through 
events such as the Expo Milano 2015, commemoration of the 150th anniversary of diplomatic 
relationship between Italy and Japan in 2016, and many other occasions, the Italian people 
 2 
seem to have developed a keen appreciation of Japan and Japanese culture. In February this 
year,  the  EU  and  Japan's  Economic  Partnership  Agreement  (EPA)  came  into  force 
establishing an economic area with a population of 640 million people, accounting for almost 
30 percent of world GDP and 40 percent of global trade. This EPA should enable an increase 
in and deepening of the trade and investment relationships among Italian and Japanese firms.  
 Coming back to the name of the new era, the Chinese characters for "Reiwa" mean "beautiful 
harmony," or more specifically "culture is born and nurtured as people's hearts are beautifully 
drawn together." As we have reaped the fruits of the rapid globalization in the Heisei Era, the 
time  is  ripe  to  face  up  to  the  associated  challenges  so  that  we  may  continue  to  gain  from 
globalization in the Reiwa Era. I truly hope that we can work together in "beautiful harmony" 
to further enhance the already strong relationship between Italy and Japan. 
 In  closing,  I  would  like  once  again  to  extend  my  sincere  congratulations  on  the  30th 
anniversary of the Banca d'Italia Representative Office in Tokyo, and to thank all those who 
have  made  this  possible.  I  look  forward  to  a  40th,  50th,  and  many  more  anniversaries  to 
come,  as  I  am  confident  that  we  will  continue  to  enjoy  an  even  stronger  friendship  and 
cooperation between Banca d'Italia and the Bank of Japan, as well as between Italy and Japan. 
Thank you. 
 3 
