Yves Mersch: Money and private currencies - reflections on Libra
Speech by Mr Yves  Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the ESCB Legal Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 2 September 2019.
 In 1787, during the debates on adopting the US Constitution, James Madison stated that “[t]he
circulation of confidence is better than the circulation of money”. It’s telling that Madison chose to
use public trust in money as the yardstick for trust in public institutions – money and trust are as
inextricably intertwined as money and the state. Money is an “indispensable social convention”
that can only work if the public trusts in its stability and acceptability and, no less importantly, if
the public has confidence in the resolve of its issuing authorities to stand behind it, in bad times
as well as in good.
Madison’s  18th  century  remark  on  the  link  between  money  and  trust  has  lost  none  of  its
relevance in the 21st century. The issue of trust in money has resurfaced in the public debate on
privately  issued,  stateless  currencies,  such  as  bitcoin,  and  their  promise  to  serve  as  reliable
substitutes  for  public  money.  Today’s  conference  is  neither  the  place  nor  the  time  for  me  to
repeat my past statements on the shortcomings of cryptocurrencies  and why they do not fulfil
the basic tests of what constitutes “money”.
1
Instead,  I  will  today  talk  about  Libra,  Facebook’s  newly  announced  private  currency.  It  is
scheduled  for  release  in  the  first  half  of  2020  by  the  very  same  people  who  had  to  explain
themselves in front of legislators in the United States and the European Union on the threats to
our democracies resulting from their handling of personal data on their social media platform.
There are three key questions here. First, how does Libra differ from other private currencies and
from public money? Second, what legal and regulatory challenges does it pose? And third, in the
light of its mandate, what position should a central bank like the ECB take towards Libra?
The  remainder  of  my  speech  will  be  dedicated  to  these  three  questions,  not  with  a  view  to
conclusively answering them, but merely to raise awareness of some of the risks of Libra, to
question its main premises and, in the process, to highlight the perils of entrusting the smooth
processing  of  payments,  the  savings  of  citizens  and  the  stability  of  the  global  monetary  and
financial systems to unaccountable private entities with a questionable track record in matters of
trust.
So let me turn to my three questions.
First, how is Libra different from other private currencies and from public money?
Despite the hype surrounding it, Libra is, in some respects, no different from other, established
private  currencies.  Similar  to  cryptocurrencies,  Libra  will  be  issued  through  a  public  ledger
running on a form of blockchain technology. And similar to e-money, Libra will be distributed to
end users electronically in exchange for funds denominated in fiat currencies.
But there are some notable differences that are extremely concerning. Libra’s ecosystem is not
only  complex,  it  is  actually  cartel-like.  To  begin  with,  Libra  coins  will  be  issued  by  the  Libra
Association – a group of global players in the fields of payments, technology, e commerce and
telecommunications. The Libra Association will control the Libra blockchain and collect the digital
money  equivalent  of  seignorage  income  on  Libra.  The  Libra  Association  Council  will  take
decisions on the Libra network’s governance and on the Libra Reserve, which will consist of a
basket of bank deposits and short-term government securities backing Libra coins. Libra-based
payment  services  will  be  managed  by  a  fully  owned  subsidiary  of  Facebook,  called  Calibra.
Finally,  Libra  coins  will  be  exclusively  distributed  through  a  network  of  authorised  resellers,
1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
centralising control over public access to Libra. With such a set-up, it is difficult to discern the
foundational  promises  of  decentralisation  and  disintermediation  normally  associated  with
cryptocurrencies and other digital currencies. On the contrary, similarly to public money Libra will
actually be highly centralised, with Facebook and its partners acting as quasi-sovereign issuers
of currency.
You may be wondering what the problem is with Libra’s centralisation. If public money is also
centralised, why should Libra be any different?
What  the  advocates  of  Libra  and  other  private  currencies  conveniently  gloss  over  is  that,
because  of  its  nature  as  a  public  good,  money  has  traditionally  been  an  expression  of  state
sovereignty. It is no coincidence that, throughout history, sovereign actors have underpinned all
credible  and  durable  currencies.  This  historical  fact,  affirmed  in  G.F.  Knapp’s  state  theory  of
money and in the Chartalist school of economic thought, has had a lasting impact on orthodox
perceptions  of  the  concept  of  money  as  a  public  good  and  has  found  its  way  into  statutory
definitions of legal tender.
When  it  comes  to  money,  centralisation  is  only  a  virtue  in  the  right  institutional  environment,
which is that of a sovereign entity and a central issuance authority. Conglomerates of corporate
entities, on the other hand, are only accountable to their shareholders and members. They have
privileged  access  to  private  data  that  they  can  abusively  monetise. And  they  have  complete
control over the currency distribution network. They can hardly be seen as repositories of public
trust or legitimate issuers of instruments with the attributes of “money”.
The high degree of centralisation that is Libra’s hallmark, and the concentration of its issuance
and distribution networks, are not the only features inhibiting trust. Despite its audacious global
currency  aspirations,  Libra  lacks  a  global  lender  of  last  resort.  Who  will  stand  behind  it  in  a
liquidity crisis situation? Libra is also devoid of the equivalent of a deposit guarantee scheme to
protect its holders’ interests during a crisis. Moreover, the limited liability of the Libra Association
members raises serious questions about their resolve to satisfy the claims of Libra holders with
their  full  faith  and  credit,  as  central  banks  do  with  public  money.  Finally,  the  fact  that  Libra  is
backed  by  a  basket  of  sovereign  currency-denominated  assets  appears  to  defeat  the  very
purpose of its issuance as a private currency. Why bank on a proxy when one can put one’s trust
in the genuine article? And how will the potential volume of payment transactions settled in Libra
affect  the  monetary  aggregates  of  its  underlying  currencies,  their  objectives  and  intermediate
targets?
Let  me  now  turn  to  my  second  question,  on  some  of  Libra’s  legal  and  regulatory
challenges.
By  straddling  the  divide  separating  currencies  from  commodities  and  payment  systems,
digitalised private currencies inevitably raise legal and regulatory questions. Libra is no exception.
To keep my speech short, I will only address three of these challenges, but rest assured that
there are many more.
The first challenge concerns Libra’s fundamental legal nature. The choice is, essentially, whether
to  treat  Libra  as  e-money,  as  a  financial  instrument  or  as  a  virtual  currency.  Libra  does  not
appear  to  qualify  as  e-money,  as  it  does  not  embody  a  claim  of  its  holders  against  the  Libra
Association. If Libra were to be treated as a transferable security or a different type of financial
instrument,  both  the  Libra Association  and  any  other  entities  engaged  in  providing  investment
services through Libra coins would fall within the remit of the Markets in Financial Instruments
Directive  (MiFID  II). Alternatively,  if  Libra  were  to  qualify  as  a  virtual  currency  then,  under  the
Fourth Anti-Money Laundering Directive, both Calibra and its authorised resellers would become
subject to the Directive’s anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing obligations, and
to  its  registration  requirement.  Given  the  different  regulatory  implications  of  Libra’s  legal
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
characterisation, regulatory intervention is essential, to either confirm Libra’s classification under
one of the existing legal and regulatory frameworks, or to create a dedicated regime adjusted to
its specificities.
A  second  challenge  is  to  ensure  that  the  relevant  EU  and  Member  State  regulatory  and
supervisory authorities can assert jurisdiction over Libra and its network. But how can this be
done when the entities behind Libra are located outside the EU? One way would be to require
national  custody  of  a  share  of  the  Libra  Reserve  funds  equivalent  to  the  amount  of  Libra  in
circulation in any given EU Member State. But there may be other ways to ensure effective public
control  over  Libra  and  its  network,  and  these  are  worth  exploring.  Ensuring  that  payment
systems are safe and accessible and exercising control over the financial market infrastructures
that underpin our economies will remain public good objectives. And the conditions under which
collateral  or  settlement  finality  are  accepted  will  remain  prerogatives  of  the  regulatory  or
legislative authorities.
The third challenge is the need for cross-border cooperation and coordination. Because Libra will
be used across borders, it is a matter of international interest. Its global nature would also call for
a global regulatory and supervisory response to avoid regulatory arbitrage, ensure consistency of
outcomes and guarantee the efficiency of public policy responses to Libra. There are welcome
signs that the global community is already working together to mitigate Libra’s risks. Both the G7
and  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  have  evaluated  Libra,  with  an
emphasis  on  its  potential  use  in  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing.  Further  work  is
expected by the G20, the Financial Stability Board and other fora with a stake in the stability of the
global monetary and financial system.
Finally, I would like to say a few words about the ECB’s general stance towards financial
innovations such as Libra.
The ECB’s Treaty-based tasks include defining and implementing the single monetary policy and
promoting the smooth operation of payment systems. In the context of monetary policy, the ECB
takes  a  close  interest  in  market  innovations  that  could  directly  or  indirectly  affect  the
Eurosystem’s  control  over  the  euro  or  shift  some  of  its  monetary  policy  to  third  parties.
Depending on Libra’s level of acceptance and on the referencing of the euro in its reserve basket,
it  could  reduce  the  ECB’s  control  over  the  euro,  impair  the  monetary  policy  transmission
mechanism  by  affecting  the  liquidity  position  of  euro  area  banks,  and  undermine  the  single
currency’s international role, for instance by reducing demand for it.
In the context of the smooth operation of payment systems, the ECB takes a close interest in
market innovations that seek to replace the euro with alternative settlement currencies or create
new  and  autonomous  payment  channels.  Although  some  of  Libra’s  aims  are  legitimate,
reductions in cross-border fund transfer costs and other efficiency gains can also be obtained
through established instant payment solutions. The Eurosystem recently launched the TARGET
Instant  Payment  Settlement  service,  or  TIPS  –  a  pan-European,  24/7  settlement  service  for
instant payments. By operating in central bank money, and by being embedded in TARGET2,
TIPS  provides  a  high-performance  payment  solution  that  is  safer  and  more  economical  than
questionable, market-based retail payment innovations.
Let me conclude here.
In  the  field  of  money,  history  bears  testament  to  two  basic  truths.  The  first  is  that,  because
money  is  a  public  good,  money  and  state  sovereignty  are  inexorably  linked.  So  the  notion  of
stateless money is an aberration with no solid foundation in human experience. The second truth
is that money can only inspire trust and fulfil its key socioeconomic functions if it is backed by an
independent but accountable public  institution  which  itself  enjoys  public  trust  and  is  not  faced
with the inevitable conflicts of interest of private institutions.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Of the various forms that money has taken throughout history, those that have best fulfilled their
purpose and proven the most credible have invariably benefited from strong institutional backing.
This backing guarantees that they are reliably available, that their value is stable and that they are
widely  accepted.  Only  an  independent  central  bank  with  a  strong  mandate  can  provide  the
institutional backing necessary to issue reliable forms of money and rigorously preserve public
trust in them. So private currencies have little or no prospect of establishing themselves as viable
alternatives to centrally issued money that is accepted as legal tender.
The stance of central banks towards modern forms of money is bound to evolve with time, and
central  bankers  have  embraced  technological  developments  in  the  field  of  money  and  will
continue to explore helpful new innovations. But the rise of cryptocurrencies and other forms of
privately issued instruments that can only fulfil some, but not all, of the functions of money is
unlikely to fundamentally upset the two truths I just described. If anything, it will serve as a useful
reminder  of  central  banks’  pivotal  role  as  responsible  stewards  of  public  trust  in  money,  and
stress  the  need  for  vigilance  towards  phenomena  capable  of  undermining  public  trust  in  the
financial system.
I  sincerely  hope  that  the  people  of  Europe  will  not  be  tempted  to  leave  behind  the  safety  and
soundness  of  established  payment  solutions  and  channels  in  favour  of  the  beguiling  but
treacherous promises of Facebook’s siren call.
1
See Mersch, Y. (2018), “Virtual or virtueless? The evolution of money in the digital age”, lecture at the Official
Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum, London, 8 February.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
