03.06.2019 
A framework for the CCyB
Opening address at the Second Financial Stability Conference  
(Banco de España /CEMFI) 
Pablo Hernández de Cos
Governor 
Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
It is a pleasure for me to welcome you to the Banco de España to participate in 
the Second Financial Stability Conference. As in the first edition, this event has 
been  jointly  organised  by  the  Banco  de  España  and  the  Centro  de  Estudios 
Monetarios  y  Financieros  (CEMFI).  So  allow  me  to  start  by  expressing  my 
gratitude to the organisers, in particular Rafael Repullo, director of CEMFI, and 
to  all the  members  of  the  scientific  committee,  responsible for  promoting  the 
conference and selecting the papers included in the programme. 
Let  me  also  thank  the  keynote  speakers,  Agustín  Carstens  and  Lars  Peter 
Hansen, for their willingness to attend. And also the rest of the speakers, the 
discussants and, of course, the participants in the panel. It was difficult for the 
scientific committee to select the eleven papers that will be presented in these 
two days from the more than one hundred submissions received. In the end, in 
my  view,  a  good  balance  has  been  reached  in  the  programme.  It  combines 
excellent academic papers that will provide interesting insights into theoretical 
and empirical developments related to financial stability with policy issues on 
the  most  practical  aspects  of  the  organisation  and  governance  structures  of 
macroprudential policy. I have no doubt that, in these two days, both supervisors 
and  financial  stability  policy-makers  will  have  a  constructive  and  enriching 
dialogue with academia on macroprudential policy.  
Macroprudential institutional framework in Spain: the creation of AMCESFI 
The  timing  of  the  conference  is  particularly  important  for  us,  since  our  new 
macroprudential institutional arrangements have just been set up. In early 2019 
the Spanish Macroprudential Authority – Financial Stability Board (AMCESFI by 
its  Spanish  acronym)  was  created.  Its  main  goal  will  be  to  contribute  to  the 
promotion of coordination and the exchange of information on financial stability 
issues among the Banco de España, the Ministry of Economy and Enterprise, 
the Spanish National Securities Market Commission and the Directorate-General 
of  Insurance  and  Pension  Funds.  Such  an  institution  provides  Spain  with  a 
structure  similar  to  that  of  other  EU  Member  States,  in  line  with  the 
recommendations issued by the European Systemic Risk Board and the IMF. 
In parallel, the supervision of the financial system was reinforced, extending the 
range of macroprudential tools available to the sectoral supervisory authorities, 
which  remain  individually  responsible  for  deciding  when  they  should  be 
activated.  In  particular,  the  Banco  de  España  is  now  empowered  to  require 
banking  institutions  to  establish  countercyclical  capital  buffers  by  credit 
segment, limits on concentration in relation to economic activity sectors, and 
limits and conditions  when underwriting new loans (in terms of loan-to-value, 
loan-to-income and debt service-to-income, and also the maturity, the currency 
in which the operation is denominated and whether the interest rate is fixed or 
variable, among others). 
3/11
Some  of  these  new  macroprudential  tools,  in  particular  those  based  on  the 
borrowers’  ability  to  pay,  have  already  been  introduced  into  the  national 
legislation  of  other  EU  Member  States  to  prevent  excessive  easing  of  credit 
underwriting  standards  by  banks  and  to  contribute  to  the  sustainability  of 
household  and  corporate  debt.  These  new  instruments  complement  those 
already available to the Banco de España included in the European legislation: 
the  countercyclical  capital  buffer,  the  systemic  risk  buffer  and  the  buffer  for 
systemic banks, among others.  
All in all, this new institutional setting is a significant step forward in reinforcing 
financial stability in Spain. 
The importance of a macroprudential policy framework 
In  my  view,  the  introduction  of  macroprudential  policy  instruments  to 
complement monetary and fiscal policy is probably one of the most significant 
policy  developments  following  the  global  financial  crisis.  For  countries  in  a 
monetary  union,  like  Spain,  the  introduction  of  these  tools  is  particularly 
important. Indeed, it is one of the few domestically managed levers available to 
guarantee the stability of the domestic financial system.  
However,  the  design  of  macroprudential  policy  poses  significant  challenges. 
This is mainly because there is little experience in the use of these tools and 
scant empirical evidence on their effectiveness, at least when compared with 
fiscal  and  monetary  policy  tools.  In  this  setting,  one  of  the  main  priorities  for 
those responsible for ensuring the stability of the financial system with powers 
over macroprudential policy is, in my view, to develop a complete and coherent 
policy framework for the application and communication of that policy. And, in 
this task, the contribution of academia is of vital importance.  
In what follows, I would like to share some preliminary thoughts on some of the 
elements that, in my opinion, should be included in this framework. In particular, 
I  would  like  to  focus  on  two  specific  issues:  first,  the  macroprudential  policy 
objectives,  which  of  course  should  be  the  basis  for  the  activation  of  the 
instruments; and second, the choice among the different tools at the disposal of 
the  macroprudential  authority  to  best  achieve  these  objectives  in  different 
circumstances. 
What should be the objective(s) of macroprudential policy?  
Allow me to focus now exclusively on banks and on one particular instrument, 
the Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB), the Basel III macroprudential tool par 
excellence. According to the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) 
its first objective is rather narrow: The primary aim of the countercyclical capital 
buffer regime is to use a buffer of capital to achieve the broader macroprudential 
goal of protecting the banking sector from periods of excess aggregate credit 
growth that have often been associated with the build-up of system-wide risk. In 
other words, according to this criterion, the CCyB should be used to build up 
resilience among banks against the reversals that typically follow periods of  
4/11 
credit exuberance. Thus, the idea is to protect banks against the risk of failure 
in  a  similar  way  as  under  the  traditional  microprudential  approach  to  capital 
regulation. 
However, the BCBS immediately added a second goal: Due to its countercyclical 
nature, the countercyclical capital buffer regime may also help to lean against 
the build-up phase of the credit cycle in the first place. This is a more ambitious 
goal. It means actively combating excessive credit growth, aiming to curb the 
development of a credit cycle boom. 
Moreover, a third goal is also referred to by the BCBS, this time connected to 
economic contraction phases: In downturns, the regime should help to reduce 
the  risk  that  the  supply  of  credit  will  be  constrained  by  regulatory  capital 
requirements that could undermine the performance of the real economy and 
result  in  additional  credit  losses  in  the  banking  system.  In  fact,  this  objective 
closely 
to  mitigate 
procyclicality, including a requirement for banks to build buffers of resources in 
good times that they can draw down when conditions deteriorate.  
the  original  2009  G-20  recommendations 
follows 
Under this third objective, the CCyB should also be helping banks withstand the 
capital implications of an economic contraction (lower profits, higher defaults, 
and  prospectively  higher  PDs  and  LGDs)  without  tightening  the  capital 
constraints to the extent that the credit supply and hence the real economy is 
damaged. In other words, under this definition, the CCyB should allow for the 
accumulation  of  shock  absorption  capacity  that  banks  could  use  in  the 
downward phase of the cycle to continue providing households and firms with 
the necessary credit flow.  
In many macroeconomic and financial contexts, the activation of the CCyB will 
be  justified  on  the  basis  of  the  three  objectives  mentioned  by  the  BCBS 
simultaneously. This would certainly have been the case in the boom period of 
the Spanish economy before the last financial crisis.  
However, there might be cases where, based on available data, only one or two 
of these objectives can warrant the activation of the CCyB. In particular, there 
have  been  numerous  examples  of  economic  recessions  not  preceded  by 
excessive credit growth. This promptly begs the question: should these buffers 
be exclusively built when the credit cycle is in a boom phase, or also when the 
economy is buoyant, i.e. when the business cycle is expanding?   
In my view, sound arguments may justify the use of the countercyclical capital 
buffer to accumulate loss-aborbing capacity in good times to be used in bad 
times,  even  when  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  emergence  of  excessive  credit 
growth. The main argument, in my view, stems from the evidence that, even in 
those  situations,  when  the  recession  comes,  borrowers’  default  rates  rise, 
5/11
negatively affecting the profit and loss account and the capital position of banks. 
And,  when  banks  do  not  have  a  sufficient  level  of  capital  to  absorb  such  a 
deterioration or can not use their capital buffers, they tend to restrict credit and, 
as a result, deepen the economic recession.  
Besides, there is also some evidence that both the credit and economic cycles 
are not independent of each other. On the contrary, a relatively stable empirical 
pattern of lag-lead between both credit and GDP gaps arises: during the initial 
phase of recoveries the output gap tends to lead the credit gap; yet when the 
expansion is firmly in motion, the credit gap leads the output gap. Therefore, 
activating the CCyB when the economic cycle is in expansion might help reduce 
the likelihood of an excessive credit expansion.  
there 
is  also  some  evidence 
Moreover, 
the 
activation/deactivation of the CCyB in good/bad times are not symmetric. For 
example, using individual and aggregate information during the introduction of 
the  Basel  III  requirements,  the  existing  evidence  shows  that  an  increase  of  1 
percentage point in the banks’ solvency ratio reduces credit growth by between  
the  effects  on 
that 
1 percentage point and 2.5 percentage points1. This same evidence shows that 
the  elasticity  linked  to  the  release  of  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer 
accumulated  during  the  expansionary  phase  could  be  much  higher  during 
downturns. In particular, the evidence points out that credit contracts between 
3 and 6 percentage points less when the banks enter into the downturn with a 
level of capital 1 percentage point higher2.  
These results, mostly reliant on data from the last crisis, are consistent with other 
studies taking a longer perspective on the impact of capital over the financial 
cycle. One of these latter studies, which considers around 150 years of financial 
cycles in Spain3, finds that increasing the CCyB by 1 percentage point prior to a 
credit  expansion  might  reduce  that  expansion  by  about  1  percentage  point. 
However,  this  same  increase  of  the  CCyB  in  the  expansionary  phase  would 
reduce the credit contraction in a downturn by around 6 percentage points.  
Thus, a potential activation of the CCyB in good times will ensure that the capital 
buffers  are  reserved  for  bad  times.  This  will  affect  credit  significantly  at  the 
negative juncture, while not having a large effect either on credit or on GDP in 
1 See, for example, “Bank Risk Taking and Capital Requirements”. R. Anguren, G. Jiménez and J. L. Peydró. 
Mimeo,  and  How  effective  are  capital-based  macroprudential  measures  in  taming  the  macrofinancial 
cycles? A structural enquiry into Spain, E. Gerba and J. Mancia (2017). Mimeo. 
2 Empirical evidence with the countercyclical provisions in Spain during the credit expansion that preceded the global 
financial crisis shows that the introduction of additional provisions in an expansive phase of the cycle did not have a 
material impact on overall credit, although the composition of credit shifted to riskier companies for the most affected 
banks.  In  contrast,  in  the  later  downturn  the  previously  accumulated  provisions  provided  5.5  percentage  points  of 
additional  credit  to  non-financial  firms  and  they  also  had  a  positive  impact  on  employment  and  firms’  survival 
probabilities (see Macroprudential Policy, Countercyclical Bank Capital Buffers and Credit Supply: Evidence from the 
Spanish Dynamic Provisioning Experiments (G. Jiménez, S. Ongena, J. L. Peydró and J. Saurina), Journal of Political 
Economy, 125 (6), 2126-2177, 2017). 
3 Bank capital, lending booms, and busts. Evidence from Spain in the last 150 years. M. Bedayo, A. Estrada and J. 
Saurina. Banco de España Working Paper No. 1847. 
6/11 
the expansionary phase. In fact, the cyclically varying nature of the elasticities 
signals that the cost of tardy activation can be much higher than the cost of an 
excessive anticipation. Moreover, this evidence also shows that the capacity of 
the CCyB to control the expansion of credit could be low, reinforcing the view 
that  its  main  objective  should  be,  on  the  basis  of  this  evidence,  to  create 
resilience for the downturn. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  current  regulation  makes  this  possibility  perfectly 
feasible. Moreover, although it grants a preponderant role to the credit-to-GDP 
gap (the so-called "Basel gap"), which would tend to capture the existence of 
excessive credit dynamics only, it also allows the use of other complementary 
indicators along with expert judgement.  
Indeed,  in  Spain  we  complement  the  Basel  gap  indicator  with  another  four 
indicators.  They  have  been  selected  on  the  basis  of  their  ability  to  predict 
systemic  banking  crises.  These  complementary  indicators  are:  house  price 
imbalances, current account balance, change in credit relative to GDP (credit 
intensity)  and  the  private  sector  debt  burden.  And  as  an  additional  important 
indicator, we are planning to incorporate the output gap, under the assumption 
that the position of the economy in the business cycle must also play a role in 
the  activation  of  this  tool.  The  usefulness  of  using  different  indicators  is 
especially important in cases like ours, in which the Basel gap does not work 
well because of the shorter average duration of credit cycles in Spain. Given the 
time lag implementation in the CCyB, we also carefully monitor the forcasted 
values of the indicators. 
Admittedly, accepting the role of macroprudential policies as an additional set 
of  macrostabilising  tools  increases  the  potential  interactions  with  other 
macroeconomic  policies.  Indeed,  the  interaction  between  monetary  and 
macroprudential  policies  is  particularly  relevant  in  a  monetary  union  such  as 
Europe’s  and  makes  a  strong  case  that  justifies  the  introduction  of  national
macroprudential policies. This is because, in a monetary union, monetary policy 
is defined on the basis of the state of the economy in the Union as a whole and, 
in some circumstances, it might lead to financial conditions that are too loose 
for certain country conditions and, therefore, can generate pockets of financial 
risk  in  some  countries.  Activating  domestic  macroprudential  policy  by  those 
national  authorities  in  such  circumstances  will  help  precisely  avoid  the 
emergence of systemic crises. 
The activation of the macroprudential tools in order to create a buffer to be used 
in bad times incorporates a new dimension into the interactions with monetary 
policy.  That  is  an  issue  which,  in  my  view,  should  be  analysed  further.  At  a 
minimum, in these cases, monetary policy and macroprudential policy should 
take  into  account  their  respective  decisions  when  calibrating  the  use  of  their 
instruments.  
As for fiscal policy, it is also important to emphasise that the creation of shock-
absorption capacity through macroprudential decisions should not be used as 
an argument for relaxing fiscal policy. In other words, fiscal policy should also 
7/11
create  buffers  in  good  times  to  be  used  in  bad  times,  through  automatic 
stabilisers  or  discretionary  action,  in  particular  in  countries  belonging  to  a 
monetary union.   
Another key issue related to this discussion is that the capital buffer built up in 
good times is expected to be released when the phase of the cycle changes. 
Significantly, this decision can be even more complex than those made in the 
activation phase. In this respect, and given the empirical evidence we have, there 
is a clear issue of timing. If it is released too early, it may even accentuate the 
expansion of the financial cycle. If it is released too late, it may entail a significant 
cost to the real economy. It is also necessary to assess whether the release has 
to be once-and-for-all or gradual. The release of the buffers may induce negative 
market reactions or generate conflicts with the microprudential supervisor.  
A  more  automatic  system  of  activation  could  solve  many  of  these  problems, 
while  at  the  same  time  introducing  an  additional  automatic  stabiliser  for  the 
lending and/or the business cycle. However, given that we do not have much 
experience  to  date  with  the  working  of  this  tool,  the  calibration  of  an  explicit 
policy rule would be premature and the principle of “guided discretion” seems a 
second-best option. 
Assesing how to use the different macroprudential tools 
Let me now turn to the second issue I wanted to tackle. Systemic risk, unlike 
inflation or the public deficit, is multidimensional and this is why having different 
macroprudential tools at the disposal of the macroprudential authority is crucial. 
However,  it  is  not  always  obvious  how  to  discriminate  among  the  different 
macroprudential  tools,  in  particular  given  the  potential  interactions  between 
them.  
A first example is the decision to activate the CCyB as opposed to activating a 
sectoral  CCyB.  It  is  perfectly  feasible  that  some  credit  segments  show 
exhuberant behaviour in the economy without any evidence of the credit cycle 
being  in  an  expansionary  phase.  The  activation  of  the  countercyclical  capital 
buffer  to  address  a  situation  of  this  type  does  not  seem  advisable.  If  this 
particular activity is sufficiently profitable (at least in the short term) and that is 
why  it  is  gaining  weight  in  the  overall  credit  portfolio,  the  increase  in  the 
aggregate cost of financing derived from the activation of the CCyB could be 
counterproductive.  In  fact,  it  cannot  be  ruled  out  that  banks  will  step  up  the 
growth of the most profitable portfolios, which are precisely those the authorities 
are  trying  to  moderate,  to  the  detriment  of  the  rest,  in  order  to  safeguard 
aggregate profitability. 
To achieve the objective of exclusively moderating the growth of the exhuberant 
portfolios, it would be necessary to act on the relative costs of financing, making 
these  more  expensive 
in  relative  terms,  through  the  activation  of  a 
countercyclical capital buffer to be applied exclusively on those credit segments. 
However, the coexistence between both tools can be complex, especially if a 
8/11 
transition from one or several sectorial buffers to the total buffer must be made. 
Accordingly, its use should be confined to very specific circumstances. 
Another example is the use of capital instruments vs borrower-based tools. From 
my  perspective,  making  all  prudential  supervision  rely  upon  the  amount  of 
capital that entities need is too reductionist: the experience accumulated during 
the last financial crisis clearly shows how credit underwriting standards are a 
crucial element for the stability of the banking system.  And this same evidence4
also  shows  that  the  analysis  of  credit  standards  must  be  multidimensional. 
Therefore, it is not enough to supervise and control a specific characteristic of 
the  loan;  rather,  a  comprehensive  approach  must  be  adopted  in  which  the 
different  dimensions  are  addressed.  This  would  also  prevent  entities  from 
eluding restrictions by adjusting some other dimension of the loan. 
At  present,  however,  credit  underwriting  standards  are  not  contemplated  in 
European legislation, although some authorities, including the Banco de España, 
are empowered to set them. I do believe that consideration should be given to 
including them in future revisions of the European regulation. In my view, this 
would offer at least three advantages. First, it would allow harmonisation of the 
different  dimensions  of  the  credit  standards.  Second,  it  would  enable  the 
different  jurisdictions  to  request  reciprocity  of  the  measures  adopted,  which 
would  duly  make  them  more  effective.  Last  but  not  least,  it  would  allow  the 
European Central Bank to top up the measures, reducing the potential inaction 
bias of national authorities. 
On the use of borrower based tools vs capital instruments, it seems reasonable, 
in my view, that, if credit is showing high and sustained growth over time but 
without credit standards being relaxed, the ideal would be to increase entities’ 
resilience using capital instruments. But, even if credit were to show moderate 
growth,  if  the  conditions  for  granting  these  loans  are  being  relaxed  (thus 
increasing  the  volume  of  credit  at  risk  of  default),  it  would  probably  be  more 
efficient to use the borrower-based tools to guarantee sound credit underwriting 
standards.     
In any case, our experience shows that, especially at the end of expansionary 
credit cycles, high increases in the volume of credit tend to go hand-in-hand 
with a substantial easing of the conditions for granting the loans. Accordingly, 
both  types  of  tools  should  perhaps  be  used  simultaneously.  With  what 
gradation? It will depend on the circumstances, but always based on a rigorous 
and detailed analysis.   
Another good example of the interactions among the different macroprudential 
instruments is related to the surcharge on systemic entities (globally systemic or 
domestically  systemic  banks),  which  is  the  main  capital  tool  to  address  the 
cross-sectional dimension of systemic risk. On top of how to calibrate this buffer, 
we need to study further how it interacts with the countercyclical capital buffer. 
This  is  especially  important  in  countries  where  credit  from  systemic  banks 
4 Beyond the LTV Ratio: New Lessons from Spain. J.E. Galán and M. Lamas. Mimeo.
9/11
represents a high proportion of total credit and, in addition, when these banks 
have  a  significant  international  presence.  On  the  one  hand,  the  empirical 
evidence  is  quite  unanimous  in  showing  how  higher  levels  of  capital  in  the 
banking system as a whole reduce the probability of systemic crises occurring. 
Consequently, if systemic entities are the main determinants of how the credit 
cycle  evolves  and  the  buffer  applied  to  them  is  sufficiently  high,  it  would  be 
reasonable  to  think that  the  probability  of  having  a  systemic  crisis  is  smaller. 
Conceivably,  then,  the  degree  of  activism  necessary  with  the  countercyclical 
capital buffer would be lower than in other jurisdictions in which the systemic 
banks  are  less  relevant.  However,  even  if  the  probability  of  a  systemic  crisis 
occurring is lower, this does not guarantee that its intensity diminishes, and this 
buffer was not designed to be released in these circumstances. In addition, as 
this buffer is demanded on all exposures, nothing guarantees that its release will 
affect the provision of credit in a specific jurisdiction. 
The other instrument in the macroprudential policy-maker’s toolkit to address 
non-cyclical risks is the systemic risk buffer. Here, we welcome the European 
initiative to allow its application to sectoral credit portfolios, thus providing it with 
more flexibility. 
Finally, let  me also stress that, for the moment, the bulk of macroprudential tools 
affect  banks  exclusively.  While  banks  continue  to  account  for  most  financial 
intermediation,  they  are  losing  relevance  and  could  do  so  even  more  in  the 
future. This can give rise to regulatory arbitrage and undermine the effectiveness 
of macroprudential tools.  
The Spanish case is to some extent innovative5, as similar borrower-based tools 
to those granted to the Banco de España were given to the financial markets 
authority (CNMV) and the insurance supervisor for their own sectors. Thus, one 
of the tests for the Spanish macroprudential institutional setting will be whether 
it  is  able  to  achieve  enough  coordination  across  authorities  to  maximise  the 
effectiveness of the macroprudential toolkit.  
In any event, we should bear in mind that global financial integration can also 
have  similar  effects  to  the  domestic  development  of  the  non-bank  financial 
sector, with banking and non-banking entities operating in different jurisdictions. 
Especially  in  this  last  area,  major  steps  have  been  taken  (with  reciprocity 
agreements); but there is still ample room for improvement. I am sure we will be 
able to address these challenges in future editions of this conference. 
Let me now conclude by stressing that, in this context in which a homogenous 
framework and experience in the use of macroprudential tools is lacking, having  
5 For international attempts to follow a cross-sectoral approach on residential mortgage underwriting see, however, the 
FSB  Principles  for  Sound  Residential  Mortgage  Underwriting  Practices  (April  2012),  the  FSB  Thematic  Review  of 
Mortgage Underwriting and Origination Practices (March 2011) and the Joint Forum Review of the Differentiated Nature 
and Scope of Financial Regulation – Chapter 3 on Mortgage Origination – (January 2010). 
10/11 
adequate  communication  is  crucial.  From  my  point  of  view,  this  is  a  critical 
element of the whole process. Even before that, macroprudential policy-makers  
must be very careful to prevent the identification of risks from becoming a self-
fulfilling  prophecy.  And  when  deciding  to  activate  any  tool,  it  is  necessary  to 
convince  stakeholders  with  arguments  and  evidence  that,  even  if  there  are 
apparent  short-term  costs,  the  medium  and  long-term  benefits  are  clearly 
greater. Obviously, this implies an in-depth ex-ante impact assessment analysis 
including all the different options and a general equilibrium approach, and also 
an  ex-post  impact  assessment  analysis  to  test  the  efficiency  of  the  selected 
tools. 
And now, let me give the floor to our first keynote speaker, Agustín Carstens, 
who we all know so well. Dr. Carstens is currently General Manager of the BIS, 
but in the past he was governor of the Bank of Mexico, vice minister of finance 
also in Mexico and vice president of the IMF. He is, then, not only an expert in 
banking and financial sector regulation and supervision, but has also had to take 
decisions on monetary and fiscal policy. And if this were not enough, the value 
of international experience in the IMF and in the various international committees 
he has presided make him a person especially sensitive to the commercial and 
financial interrelations between the different economies. In sum, we are fortunate 
to have with us today a policy-maker whose wide-ranging experience in different 
areas of the economy is second to none. Agustín, many thanks once again for 
accepting our invitation. The floor is yours. 
11/11
