Anita Angelovska Bezhoska: Speech at the Ministerial Dialogue on
the Economic Reform Programmes of the Candidate Countries
Speech  by  Ms Anita Angelovska  Bezhoska,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of
North  Macedonia,  at  the  Ministerial  Dialogue  on  the  Economic  Reform  Programmes  of  the
Candidate Countries, Brussels, 17 May 2019.
Dear Ministers,
 Dear representatives of the European Commission, European Central Bank and Eurostat,
It is always a great pleasure to be part of the regular Ministerial Dialogue, having the opportunity
to reflect on important issues that are in the spotlight of the economic agenda. At the same time
it  as  an  excellent  occasion  to  express  our  appreciation  on  the  provided  assessments  of  the
Economic  Reform  Programme.  The  main  takeaways  from  these  assessments  have  been
important guidelines, mapping our policy actions, enhancing our capacity, and providing for faster
closure of the existent gaps.
Now, let me briefly reflect on the topic of Structural reforms for attracting foreign direct
investment and increase resilience. There is no doubt that investments are one of the key
ingredients for increasing the long-term potential of an economy. When it comes to emerging
economies,  commonly  there  is  a  need  for  additional  cross  –  border  capital,  which  can
complement the insufficient domestic saving. The more these flows are comprised of FDIs, the
higher the positive impact on productivity and competiveness. In the regional context, pre-crisis
investments were an important growth driver, reaching close to 30% of GDP, while in the post-
crisis period investment ratios has plunged. North Macedonia stands out as an outlier, as the
share of investments continued to increase, and it is one of the rare economies with investment
level currently well above the pre-crisis one. This reflects stable and resilient domestic financial
system, and rising inflows of FDIs, mostly in the tradable sector, that persisted despite the global
crisis.  This  process  was  driven  by  the  investment  supportive  policies  and  reforms,  that
significantly improved the business environment, as visible through the high ranking on the WB’s
Doing business  - improvement of 22 positions in ten years, currently ranked tenth.  It diversified
the structure of the economy, making it more resilient to external shocks, and leading to positive
shifts in the export base towards higher value added products.  The outcome of this process was
visible  improvement  of  the  external  position  of  the  economy,  and  further  increase  of  official
reserves,  thus  creating  room  for  accommodative  monetary  policy,  given  the  de  facto  fixed
exchange rate. Clearly, we are a good example that reforms pay off and we remain committed to
their implementation.
The  best  contribution  that  we  as  central  bank  can  and  do  make  is  to  maintain  price
stability  and  assure  and  strengthen  the  soundness  of  the  financial  system.
Macroeconomic and financial stability is the basis of the investment climate that when in place
significantly  reduces  the  country  risk  premium  and  attracts  foreign  investors,  but  also  boost
domestic savings.   
In this light, in recent period, we have undertaken a number of measures to assure for
the soundness and resilience of the banking system. Capital buffers, introduced in line with
EU Capital Requirements Directive and Basel 3 capital requirements, allows for better  linking
banks’  capital  base  with  the  level  of  systemic  and  macro-financial  risks. This  assures  for
maintenance of adequate capital adequacy ratio of about 16% and strong resilience to shocks.
Changes in regulation to strengthen banks’ corporate governance were also introduced,
recognizing the crucial importance of the corporate governance culture and values for a proper
functioning  of  banks.    Several  aspects  are  tackled,  related  to  the  perimeter  of  the  role  of  the
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Supervisory  Board,  mechanisms  for  regular  internal  review  of  capacity  of  Supervisory  and
Management Board members and other key function holders, enhancement of the remuneration
requirements, as well as enhancement of the role of control functions.  A number of measures
were also undertaken to further improve the quality of banking system assets, including a
Strategy for NPL resolution that has led to tangible results- NPls to about 5%, one of the lowest in
the region. The euroization, although declining to around 40% of total loans and deposits, and
being  among  the  lowest  in  the  region,  is  being  tackled  through  many  measures,  with  more
systematic approach employed as well, through the “Denarisation Strategy”.  This also adds to
reduction of possible risks from financial stability perspective.
Notwithstanding all the efforts, challenges remain ahead and we will continue to address them
with an aim to increase the stability and resilience of the banking system, as the key pillar of the
financial  system  and  thus  contribute  to  stronger,  but  sustainable  financial  support  of  the  real
sector. In this light we will proceed with strengthening the supervision on systematically important
banks, enhancing our macro – prudential capacity, modernizing the organizational and analytical
infrastructure for crisis preparedness and resolution, contributing toward further development of
alternative  financial  instruments,  innovative  financing,  deepening  of  financial  markets,  and
encouraging non-disruptive entrance of fintech services. 
Last but not least, let us not forget that investors’ decisions are information and data based. A
strong portfolio of high – quality data, in line with the data international standards, is a prerequisite
for investors to make their first steps in making due diligence and decide on the comparative
advantage  of  the  country.  Our  adherence  to  the  highest  IMF  SDDS  Plus  standard  this  year,
made us part of a small pool of 18 countries globally, assuring for the quality of our data and
contributing to the health of the overall business environment.
Of course, there are many gaps on the structural front that should be addressed, to allow for
faster  growth  and  convergence.  I  am  more  than  confident  that  with  strong  commitment  of  all
stakeholders involved, in conjunction with accelerated EU accession process, we will achieve
our milestones, contributing to the wellbeing of the overall society.
Thank you. 
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
