Johannes  Beermann:  Back  to  the  roots  -  cash  and  its  core
functions
Remarks  by  Dr  Johannes  Beermann,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the International Cash Conference, Munich, 10 September 2019.
1 Introduction
Good morning ladies and gentlemen,
 It is a great pleasure to welcome you to this year’s International Cash Conference.
As  the  member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  responsible  for  cash
management, I am particularly delighted to see the active research agenda that all of you are
pursuing in the field of cash.
This made it both difficult and easy for us to put together this year’s programme. Easy because
we had many contributions to choose from, and who doesn’t like choice? Difficult because who
said that making choices was easy?
I would like to thank all of my colleagues from the Directorate General Cash Management who
have helped organise this event or who are taking part as presenters.
Also, I would like to wish a particularly warm welcome to our keynote speakers, Lars Feld and Bill
Maurer. We greatly value the insights that you are bringing to this year’s conference and I look
forward to being part of the discussion with you in the panel soon.
Today’s  first  session  especially  benefits  from  the  contributions  of  our  guest  of  honour,  De
Nederlandsche  Bank.  The  Dutch  central  bank  is  one  the  leading  institutions  with  regard  to
research in the field of cash management in the Eurosystem and I look forward to hearing more
about the various links between research and operational aspects.
No doubt, there is currently a rather active strand of research into distributed ledger technologies
and various forms of digital money.
This interest is no longer confined to rather small IT start-ups. Central banks and international
organisations  are 
forming innovation  labs  to  better  understand  how  these
technologies could be of “use to the greater public”.
increasingly 
So  far,  these  endeavours  have  been  largely  confined  to  conceptual  proofs  of  concept  and
explorative, mostly theoretical considerations.
But they are important, and research into cash is bound to benefit from these insights as well:
The closing session on Thursday will give us a first glimpse of the neurometrics applied to
banknote design and the potentially digital future of cash.
As exciting as these new technologies may be, a key insight that I have taken away from the
discussions I have had over the last couple of years is that people care a lot about the coins and
banknotes they keep in their pockets.
Cash is something that everyone understands and has a view on.
Research,  of  course,  has  to  go  beyond  mere  expressions  of  opinion.  Central  bankers  and
researchers in the area of cash need to understand the fundamental drivers of cash circulation
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
and establish microeconomic evidence on cash usage.
Cash passed the conceptual stage centuries ago. It has been around ever since. Cash is the
only legal tender and, as such, it forms the basis for its cashless alternatives.
Going “all cashless” without the backing of a national unit of account is difficult to imagine. There
always has to be the option to convert deposits into legal tender and the other way around.
That is why research on cash is at least as relevant as ever. In a way, this means going back to
the roots and asking the fundamental questions.
As the title of this year’s conference suggests, we are living in the age of payment diversity.
Diversity  is  actually  a  concept  derived  from  sociology.  It  implies  that  you  recognise  individual
characteristics and allow for the inclusion of a range of people or objects.
Cash has several of those unique characteristics which greatly add to the diversity of existing
payment instruments.
First and foremost, cash is money because it fulfills fundamental macroeconomic functions. It
acts as a store of value, a medium of exchange and a unit of account.
Let us briefly go through these well-known textbook functions in turn to see what they imply with
respect to cash usage.
2 Cash as a store of value
Ladies and gentlemen,
As we will be talking over the next couple of days about cash usage in different countries, allow
me to set the scene a little bit for Germany.
Central banks “make money” in quite the literal sense. The physical banknotes we produce are
our  main  output  and,  as  such,  straightforward  to  measure.  The  value  of  euro  banknotes  in
circulation is growing. By the end of 2018, total banknote circulation exceeded 1.2 trillion euros,
and it is still on the rise.
Just  like  any  other  commodity,  cash  gets  around.  It  crosses  borders  and  switches  hands. A
considerable chunk leaves the euro area altogether. At the end of the day, about one-quarter of
the total value of banknotes in circulation remains in Germany, which is roughly in line with the
domestic economy’s share of aggregate euro area output.
Of course, households use cash for transactions, but they use it even more so as a store of
value.  Our  estimates  for  Germany  suggest  that  around  three  out  of  four  banknotes  held
domestically end up under the proverbial mattress or – perhaps for greater security – in a safe
deposit box.
The  relatively  high  importance  of  the  store-of-value  function  of  cash  has  remained  largely
unchanged  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro  as  legal  tender.  German  households  value  the
existence of a safe and liquid asset.
Cash  is  especially  reliable  in  that  regard,  and  in  an  environment  of  low  interest  rates,  the
opportunity costs of holding this asset decrease.
While credit institutions’ cash holdings are increasing, reflecting special monetary policy effects,
we need to see matters in perspective:
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Banks’  additional  cash  holdings  in  Germany  since  2015  amount  to  22  billion  euros,  or
relative to current cumulative net issuance by the Bundesbank, about 3%.
This leaves 97% of banknotes in circulation for foreign demand, use as a domestic store of
value by households or overall domestic transactions demand.
3 Cash as a means of payment
Ladies and gentlemen,
That leads us directly to the second main function of cash, which is making payments.
Cash is unique in that it is the only means of payment which is non-electronic. This limits its
typical  use  to  point-of-sale  transactions,  where  cash  usage  in  countries  such  as  Germany,
Austria, Spain and Italy continues to be high by international standards.
Evidence for the euro area as a whole suggests that, in 2016, cash payments accounted for
1
more than half of the total value of euro payments at the point of sale.
Payment technologies are continuing to evolve. The rise of contactless payments and the so-
called stable coins are likely to shake up the relative market shares of payment instruments even
further.
Does this mean that households are willing to give up cash as a means of payment altogether?
The empirical evidence I have seen and the conversations I have had do not leave me with that
impression.
One reason which frequently comes up is concerns over the protection of personal privacy.
People want to carry out a certain number of transactions without leaving a trace, making
sure businesses and other institutions cannot “connect all of the dots at all times”.
In  my  view,  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  potentially  shady  activities.  I  simply  think  that
maintaining a certain level of personal privacy is a basic human desire.
Leaving  the  numerous  and  still  open  questions  concerning  operational  aspects  to  one  side,  I
therefore  do  not  believe  that  stable  coins  such  as  Libra  have  the  power  to  crowd  out  cash
altogether any time soon.
Still,  and  in  keeping  with  the  spirit  of  diversity,  I  do  see  potential  benefits  behind  such  new
payment instruments.
Those relate, in particular, to the segment of person-to-person payments, or P2P transactions. I
find it remarkable that cash dominates to such an extent when it comes to payments between
individuals, such as in-home services and giving money to relatives, friends, churches or other
charity organisations.
Our latest payments study suggests that 93% of the value of all P2P transactions in euro was
2
attributable to cash payments.
This may also reflect the still fragmented payments landscape in Europe. To date, cash remains
the one truly universal means of payment when it comes to P2P transactions in the euro area.
But again, we have to see matters in perspective: the total amount of P2P cash transactions in
3
euro is fairly small, amounting to about 4% of all cash payments in the euro area.
4 Cash as a unit of account
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Ladies and gentlemen,
Cash increases the diversity  of  payment  instruments  by  offering  several  unique  features:  it  is
tactile and does not require any technical equipment.
It is this haptic nature of cash which, in my view, is an important element of ensuring financial
inclusion.
Cash as a means of payment is easily understood across the generational divide.
To me, this is closely associated with the third core function of cash, which is serving as a unit of
account.
Universally accepted currencies are not a new phenomenon: be it gold during the gold standard,
the pound sterling during the Industrial Revolution or the US dollar to this day, all have served as
major internationally accepted units of account.
Households value currencies they can count on and, more importantly, count with.  
There is arguably an important element of economic education underlying physical legal tender.
We  all  have  grown  up  playing  board  games,  exchanging  and  counting  paper  money  with  our
hands.
Cash bridges generations. When we at the Deutsche Bundesbank open our doors to the general
public as part of our efforts to inform people about the tasks we perform within the Eurosystem,
the  display  of  actual  cash  and  gold  at  our  stalls  attracts  visitors  both  young  and  old.  These
physical items serve as the first point of entry into the often abstract world of monetary policy.
But, how is the increasingly widespread use of e-wallets and mobile payment apps impacting on
households’ financial literacy? Are children still able to grasp the educational aspect of cash in an
increasingly digitalised payments landscape?
After  all,  there  may  be  parallels  to  the  digital  transformation  of  the  reading  experience.
Research suggests that readers retain less information from e-books than from traditional
paper books.
I feel these are relevant questions which deserve further investigation, and I would urge all of
you, too, to look into these at future meetings of the International Cash Conference.
5 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
Money is what money does.
Based on the core functions of money, cash is money.
That is not to say that there cannot and will not be other forms of money. True diversity implies
co-existence.
Cash has unique features which point towards its continued high usage in the euro area.
As central bankers, it is our task to always maintain the public’s trust in euro cash.
As researchers, we need to understand the core functions of money in the digital era.
Cash is the natural starting point and the relevant benchmark in comparisons with other payment
instruments.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
I now look forward to having fruitful discussions with all of you. I hope you have a great time at the
conference here in Munich and are able to exchange many valuable insights and ideas.
Thank you.
1
2
3
H. Esselink and L. Hernández (2017), The use of cash by households in the euro area, ECB Occasional Paper
Series, No. 201, November 2017.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Payment behaviour in Germany in 2017 – fourth study of the utilisation of cash
and cashless payment instruments.
H. Esselink and L. Hernández (2017), The use of cash by households in the euro area, ECB Occasional Paper
Series, No. 201, November 2017.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
