Macroprudential Policy: Past, Present 
and Future 
A speech delivered to 54th University of Otago Foreign Policy School in Dunedin 
On 30 June 2019 (9:00 am) 
By Geoff Bascand, Deputy Governor & General Manager of Financial Stability
2 The Terrace, PO Box 2498, Wellington 6140, New Zealand 
Telephone 64 4 472 2029 Online at www.rbnz.govt.nz  
Macroprudential Policy: Past, Present and Future 
Kia ora tatou, it is great to be here with you today to talk about the important role of 
macroprudential policy in the management of financial stability.1  
It is six years now since macroprudential policy was established in New Zealand via a policy 
memorandum with the government in May 2013, and loan-to-value ratio (LVR) restrictions were first 
implemented in October 2013.2 At its introduction, we committed to reviewing the policy’s efficacy 
after five years; most of my talk today is drawing on that recently completed review and the lessons 
we drew for how we use macroprudential policy in the future.3   
Macroprudential policy in some ways is new wine in old vessels. Direct restrictions on the borrowing 
capacity of households, such as the LVR instrument, are novel for New Zealand’s recent history. 
More than 30 years ago the removal of a wide range of restrictions on borrowing, including interest 
rate controls and government directives on bank lending to various industries, led to significant 
improvements in the efficiency of the financial system.   
We don’t want to undo the fruits of these reforms, so why did we bring lending restrictions back?  
International experience and research has demonstrated that good regulations – including 
macroprudential policy such as targeted borrower restrictions – are beneficial for promoting 
financial stability. And financial stability is very worthwhile, because wellbeing is seriously harmed by 
financial crises. 
With evidence from over 140 banking crisis around the world over the past fifty years to draw on, 
we can clearly see the immense impact those countries experience in terms of lost economic 
growth, increased public debt and unemployment rates. Furthermore, these adverse economic 
impacts tend to be more severe for the most vulnerable in society, which ultimately translates into a 
deterioration in social cohesion and the quality of life. While in New Zealand the lack of recent 
severe downturns could cloud our sense of risks, the international evidence demonstrates their 
profound economic impacts and serves as a lesson for us too. 
My speech from earlier this week outlined the Reserve Bank’s overall prudential framework for 
safeguarding financial stability.4 Macroprudential policy is one key part of this prudential framework. 
We want to use macroprudential tools when risks are particularly high, to build resilience among 
banks and households, and to mitigate the economic cost of a future crisis.5 
My talk will cover three broad issues. Firstly, how does macroprudential policy mitigate risks to the 
financial system? Secondly, looking back, has the Reserve Bank’s macroprudential policy enhanced 
1 I am very grateful to Bruce Lu for considerable assistance in the preparation of this speech, along with 
valuable comments from other Reserve Bank colleagues. 
2 The loan-to-value ratio is a measure of the size of the loan relative to the value of the borrower’s collateral 
held against the loan, usually expressed as a percentage. 
3 Lu (2019) assesses the effectiveness of loan-to-value restrictions in enhancing financial stability, and looks for 
any side effects. Ovenden (2019) discusses the Reserve Bank’s strategy for operating macroprudential policy. 
4 Bascand (2019). 
5 Macroprudential policy in the New Zealand context refers to policies with a time-varying dimension, although 
internationally the term is broadly used to refer to prudential policies that are focused on the financial system.  
2  
financial stability, and were there any side effects? Lastly, I want to discuss how macroprudential 
policy should be governed, and the Reserve Bank’s approach to using the tools. 
Part 1 – The role of macroprudential policy 
To start with, let’s take a look at how systemic risks are created from the boom and bust in the 
financial cycle, and how macroprudential policy can increase resilience of banks and households 
when those risks are high.  
When the economy is doing well, banks face competitive pressure to relax their lending standards. 
When homeowners experience house price inflation, their access to credit will generally increase. As 
a result, lending to less credit-worthy borrows can increase to an extent that is harmful to society 
(figure 1), without individual lenders bearing the full cost of higher debt levels.  
It’s no surprise that those dynamics can apply in reverse when the economy weakens: as household 
incomes fall, the ability of borrowers to service debt is undermined, and defaults increase. This 
produces losses in the banking system and can trigger a fire-sale of housing, which compounds the 
downturn in house prices. In this situation, the banks respond by become significantly less willing to 
lend, making the downturn in the economy more severe and the recovery slower than it need be. 
Figure 1: Boom-bust financial cycles 
Banks 
adopt 
same 
strategy 
Greater 
lending
Boom
m
Asset 
prices 
go up
Bank 
funding 
costs go 
up
Reduced 
lending
Bust 
Asset 
prices 
go down
Lending 
standad 
falls
Defaults 
go 
down
Banks 
need 
more 
capital
Defaults 
go up
Based on a large sample of downturns across many countries, we understand that the occurrence of 
a house price bubble and strong credit growth in the upswing of a financial cycle tend to be followed 
by deeper recessions, in terms of lost GDP per capita and increased unemployment (figure 2).6 
6 Jorda at al. (2013), Bridges et al. (2017), and Aikman et al. (2018). For an overview of financial stability risks 
from housing market cycles, see Thornley (2016). Figure 2 shows that a recession tends to be more severe, in 
terms of lost GDP per capita, if it is immediately preceded by an asset price bubble, and be even more severe if 
preceded by both an asset price bubble and strong credit growth. 
3  
Figure 2: The role of asset bubbles and credit in the severity of recessions (1870-2013) 
    Source: Jorda et al (2015)
Our prudential framework for safeguarding financial stability is more than just our macroprudential 
policy (Table 1).7 Our framework includes a minimum level of capital and liquid assets that banks 
must hold, to ensure they remain solvent and can retain market confidence during periods of severe 
stress. We call these our baseline prudential buffers. In cases of bank distress or failure, there are 
procedures in place to carefully manage the situation and limit the impact. We use macroprudential 
policy to build an additional layer of protection if risks are particularly high at a point in time.  
It’s important to remember that macroprudential tools are complementary to a strong set of 
baseline prudential buffers, and will be ineffective at promoting lending during hard times if banks 
are unable to remain solvent or retain market confidence. And prompt use of macroprudential tools 
reduces the likelihood that prudential buffers are drawn on.  
The Reserve Bank’s LVR policy, that’s our loan-to-value ratio policy, is the most well-known tool of 
macroprudential policy and upholds lending standards during the credit upturn, thereby lowering 
the debt burden of households ahead of a downturn. In the macroprudential toolkit8, we also have 
capital and liquidity tools that build additional buffers for banks, putting them in a better position to 
keep lending to the economy when things turn sour.  While the liquidity tool – minimum core 
funding requirements – is in place, we haven’t adjusted it so far to limit risks to financial stability. So 
in practice our active use of macroprudential policy pertains only to LVRs. 
In addition to its financial stability role, the Reserve Bank also has responsibility for price stability. 
Macroprudential policy and monetary policy are set for different objectives, but they do interact. For 
example, the official cash rate (OCR) may be raised in response to an upturn in the economic cycle, 
which generally helps with the macroprudential objective by moderating credit and house price 
growth. However, the impact of macroprudential policy on inflation is much smaller than the OCR, 
and the policy is not a lever for achieving inflation or employment goals. In general, macroprudential 
policy and monetary policy tend to be complementary, and together will maximise both financial 
stability and price stability. 
7 Bascand (2019) explains in more detail how our regulatory tools fit together and complement one another. 
8 A memorandum of understanding between the Reserve Bank and the Minister of Finance lists four 
macroprudential instruments. These are the core funding ratio, the countercyclical capital buffer, the sectoral 
capital requirements, and the LVR restrictions (English and Wheeler, 2013). 
4  
 n
o
i
t
n
e
v
e
r
P
  
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
M
Impact on financial system resilience 
Impact on wider economy 
Table 1: Macroprudential policy and baseline prudential requirements 
Purpose 
Macroprudential policy 
Relevant 
instruments 
Borrower 
restrictions (LVRs) 
Reduce risk that the financial system 
amplifies a severe economic 
Reduced losses in a severe economic 
downturn 
downturn 
Capital and liquidity 
instruments 
(CCyB/SCR) 
More resilient households and banks reduces 
potential severity of an economic downturn 
Lowers incentives on banks to deleverage in a 
downturn; supports higher credit supply and 
economic activity 
S
u
p
e
r
v
s
o
n
i
i
Prudential policy 
Capital buffers 
Maintain baseline resilience of the 
economic cycle 
financial system 
Liquidity policy 
and lowers risk of sudden increases in funding 
costs for households, businesses and the 
economy 
Banks remain solvent through the 
Maintains market confidence 
Manage and limit impact of distress 
or failure 
Governance and 
local incorporation 
Collateral 
standards 
Outsourcing 
OBR 
Banks remain functioning parts 
of financial system 
Maintains availability of credit and banking 
services necessary for economic activity 
Mitigates costs for creditors and taxpayers 
Minimum capital 
Losses absorbed by shareholders first 
5  
 i
o
v
e
r
s
g
h
t
 
a
n
d
d
s
c
o
s
u
r
e
 i
l
 As with all interventions, the financial stability benefits of macroprudential tools need to be weighed 
against their potential cost to efficiency. As such, it’s vital to review such tools, and publish the 
results to increase accountability and transparency, and to build lasting legitimacy in the eyes of the 
public.  
Part 2 – Have the LVR restrictions enhanced financial stability? 
New Zealand was among the leaders in macroprudential policy when the LVR restrictions were first 
introduced, and since 2013, borrower-based tools have gained greater acceptance internationally, 
including in the UK, Ireland and Canada. While a few Southeast Asian countries have used the LVR 
tool since the 1990s, it was the global financial crisis - referred to as the GFC - that made the world 
more conscious of financial stability risks, leading to a greater acceptance of mortgage lending 
restrictions. 
And that takes me to our review of the LVR policy and its effectiveness by looking at the implications 
for financial stability, financial system efficiency and other public policy objectives.9   
Our analysis showed that as a result of introducing the LVR policy, resilience of the banking system 
has increased. And while it’s more difficult to pinpoint, we also found that the policy has had a 
significant benefit in mitigating the risk to the economy from financial cycles. As you might expect, 
the restrictions have lowered the LVRs of mortgage borrowers. The share of the stock of mortgages 
with a LVR of above 80 percent has declined from 20 percent in 2013 to an average of 7.5 percent in 
the past two and a half years (figure 3). This fall has reduced the proportion of loans that would be in 
negative equity given a house price decline, meaning that the credit losses on banks’ mortgage 
portfolio would be lower in a stress event. 
Figure 3: Share of the mortgage stock with LVR above 80, by value 
Sources: RBNZ LVR Lending Positions Survey 
Not only that, the policy has lowered the magnitude of a potential house price correction, which 
further mitigates potential credit losses. It has achieved this by reducing the number of distressed 
borrowers who would be forced to sell their homes and by lowering house price inflation during 
the housing market upswing, thereby bringing house prices more in line with economic 
fundamentals.  
9 Lu, 2019. 
6  
We estimate that, had we not imposed the LVR restrictions, mortgage losses in a severe economic 
downturn involving a fall in house prices would absorb nearly all the capital banks hold against their 
housing loans (figure 4). Under the current environment, mortgage losses in a severe downturn are 
estimated to be lower, showing that the LVR policy has improved the resilience of the banking 
system. 
Figure 4: Modelled credit losses as a share of housing capital requirement 
Source: Lu and Bloor (2019). 
 Improving the resilience of banks is only one objective of the LVR policy – the other goal is to reduce 
the potential for the financial cycle to impair economic performance.  
International evidence show that economies with high household debts relative to disposable 
incomes have suffered larger declines in consumption during the GFC than less indebted 
economies.10 The other major factor driving the collapse in consumption in many economies is the 
large fall in house prices. These dynamics have worsened the impact of the GFC. 
A more severe economic downturn will weigh on wellbeing, but will also lead to a deterioration in 
banks’ non-mortgage assets. For example, in Ireland private consumption fell sharply over the GFC 
with retail sales declining by almost 20 percent annually by 2009, which led to widespread defaults 
on business loans. By 2013, more than 40 percent of SME loans in Ireland were in default. 
Our modelling suggests that the LVR policy has slowed the growth in household debt in New 
Zealand. A lower level of household debt and more durable house prices should insulate domestic 
demand, and the wider economy, against financial instability. 
Side effects of LVR intervention 
Up to now, I’ve talked about the benefits of the LVR policy, but we need to acknowledge that all 
regulations have the potential for unintended impacts in the process of achieving their objectives. 
The LVR restrictions have the potential to undermine financial system efficiency by restricting 
lending to some borrowers who are able to comfortably service the loan, but who have insufficient 
housing equity to meet the LVR requirements. This is why the Reserve Bank allows a speed limit of 
high-LVR loans under the policy, which are available to borrowers at the discretion of their bank. 
                                                           
10 Floden, 2014 and Cecchetti et al., 2011. 
7  
The LVR policy can also work against the social objective of housing affordability. To be clear, the 
Reserve Bank does not have housing affordability as an objective, but it is sensible to be aware of the 
impact of our actions on the other goals of the government. A uniform calibration for the LVR 
restrictions, as was the case in late 2013 and 2014, is likely to restrict the access to credit for first 
home buyers, who tend to have less savings for a deposit and have not benefitted from previous 
house price appreciation. These controls that restrained first home buyers were necessary to protect 
the financial system, and to stop buyers from taking on too much debt and becoming distressed. In 
contrast, the effect on investors from a uniform LVR policy tends to be weaker in a rising market. 
We’ve recalibrated the LVR restrictions over time to target the riskier forms of investor lending, as 
the emerging evidence points to greater risks associated with highly leveraged investors. This also 
had the effect of rebalancing the burden of policy away from first home buyers. The share of new 
mortgages going to first home buyers has risen from 10 percent in 2014 to 17 percent by the end of 
2018, a historically healthy level. In the recent years, first home buyers have accounted for the lion’s 
share of the high-LVR lending permitted under the policy (figure 5).  
Housing affordability remains an important challenge for public policy, and structural reforms are 
necessary to improve affordability in the long term. The LVR restrictions are for the purpose of 
enhancing financial stability, and aren’t suitable for addressing broader social challenges. 
Figure 5: First home buyer high-LVR lending 
 Exemptions can be used to mitigate the tension between the LVR and other public policies, so long 
as they do not undermine the financial stability objective. For example, the exemption on 
construction finance has helped to address concerns that the LVR policy is hindering new housing 
supply. The Reserve Bank’s consultation with stakeholders in all macroprudential policy 
interventions helps to inform the design of policy, including the exemptions. 
Between November 2015 and September 2016, the Reserve Bank implemented targeted LVR 
restrictions for Auckland borrowers, owing to high risks of a severe house price decline in Auckland 
that would heavily affect the financial system. This move was effective in moderating the risk in 
Auckland. However, market intelligence suggested that Auckland investors increasingly purchased in 
other regions, which contributed to housing market exuberance in the rest of New Zealand. With 
high risk lending continuing to rise elsewhere, this tells us that a regional policy may be ineffective at 
reducing vulnerabilities at the national level. The likely spill-over effects would need to be 
considered carefully before using a regional policy in the future.  
8  
Figure 6: Annual house price inflation in urban areas 
Source: Real Estate Institute of New Zealand  
 An underlying concern we had with the LVR policy is that risky lending could shift from banks to non-
bank lenders who are not constrained by the policy. While there has been some growth in mortgage 
lending by non-bank lenders since 2014, their funding of purchases in the housing market remains 
very low. Non-bank deposit takers account for less than one percent of total mortgages with an LVR 
of more than 80 percent (figure 7). This evidence suggests that the LVR restrictions policy has 
remained effective for a longer period than we had initially thought. 
Figure 7: NBDT mortgage stock by LVR, and NBDT share of total high-LVR mortgages 
Part 3 – Strategy for macroprudential policy 
 The experience we have had in operating macroprudential policy is invaluable for developing an 
effective policy strategy. I want to touch on the principles of good governance, before discussing our 
operational strategy, and the outlook for macroprudential policy.  
Principles of good governance 
In this context, governance relates to the process for making macroprudential decisions, and 
mechanisms for holding decision-makers to account for those decisions. The Phase 2 Review of the 
Reserve Bank Act is considering the suitable governance framework for macroprudential policy. 
9  
The operational independence of the Reserve Bank is a guiding principle of the Phase 2 review, and 
we strongly agree that this is important for a functioning governance framework. The cost of a 
macroprudential intervention, in terms of reduced credit availability, are highly visible, while the 
longer-term financial stability benefit is hard to measure. Clearly, deploying macroprudential policy 
when it is needed does not make you popular, and therefore elected politicians may have difficulty 
committing to what is required for a long-term financial stability objective. Internationally, 
macroprudential tools are used far less actively in jurisdictions where the government is heavily 
involved in decision-making.11  
We think that operational independence is key for all macroprudential instruments. The Phase 2 
review raised the option of political oversight for borrower-based tools, like the LVR restrictions. The 
rationale is that, because these tools incur a direct distributional cost on affected households, 
elected politicians are needed to maintain legitimacy. However, in the Reserve Bank’s view, the 
controversial nature of these tools strengthens the case for operational independence, to ensure 
that the tool can be used promptly when necessary. 
That said, the accountability and transparency of decision-makers plays a particularly important role 
in macroprudential policy, because financial stability is inherently difficult to quantify as an 
objective. The Reserve Bank has been transparent in explaining its policy decisions in consultations 
and the Financial Stability Reports, although transparency was more limited prior to policy action. To 
fill this gap, the Reserve Bank has recently published a macroprudential framework document that 
explains our strategy for using the tools. 
The government has recently announced an in-principle decision to change the governance 
framework for prudential policy. We agree that the governance framework can be improved by 
moving from the single decision-maker model, where all powers related to prudential policy rest 
with the Governor, to a governance board. A governance board allows for more rigorous testing of 
decisions from a diverse range of perspectives, provides for more external input, and can insure 
against extreme preferences by individuals - the board model is also widely understood and used. 
We can see the Reserve Bank Board taking responsibility for the macroprudential framework and 
scrutinising the operation of macroprudential policy by the Governor and his staff for which the 
Board will ultimately be responsible. 
As I have acknowledged earlier, macroprudential policy can produce tension with other objectives of 
public policy. This reinforces the importance of consultation with the government, in line with our 
current practice, although there needs to be a clear boundary between consultation and decision-
making. The Phase 2 review raised the option of assigning a formal advisory role to an interagency 
committee, which could be well placed to consider the potential tension between macroprudential 
policy and other government policies. However, in our view, an interagency committee runs the risk 
of undermining accountability, and its added value may be limited given that the Reserve Bank 
already consults extensively on macroprudential decisions. 
The Phase 2 review of the Reserve Bank Act will have a significant bearing on the future of New 
Zealand’s financial system, and it’s important that you have a say - I encourage you to take a look at 
the consultation material on the Treasury’s website.  
                                                           
11 Edge and Liang, 2017. 
10  
Decision making for macroprudential policy 
So how do we operationalise our macroprudential policy in line with the principles of transparency, 
accountability and rigorous decisions? Well, the Reserve Bank’s decision-making follows three steps 
(figure 8). 
Figure 8: Operation of macroprudential policy 
1. Systemic risk 
monitoring
• Probability of a 
correction
• Resilience
• Feedback effect
2. Policy choice
3. Policy assessment
• Capital and liquidity 
tools?
• Borrower tools?
• Consultation
• Decision
• Ongoing 
assessment
 Firstly, we assess the nature of the risks facing the financial system, or systemic risk monitoring, by 
using a range of quantitative indicators.  
We look at the probability of a correction in the credit cycle. A number of studies have identified 
house price overvaluation and household debt as reliable predictors of a correction in the credit 
cycle.12 
Next, we assess the current resilience of the financial system to a correction. To do this, we monitor 
banks’ lending portfolios, their capital positions, and undertake stress tests of banks. 
Finally, we examine the feedback effect of the identified risk with the wider economy. The main 
indicator for this assessment is bank lending standards, which could undermine the resilience of the 
financial system over time, and increase vulnerabilities in the housing market and wider economy.  
After considering all this information, we can judge whether these risks fall into the purview of 
macroprudential policy. That said, no set of indicators can mechanically capture the nature of risks, 
and reasoned judgements will always form a part of our decision-making. 
The second step is policy choice, where we consider what an appropriate policy response might look 
like. Macroprudential instruments can be categorised into capital and liquidity tools that are focused 
on improving bank balance sheets, and borrower-based tools that improve household resilience. 
Three capital and liquidity instruments are available, including the countercyclical capital buffer, the 
sectoral capital requirement and the core funding ratio. These tools build additional buffers for the 
banking system to absorb adverse shocks. In a downturn, these buffers reduce the risk of bank 
failure or deleveraging, and can be cut to support the supply of credit to the economy. The single 
borrower-based instrument we have is the LVR restrictions. In our view, a debt-to-income (DTI) tool 
would be a useful addition to our macroprudential toolkit. The Phase 2 review will consider the 
appropriate instruments to be included in the Reserve Bank’s future toolkit. 
                                                           
12 Borio et al. (2018) and Aikman et al. (2018). 
11  
Our choice of tools depends on the risk we face. On the one hand, if we are concerned with low 
resilience on bank balance sheets, capital-based instruments may be the most effective tool. On the 
other hand, the LVR restrictions are more effective at restraining exuberance in the housing market 
and household debt, and at insulating the economy against adverse shocks.  
It's worth noting that all tools come with possible costs to financial system efficiency. For example, 
capital and liquidity tools increase the cost of credit provision for banks, while borrower-based tools 
curtail credit availability. Both of these effects could reduce short-run economic growth. We need to 
choose the right tool for the job to have confidence that the benefits to financial stability exceed any 
costs to efficiency.  
The final step in our decision-making is policy assessment, which includes consultation, a final 
decision and ongoing assessment. The consultation will typically consider several policy responses 
and settle on a favoured option. However, we listen carefully to our stakeholders and, should we 
find their arguments persuasive, we will change our views. 
Once a macroprudential tool has been deployed, the Reserve Bank will continue to assess its effect 
in the six-monthly Financial Stability Report. This asks whether there are unintended consequences, 
and whether the policy intervention remains optimal. Our ongoing assessment of the impact of the 
LVR policy has informed each adjustment in its calibration. The good news is that declining risks have 
allowed us to ease the LVR restrictions, starting in 2017. 
The outlook for macroprudential policy 
We left the LVR policy unchanged in the May Financial Stability Report, in order to monitor the 
effect of our recent easing and the recent fall in mortgage rates. Looking ahead, we are comfortable 
with further easing in the LVR policy over time, but this is predicated on risks continuing to abate. 
Specifically, we want to see household debt levels remaining stable relative to incomes, prudent 
lending standards from banks, and moderate house price inflation. If these conditions are met, we 
are inclined to continue easing the restrictions.  
In the long term, we face a choice between removing the LVR restrictions and maintaining a 
permissive setting. A full removal would of course eliminate any efficiency cost, and could be done 
alongside the deployment of a less intrusive tool if we are still worried about residual risks. But on 
the flip side a permanent LVR setting will continue to guard against the very risky forms of lending, 
and may better prepare the banking system to adapt to a more restrictive calibration if risks re-
emerge. The efficacy of a permanent LVR setting is an important policy question for future research. 
As you may know, the Reserve Bank has proposed a material increase to banks’ capital requirements 
to increase the resilience of the financial system. The proposals include a more prominent role for 
the counter-cyclical buffer, providing more certainty that this buffer will be built prior to a downturn 
in the financial cycle, in order to support lending during a systemic crisis.13  As a consequence, 
macroprudential tools, including the LVR restrictions, may need to be used less actively. That said, 
                                                           
13 The counter cyclical buffer would be released during a systemic downturn to support lending. In contrast, it 
is unlikely that easing LVRs during a downturn would have the same benefit, as banks will be reluctant to 
undertake high-LVR lending when under stress. 
12  
different tools are effective for addressing different risks, and there will still be a role for borrower-
based tools to more directly address risks associated with household debt.   
Part 4 – Conclusion 
In conclusion, financial stability is important for the wellbeing of New Zealanders, and 
macroprudential policy is a key line of defence for safeguarding financial stability. Baseline 
prudential tools ensure that potential threats to the financial system can be absorbed and the 
damage repaired. Macroprudential policy reduces the likelihood and severity of the threat, and 
mitigates the adverse impact on the economy.  
To inform our strategy for macroprudential policy, we have reviewed our operation of the LVR 
restrictions policy since 2013 and the growing research on macroprudential policy internationally. 
We found that the LVR restrictions policy has significantly improved the resilience of the banking 
system. We have also gained a broader understanding of the side effect of the LVR policy on other 
public policy areas, of ways to mitigate the potential policy tensions, and of the limitations of 
macroprudential policy. 
Our experience in LVR restrictions has helped to shape our strategy for using macroprudential policy. 
Our strategy broadly follows a three-step process of systemic risk monitoring, policy choice, and 
policy assessment, including evaluation after implementing the macroprudential tools. We are 
transparent and accountable, both in outlining how the tools will be used and in making the case for 
their implementation. 
The government is reviewing the role and powers of the Reserve Bank as they relate to financial 
stability, including whether our macroprudential framework remains fit for purpose. The principles 
of good governance I have touched on, and our refreshed macroprudential strategy, form an anchor, 
and should be compatible with a range of outcomes of the review. I hope our refreshed strategy on 
macroprudential policy has contributed to the understanding, accountability, and lasting legitimacy 
for the framework.  
 References 
Aikman, D., Bridges, J., Burgess, S., Galletly, R., Levina, I., O’Neill, C., and A. Varadi (2018). 
“Measuring Risks to UK Financial Stability”, Bank of England Staff Working Paper no. 738. 
Bascand, G. (2019). “Renewing the RBNZ’s Approach to Financial Stability.” 
Borio, C., Aldasoro, I., and M. Drehmann (2018). “Early Warning Indicators of Banking Crises: 
Expanding the Family”, BIS Quarterly Review, March 2018. 
Bridges, J., Jackson, C., and D. McGregor (2017). “Down in the Slumps: the Role of Credit in Five 
Decades of Recessions.” Bank of England Staff Working Paper No 659. 
Cecchetti, S., Mohanty, M., and F. Zampolli (2011), “The real effects of debt”, Bank of International 
Settlements Working Paper no. 352.  
13  
Edge, R., and N. Liang (2017). “New Financial Stability Governance Structures and Central Banks.” 
Hutchins Centre Working Paper no. 32, Brookings Institution. 
English, B., and G. Wheeler (2013). “Memorandum of Understanding between the Minister of 
Finance and the Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand.”, available at 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/financial-stability/macro-prudential-policy/mou-between-minister-of-
finance-and-governor-of-rbnz. 
Floden, M. (2014), “Did household debt mater in the Great Recession?”, supplement to Blog Post on 
ekonomistas.se. 
Jorda, O., Schularick, M., and A. Taylor (2013). “When Credit Bites Back.” Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking, 45(S2), 3-28. 
Jorda, O., Schularick, M., and A. Taylor (2015). “Leveraged Bubbles.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 
76. 
Lu, B. (2019). “Review of the Reserve Bank’s Loan-to-value Ratio Policy.” Reserve Bank of New 
Zealand Bulletin, 82(6). 
Bloor, C., and B. Lu (2019). “Have the LVR Restrictions Improved Banking System Resilience?” 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note.  
Ovenden, P. (2019). “Macroprudential policy framework: mitigating the likelihood and severity of 
boom-bust cycles.”, available at https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-
/media/ReserveBank/Files/Publications/Background%20papers/Macroprudential-policy-
framework.pdf?revision=02bcd033-70a7-4d28-829f-ee28d71fa7cb&la=en.  
Thornley, M. (2016). “Financial Stability Risks from Housing Market Cycles.” Reserve Bank of New 
Zealand Bulletin, 79(12).  
14  
