François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  How  to  develop  a  “financial
Eurosystem” post-Brexit
Closing remarks by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at theEurofi
High Level Seminar 2019, Bucharest, 5 April 2019.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It is a pleasure to be in Bucharest today to conclude this Eurofi High Level Seminar. I am grateful
to  D.  Wright  and  D.  Cahen  for  offering  me  the  opportunity  to  give  this  keynote  speech...  but
perhaps less grateful about the theme they asked me to address: “Opportunities for developing
EU autonomy in the financial area post-Brexit”. We are still faced with great uncertainties, and
Brexit  is  and  remains  bad  news,  not  only  for  the  United  Kingdom,  but  also  for  Europe.  This
unchartered territory has nevertheless the merit of making one thing very clear: it costs dearly to
leave the single market. So we are still hoping for the best, but we have to prepare for the worst:
a no-deal Brexit and all the risks it implies. This will be my first point today. Then, your theme
obliges  us  to  look  ahead,  beyond  Brexit:  Europeans  should  use  the  demands  created  by  the
current  context  to  build  a  more  integrated  “financial  Eurosystem”,  and  add  some  pillars  to
Europe’s financial sovereignty. 
I. Preparing for the risks
 It has been – first and foremost – the responsibility of the financial industry itself to prepare for the
consequences  of  Brexit,  starting  with  the  loss  of  EU  passporting  rights.  Supervisors  both  at
national and European levels have encouraged and monitored the implementation of contingency
plans. Up until now, most major players have taken the necessary steps, but some concerns
linger regarding the preparedness level of the smaller players, particularly electronic money and
payment  institutions.  On  the  other  hand,  public  measures  have  been  taken  to  deal  with  the
specific risks of a no-deal Brexit that could threaten financial stability or consumer protection.
The temporary and conditional recognition of British CCPs should prevent cliff-edge effects, as
well  as  temporary  waivers  on  mandatory  clearing  and  bilateral  margin  exchange  for  a  limited
category  of  products.  Member  states  have  also  adapted  their  domestic  regulations  or  are
planning to do so. In France, legislation has been enacted ensuring contract continuity for cross
border activities and an extended access to UK settlement systems.  
II. Building  a financial Eurosystem
Let me now turn to the heart of my topic. The unfortunate reality is that Brexit leaves us no other
choice: we must now  reshape  the  European  financial  system  and  develop  its  autonomy.  The
euro  area  can  already  build  on  strong  assets:  an  effective  monetary  Eurosystem,  the  legal
framework for a single financial market and essential components of a Banking Union. However
we do not, as yet, have a “financial Eurosystem”, made up of stronger pan-European financial
institutions  and  market  infrastructure.  Let’s  be  clear:  there  will  not  be  a  single  City  for  the
continent, but rather an integrated polycentric network of financial centres, with specialisations
based on areas of expertise. A polycentric system of this nature can function, as illustrated by
the United States: New York’s financial centre is favoured by corporate and investment banks,
Chicago’s financial centre handles futures, while Boston specialises in asset management.
Starting with the Banking Union, its success depends on the completion of a robust resolution
mechanism, probably even more than a full common deposit insurance scheme. Regarding the
backstop of the Single Resolution Fund, in the interests of financial stability, we should consider
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
extending the maturities on the credit lines. But we will not achieve an effective and profitable
Banking Union without cross-border consolidation in Europe: there are still too many roadblocks
and not enough cross-border restructuring. Compared to the US market, the European banking
sector  remains  fragmented:  the  market  share  of  the  top  5  European  banks  amounts  to  20%,
compared to more than 40% in the US. So we should aim to create a “single banking market”, as
recently  proposed  by  Annegret  Kramp-Karrenbauer,  where  genuine  pan  European  banking
groups could operate more effectively and better face foreign competition. On top of that, banking
integration makes banks more resilient as it reduces their exposure to asymmetric shocks which
leads  to  enhanced  risk-sharing  and  a  better  allocation  of  resources.  A  useful  step  towards
forming  genuine  pan-European  banking  groups  could  be  to  lower  capital  requirements  of
European subsidiaries, while safeguarding their financial position through credible cross-border
guarantees provided by the parent company, which could be triggered both in normal times and
in  crisis  situations.  This  would  be  based  on  European  Union  law  and  enforced  by  European
Union authorities.
I add the obvious, on bank regulation: it is now desirable that we stabilise visibility on total capital
requirements, adding up from various origins. The smooth transposition of Basel 3 is part of this
clarification, including the implementation of the output floor only at consolidated level within the
European Union: if not, we will have introduced a new obstacle to cross-border activities within
Europe. 
Together  with  the  Banking  Union,  a  genuine Capital  Markets  Union  (CMU)  is  essential  to
strengthening  financial  integration  in  Europe:  we  advocated  it  strongly  with  Jens  Weidmann,
President of the Bundesbank, in a joint paper published yesterday, and it will be a key topic of
today’s 
the  Romanian  Presidency.  Despite  some  recent
achievements, progress on this topic is proving difficult and slow. Let us finally move on from a
rhetorical  consensus  in  principle  to  concrete  headways,  notably  on  instruments,  access  to
finance for SMEs, and supervision.
informal  Ecofin, 
thanks 
to 
In this respect, I welcome the progress achieved on a Pan-European Personal Pension Product
(PEPP): this product is portable across member states and offers consumers a wider range of
investment  opportunities.  We  should  also  make  progress  towards  the  harmonisation  of
insolvency regimes. It should facilitate cross-border investment.
One of the most challenging issues of the CMU is to provide cheaper and easier access to equity
for SMEs in order to support their growth. Equity financing is a key driver of innovation: it is better
suited to the uncertainty and offers long-term returns associated with innovative projects. The
euro  area  is  seriously  lagging  behind  in  this  respect:  equity  only  accounts  for  80%  of  GDP,
compared with 122% in the United States.
Integrated capital markets also require effective supervision. Here again, milestones have been
reached  thanks  to  the  outcome  of  the  recent  review  of  ESAs  towards  enhancing  their  role.
Concerning the supervision of financial markets, ESMA will as a first step contribute to furthering
convergence of supervisory practices. Yet in the longer run, the scope of its direct supervisory
powers should be expanded starting with the supervision of wholesale markets. Regarding the
insurance sector, a particular attention was paid to strengthening the supervision of cross-border
activities through EIOPA. I welcome also the enhanced EBA role on AML-CFT issues, an area
where progress in the European framework is absolutely needed.
Finally, the Capital Markets Union needs robust market infrastructure. Thanks to EMIR II, Europe
has given itself powers – via ESMA – to directly supervise third country CCPs which have a
systemic footprint vis-à-vis the EU. This being said, EMIR II is not the end of our journey. Much
more needs to be done regarding either the role of the ECB or ESMA’s prerogatives over EU
CCPs.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Both the Banking Union and the Capital Markets Union are the key components of what we call
with Jens Weidmann a genuine “Financing Union for Investment and Innovation”: this idea is a
way of better channeling our abundant resources – our EUR 340 billion savings surplus in 2018 –
towards the concrete needs of the European economy: the energy transition, SMEs’ equity or
digital innovation. This unified branding has the merit of highlighting the purposes of this Union to
the general public: investment and innovation, or in other words the financing of the future.
III. Some pillars of a European financial sovereignty
In the longer run, we should build three key pillars of the future European financial sovereignty.
First of all, the EU needs to strengthen its position as rule maker through enhanced equivalence
regimes. Brexit  has  given  new  momentum  to  this  topic:  a  comprehensive  reassessment  of
current equivalence regimes is essential given the scope of the relationships between the EU
and  the  UK.  Beyond  the  issue  of  Brexit,  the  review  of  equivalence  regimes  also  provides  an
opportunity  to  improve  them.  There  is  a  need  for  greater  transparency  in  the  procedure  for
granting  equivalences,  within  a  comprehensive  institutional  framework.  The  monitoring  and
control of equivalence decisions could also be improved by granting more power to ESAs, and by
providing the European Commission with more gradual options through flexible tools in the case
of regulatory divergence: for example, temporary, partial or conditional lifting of equivalences.
The second pillar of European financial sovereignty concerns the efficiency of retail payments
and market infrastructure. Regarding retail payments, while the Single Euro Payments Area
(SEPA)  has  proved  to  be  successful,  further  convergence  is  still  needed  in  response  to  the
growing influence of major third countries’ firms in payments solutions. In order to preserve our
sovereignty,  a  European  strategy  for  retail  payments  would  be  necessary,  with  a  view  to  (i)
addressing market fragmentation and promoting unified European-based solutions, (ii) improving
the protection of payment data and (iii) encouraging European players to take part in the current
concentration  in  retail  payments.  Regarding  infrastructure,  the  European  System  of  Central
Banks  shouldered  its  responsibilities  in  strengthening  European  post-trade  integration,  notably
through  the  Target2Securities  platform.  In  the  coming  years,  the  set-up  of  a  unified  collateral
management platform operated by the Eurosystem will be another key step directly contributing
to an effective Capital Markets Union.
Moving  on  to  the  third  pillar,  the international  role  of  the  euro  is  a  key  component  of  our
European  financial  sovereignty. After  a  significant  rise,  the  international  use  of  the  euro  has
declined  since  the  financial  crises  of  2008–2012  and  remains  limited  in  comparison  with  the
dollar. The US dollar is a clear advantage in the exercise of American power, while China cares
about the internationalisation of the renminbi. A larger use of the euro would help to protect our
businesses against foreign exchange risks or legal disputes abroad. In this regard, the concrete
measures  identified  by  the  European  Commission  in  December  are  particularly  relevant.  The
development of fully unified European instant payment systems, integrated capital markets, and
the possible creation of a safe euro-denominated asset should among others contribute to the
international expansion of the euro.
 At this critical time, let me conclude with verses from Othello: “To mourn a mischief that is past
and  gone  is  the  next  way  to  draw  new  mischief  on”.  In  modern  English  it  means:  “when  you
lament something bad that’s already happened, you’re setting yourself up for more bad news.”
Making the best of such a misfortune as Brexit is the surest way to overcome it. Our collective
response to Brexit should be the further integration of Europe: if we remained mired in technical
nit-picking  with  self-satisfaction  in  some  quarters  and  attacks  from  others,  and  distrust  on  all
sides, we would not only have missed an opportunity, we would, collectively, have failed in our
duty. Thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
