Regulatory and Supervisory Expectations on Compliance Function in Banks 
(Shri M.K.Jain, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India - Tuesday, August 20, 2019 - at 
Financial institution Benchmarking and Calibration (FIBAC) 2019 – the Annual Global Banking 
Conference organised by IBA and FICCI, Mumbai) 
Shri Sunil Mehta, Chairman – IBA, Chairmen and Chief Executive Officers of banks, 
other dignitaries and participants, Good Evening to all. This conference brings in the 
best minds from the Indian banking fraternity, the technology, knowledge and other 
service providers together to deliberate the latest developments and future agenda for  
banks in India. It is indeed a great pleasure to be amongst you here today. 
The banking landscape of India is changing rapidly. With the evolution of technology, 
the entire industry has undergone a massive transformation that has changed the way  
financial procedures are carried out, and the way financial institutions operate. The 
collaboration between finance and technology has led to a radical change in several 
aspects of banking. Financial technology is said to be a disruptive force that in the 
future  is  expected  to  reshape  the  financial  sector,  business  models  and  banking 
structures. This paradigm change has posed significant challenges to the banks as 
well  as  the  regulators.  One  of  the  important  challenges  is  ‘compliance’;  a  very 
important aspect for sustainable success story for any banking and financial system. I 
am going to share my thoughts on this aspect today. 
Compliance  is  defined  as  the  act  of  following  laws,  rules,  regulations,  and  various 
codes of conducts including the voluntary ones. Although most of these arise from 
external requirements, following the organization’s own internal rules, policies, and 
procedures, acting in accordance with ethical practices is equally important. A strong 
compliance  culture  should  also  ensure  adherence  to  fair  practice  codes,  manage 
conflicts of interests, and treat customers fairly, with the larger objective of delivering 
efficient customer service. Thus, compliance shall go beyond what is legally binding 
and embrace broader standards of integrity and ethical conduct. 
Benefits of good compliance culture 
It is very important for banks to demonstrate a good compliance culture to maintain 
their reputation and win the trust of customers, investors and regulators. Such culture 
is important for banks to avoid poor conduct and loss of trust.  
A good compliance culture can benefit banks in several ways1; which includes: i) low 
organizational and individual risk; ii) low reputational risk; iii) less hesitance and more 
confidence among employees while performing their jobs; iv) Helps attract and retain 
talent and ensure employee engagement. v) improved transparency which enables 
better decisions; vi) enhanced relationship with regulators and other stakeholders and 
vii) enhanced valuation among investors;  
In a stress tests survey conducted by banks, it was observed that compliance can 
have some business benefits. Over a third of bankers who have undergone the stress 
testing program indicated that top benefits of complying with stress testing principles 
are  better  informed  capital  planning  decisions,  and  maintaining2  a  forward-looking 
view of the organization’s risks. 
                                                            
1 https://www.pm360online.com/silver-linings-10-business-benefits-of-your-compliance-program/ 
2 https://www.forbes.com/sites/tomgroenfeldt/2014/08/19/compliance-efforts-can-bring-business-benefits-
for-banks/#2b5b69f6772c 
 
 1 
We, therefore, need to embrace compliance if we want customer satisfaction which 
eventually leads to better return on equity. 
Costs of poor compliance culture 
Compliance risk is the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions, material financial loss, or 
loss  to  reputation  a  bank  may  suffer  as  a  result  of  its  failure  to  comply  with  laws, 
regulations,  rules,  related  self-regulatory  organization  standards,  and  codes  of 
conduct applicable to its banking activities. On the other hand, an effective process 
would identify compliance risks in each business line, product and process, and devise 
ways  to  mitigate  such  risks.    The  processes  and  requirements  should  be  properly 
documented with a list of do’s and don’ts accompanying the same. The instances of 
failure  to  adhere  to  proper  conduct  should  be  converted  into  case  studies  and 
disseminated among the staff for education and entrenchment of desired attitudes.   
Banks should eschew the tendency to treat compliance merely as cost and should 
recognise  that  proper  conduct  saves  the  bank  from  possible  reputational  loss  and 
penalties – thus, generates hidden earnings which most banks do not quantify, and 
hence do not realise. A poor compliance culture may lead to heavy costs to the banks. 
Globally, from the beginning of the financial crisis and  until 2020, penalties and fines 
on banks is are expected to top USD400 bn. Quinlan and Associates, a Hong Kong-
based financial services consultancy estimated that  bad behaviour had erased $850 
billion in profits for the top 50 global banks since the 2008 financial crisis in the form 
of write-downs, trading losses, fines and higher compliance costs3. From June 2018 
to July 2019, the Reserve Bank has imposed monetary penalties on 76 occasions 
amounting to ` 122.9 crore on various commercial banks operating in India.  
However, fear of fines and penalties will not be enough to keep up with the evolving 
nature of regulations. But a financial management system with built-in control makes 
compliance an everyday practice that enables the organisation to operate at greater 
efficiency.  In  addition,  sound  governance  creates  conducive  environment  for  the 
values  of  compliance,  integrity,  trust,  and  respect  for  the  law;  to  thrive  in  the 
organisation’s  culture.  As  a  result,  a  bank  can  empower  its  entire  organization  to 
operate with responsibility while maintaining the flexibility necessary to stay ahead of 
ever-evolving regulations and business challenges.  
Compliance culture – Indian scenario 
Reserve Bank of India had introduced a system of “Compliance Officer” in banks way 
back in August 1992, based on recommendations by the Committee on Frauds and 
Malpractices in Banks (Ghosh Committee). The role of compliance officers came into 
sharper focus since 1995 when the General Manager in charge of Audit and Inspection 
was made responsible for the compliance functions, with a requirement for periodic 
reporting or certification on compliance functions directly to the CMD. However, it was 
gradually recognized that the circumference of compliance functions in banks needed 
to  be  not  only  enlarged,  but  also  clearly  defined,  especially  in  a  scenario  where 
successive Annual Financial Inspection Reports prepared by the banking supervisor 
highlighted  a  host  of  compliance  deficiencies.  RBI’s  recognition  for  the  need  and 
importance of compliance functions received a further impetus after Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision (BCBS) issued the High Level Paper on Compliance Risk and 
Compliance Function in Banks in April 2005. These principles formed the basis for our 
                                                            
3https://in.reuters.com/article/banks-regulator-fines/u-s-eu-fines-on-banks-misconduct-to-top-400-billion-by-
2020-report-idINKCN1C210D 
 2 
work on issuing rigors for compliance functions in banks, in the year 2007. Subsequent 
to the financial crisis, the focus on compliance has gone up significantly, especially in 
the area of conduct, KYC/AML, suitability and appropriateness of banking products 
offered to a specific customer.   
In this context, and acknowledging the benefits offered by a good compliance culture 
and  costs  of  poor  conduct,  the  compliance  culture  of  Indian  banks  needs  to  be 
strengthened. During the course of the supervisory process, the Reserve Bank has 
observed  various  lacunae  in  the  compliance  culture  of  Indian  banks.  Some  of  the 
weaknesses and irregularities observed have been recurring in spite of the averments 
made by bank managements having carried out remediation. My expectation from the 
banks  is  that  they  make  serious  efforts  towards  overall  improvement  of  their 
compliance function.  
It will not be an exaggeration to say that some of the big losses suffered by banks on 
account of frauds could have been avoided if a good compliance culture was ingrained 
in respective banks. As defined earlier, compliance also includes adherence to internal 
policies and procedures of banks. In most cases of frauds, a common thread is non-
adherence to internal policies and procedures by employees concerned. Increasing 
incidences of frauds in recent years, the quantum of amounts involved and also the 
complexities of modalities adopted highlight the importance of a strong compliance 
culture in the banks. 
Compliance Risk relating to Cybersecurity 
On  a  specific  note,  in  technology  driven  banking,  compliance  with  cybersecurity 
guidelines  is  gaining  importance.    Generally,  cyber  resilience  frameworks  aim  to 
address three broad issues – confidentiality breach (confidential data being stolen), 
availability  breach  (systems  are  intact,  but  services  are  made  unavailable),  and 
integrity breach (corruption of data or systems affecting the integrity of information and 
processing  methods).  Compliance  risk  relating  to  these  breaches  are  gaining 
significance and needs to be addressed on a priority. 
Minimum supervisory expectation on compliance culture 
Compliance starts at the top. It may be recalled that, in February 2019, I had drawn 
attention of the CEOs of select banks, wherein the board of directors along with the 
senior  management  were  urged  to  set  the  tone  at  the  top  and  usher  in  a  strong 
compliance culture in banks. Compliance should be an integral part of the culture of 
the organisation; it should not just be the responsibility of staff working in compliance 
function. It should be a shared responsibility of each staff member of the bank, and 
business unit of a bank should be equally responsible for any non-compliance.  A bank 
should hold itself to high standards when carrying out business, and at all times strive 
to observe the spirit as well as the letter of the law. Failure to consider the impact of 
its actions on its shareholders, customers, employees and the markets may result in 
significant adverse publicity and reputational damage, even if no law has been broken. 
Strong compliance culture is a pre-requisite for an effective compliance function.  
If we may further delve into it, a robust compliance culture has the following essential 
elements-  
Tone  from  the  top-  Whether  the  value  statements  of  Board  members,  senior 
management are in sync with value demonstration in actions. The Board’s oversight 
over compliance function should not be limited to framing policies, and its periodic 
 3 
review. A bank’s compliance policy will not be effective unless the Board of Directors 
promotes  values  of  honesty  and  integrity  throughout  the  organisation.  The  Board 
should also formulate and maintain a quality assurance and improvement program 
that covers all aspects of the compliance function. 
Accountability  –  The  bank’s  senior  management  is  responsible  for  effective 
adherence to the compliance policy of the bank by the management and staff; and to 
for ensuring that compliance risk is minimised. Culture of owning the responsibility 
individually  and  collectively  by  board;  clear  demarcation  of  accountability  of  senior 
management, functional head and operational head; role of business unit as first line 
of  defence  and  role  of  internal  audit  as  third  level  of  defence  in  facilitating  robust 
compliance culture are all important. 
Communication:  Clarity  and  transparency  should  be  promoted  by  making  a 
distinction between general standards for all staff members and rules that only apply 
to  specific  groups  of  staff.  An  effective  compliance  culture  requires  continuous 
communication of expectations on risk and compliance and practices across the bank; 
compliance  awareness  channels  for  existing  and  new  Board  members,  senior 
management and employees; process for containing conduct risk and whistle-blower 
mechanism. 
Incentive Structure: An adequate incentive structure should be in-built in the bank’s 
decision making systems and processes to achieve the desired compliance culture. 
Ex  Ante  and  Forward  Looking:  Compliance  is  distinct  from  other  assurance 
functions  viz.,  risk  management  and  internal  audit.    The  focus  of  the  compliance 
function should be preventive compliance.  By definition, preventive compliance would 
assess 
the  bank  before  hand  and  prevent  non-compliant 
activities/transactions from being carried out. Compliance should be an ex ante activity 
and forward looking.  
Compliance  Organsiation,  Authority  and  Resources:  A  bank  should  organise  its 
compliance function and set priorities for managing its compliance risk in a way that is 
consistent with its own risk management strategy and structures. For instance, some 
banks may wish to organise their compliance function within their operational risk function, 
as there is a close relationship between compliance risk and certain aspects of operational 
risk. Others may prefer to have separate compliance and operational risk functions, but 
establish  mechanisms  requiring  close  cooperation  between  the  two  functions  on 
compliance matters. Regardless of how the compliance function is organised within a 
bank, it should have sufficient authority, stature, independence, resources and access to 
the  Board.  Its responsibilities  should  be  clearly  specified,  and  its  activities  should  be 
subject to periodic and independent review by the internal audit. Management should 
respect the independence of the compliance function and not interfere with their fulfilment.  
Nevertheless, even at the cost of repetition, I would like to stress that compliance is a 
shared responsibility of each and every staff of the bank.  
Importance of Corporate Governance 
While feedback mechanisms are important in a bank to permeate a strong compliance 
culture,  enabling  environment  in  a  bank  that  fosters  such  culture  embedded  with 
strong internal control has to emanate from the directions of the Board.  Aspects  with 
benefits to the bank not apparent has to be enforced through a top down approach.   
the  activities  of 
 4 
Corporate governance determines the allocation of authority and responsibilities by 
which  the  business  and  affairs  of  a  bank  are  carried  out  by  its  board  and  senior 
management,  including  how  they:  align  corporate  culture,  corporate  activities  and 
behaviour with the expectation that the bank will operate in a safe and sound manner, 
with integrity and in compliance with applicable laws and regulations. In this context, 
it may be noted that Board should adopt policies in accordance to each bank’s size, 
complexity, risk appetites, business model and philosophy.  Board approved policies 
should factor in entity specific vagaries.  Also, mere adoption of policies does not solve 
anything.    An  effective  implementation  of  Board  approved  policies  is  essential  to 
percolate  down  the  philosophy  embedded  in  policy  throughout  the  firm.    A  strong 
compliance culture has a significant role to play in this context. 
Conclusion 
Lot of improvement is needed in compliance culture across banks. As a supervisor of 
banks,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  keen  interest  in  sound  corporate  governance  and 
compliance culture, as it is an essential element in the safe and sound functioning of 
a bank and if not followed effectively may adversely affect the bank’s risk profile. Well 
governed banks contribute to an efficient and cost-effective supervisory process, as 
there  is  less  need  for  supervisory  intervention.  Such  sound  culture  would  help  in 
building organisations that are strong, resilient, disciplined and enjoy the benefits of 
sustained growth and customer confidence. It will also pre-empt several supervisory 
actions, and attendant reputational risk, that would follow in case transgressions are 
detected. 
Role of compliance has been gaining wider attention across the globe and it has been 
acknowledged  by  the  central  banks  and  bankers  alike  that  compliance  warrants 
considerable  attention.  Regulators,  supervisors  and  international  standard  setters 
have  become  increasingly  cognizant  of  the  fact  that  merely  enacting  rules  and 
regulations is a futile exercise unless these are complied with, both in letter and spirit, 
by the regulated entities. 
Sound  corporate  governance  and  compliance  culture  will  permit  the  supervisor  to 
place  more  reliance  on  the  bank’s  internal  processes.  In  this  regard,  supervisory 
experience  underscores  the  importance  of  having  appropriate  levels  of  authority, 
responsibility, accountability, and checks and balances within each bank, including 
those of the board of directors, senior management and the assurance functions by 
way of risk, compliance and internal audit. 
I am hopeful that deliberations over the past two days on emerging trends in banking, 
changes  in  global  regulatory  landscape,  the  new  bankruptcy  regime  in  India  and 
technological innovations affecting the way banks do business would prepare banks 
to  not  only  cope  up with  the  emerging  challenges,  but  also  help  banks  to  use  the 
opportunity  provided  by  the  new  paradigm  to  further  the  agenda  of  inclusive  and 
compliance oriented banking in the country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 
References 
1.  Bank of International Settlements, “Compliance and the compliance function in banks”, BIS (2005) 
2.  Bank of International Settlements, “Corporate governance principles for banks – Guidelines”, BIS (2015) 
3.  Flanner, Mark. J, “Market Discipline in Bank Supervision”, Chapter 15 of The Oxford Handbook of Banking, First Edition, OUP 
(2010) 
4.  Hagendorff, Jens, “Corporate Governance in Banking”, Chapter 6 of The Oxford Handbook of Banking, Second Edition, OUP 
(2015) 
5.  Mundra, S. S., “Re-emphasizing the Role of Compliance Function In Banks”, Speech delivered at the CAFRAL Conference 
of Chief Compliance Officers in RBI, Mumbai  (2014) 
6.  Chakrabarthy,  K.  C.,  “Compliance  function  in  banks  –  back  to  the  basics”,  Speech  delivered  at  the  launch  of  certificate 
programmes on compliance function and training, Mumbai (2013) 
7.  Padmanabhan, G., “Emerging Issues in Cyber Security in the Financial Sector”, Speech delivered at the Sri Chithira Thirunal 
Memorial Lecture Series organised by the State Bank of Travancore, Thiruvananthapuram (2015) 
  6 
