NATIONAL BANK OF SERBIA 
         Speech at the presentation of the Annual Financial Stability 
Report for 2018  
 Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor 
           1 
Belgrade, 31 July 2019 
 Ladies and gentlemen, esteemed members of the press, dear colleagues,  
 Welcome to the presentation of the Annual Financial Stability Report for 2018. Before you is 
a  report  for  the  year  in  which  Serbia  achieved  the  highest  growth  rate  in  the  last  ten  years, 
maintained  low  and  stable  inflation  and  additionally  strengthened  the  domestic  financial 
system.  The  year  in  which  long-term  investment  in  our  country  increased  and  the  share  of 
public  debt  in  GDP  contracted  further.  I  have  to  say  that  such  results  were  achieved  in  the 
face of challenges from the international environment we have all been witnesses to – such as 
global  protectionism,  geopolitical  tensions,  or  uncertainties  surrounding  the  UK’s  exit  from 
the European Union. 
The  Financial  Stability  Report  starts  with  the  ever  important  conditions  in  the 
international environment, because they have a significant bearing on the conditions at 
home  too.  At  the  global  level,  2018  was  marked  by  an  economic  slowdown  experienced  in 
the second half of the year by advanced and, consequently, emerging economies. This put an 
upward pressure on the risk premia of countries in the region  and prompted revisions to  the 
growth  outlook.  Trade  tensions  between  major  world  economies  also  fuelled  uncertainty  in 
international  commodity  and  financial  markets.  In  such  an  environment,  the  pace  of 
normalisation of monetary policies of leading central banks, the European Central Bank and 
Federal Reserve System, was uncertain. 
What  is  the  best  response  of  policy  makers  to  growing  uncertainties  in  the  external 
environment? The best, and in fact the only response, is to strengthen the domestic economy. 
In coordination with other economic policy makers, the National Bank of Serbia has worked 
continuously  towards  further  narrowing  of  internal  and  external  imbalances.  More  stable 
conditions  of  doing  business  reflected  in  price  and  financial  stability,  sound  public  finance 
and better prospects were also “sealed“ by the Standard & Poor’s upgrade of Serbia’s outlook 
from  “stable”  to  “positive”.  As  the  reasons  for  its  decision,  the  rating  agency  cited  the 
country’s  strong  economic  growth,  as  well  as  the  results  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  in 
maintaining price and financial stability. 
  We have kept inflation under control for six consecutive years. 
Over the past six years inflation in Serbia  has been kept firmly under control.  Inflation 
averaged around 2% in  2018, while medium-term inflation expectations of the financial and 
corporate sectors remained anchored.  
 2 
Against  the  background  of  low  inflationary  pressures,  but  also  risks  from  the  international 
environment,  we  maintained  a  cautious  monetary  policy  stance  and  lowered  our  key  policy 
rate  in  two  25  bp  steps  to  the  level  of  3%.  This  way,  we  continued  to  support  economic 
growth that reached 4.3% last  year.  In July  this year, we trimmed the key policy rate by 
another  25  bp,  to  2.75%,  which  is  its  lowest  level  in  the  inflation  targeting  regime  yet. 
We  expect  that  this  impulse  will  soon  pass  through  to  all  segments  of  the  market,  thereby 
extending our support to economic growth going forward.  
    The cost of financing declined, while disposable income of corporates  and households 
increased. 
Continued monetary policy easing contributed to  a further reduction in the  cost of financing 
for  households  and  corporates,  as  well  as  for  the  government.  This  is  evident  from  the  fact 
that compared to May 2013 when we embarked on a monetary policy easing cycle, interest 
rates on dinar loans for households are now twice lower,  while those for corporates are 
even three times lower. In the case of the government, an evident example is that of seven-
year dinar securities where the interest rate fell from 13% at end-2013 to 3.59% this July. 
And this is exactly where the effect of full coordination of our policies and the progress 
Serbia made on the macroeconomic front is best seen.  
Considerably lower interest  rates and the consequently higher disposable income, as well as 
economic growth accompanied with a rise in wages and the lowest unemployment rate, were 
the key drivers of lending activity. The y-o-y growth in loans to the private sector was almost 
two-digit  in  2018,  measuring  9.9%,  and  the  loan  structure  was  favourable.  In  2018  alone, 
 3 
over  RSD  240  bn  worth  of  new  investment  loans  was  disbursed,  which  is  the  highest 
level so far. This supported the profitability of corporates, which has been on a constant rise 
since 2015. The corporate sector ended 2018 with a net profit of RSD 500 bn, which is by 
RSD 126 bn or by one  third  more than the year before.  If  we look at company size,  we 
will  see  that  profitability  was  in  the  positive  zone  in  all  categories  –  from  micro  to  large 
enterprises.  
 Positive fiscal trends extended into 2018 – Serbia recorded a fiscal surplus of around 0.6% of 
GDP. The share of public debt in GDP dropped by 4.1 pp  y-o-y to 53.8% in 2018, and went 
further down to 51.8% in May 2019.  
In  the  context  of  financial  stability,  particularly  important  is  the  reduction  in  the  dollar 
share of public debt in the previous two and a half years, from around one third to around 
one fifth of total public debt in June this year.  
Also, the country’s external position is sustainable. For four years in a row the current account 
deficit  was  fully  covered  by  the  inflow  of  foreign  direct  investment,  which  in  2018  reached 
EUR 3.5 bn or 8.2% of GDP. Full coverage of the current account deficit continues in 2019.  
  We have preserved financial stability.  
In  such  an  environment,  appreciation  pressures  prevailed  in  2018  as  well.  The  dinar 
strengthened  against  the  euro  owing  to  good  macroeconomic  indicators,  greater  interest  in 
long-term investment in Serbia and rising exports of goods and services. To prevent excessive 
short-term  volatility  of  the  dinar  exchange  rate,  we  intervened  in  the  interbank  foreign 
exchange  market  on  both  sides  –  by  buying  and  selling  foreign  currency.  We  bought  EUR 
1.58  bn  net.  This  also  gave  an  additional  boost  to  the  country’s  FX  reserves  which  at  end-
 4 
December  2018  came  at  EUR  11.3  bn.  At  end-June  this  year,  FX  reserves  reached  EUR 
12.1  bn  in  gross  terms,  or  over  EUR  10  bn  in  net  terms,  which  is  the  highest  level  on 
record. Such a high level of FX reserves ensures security not only in conditions of stability, 
but also in case of potential external shocks.  
Serbia’s  banking  sector  was  adequately  capitalised,  highly  liquid  and  profitable  throughout 
2018  as  well,  with  indicators  standing  high  above  the  regulatory  minimums.  The  dominant 
role  among  the  sources  of  funding  was  that  of  domestic  deposits,  which  reduces  banks’ 
dependence on external sources of funding and their exposure to risks from the international 
environment.  In  addition,  the  results  of  macroprudential  stress  tests,  which  we  continued  to 
regularly conduct in 2018, confirm that banking sector capitalisation and liquidity would not 
be jeopardised even in case of extremely negative developments. 
 At  our  previous  presentations  of  the  Annual  Financial  Stability  Report,  we  underscored  the 
share of non-performing loans as a systemic risk. This is also how we tackled the issue – in 
a systemic way. As a result, the share of non-performing loans in total banking sector loans 
was lowered to 5.7% at end-2018 and to 5.21% in June this year. The ratio of non-performing 
loans is smaller by around 17 pp and their stock by around 70% compared to the period when 
the  Serbian  Government  and  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  adopted  the  NPL  Resolution 
Strategy. At the same time, the current ratio of non-performing loans is the lowest on record. 
Being  proactive,  last  year  we  also  adopted  regulatory  measures  to  curb  risks  potentially 
arising from unsecured non-purpose lending to households at unreasonably long maturities. 
    5 
   Late  last  year,  we  signed  with  the  Serbian  Government  the  new  Memorandum  on  the 
Dinarisation  Strategy,  outlining  additional  measures  and  activities  which  aim  to  encourage 
further  dinarisation  and  reduce  FX  risk  in  the  financial  system.  We  are  particularly  happy 
about  the  rise  in  dinar  savings,  which  are  today  almost  four  times  higher  than  at  end-
2012, exceeding RSD 70 bn in July this year. This truly reflects citizens’ increased trust 
in the domestic currency. 
   In following the latest trends, we strive to meet consumer needs. 
 Last  year  as  well,  we  showed  that  besides  being  traditional,  we  always  support  the 
development  of  cutting-edge  technologies,  while  ensuring  safety  and  protecting  financial 
service  consumers.  In this  regard,  one of the key projects  of the National  Bank of Serbia in 
2018 was the launch of the instant payments system in the Republic of Serbia. The system is 
 6 
an important step towards the digitalisation of payment services, enabling instant payments 24 
hours a day, seven days a week, 365 days a year. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, esteemed members of the press, dear colleagues,  
 Low  and  stable  inflation,  a  cautious  monetary  policy  stance,  a  stable  banking  system  and 
favourable  fiscal  trends  have  provided  a  positive  contribution  to  maintaining  and 
strengthening the resilience of the domestic financial system and macroeconomic stability of 
the country in 2018 as well. 
Despite all challenges from the international environment, which were not few, last year saw 
the  lowest  unemployment  rate  on  record  and  an  increase  in  employment  and  wages,  which 
shows  that  sound  economic  policy  was  pursued  in  Serbia  and  that  the  resilience  of  the 
domestic economy to potential risks was strengthened. 
By consistent implementation of monetary policy and full coordination with fiscal policy, the 
National  Bank  of  Serbia  significantly  contributed  to  the  country’s  solid  economic 
performance, which strengthened the basis for sustainable growth. We are therefore able to 
talk today about the lowest risk premium, which in July, for the first time since records 
are available for our country, fell below 60 bp.  
 Thank  you for  your attention. Please allow me now to pass the floor to  General Manager of 
the Financial Stability Department Mr Darko Kovačević. 
  7 
