Yukitoshi Funo: Economic activity, prices, and monetary policy in
Japan
Speech by Mr Yukitoshi Funo, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting
with business leaders, Hiroshima, 3 July 2019.
I. Recent Economic and Price Developments
A. Overseas Developments
 I would like to begin by talking about overseas economies, which have been growing moderately
on the whole, although slowdowns have been observed. Uncertainty regarding the outlook has
been heightening, due in part to protectionist moves, but private consumption has been firm on
the  whole,  partly  supported  by  a  favorable  employment  and  income  situation.  In  terms  of  the
outlook,  slowdowns  are  likely  to  continue  for  the  time  being;  thereafter,  however,  overseas
economies  are  expected  to  grow  moderately  on  the  whole  with  their  growth  rates  rising
somewhat.
Looking at developments by major region, the U.S. economy has been expanding moderately,
whereas the European economy has been decelerating. The Chinese economy has continued to
see stable growth on the whole, but some weakness has been observed in the manufacturing
sector. Other emerging and commodity-exporting economies have been recovering moderately
on the whole, mainly on the back of the effects of those economies’ stimulus measures. As for
the outlook, the U.S. economy is expected to maintain its moderate expansion and the European
economy is projected to gradually move out of its deceleration phase. The Chinese economy is
likely to broadly follow a stable growth path as authorities conduct fiscal and monetary policies in
a timely manner. Other emerging and commodity-exporting economies are likely to continue to
see moderate recovery on the whole.
Risk factors to the overseas economic outlook are wide ranging and likely to be significant, as
exemplified by (1) the U.S. macroeconomic policies and their impact on global financial markets,
(2)  the  consequences  of  protectionist  moves,  including  those  observed  in  U.S.-China  trade
negotiations  and  their  effects,  (3)  developments  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting
economies, (4) the progress in global adjustments in IT-related goods, (5) negotiations on the
United Kingdom’s exit from the European Union (EU) and their effects, and (6) geopolitical risks.
As it can be said that there is uncertainty surrounding overseas economies, it is necessary to
stay  vigilant  regarding  these  risk  factors,  including  their  impact  on  firms’  and  households’
sentiment in Japan.
B. Japan’s Economy and Prices
1. Economic activity
I  will  now  discuss  the  economic  situation  in  Japan.  The  economy  has  been  on  a  moderate
expanding trend, with a virtuous cycle from income to spending operating, although exports and
production have been affected by the slowdown in overseas economies. It has continued to grow
at a pace above its potential growth rate.  This is evidenced by the real GDP growth rate having
registered 1.8 percent for the October-December quarter of 2018 on an annualized quarter-on-
quarter basis, and 2.2 percent for the January-March quarter of 2019. According to the Bank of
Japan’s June 2019 Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) released at
the  beginning  of  July,  the  diffusion  index  (DI)  for  business  conditions  for  all  industries  and
enterprises  has  remained  positive  despite  being  affected  by  the  slowdown  in  overseas
economies and other factors.
1
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Meanwhile, after enduring the severe damage caused by the heavy rain, which mainly affected
western Japan in July 2018, Hiroshima Prefecture has seen steady progress in its restoration
and reconstruction, owing to the efforts of those involved. To give an example, although firms’
production activities had become stagnant due to damage to production facilities, a water cutoff,
and disruptions to traffic infrastructure, these effects have more or less dissipated. Moreover,
such inviting locations as the two World Heritage Sites of Hiroshima — the Atomic Bomb Dome
and the Itsukushima Shrine — as well as the beauty of the archipelago in the Setouchi region are
attracting tourists from home and abroad once again, making up for the past slowdown.
2
With regard to the outlook, Japan’s economy is likely to continue growing at about the same pace
as its potential on average and continue on an expanding trend, despite being affected by the
slowdown in overseas economies for the time being.  Specifically, for now, exports are projected
to show some weakness and business fixed investment also is likely to decelerate somewhat,
reflecting the effects of the slowdown in overseas economies. Meanwhile, private consumption is
expected to continue increasing as the employment and income situation continues to improve.
Thereafter,  Japan’s  exports  are  projected  to  return  to  their  moderate  increasing  trend,  with
overseas economies expected to grow moderately on the whole. Domestic demand is likely to
follow an uptrend, with a virtuous cycle from income to spending being maintained in both the
corporate  and  household  sectors,  mainly  against  the  background  of  highly  accommodative
financial conditions and the underpinnings through government spending, despite being affected
by  such  factors  as  the  scheduled  consumption  tax  hike.  In  terms  of  specific  figures  for  the
economic growth rate, as provided in the April 2019 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices
(Outlook Report) released by the Bank, the medians of the Policy Board members’ forecasts are
0.8 percent for fiscal 2019, 0.9 percent for fiscal 2020, and 1.2 percent for fiscal 2021.
1.  Under a specific methodology, Japan’s potential growth rate is estimated to be in the range
of  0.5-1.0  percent  recently.  However,  the  estimate  of  the  potential  growth  rate  varies
depending  on  the  methodologies  employed  and  could  be  revised  as  the  sample  period
becomes longer over time. Thus, it should be regarded as being subject to a considerable
margin of error.
2.  It is assumed that the consumption tax will be raised to 10 percent in October 2019 and that
a reduced tax rate will be applied to food and beverages — excluding alcohol and dining out
— and newspapers.
2. Prices
Let me now explain price developments. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price
index  (CPI)  for  all  items  less  fresh  food  is  in  the  range  of  0.5-1.0  percent  and  at  around  0.5
percent excluding the effects of energy prices, together suggesting that it has continued to show
relatively weak developments compared to the economic expansion and labor market tightening.
With  regard  to  the  outlook,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  projected  to  rise
gradually as firms’ stance is likely to gradually shift toward further raising wages and prices with
the output gap remaining positive. As a result, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all
items less fresh food) is likely to increase gradually over time. In terms of specific figures, the
medians of the Policy Board members’ forecasts of the year-on-year rate of change presented in
the April 2019 Outlook Report are 1.1 percent for fiscal 2019, 1.4 percent for fiscal 2020, and 1.6
3
percent for fiscal 2021.
1.  3The forecasts assume the following: (1) the consumption tax will be raised to 10 percent in
October 2019 and a reduced tax rate will be applied to food and beverages — excluding
alcohol and dining out — and newspapers, and (2) with regard to policies concerning the
provision of free education,  measures  for  free  early  childhood  education  as  well  as  other
measures including free higher education will be introduced in October 2019 and April 2020,
respectively.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
II. Keys to Assessing the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices
In what follows, I would like to discuss several points that I think deserve particular attention in
terms of realizing the outlook for economic activity and prices that I mentioned earlier.
A. Employment and Income Situation
Let me first talk about the employment and income situation. As the economy has continued its
moderate  expansion,  the  output  gap  has  remained  clearly  positive,  and  supply-demand
conditions  in  the  labor  market  have  continued  to  tighten  steadily.  The Labour  Force  Survey-
based number of employees has continued to increase firmly when smoothing out fluctuations,
and the active job openings-to-applicants ratio has been at a high level that exceeds the peak
marked during the bubble period. In addition, the unemployment rate has remained at a low level.
These indicators of supply-demand conditions in the labor market show that the degree of labor
market tightness has been at the level last seen in the first half of the 1990s or in the first half of
the 1970s.
Amid such supply-demand conditions in the labor market, the latest rate of base pay increase for
fiscal 2019 is about the same as the actual rate for fiscal 2018. The year-on-year rate of increase
in scheduled cash earnings of full-time employees is in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent. In addition,
that in hourly scheduled cash earnings of part-time employees, which are responsive to supply-
demand conditions in the labor market, has registered relatively high growth at around 2 percent.
As a result, although total cash earnings per employee have been increasing moderately, albeit
with  fluctuations,  the  increases  have  remained  relatively  weak  compared  to  the  labor  market
tightening, partly due to the high wage elasticity of labor supply in recent years, mainly among
women and seniors.
As Japan’s economy is likely to continue on an expanding trend, it is expected that the number of
employees will keep increasing and supply-demand conditions in the labor market will continue to
tighten steadily. I therefore expect the rate of increase in total cash earnings per employee to
gradually accelerate.
B. Prices
Next, I will turn to price developments, taking into account the employment and income situation.
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food and energy) has remained
at around 0.5 percent. The relatively weak developments compared to such factors as the labor
market  tightening  are  attributable  to  the  mindset  and  behavior  based  on  the  assumption  that
wages and prices will not increase easily, which have been deeply entrenched among firms and
households,  due  mainly  to  the  experience  of  prolonged  low  growth  and  deflation.  In  addition,
room for raising productivity and progress in information technology in recent years, for example,
have allowed firms to absorb an increase in costs and thereby maintain their cautious stance
toward raising prices.
While affected by various factors, I view the underlying trend in prices as being determined by the
aggregate supply-demand balance. In other words, a positive output gap leads to a rise in the
inflation rate through a virtuous cycle from income to spending. In the case of households, for
example, a tightening of labor market conditions encourages an increase in private consumption
through a rise in wages, thereby leading to an increase in the year-on-year rate of change in the
CPI.
In this regard, looking at annual price changes across all CPI items less fresh food, the share of
price-increasing items minus the share of price-decreasing items has been rising on average
recently. In this situation, I believe various changes are spreading throughout the economy. For
example, in terms of private consumption, firms have developed and supplied new products to
tap potential demand in view of the increasing variation in consumer needs. My impression is that
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
consumers, in response, are tolerant of the prices set for products and services that are not
necessarily  inexpensive,  as  long  as  they  are  unique  and  have  high  value-added,  like  travel
packages that offer a new life experience in return.
As  for  the  outlook,  it  is  projected  that,  with  the  output  gap  remaining  positive,  firms’  stance
gradually  will  shift  toward  further  raising  wages  and  households’  tolerance  of  price  rises  will
increase.  In  this  situation,  further  price  rises  are  likely  to  be  observed  widely  and  medium-  to
long-term inflation expectations are projected to rise gradually. As a consequence, it can be said
that  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  is  likely  to  increase  gradually.  Conversely,
attention  should  be  paid  to  the  fact  that  a  change  in  the  mindset  and  behavior  of  firms  and
households does not occur overnight and may in fact take a considerable amount of time.
III. Conduct of Monetary Policy
Let me now turn to the Bank’s monetary policy.
The  Bank  has  set  the  price  stability  target  at  2  percent  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of
change in the CPI and has been conducting monetary policy to achieve this target at the earliest
possible time. To this end, the Bank has been pursuing powerful monetary easing, considering
developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices,  as  well  as  financial  conditions,  under  the
framework of Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control. The
Bank, under this framework, has been conducting yield curve control, in which it controls short-
and  long-term  interest  rates.  Specifically,  at  present,  according  to  the  guideline  for  market
operations, the Bank sets the short-term policy interest rate at minus 0.1 percent and purchases
Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that 10-year JGB yields will remain at around 0 percent.
By conducting this operation, short- and long-term interest rates have been stable at low levels,
and I consider that the highly accommodative financial conditions, brought about by yield curve
control, have stimulated firms’ and households’ spending activities.
Meanwhile,  prices  have  continued  to  show  relatively  weak  developments  compared  to  the
economic  expansion  and  labor  market  tightening,  with  Policy  Board  members’  forecasts
presented in the April 2019 Outlook Report indicating that it likely would still take time to achieve
the price stability target. As part of its efforts to do so, at the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held
on April 24 and 25, the Bank decided to clarify forward guidance for policy rates. Specifically, the
description  of  the  existing  guidance  was  partially  revised,  thereby  making  clear  that  the  Bank
would  “maintain  the  current  extremely  low  levels  of  short-  and  long-term  interest  rates  for  an
extended period of time, at least through around spring 2020, taking into account uncertainties
regarding economic activity and prices including developments in overseas economies and the
effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike.” By doing so, the Bank clarified its unchanged
policy stance to persistently continue with the current powerful monetary easing. What I would
like to call attention to here is that the current extremely low levels of short- and long-term interest
rates will be maintained “for an extended period of time” and that the inclusion of “at least” in the
description regarding the time frame of the guidance indicates a fair possibility that the current
low  interest  rates  will  be  maintained  beyond  “around  spring  2020.”  In  other  words,  “for  an
extended  period  of  time”  does  not  denote  “through  around  spring  2020";  rather,  it  implies  an
open-ended period even beyond that.
The Bank also decided at the April MPM to implement measures contributing to the continuation
of powerful monetary easing. Specifically, the Bank decided to (1) expand the scope of eligible
collateral  for  its  provision  of  credit  for  such  purposes  as  the  Bank’s  lending  to  financial
institutions, (2) improve the use of the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the
Foundations  for  Economic  Growth,  (3)  relax  the  terms  and  conditions  for  the  facility  of
temporarily lending Japanese government securities (JGSs) held by the Bank, and (4) consider
introducing an exchange-traded fund (ETF) lending facility, which would make it possible to lend
its ETFs to market participants. These measures are aimed at strengthening policy durability in
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
order  for  the  Bank  to  continue  with  powerful  monetary  easing  through  its  smooth  fund-
provisioning and securing of market functioning.
Given  the  current  situation,  where  prices  and  inflation  expectations  have  not  risen  easily,  it  is
necessary to maintain a positive output gap for as long as possible by keeping interest rates at
sufficiently low levels for a prolonged time, in order to achieve the price stability target. I believe
that  the  clarification  of  forward  guidance  and  the  aforementioned  four  measures  will  bolster
confidence  in  the  Bank’s  continuation  of  powerful  monetary  easing  and  further  ensure
achievement  of  the  price  stability  target.  With  a  view  to  achieving  the  target,  the  Bank  will
continue conducting monetary policy in an appropriate manner, taking account of developments
in economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions.
IV. Challenges for Japan’s Economy
I  now  would  like  to  express  my  thoughts  regarding  the  current  situation  for  Japan’s  economy
from a longer-term perspective.
According to the Bank’s estimates, the potential growth rate has been in the range of 0.5-1.0
percent  recently. Although  the  rate  has  risen  compared  to  around  2010,  it  can  be  said  that
Japan’s growth potential has been sluggish. This is also an indication of the various challenges
that  Japan  faces  in  achieving  a  rise  in  productivity.  With  regard  to  corporate  activities,  for
example, firms’ utilization of resources to achieve the intended goals should be minimized, and
the achievement process needs to be managed by means of effective corporate governance.
Unless  this  way  of  thinking  is  widely  accepted  by  firms,  however,  excessive  resources  —
including labor — tend to be allocated in order to produce results that are more impressive than
necessary, regardless of the marginal benefit. This tendency, prevalent across professions and
industries, seemingly is encouraged by Japan’s employment practices and bottom-up approach
to management.
In  spite  of  these  trends,  going  forward,  I  see  the  potential  growth  rate  rising  through  an
improvement  in  productivity  as  a  wide  range  of  entities  continue  with  initiatives  concerning
structural reforms and growth strategies. Take recent developments for instance; namely, the
output gap being positive and labor market conditions remaining considerably tight, as evidenced
by  the  existing  labor  shortage.  Such  underlying  developments  seem  to  have  given  rise  to
changes in employment practices, including increased mobility in the labor market brought about
by the efficient allocation of excess labor resources from sectors with low productivity to those
with  high  productivity.  Alongside  this,  progress  in  working-style  reforms  and  other  initiatives
suggests  a  deepening  awareness  among  both  workers  and  managers  of  the  need  to  raise
productivity. Pursuing structural reforms and growth strategies is not an easy task and a fairly
extensive  process.  Nonetheless,  it  is  safe  to  say  that  the  necessary  conditions  for  a  rise  in
productivity,  which  will  bring  about  a  boost  in  Japan’s  growth  potential,  gradually  are  being
fulfilled.
I believe these developments will play a role in underpinning the virtuous cycle from income to
spending. Specifically, a rise in productivity will act as a starting point of such cycle, stimulating
price rises through increases in wages and private consumption. Effects of monetary policy are
not directly transmitted to economic entities — namely, individual firms and households — and
thus may take time to materialize in the form of backing up their efforts. However, they should be
able to support various initiatives as the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy stimulates aggregate
demand and suitably tight supply-demand conditions are maintained. Therefore, with a view to
achieving  its  price  stability  target  and  realizing  sustainable  economic  growth  in  a  coordinated
manner,  the  Bank  needs  to  persistently  continue  with  its  powerful  monetary  easing  and
consistently provide support for the initiatives of a wide range of economic entities.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
