           DIGITAL BANKING SUMMIT 2019 
KEYNOTE ADDRESS 
 DR. MAXWELL OPOKU-AFARI  
FIRST DEPUTY GOVERNOR 
BANK OF GHANA 
 AUGUST 19, 2019  
KEMPINSKI HOTEL, ACCRA 
Captains of Banking Industry and Digital Technologies, 
 Distinguished Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 1. Good morning and it is a great pleasure to be here today at 
this Digital Banking Summit. Before I continue, let me thank 
the  International  Centre  for  Strategic  Alliances  (ICSA)  and 
KPMG  for  providing  this  unique  platform  to  deliberate  on 
pertinent  issues  on  digitisation  of  banking  services  across 
the  African  continent.  The  choice  of  Accra  for  this  important 
event,  with  Master  Card  as  the  lead  sponsor,  underscores 
the  growing  importance  of  Ghana  as  one  of  the  emerging 
digital financial service hubs on the African Continent.  
 2. Ladies  and  gentlemen,  digital 
innovation 
is  creating 
unprecedented  opportunities  for  Africa  to  grow  its  economy, 
create  jobs,  and  transform  people’s  lives.  New  technologies 
and  business  models  are  opening  alternative  pathways  to 
economic growth in emerging markets, offering opportunities 
to reshape our lives and improve economic growth. 
 1 
  3. The  Government  of  Ghana’s  commitment  to  formalize  the 
Ghanaian  economy 
through  digitisation 
is 
laudable. 
Digitisation  is  a  key  component  of  the  “Ghana  Beyond  Aid 
Agenda” which is firmly anchored in leveraging technology to 
promote  economic  efficiency  and 
inclusiveness 
for 
accelerated development and poverty reduction. Indeed, the 
President has shown keen interest and remains committed to 
building an inclusive modern society. This drive has seen the 
roll-out  of  several  digital  initiatives  such  as,  the  digital 
property addressing system, the National biometric ID cards 
which  will  be  linked  to  Government  agencies  to  help  ease 
identification  processes  and  promote  integrity  and  efficiency 
in business transactions.  
 4. We  are  also  witnesses  to  the  tremendous  impact  of 
digitisation  on  the  financial  sector.  Ghana’s  progress  in 
migrating  to  electronic  payments  has  been  phenomenal.  In 
less  than  a  decade,  we  have  increased  the  number  of 
 2 
financially  included  persons  from  41  percent  in  2014  to  58 
 percent in 2017, and most of the jump emanated from mobile 
money patronage. For instance, the volume of mobile money 
transactions  jumped  by  more  than  40  percent  from  982 
million to 1.4 billion transactions between 2017 and 2018. 
 5. With 
the  advent  of 
technology,  conservative  banking 
operations  has  given  way  to  dynamism  and  competition  as 
innovative  financial  services  and  product  are  constantly 
being  churned  out.  Currently,  banks  are  not  only  competing 
among  themselves  for  financial  services  but  also  with  non-
traditional providers such as financial technology companies 
(fintechs).  These  developments  raise  important  issues  on 
banks’  business  models  that  would  appropriately  deal  with 
the  increased  levels  of  competition  in  the  industry.  Faced 
with  these  challenges,  banks  are  adopting  collaborative 
strategies  and  leveraging  on  opportunities  to  partner  new 
payment service providers or existing players in the delivery 
of financial services. 
 3 
  6. In the mobile money space, financial technology companies, 
banks  and  mobile  money  operators  have  collaborated  to 
introduce value added services such as digital credit, savings 
and  investment,  online  payment  platforms,  Unstructured 
Supplementary  Service  Data  (USSD)  services,  mobile 
banking services, Quick Response (QR) codes, Point of Sale 
(POS) devices, termination of inward remittances into mobile 
wallets  or  bank  accounts,  and  agency  banking  services. 
Fintechs  have  also  partnered  with  insurance  companies  to 
deliver digital insurance products to the underserved. 
 7. Indeed,  digitisation  provides  great  potential  for  the  banking 
sector  to  offer  products  and  services  that  hitherto  was  not 
regarded  as  feasible.  However,  the  transition  to  a  digital 
economy  requires  re-orientation  of  the  sector  to  meet 
consumer  demand.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  against  this 
background  that  the  chosen  theme  of  ‘Digitisation  of  the 
Banking  Sector  –  En  route  to  a  Cashless  Africa’  is 
 4 
deemed  appropriate  and  timely  as  the  Continent  seeks  to 
 harness  the  potential  of  digital  technology  to  achieve  the 
cash-lite agenda. 
 8. In  the  pursuit  of  this  agenda,  let  me  draw  on  Ghana’s 
experience  and  highlight  some  important  elements  of  the 
country’s  strategy  towards  financial  inclusiveness  and  cash-
lite  transactions.  Over  the  past  fifteen  years,  the  Ghana 
Interbank  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (GhIPSS),  a 
subsidiary  of  the  Bank  of  Ghana,  in  collaboration  with  other 
payment 
service  providers  have  made  enormous 
investments in the payments system infrastructure to provide 
the platform for digital payments.  
 9. Among  others,  the  payments  system  infrastructure  has  also 
created  an  integrated  and  interoperable  retail  payments 
ecosystem  which  includes  cheque  codeline  clearing  with 
truncation,  automated  clearing  house  for  direct  debit  and 
credit transactions, an instant retail payment system, mobile 
 5 
money interoperability and the recently launched hybrid card 
 – which has consolidated the e-zwich and gh-link cards – to 
provide convenience to customers.  
 10.  Mr.  Chairman, 
for 
the  payment  system 
to  operate 
efficiently, it must be subjected to strong legal and regulatory 
frameworks  to  provide  certainty  to  all  stakeholders.    In  this 
regard, the Bank of Ghana initiated processes that led to the 
passage  of  the  Payment  Systems  and  Services  Act  2019, 
(Act 987) to provide an enabling regulatory regime for digital 
payments.  
 11.  For  all  intents  and  purposes,  the  Act  seeks  to  promote 
innovation  in  the  design  and  delivery  of  payment  products 
and services by widening the scope of the payments industry 
to Fintechs and engendering competition. It is expected that 
Fintechs’  innovations  will  deliver  products  that  meet  the 
needs of all stakeholders, whether banked or unbanked and 
underserved,  to  attract  them  into  the  digital  payment  space. 
 6 
Also, a proportionate regulatory regime has been adopted to 
 promote  fairness  in  regulation  and  accommodate  different 
payment service providers. 
 12.  The  quest  for  cashless  payments  is  gradually  shifting 
consumer  interfaces  from  the  manual  environment  to  cyber 
space.  Alongside  this  transition,  there  has  also  been  an 
increased  spate  of  complex  cyber  security  threats  which  is 
posing risks to the cashless agenda. The Bank of Ghana has 
therefore issued a cyber-security directive for compliance 
by banks and payment service providers to build a robust 
and  resilient  digital  ecosystem.  To  further  accelerate  the 
digitisation  process,  stakeholders  must  work  collectively  to 
promote  merchant  acceptance  of  digitised  financial 
products  and  services,  with  particular  emphasis  on  lower-
tier merchants, such as small and micro-enterprises.   
 13.  The  next  key  area  is  enhancing  public  confidence.  
Despite the successes achieved so far, some consumers still 
 7 
lack  awareness  and  confidence  in  electronic  payments.  In 
 this  direction,  the  various  stakeholders  are  undertaking 
continued consumer education and financial literacy to build 
confidence  and  help 
in 
fraud  reduction.  GhIPSS  and 
stakeholders in the payment industry are also building a fund 
to  support  consumer  education.  Also,  on  a  regular  basis, 
payment  service  providers  are  educating  the  public  on  how 
to  avoid  scams  in  the  use  of  the  newly  deployed  payment 
products and services. 
 14.  The  Bank  of  Ghana  is  fully  committed  to  the  cash-lite 
agenda which ties in with the Government of Ghana’s digital 
economy  agenda.  So  far,  we  have  seen  the  introduction  of 
the  biometric  national  identification  system  and  the  digital 
addressing  system  which  are  all  supportive  of  our  quest  to 
drive digitised financial transactions. As the central bank, we 
will  continue  to  work  with  all  stakeholders  to  ensure  the 
successful  implementation  of  these  initiatives.  Of  course, 
 8 
there  will  be  challenges,  but  with  firm  commitment,  we  will 
 eventually reduce the dominance of cash in transactions and 
improve  the  efficiency  and  security  of  payments  for  a  more 
inclusive society.  
 15.  To  conclude,  let  me  note  that  the  future  of  banking 
services  is  digitisation  and  it  brings  opportunities  as  well  as 
challenges.  We  can  harness  digitisation 
to  promote 
transactional efficiency in the delivery of financial services as 
well  as  scale  up  and  broaden  financial  access  to  all 
segments  of  the  society.  Together,  we  must  leverage  on 
these  opportunities  to  deliver  financial  inclusion  across  our 
various  countries  and  the  continent  at  large.  I  believe  that 
these issues will form the basis for the panel discussions and 
focus  sessions  at  this  two-day  Summit.  I  wish  you  a  fruitful 
deliberation.   
  16.  Thank you for your attention.  
 9 
   10 
