Marzunisham  Omar:  Capital  flows  management  for  monetary  and
financial stability
Remarks by Mr Marzunisham Omar, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara Malaysia), at the Seminar and Meeting of the SEACEN Expert Group on Capital Flows,
Kuala Lumpur, 11 June 2019.
 I am delighted to be here today. Let me take this opportunity to express Bank Negara Malaysia’s
appreciation for the collaborative efforts of the SEACEN Centre and the Bank of Japan that have
gathered us here for this biennial SEG event.
It has been six years since I last attended the SEG Seminar in Manila, back in 2013 as the newly
appointed co-chair. I am truly honoured to have had the opportunity to work alongside Deputy
Governor  Diwa.  Under  his  capable  stewardship  and  intellectual  guidance,  the  SEG  has
developed into a beneficial platform for its members since it was established 19 years ago. As
we approach two decades of the SEG, it is timely that we re-establish our bearings to ensure we
remain relevant and true to the original mission of contributing to the international dialogue on
capital  flows  to  ensure  that  the  concerns  and  interest  of  the  SEACEN  group  are  adequately
1
protected.
As most of our economies continue to face wave after wave of large and often volatile capital
flows,  I  am  reminded  of  the  remark  by  Professor  Jon  Kabat-Zinn,  a  professor  emeritus  of
medicine at the University of Massachusetts who famously said: “You can’t stop the waves, but
you can learn to surf”.  Just like the surfers who do not have control over the speed and patterns
of the waves, policymakers from small open economies do not have much control over the size,
speed,  and  the  direction  of  capital  flows  that  each  country  faces.  Like  it  or  not,  capital  flow
volatility and the risks it entails are a by-product we have to deal with as long as we intend to
benefit from free capital mobility. To paraphrase Professor Kabat-Zinn, we can’t stop the flows,
but we can learn to manage these flows in the best way possible.
2
Unlike the surfers, however, we policymakers do not have the luxury of repeating a surf when we
make a mistake. There is no room for policy missteps as investors can be very unforgiving. This
is  the  reason  why  it  has  always  been  my  firm  belief  that  timely  sharing  of  experiences  and
lessons  between  policymakers  is  in  itself  a  big  part  of  policymaking.  Candid  discussions  on
policy effectiveness and unintended risks that could arise go a long way in minimising potential
policy missteps.
While capital flow volatility will remain a key feature of the global financial system, we have to
acknowledge  that  with  heightened  uncertainties  prevailing  in  the  global  economy,  capital  flow
volatility would only intensify. For example, in Malaysia, two-way capital flows have increased by
almost three-fold in the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis.
Yes, we have had large swings in capital flows before and we have been able to manage these
surges. What worries me, however, is the fact that monetary and financial stability risks posed
by large and destabilising capital flows are expanding, evolving and becoming more entangled.
We are very familiar with the risks posed by volatile capital flows. At the extreme, capital flows
can  lead  to  the  build-up  of  domestic  vulnerabilities,  such  as  currency  mismatches,  external
indebtedness and broader financial imbalances. These risks are becoming more entwined and
complex than ever before. Capital flows undoubtedly complicate efforts to achieve monetary and
financial stability. Allowing exchange rate adjustment to deal with capital flows may also be too
simplistic.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
While  capital  flow  risks  have  become  more  complicated,  the  issue  faced  by  policymakers
remains  unchanged  –  that  is,  how  can  we  better  manage  these  risks  and  yet  maximise  the
benefits that come with capital flows.
The experience of our economies in dealing with capital flow volatility underscores the need to
ensure our economic fundamentals are robust. While this is necessary, it is not sufficient. We
have seen how external developments that are beyond our control, such as Taper Tantrum and
trade tensions, could trigger periods of sharp capital flow volatility in emerging economies with
severe consequences. There are “innocent bystanders” who are gravely impacted. 
It  is  therefore  imperative  that  collectively,  we  continue  to  urge  the  global  community  to  better
manage the risks arising from financial openness. More needs to be done at the international
level to have, to quote IMF MD Christine Lagarde, “safer capital flows".
Nevertheless, we have to recognise that it is not easy to expect change at the international level.
It will definitely take time. While the global community continues to debate and explore possible
solutions to manage spillovers and spillbacks of policies in advanced economies, our economies
will have to continue to grapple with capital flow volatility and its consequences on financial and
macroeconomic stability.
Therefore, I strongly believe that emerging economies must have the necessary domestic policy
space  in  dealing  with  capital  flows.  Given  the  multifaceted  risks  posed  by  capital  flows,
policymakers  must  be  able  to  avail  ourselves  of  a  broad  range  of  policy  instruments.  These
policy  instruments  include  interest  rate,  exchange  rate,  macroprudential  and  capital  flow
measures.
In  deciding  which  instruments  to  use,  we  should  avoid  ruling  out  the  use  of  any  policy  tools
upfront.  Rather,  the  choice  of  instruments  needs  to  be  tailored  to  the  specific  risks  being
managed  and  the  circumstances  the  economy  is  facing.  In  addition,  the  choice  of  policy
instruments  also  needs  to  be  considered  in  an  integrated  manner  to  increase  the  efficacy  of
policies, minimise potential trade-offs, and avoid overburdening of any single policy tool.
Finally, I would like to briefly touch on the role of SEG and SEACEN in dealing with this issue.
Earlier, I mentioned the importance of surfers learning how to deal with all types of weather and
wave conditions. What I did not mention is the fact that it is impossible for them to learn these
skills individually. In Pro Surf Bali, one of the most popular surfing schools in Bali, surfers come
together to share their experiences surfing in the toughest conditions, and in doing so, prepare
each other for possible eventualities.
The SEG forum on capital flows is in a unique position to achieve this objective. The forum can
facilitate deeper awareness and understanding of member countries’ challenges in dealing with
capital flows. The frank exchanges of experiences and policies will place member countries on a
stronger  footing  when  facing  the  next  wave  of  capital  flows.  While  I  commend  the  significant
development of the SEG forum in the 19 years since its inception, I know we can do so much
more to leverage on the experience of each member country here.
There is definitely a role for SEACEN that goes beyond equipping member countries with the
necessary skills to manage capital flows. For instance, SEACEN can provide thought leadership
on the need for small open economies to have a broad policy toolkit in preserving monetary and
financial  stability  in  the  face  of  volatile  capital  flows.  SEACEN  can  take  a  leading  role  in
intellectually challenging the prevailing view that capital flow measures should only be considered
as a last resort.  There is no monopoly on good policies and Asia has plenty to offer. SEACEN
can lead the way.
On  this  note,  I  look  forward  to  an  engaging  and  fruitful  discussion  among  members  in  our
sessions today. I believe the forum will be thought provoking, with important learning points that
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
will help us better weather the new waves of challenges ahead.
Thank you.
1
2
Terms of Reference of the SEG.
Jon Kabat-Zinn (1994), Wherever You Go, There You Are. New York: Hyperion.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
