Stephen S Poloz: Turbulent times for trade
Remarks  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  Baffin  Regional
Chamber of Commerce (BRCC) and the Nunavut Mining Symposium (NMS), Iqaluit, Nunavut, 1
April 2019.
Introduction
 It is an honour and real privilege to be here in Iqaluit, the territorial capital, today: Nunavut’s 20th
birthday.  Over  the  past  two  decades,  Nunavut  has  become  a  real  destination,  proud  to
demonstrate its culture, traditions and values to the rest of Canada, and to the world. There is
tremendous potential here and I look forward to watching you continue to achieve it. So, happy
birthday!
I’m here today to talk about trade. Canadians have always understood trade, because we have
to. Without trade, Canada would never have become a nation of more than 35 million people with
a modern, diversified economy. And as people here know well, trade will always be absolutely
vital to the future of the North.
Back in the 1860s, when the United States imposed tariffs on our exports, the provinces reacted
by  uniting  in  Confederation.  In  effect,  we  chose  to  grow  our  national  economy  by  building
infrastructure  and  increasing  interprovincial  trade.  Since  the  1940s,  though,  Canada  has
consistently advocated for more liberalized international trade, even while allowing interprovincial
trade barriers to persist, or even to increase.
Our dependence on international trade makes recent developments on this front very worrisome.
The  United  States  has  imposed  tariffs  on  steel  and  aluminum  imports  from  many  countries,
which, in turn, have placed countermeasures on a wide range of US products. The United States
is engaged in a trade war with China, and extensive measures have been taken on both sides.
NAFTA has been renegotiated, but the new agreement still needs to be ratified. Europeans are
waiting to see whether the United States will make good on its threat to impose tariffs on their
auto exports.
In  short,  there  has  been  a  significant  increase  in  uncertainty  around  the  future  of  the  global
trading  system.  This  is  having  an  impact  on  business  confidence  worldwide.  Data  from  47
countries—representing more than 80 per cent of the global economy—show that exports and
business investment slowed sharply late last year. If a company cannot rely on international trade
rules, it is not going to make investments to expand capacity and fuel economic growth.
Canada’s economic growth slowed late last year, and this weakness is extending into 2019. Part
of this is due to developments in our oil sector and in our housing sector, but the broader effects
of trade uncertainty on investment are clearly there. Fortunately, our economy also has areas of
strength that are providing a cushion. Some services exports have been growing strongly. More
than 350,000 jobs were created over the past year. Indeed, labour income grew by almost 5 per
cent  in  the  fourth  quarter.  The  data  are  currently  giving  us  a  mixed  picture  and  need  to  be
carefully monitored. But the deeper question we face is whether Canada can continue to thrive
as a trading nation.
Trade and globalization
To address this question, we need to put recent trade developments into context. Trade growth
has  generally  fallen  short  of  expectations  since  the  global  financial  crisis  a  decade  ago.  To
understand this, we must first understand why international trade grew so rapidly in the years
before the crisis.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
International  trade  began  to  accelerate  during  the  1990s  as  companies  took  advantage  of
opportunities provided by new technology and trade liberalization. Many firms found efficiencies
by  breaking  down  their  products  into  components.  This  allowed  for  unprecedented  levels  of
manufacturing specialization, with components sourced from wherever in the world it made the
most sense.
Instead of a domestic assembly line, you had a complex international value chain. A final product,
like a car made in Oshawa or a cellphone assembled in Mexico, might have contained many
components that were traded internationally several times. Then the final product was exported,
too. This is why international trade rose relative to gross domestic product during this period. As
economists would put it, the trade intensity of goods increased.
Global  trade  really  took  off  after  China  joined  the  World  Trade  Organization  in  2001.  With  a
massive supply of low-cost labour, China became key to many companies’ value chains, and
trade intensity grew even further. This gave rise to concerns that all manufacturing would move
to  developing  economies.  But  there  was  always  a  natural  limit  to  this  offshoring  process. A
manufactured product can be fragmented only so far, and some pieces require more labour than
others. This is what determines where best to produce each component.
A manufacturing process that requires many workers and only a bit of machinery can often be
made cheaper by moving it to a country where wages are low. But a process that has a lot of
complex machinery and relatively fewer workers is much less likely to move to a lower-wage
country. Importantly, companies must also take into account the relative productivity of workers
in various countries. In other words, even if workers are paid more in one country than another,
they may be more productive, giving them a comparative advantage over less-productive, lower-
paid workers elsewhere. It is this complex balance of factors that leads to a natural distribution of
value chains around the world.
Furthermore, economies never stand still. In China, for example, globalization has led to a steady
increase  in  wages. And  this  reduces  the  incentive  for  firms  in  advanced  economies  to  move
production  there,  even  if  that  production  is  labour-intensive.  At  the  same  time,  advances  in
technology  have  allowed  firms  to  automate  manufacturing  more.  This  means  a  higher  capital
intensity, which also reduces the incentive to move production to lower-wage countries.
In short, these trends have made the cost of labour less of a factor in deciding where to locate
global  value  chains.  Indeed,  some  companies  have  moved  production  back  to  advanced
economies, a process called reshoring. Often the motivation is to have production located closer
to the ultimate customer, an action sometimes called nearshoring. Or, it may make more sense
to locate closer to the source of raw materials.
For various reasons, then, we have seen some global value chains become more simplified and
a reversal of some of the fragmentation of manufactured products we saw 20 or 30 years ago.
As a result, components are crossing fewer borders in the assembly process. Trade intensity
has eased, and we see a slowing of trade growth around the world.
A detailed study published earlier this year by the McKinsey Global Institute sheds light on these
developments. McKinsey looked at 23 different industries across 43 countries over 22 years. It
found that many goods-producing value chains are becoming less trade-intensive as they locate
closer to their customers. And as emerging markets like China develop and consume more of
what they produce, companies are building more domestic value chains.
The  bottom  line  is  that  the  evolving  nature  of  globalization  is  contributing  to  slower  growth  in
international  trade.  This  is  true  for  the  global  economy  generally,  and  for  Canada  specifically.
That said, there are other factors specific to Canada that have been holding back trade in recent
years.  They  include  a  loss  of  exporting  capacity  in  certain  sectors  and  competitiveness
challenges in others. I will come back to this later.
 
2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The seen and unseen growth of services
First, though, I want to broaden our discussion of trade. So far, I have been describing trade as
shipments of tangible goods. This is how most people think of it, and my story about globalization
and value chains clearly envisioned a complex product, like a car or a smartphone.
Tangible goods also include products like oil, nickel, canola, pork or lumber. We sell over $500
billion in merchandise to the world each year. Natural resources and agriculture will always be an
important base for our economy, as the folks here today from the mining sector know full well.
Despite recent difficulties, energy products remain our number one export category, at over $80
billion  per  year.  We  can  continue  to  find  new  customers  for  these  products  and  grow  those
businesses over time.
But, as we just saw, economies are constantly evolving. Growth in Canada’s economy, which
was  based  on  trade  in  natural  resources  in  its  early  years,  is  now  driven  mainly  by  service
industries.  Roughly  80  per  cent  of  Canadians  are  now  employed  in  services,  and  trade  in
services has been growing at a much faster pace than goods. Today, we sell about $120 billion
per year in services to the world.
For  example,  Canada  is  a  world  leader  in  the  mining  services  sector,  with  almost  4,000
companies  providing  engineering,  environmental  and  other  professional  services.  These
categories  had  exports  worth  about  $12  billion  last  year.  Canada  has  long  been  an  important
exporter of financial services—last year these totalled about $13 billion and supported many well-
paying  jobs  in  Canada.  Tourism  exports  are  worth  around  $25  billion  per  year.  This  category
includes exports of education services to visiting students—valued at about $8 billion annually.
And on the cutting edge, Canada is becoming known as a global heavyweight in video games,
employing more than 21,000 Canadians, with above-average salaries. Many service sectors saw
exports  growing  at  near  double-digit  rates  or  faster,  including  financial  services,  the  telecom,
computer and information sector, intellectual property and tourism.
As  large  as  these  numbers  sound,  services  trade  is  difficult  to  track  and  probably
underestimated. For example, many manufactured products include a large services component
that is buried in the price. By some estimates, as much as 30 per cent of the value of goods
exports is actually created through services.
Consider a smartphone. The parts and labour needed to assemble it might constitute less than
half of what the consumer will eventually pay for it. Most of the difference represents the cost of
all the software that is loaded on the phone.
Here is another example. Many companies today purchase back-office computing services on
the  cloud.  Previously,  a  company  may  have  invested  in  equipment  and  software  and  hired
specialized staff to perform these functions. By purchasing cloud services, the company saves
those  expenses  and  boosts  its  productivity.  This  is  clearly  positive  for  the  economy,  yet  our
conventional statistics show a drop in investment and in trade.
Resolving the mixed picture
I mentioned before that many countries have seen a slowdown in trade and investment, mainly in
response  to  trade  uncertainty. At  the  same  time,  many  countries  are  seeing  strength  in  their
labour markets. It is worth considering whether the shift in economic growth toward technology
and services is playing a role.
In Canada, the job market appears to be in great shape. The unemployment rate is near historic
lows and the participation rate of prime-age workers—those
25–54  years  old—has  never  been  higher.  The  number  of  working  Canadians  increased  by  a
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
healthy  2  per  cent  over  the  past  12  months. And  a  sectoral  breakdown  shows  this  growth  is
being driven by several key service industries.
Start with the professional, scientific and technical worker category. This includes programmers
and software engineers. More than one million Canadians work in this category, which grew by 7
per cent over the past year.
Then there are categories like education, health care and public administration. Together, these
industries  employ  about  5  million  Canadians.  Including  two  more  sectors—transportation  and
warehousing,  and  business  and  other  support  services—brings  us  to  more  than  8  million
Canadians—that  is  about  45  per  cent  of  the  workforce.  The  weighted  average  of  job  growth
among these categories was 4.6 per cent over the past year, more than double the rate of the
entire economy. This is behind the strong increase in labour income we have seen.
These data suggest that the mixed picture offered up by the Canadian economy today reflects
some important structural changes beneath the surface. In particular, our oil sector continues to
adjust to global oil prices of around US$50–60 per barrel. It is important to remember that only
five years ago it was a widely held view that oil prices would remain far higher than that. Plans
were made, investments were deployed, and it will take time for the sector to adjust fully. The
situation  is  made  more  complicated  by  capacity  constraints  for  oil  exports.  When  the  dust
settles, oil will remain a very important sector for the Canadian economy. But the adjustments
are weighing on investment, exports, and wage performance.
Technological  advances  may  also  be  prompting  similar  adjustments  for  a  wide  range  of
economic sectors. Automation puts certain jobs at risk—from manufacturing to financial advising
—holding back wage increases and inflation. But it also creates new jobs for those who write the
software or maintain that advanced technology, and those wages rise rapidly. The people earning
those  wages  spend  them  on  all  sorts  of  goods  and  services,  creating  demand  in  traditional
sectors  including  construction,  transportation,  maintenance  and  so  on. As  these  adjustments
proceed,  there  are  now  more  than  500,000  job  vacancies  in  the  Canadian  economy.  Judging
what all this means for the outlook for inflation is of course a challenge for us.
The risks posed by trade wars
But that challenge pales in comparison to the one posed by the possibility of a global trade war.
We have been highlighting this risk to the outlook for the past two years. At the same time, we
have said that the global economy could get a significant lift if trade peace were restored.
The likelihood of trade peace breaking out seems to fluctuate almost daily. Even so, the global
economy has been dealing with heightened uncertainty over trade policy for an extended period
now. Over that time, some business investment decisions have been scrapped entirely or made
in a distorted situation. Even if the uncertainty lifted completely tomorrow, these decisions could
not be reversed, and some of the damage done over the past two years would remain.
People who advocate for protectionism through tariffs tend to miss a basic point. When a country
imposes tariffs on imports, those tariffs are paid by its own consumers and companies. A few
people involved in the protected industry might benefit from the tariffs, but the economy is worse
off overall.
Bank  of  Canada  staff  analyzed  the  impact  of  the  trade  actions  that  have  already  been  taken.
They have found that the various actions will lower economic output while raising prices. In other
words,  a  trade  war  is  stagflationary.  Of  course,  it  is  possible  that  unilateral  tariffs  will  boost
production in the economy that imposes the tariffs, but that is usually a temporary effect, as the
impact  on  consumer  purchasing  power  affects  everyone.  More  importantly,  a  unilateral  tariff
rarely stays unilateral for long. Companies facing tariffs on their exports will appeal to their own
governments  to  level  the  playing  field  by  applying  countermeasures.  Such  retaliation  is
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
understandable, but in the end, the global economy will be worse off, and so will many innocent
bystanders.
Opportunities and adjustments
It is possible that we will have to deal with frictions in the global trading system for some time yet.
Even so, as we said in January, we expect that both exports and investment will return to positive
growth  later  this  year.  Since  the  start  of  the  year,  the  labour  market  has  continued  to  show
strength. The adjustments underway in our oil sector will eventually be completed. And firms tell
us that they need to make new investments, and the recent rules around capital cost allowances
are likely to speed that up.
The Bank’s role in this process is to maintain a predictable environment for decision making. We
have  learned  from  experience  that  keeping  inflation  low,  stable  and  predictable  is  the  best
contribution  we  can  make  to  Canada’s  economic  welfare.  Crucially,  our  inflation-targeting
framework includes a floating exchange rate that helps our economy adjust to external shocks.
We only have to look back a few years for an example. Following the oil price collapse of 2015,
movements in the exchange rate helped to offset the loss of jobs in the oil sector by boosting
exports in other sectors.
In addition to the solid economic base that comes from our natural resource sectors, we have
numerous  advantages  we  can  use  to  create  new  economic  growth. Among  other  things,  we
have a well-educated and diverse workforce that is growing through immigration. And, we have
trade  agreements  like  the  Canada-United  States-Mexico  Agreement,  the  Comprehensive
Economic  and  Trade  Agreement  with  the  European  Union,  and  the  Comprehensive  and
Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership. These agreements should help to buffer
us from some of the negative trade developments I mentioned at the beginning.
Another  possible  buffer  lies  right  here  at  home.  Recall  that  when  the  United  States  turned
protectionist  in  the  1860s,  we  responded  by  uniting  our  own  economic  clout  through
Confederation.  In  today’s  trade-uncertain  world,  it  is  even  more  important  that  we  continue  to
make  progress  in  promoting  trade  among  our  own  provinces  and  territories. And  enhancing
economic links between North and South is even more urgent, given the growing risks around
climate  change.  You  are  already  feeling  the  impact  of  climate  change  here,  and  it  will  affect
almost every aspect of life in the North. Lowering barriers to trade could certainly help mitigate
these economic impacts.
The good news is that trade in services among the provinces has been growing rapidly over the
past 10 years and is already larger than interprovincial goods trade. The bad news is that goods
trade between provinces has basically been stagnant for a decade.
To make this point concrete, Bank staff estimate that Canada’s potential economic growth would
increase  by  about  0.2  percentage  points  per  year,  or  about  $4.5  billion,  if  interprovincial  trade
barriers were lowered. This would include harmonizing regulations on all manner of things. In a
time of slow economic growth, that is too good an opportunity to pass up.
Conclusion
It is time for me to conclude.
Clearly, there are challenges in the Canadian and global economies that we need to manage. But
there are clear signs that Canada is adjusting to the challenges. After taking into account the
economy’s structural adjustment to lower oil prices that is still going on, we can see many areas
of encouraging economic growth. These are both traditional and cutting-edge, and are export-
oriented.  Canada’s  portfolio  of  trade  agreements  should  serve  us  well  as  this  story  unfolds,
despite the uncertainties the world faces today.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
That being said, it is clear that the global economy is performing less well than we believed only a
few  months  ago,  and  Canada  is  feeling  the  effects.  In  addition,  our  housing  sector  is  taking
longer than previously expected to digest the combined effects of stricter mortgage guidelines
and higher interest rates.
That is why we said at our last interest rate announcement in March that the economic outlook
continues to warrant a policy interest rate that is below the neutral range, to help the economy
work through this downshift in growth and keep inflation close to target. Recent economic data
have been generally consistent with our expectation that the period of below-potential growth will
prove to be temporary.
Our next interest rate announcement and Monetary Policy Report will be released on April 24,
and I can promise a fuller analysis at that time. For now, let me thank you for your kind attention,
and for your wonderful hospitality here in Iqaluit.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
