  The Evolving Landscape of AML/CFT in The Bahamas 
 Remarks by Governor John A Rolle, Central Bank of The Bahamas (as prepared for delivery) at the 
2019 AML/CFT Risk Management Seminar of The Bahamas Group of Financial Services Regulators, 
26 June, 2019. 
 
Introduction 
Good morning Ladies and Gentlemen. 
Once  more,  on  behalf  of  the  Group  of  Financial  Services  Regulators,  it  is  a  pleasure  to 
welcome you to today’s anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism risk 
management  seminar.    We  are  grateful  to  have  the  support  of  the  Honourable  Attorney 
General,  and  both  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  the  Minister  of  Financial  Services  for  this 
important event. 
We are setting the standard for continuous engagement with financial sector stakeholders, 
with  the  expectation  that,  as  practitioners,  we  will  collectively  strengthen  and  maintain 
national defenses against the use of Bahamian financial services for illicit purposes. 
If we have learnt anything in getting to this point, it has been that we have to do a thorough 
job in quantifying, rather than just speculating, about the risk posed by illicit activities; and 
that we have to make measurable progress in managing both our actual and perceived risks. 
Today, I will touch upon three topics related to these themes: 
-  Where the Central Bank is seeing material money laundering risks in the Bahamian 
economy, and what the responsible authorities are doing about these risks; 
-  Summarising  recent  progress  on  AML/CFT  risk  management  among  supervised 
financial entities (SFIs) licensed by the Central Bank; and 
-  The Central Bank’s plans to improve both the reality and the reputation of Bahamian 
AML/CFT risk management. 
 Money laundering risks in the domestic economy 
Money laundering arises when illicit funds are converted to, apparently, illicit assets usually 
through the financial system.  In the Bahamian case, we need to consider both the domestic 
economy and our international financial firms. 
Let’s look first at the domestic banking system.  The Central Bank has just released a study of 
domestic  deposit  inflows  across  17  sectors  that  have  been  identified  globally  as  potential 
money laundering or terrorism financing problem areas.  The bottom line from this work is 
 1 
that with limited exceptions, headed by real estate, there is no evidence that any element of 
the  domestic  banking  industry  or  that  industry’s  clients  is  facilitating  material  money 
laundering.  
In  2018,  Bahamian  domestic  banks  accepted  $52  billion  in  deposited  funds,  mainly  from 
commercial customers. 
Table 1: Domestic Deposit Inflows in  
2018 (Rounded $Millions)  
 
 
Deposited Funds 
of which 
Retail 
Commerc'l/Other 
of which 
Cash 
Non-Cash 
BSD 
Non-BSD 
Total 
 37.6 
 7.6 
30.0 
 5.7 
31.2 
 13.9 
 0.7 
13.3 
 0.5 
13.4 
 51.6 
 8.3 
43.3 
 6.2 
44.6 
Source: Central Bank of The Bahamas 
 Chart 1: Domestic Deposit Inflows in 2018 ($Billions) 
 
Source: Central Bank of The Bahamas 
       2 
  Table 2: Canadian Banks’ Share of Domestic  
Deposit Inflows, 2018 (%) 
 
 
Deposited Funds 
of which 
Retail 
Commerc'l/Other 
of which 
Cash 
Non-Cash 
BSD 
 82% 
 68% 
86% 
 Non-BSD 
Total 
 98% 
 96% 
98% 
  87% 
 70% 
90% 
 85% 
84% 
96% 
98% 
86% 
88% 
We can see that the three Canadian banking groups accounted for 90 per cent of the funds 
placed in commercial deposit accounts, and nearly all non-Bahamian dollar gross deposits.  
On  the  commercial  and,  particularly,  the  cross-border  side,  the  standard  of  AML/CFT  risk 
management in these operations in Nassau or Freeport would be the same as in Toronto or 
Winnipeg.  Bahamian-owned banks are less engaged in commercial banking, but have about 
30% of the deposits placed by individuals. 
Let’s now look at the 17 individual categories where global experience suggests we should be 
looking hardest for money laundering. 
Source: Central Bank of The Bahamas 
 
   3 
 The aggregate 2018 deposits in each segment can be viewed from several perspectives: by 
Bahamian  dollars  versus  foreign  currency  accounts,  and  split  by  cash  versus  non-cash 
deposits.  Broadly speaking, cash carries more AML risk than non-cash deposit.   
That said, only about 10 per cent of the funds deposited in Bahamian banks in 2018 fell into 
these 17 sector categories, with the remainder in less potentially troublesome areas. 
There are several lessons apparent from the data.   
First, many segments which the international community and standards setting bodies flag as 
susceptible are simply too small in The Bahamas to constitute a material money laundering 
risk in the domestic economy.  Examples include diplomatic establishments, pawnshops, and 
wholesale jewellery stores. The domestic banks have yet to commence taking deposits from 
crypto-asset sources, but this may change in the future. 
Second,  nearly  all  segments  are  dominated  by  non-cash  deposits.    When  looking  at  retail 
jewellery stores, auto dealers, and maritime sectors, for example, very low cash flows were 
evident,  with  electronic  payments  such  as  credit  and  debit  cards,  and  other  traceable 
instruments settled through the wholesale and retail clearing houses more notable. 
Third,  adding  up  the  real-estate  relevant  sectors,  which  include  the  legal  industry  holding 
settlement funds, identifies over half of the gross funds deposited across the 17 sectors. 
Meanwhile, the material sources of cash deposits are in limited sectors: 
-  Gaming 
-  Money transmission 
-  Religious organisations 
- 
Insurance 
On the gaming front, the Gaming Board has already published a paper1 which demonstrates 
that  retail  gaming  through  web  shops  gives  no  indication  of  material  money  laundering 
activity.  The Central Bank agrees with this assessment.  Casinos are the only material source 
of foreign currency inflows in the domestic banking industry.  The Gaming Board regulates 
casinos  to  the  same  standards  held  in, for  example,  Las Vegas.  I  will  discuss  about  money 
transmission  businesses  in  the  next  segment  of  this  presentation.    As  for  religious 
organisations, most, if not all us have been experienced the churches’ weekly collection take 
up, which is heavily cash-based, but hardly risky for money laundering. 
In addition to this deposit survey, the Central Bank has been gathering data from its own and 
other  Bahamian  public  sector  resources.    Examples  include  commencing  publication2  of 
information  on  Bahamian  dollar  denominated  and  US  dollar  denominated  currency  notes 
moving through the economy.   
Without  going  into  details  today,  the  US  dollar  currency  flows  are  substantial  but  highly 
consistent with tourism activities rather than money laundering.  The median note value is 
                                                           
1 https://www.centralbankbahamas.com/download/056332100.pdf, page 13 
2 https://www.centralbankbahamas.com/download/056332100.pdf, page 35 
 4 
$10, and there are 40 times more $1 bills collected than $100 bills.  This contrasts with global 
experience,  where  the  United  States  has3  issued  more  $100  bills  than  $1  bills.    As  for 
Bahamian dollar cash, again the median note is $10,  which limits any material capacity for 
cash-based money laundering. 
The Central Bank also analysed vehicle import data provided by the Customs Department, 
which reveals that the total and average value of vehicles imported into The Bahamas show 
little if any evidence of vehicle-based money laundering.  This is also consistent with our auto 
dealer deposit data, which reveals a heavy non-cash industry. 
In summary, it is the case and, doubtless, will remain the case that some Bahamian criminals 
will use the domestic financial system to launder some funds.  The police and the courts deal 
with a reasonable number of such cases per year.  But, more importantly, it is generally the 
case  that  the  domestic  banking  system  provides  no  evidence  that  it  is  being  used  in  any 
material way for money laundering. 
 Money laundering in the international financial sector 
When the rest of the world looks at The Bahamas for AML/CFT risk, in a risk-based sense, they 
really should focus on the international banking, trust, funds management, and international 
business company segments. The Bahamian international financial sector, by balance sheet, 
measures around twenty times larger than the domestic banking sector.  Domestic banks, for 
example,  have  about  $20  billion  in  assets,  while  international  banks  and  trust  companies 
control close to $400 billion in assets.  While, as mentioned, domestic bank had gross deposit 
receipts of $52 billion in 2018, SWIFT data reveal that gross cross-border funds movement 
amounted to several trillion US dollars. 
There are four large and essentially permanent sources of AML/CFT risk in the international 
sector.  Our national strategy is not to remove the underlying risks, but, instead, to control 
them such that the sector is overwhelmingly focused on  clean business.  The four relevant 
sectors are: 
 International banking/trust/funds management, for which the Central Bank and the 
Securities Commission are the lead regulators; 
-  Cross-border real estate; 
- 
-  Money transmission businesses. 
International business companies; and 
From January 2018, the Central Bank has moved to continuous supervision of AML risks, in 
the same way that we continuously supervise financial failure risks. Our current assessment 
is that all our substantial licensees are at least tolerably well placed for AML/CFT risks, with 
the typical entity not displaying any critical deficiencies, but also exhibiting a number of areas 
needing improvement. 
                                                           
3 See for example the Harvard Kennedy School paper from Sands et al: Making it harder for the bad guys: the 
case for eliminating high denomination notes, February 2016. 
 5 
Most  hearteningly,  our  industry  has  converted  from  a  business  model  which  historically 
included a large element of hiding money from foreign authorities, to one in which hiding 
money  is  no  longer  possible  or  desired.    Instead,  The  Bahamas  offer  what  is  intended  to 
become  and  remain  the  western  hemisphere’s  jurisdiction  of  choice  for  legitimate  private 
wealth preservation. 
As for real estate, the Bahamian public sector’s challenge is that we have many data sources 
on  cross-border  and  luxury  real  estate  purchases,  but  these  have  not  yet  been  fully 
integrated.      Data  directly  available  to  the  Central  Bank,  notably  our  Exchange  Control 
approvals  for  foreigners  purchasing  real  estate,  reveal  nothing  worrisome.  At  this  point, 
however, we lack a comprehensive database of all property in The Bahamas.  The Department 
of Inland Revenue and the Ministry of Finance have commenced a major project to remedy 
this data shortage. As a substantial side benefit of this work, we expect that a full registry of 
Bahamian property ownership would facilitate a universal approach to preventing real estate-
based  money  laundering.    In  the  interim,  the  Central  Bank  will  work  with  several  other 
agencies to better coordinate real estate-relevant data. I am hopeful that within three years, 
The Bahamas can demonstrate that we have a world-leading and fully data-driven approach 
to preventing real estate-based money laundering. 
The international business company or IBC story is somewhat similar.  The Attorney-General’s 
Office  is  the  responsible  authority  for  introducing  and  administering  the  2018  register  of 
beneficial ownership legislation.   During the second half of 2019 and into 2020, The Bahamas 
will make rapid progress in demonstrating good global practice for monitoring AML risk for 
cross border legal entities. 
Money  transmission  businesses  are  negligible  in  balance  sheet  terms  but  generate 
appreciable cross border cash flows, which are, in turn, mainly driven by currency notes in 
the underlying transactions. 
 Table 3: October through December 2018 MTB  
Cross-Border Payments -- Selected Statistics 
Transaction 
Transaction 
Largest 
Number (000s) 
Value ($million) 
Transaction 
172 
50 
($000) 
44 
Source: Central Bank of The Bahamas 
Average 
Transaction 
($Actual) 
290 
Main 
Countries 
USA, Haiti, 
Jamaica 
As  these  statistics  demonstrate,  the  MTB  transaction  flow  is  dominated  by  payments 
averaging  a  few  hundred  dollars,  with  no  payments  over  $50,000.    The  main  source  and 
destination countries are consistent with Bahamian economic engagement with the United 
States and our Caribbean neighbours. 
The  Central  Bank  is  the  regulatory  authority  for  MTBs.    As  we  have  ramped  up  our  AML 
supervisory focus since January 2018, we have discovered a number of areas for necessary 
 6 
improvement in MTB risk management.  This work is in progress, and we expect it will require 
a year or two to reach a fully satisfactory outcome.  
So, to summarise the international sector: 
-  The biggest segment, banking, trusts, and funds management, is in reasonable shape 
but still requires improvement; 
-  The current extensive controls on foreign real estate purchases seem to be effective, 
but we are probably two to three years away from being able to definitively prove this; 
-  The IBC sector’s data infrastructure will improve over the next year or so to a point 
where we can demonstrate world-class surveillance of legal persons; and 
-  The MTB sector needs to improve its controls, and this work is in progress. 
 Current supervisory focus 
In  the  Central  Bank’s  supervisory  arrangements,  the  word  “requirement”  has  special 
meaning,  referring  to  a  deficiency  which  the  Central  Bank  is  prepared  to  deploy  statutory 
force if needed to correct.  The ebb and flow of requirements, and particularly the quick and 
comprehensive clearance of outstanding Requirements, is an essential element in effective 
supervision. The Bank has formally measured progress on requirements since the end of 2017. 
Table 4: Supervisory AML Requirements by Sector 
 December 2017 
March 2018 
Sept 2018 
March 2019 
Domestic 
Banks 
Domestic 
Other 
15 
14 
43 
29 
13 
10 
8 
22 
Source: Central Bank of The Bahamas 
International 
International 
Home 
20 
48 
35 
59 
Host 
28 
20 
23 
26 
Unsurprisingly, the volume of new requirements over this period has increased, as the Central 
Bank has intensified its AML supervision.  Gratifyingly, the industry has, in general, lifted its 
focus on these issues, and is clearing Requirements, more or less, as fast as we are identifying 
them. This pattern, plus other information, suggests that Central Bank regulated entities are 
in reasonable shape for AML/CFT risks, but with material areas where they could get better, 
and they are in fact getting better. 
On  the  other  hand,  in  the  domestic  sector,  there  is  a  disproportionate  concentration  of 
requirements among the nonbank sector, comprising credit unions and MTBs.  Over the past 
18  months,  the  Central  Bank  has  concentrated  heavily  on  lifting  the  AML  performance  of 
banks  and  trusts  companies,  which  account  for  over  99  per  cent  of  the  relevant  industry 
assets.  From late 2019, we will deploy more supervisory attention on the smaller domestic 
licensees. 
In  the  international  sector,  the  Central  Bank  has  identified  relatively  more  requirements 
among home-supervised rather than host-supervised institutions.  This is, to some extent, an 
 7 
artefact  of  our  2018  and  2019  onsite  examination  schedule,  which  has  focused  more  on 
Bahamian-owned vs. foreign-owned banks and trust companies. 
In summary, the Central Bank is working with generally cooperative and competent  SFIs to 
rapidly improve the quality of Bahamian AML/CFT risk management from acceptable to good. 
 The national AML/CFT risk management reality  
From the Central Bank’s perspective, the reality of Bahamian AML/CFT risk management is as 
follows: 
-  We  have,  as  a  nation,  made  tremendous  progress  on  world  class  legislation  and 
regulation, but much of this needs bedding down through experience; 
-  Our  domestic  sector  is  keenly  aware  of  the  relevant  issues,  and  over  all  is  not  a 
material AML risk; 
-  Our international sector will always be a material potential risk, but we have at least 
acceptable and increasingly sound controls in place; 
-  There are material data issues in the cross border real estate and IBC areas, which are 
 being addressed at the moment; and 
In general terms, larger and foreign-owned financial institutions are somewhat ahead 
of smaller and Bahamian-owned institutions in AML risk management. 
Above  all,  as  an  industry  and  as  a  society,  we  are  definitively  out  of  the  money-hiding 
business.    Given  that  many  jurisdictions  cannot  make  this  claim,  the  world’s  dirty  money 
managers are on notice that they should take their business elsewhere.  From what we can 
see, which vision is not yet as perfect as we would like, the world’s dirty money managers are 
heeding this message. 
 What about reputation? 
On  the  reputation  front,  we  are  dealing  with  an  essential  and  possibly  existential  global 
fallacy.  That fallacy is that in the field of dirty money, small countries with large international 
financial sectors are the problem.  Now it is true that countries such as The Bahamas have in 
the past been part of the problem, hence, our massive reforms since 2000 and more recently. 
The other fallacy  we  are  struggling  with  is  that  financial  crime  is  an  impossibly  intractable 
problem, so, there is no point trying to empirically study the issue. 
These two fallacies combine to create an environment in which it is very hard for jurisdictions 
such  as  The  Bahamas  to  reap  the  reputational  benefits  from  becoming  highly  resistant  to 
money laundering and other financial crimes. 
It is obvious to informed observers that: 
-  The world has been unable to appreciably intercept the flow of dirty money, which 
could be in the trillions annually and tens of trillions in embedded asset terms.  This 
 8 
compares with illicit asset recoveries, which could be generously measured in the low 
tens of billions. 
-  The world’s large countries, starting with the United States, Great Britain, and the EU, 
are  both  the  sources  and  the  destinations  for  the  great  bulk  of  the  world’s  dirty 
money4;  although  one  of  the  lessons  from  the  outside  should  be  in  how  our 
jurisdiction mobilises its enforcement resources. 
Put  simply,  life  isn’t  fair  when  you  are  a  small  country  daring  to  compete  in  international 
financial services. 
So what do we do about this?   
The  Central  Bank  and  the  rest  of  the  Bahamian  public  sector  have  adopted  two  obvious 
strategies.    First,  there  is  no  point  in  even  continuing  this  conversation  unless  we  can 
demonstrate  that  our  financial  services  industry  and  economy  are  under  close  control  for 
AML/CFT purposes.  We have made very large strides in this area—but the fact that we have 
had to make very large strides indicates that we started from a weak position. 
In any event, our current actual position is reasonably good, and in two to three years will be 
world-leading.   
The Bahamas must now be able to encourage the world’s relevant opinion-makers, such as 
the FATF, U.S. authorities, EU, OECD, and correspondent banks, to give us fair credit for our 
actual position. There is no easy and cheap answer to this challenge. The Central Bank and 
the  rest  of  the  public  sector  are  buckled  down  for  a  long,  hard  slog.  The  Central  Bank’s 
activities in this space include the following: 
-  With  other  Bahamian  regulators  and  government  agencies,  we  are  publishing  an 
annual report on Bahamian AML/CFT matters.5 
-  We  will  shortly  commence  regular  direct  communications  with  all  correspondent 
bankers to Bahamian banks. 
-  We  have  sponsored  the  annual  Bahamian  AML  conference,  of  which  todays  is  the 
second edition. 
-  We intend to sponsor, every two years a major international and regional conference 
on AML risk management.  Many of you attended the inaugural event in September 
2018.  We are co-sponsoring the 2020 version with CARICOM Secretariat and a very 
good international cast of speakers, anticipated in May 2020. 
-  We  are 
introducing  annual 
letters  on  financial  strength  and  AML/CFT  risk 
management to our supervised financial institutions, which are explicitly meant to be 
shared with current and potential correspondent bankers. 
-  From January 2020, the Central Bank will host the world’s leading research conference 
on empirical approaches to AML and financial crime suppression.  This will become an 
important tool to encourage data-driven as opposed to opinion-driven approaches to 
assessing national financial crime risks, and will usefully lift the Bahamian reputation 
                                                           
4 See for example Oliver Bullough’s 2018 book Moneyland 
5 https://www.centralbankbahamas.com/download/056332100.pdf 
 9 
as a jurisdiction that is part of the solution rather than the problems of global AML/CFT 
management. 
Conclusion 
The Central Bank and our public sector colleagues are doing quite a lot to improve both the 
reality and  the  reputation of  The  Bahamas  as  a  high probity, low  risk  regime for  AML  and 
financial crime.  We need industry’s continued competence and cooperation so that we can 
collectively achieve the reality and the reputation we all want. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
 10 
