Mugur  Isărescu:  How  CEE  economies  can  face  future  policy
challenges amid changing trade and monetary landscapes
Opening remarks by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the ECB
conference  ”Resilience  to  global  headwinds?  CESEE  responses  to  a  changing  trade  and
financial  landscape”,  Session  "Responses  to  monetary  policy  and  financial  shocks",  Frankfurt
am Main, 12 June 2019.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 The  two  keynote  speakers  shared  with  us  insightful  thoughts  about  the  consequences  of
monetary policy and financial shocks and about the responses of CEE countries.
My intervention will be structured around three issues. First, I will refer to the impact on emerging
economies in the EU expected to be exerted by monetary policy normalisation in the euro area.
Second, I will tackle the subject of how inflation targeting has adapted to the post-crisis global
economic and financial landscape. Finally, the topic of what the CEE economies need to do in
order to cope with any strong volatility headwinds will be touched upon.
There is no doubt that the recovery of the EU economy in the past years was largely due to major
central banks’ non-standard operations, as well as to very low interest rates. We all know that the
reversal of this process also has substantial implications for the economic development, mainly
through the influence of monetary policy normalisation on financing conditions or capital inflows.
Irrespective of the uncertainties currently surrounding the timing and pace of policy normalisation
in  the  euro  area,  it  will  eventually  gain  momentum  and  the  impact  on  the  emerging  EU
economies, to which I will come back later, should not be underestimated. It is debatable if the
forthcoming normalisation process involves going back to the pre-crisis normal or rather moving
forward to a “new normal”, characterised by lower interest rates and possibly by larger central
bank balance sheets.
What  is  certain  is  that  future  policy  actions  of  central  banks  in  CEE  countries  will  definitely
depend  on  the  way  monetary  policy  normalisation  unfolds  in  Europe.  What  happened  in  the
emerging economies that are part of the US dollar sphere of influence following the FED’s policy
normalisation is quite relevant. Higher interest rates in the developed world would trigger a capital
flight away from emerging economies, thus generating depreciation pressures. The response of
policymakers  in  emerging  economies  will  depend  on  the  specific  strengths  and  weaknesses.
Where  adequate  policy  buffers  are  in  place  and  investor  confidence  is  elevated,  market
mechanisms,  countercyclical  macroeconomic  and  prudential  policies  may  be  relied  upon  to
tackle  a  slowdown  in  capital  inflows.  Where  there  is  less  room  for  manoeuvre,  tightening
monetary  and  fiscal  policies  may  be  required  to  lower  financing  needs  and  attract  additional
inflows.  Where  foreign  reserves  are  adequate,  they  may  be  used  to  moderate  or  smoothen
exchange rate depreciation.
Let me now move on to the second point of my intervention: how inflation targeting has evolved in
response to the post-crisis global economic and financial environment. The NBR, the same as
the central banks of Poland, Czech Republic and Hungary, is an inflation targeter. In Romania,
we  have  remained  loyal  to  inflation  targeting  since  2005,  but  inflation  targeting  itself  is  quite
different now from 15 years ago.
Indeed, it is rather difficult to say at present what is left of its underlying principles. The outbreak
of  the  global  crisis  and  the  post-crisis  developments  have  naturally  led  to  the  tailoring  of  the
strategy to the new realities. Some departures from the old orthodoxy are almost unavoidable in
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  present  context,  marked  by  a  changing  global  financial  and  economic  landscape.  For
instance,  after  the  crisis,  forex  interventions  re-entered  the  arsenal  of  many  central  banks,
including some of the previously more purist floaters. A case in point is the Czech National Bank,
which resorted to the so-called “exchange rate commitment” from November 2013 to April 2017,
intervening whenever necessary without time or volume limits to prevent the appreciation of the
koruna below a publicly announced floor.
I find relevant what Agustín Carstens, General Manager of the BIS, said in his lecture held at the
London  School  of  Economics  in  May  2019:  “The  textbook  version  of  the  inflation  targeting
framework,  which  prescribes  pursuing  inflation  stability  with  floating  exchange  rates  through
adjustments  of  a  short-term  interest  rate,  is  obviously  too  narrow  for  EME  central  banks.  In
particular, the financial channel of the exchange rate gives rise to difficult trade-offs for monetary
policy,  while  at  the  same  time  complicating  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  by  weakening  its
transmission.  EME  central  banks  have  risen  to  this  challenge  through  their  innovative  use  of
additional  policy  instruments.  They  have  turned  to  FX  intervention  to  deal  directly  with  the
financial channel or insure against undesired exchange rate swings, and to other non-orthodox
balance  sheet  policies  as  well  as  macroprudential  tools  to  deal  with  specific  imbalances  or
vulnerabilities in a targeted way.” Not only that I share his view, but I have to say that, in Romania,
we started practicing what he speaks about now even before the outbreak of the global crisis.
We resorted to forex interventions in order to mitigate the exchange rate volatility and we took
prudential measures to contain excessive growth of credit (of forex lending in particular). The IMF
mentioned  the  NBR  as  being  among  “the  pioneers”  of  what  was  later  referred  to  as
“macroprudential instruments".
As  a  matter  of  fact,  back  in  2005,  being  aware  of  the  risks  associated  with  the  free  capital
movement  and  subsequent  ample  fluctuations  of  the  exchange  rate,  the  National  Bank  of
Romania decided to adopt a “light” version of inflation targeting. We deemed it more suitable than
any  other  option  in  terms  of  sustainably  achieving  price  stability,  while  limiting  the  cost  of
excessive volatility in output and employment. In fact, the NBR’s overall approach has been a
balanced one. On one hand, we did not ignore the threat of inflation for the sake of fast and easily
gained  (and  therefore  unreal)  prosperity.  On  the  other  hand,  we  tried  to  avoid  becoming,  in
Mervyn King’s words, an “inflation nutter".
Let me emphasise that the classic recipe of inflation targeting would recommend a policy rate
hike at the current juncture in some of the CEE countries. However, in Poland, Czech Republic,
Hungary  and  Romania,  policy  rates  currently  stand  below  the  inflation  rate.  And  precisely
because we are not cut off from what is going on around us, the NBR’s monetary policy stance
should be assessed in a regional context.
But beyond the regional environment, if we look at advanced economies and, in general, at the
euro  area,  we  see  low  inflation  and  modest  economic  growth  rates  prevailing.  They  do  not
necessarily call for a tightening of monetary policy. By contrast, CEE countries have rather high
inflation and significant economic  growth  rates,  therefore  the  context  would  be  described  in  a
textbook as adequate for tightening. Yet, in the case of these countries, there is a real risk posed
by speculative capital inflows.
As long as negative real interest rates prevail in Europe, straying too far away from our regional
peers in terms of policy rate would invite considerable appreciation pressures. While helpful in
terms of taming inflation, these would not be welcome, given Romania’s increasingly significant
external imbalance that is singular in the region in terms of size and trend. It owes to the faster
growth  of  domestic  absorption  than  that  of  domestic  output,  as  well  as  to  non-price
competitiveness  issues  manifest  in  certain  production  sectors.  Therefore,  striking  the  right
balance in terms of the interest rate differential is of the essence. After the tightening undertaken
so far in Romania (including three policy rate hikes in the first half of 2018), it is probably wise to
proceed cautiously in the future.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Which brings me to the last issue I would like to address: what is advisable in terms of economic
policies in order to cope with any future adverse developments. For the sake of simplicity, allow
me  to  try  to  formulate  three  general  rules  that  are  instrumental  in  dealing  with  such
developments.
First of all, irrespective of the possible scenarios, it is wise to put your house in order before the
storm  comes.  One  example  is  fiscal  consolidation,  which  is  paramount  for  the  economy.
Relatively high fiscal and current account deficits may weaken the foundation of the building and
adjusting them in a smooth manner is a much more sensible thing to do than letting the market
forces  make  an  abrupt  correction.  As  regards  monetary  policy,  strict  liquidity  management
represents a step in the right direction.
But, of course, monetary policy alone is not enough. Which brings us to the second rule: there is
no substitute for a predictable and coherent economic policy mix. Let me stress that it should
remain so even when facing the challenges of election years (there are several election rounds in
Romania  in  2019  and  2020). A  significant  pace  of  economic  convergence  is  desired,  but  the
process  should  unfold  sustainably  to  preserve  macroeconomic  equilibria  and  safeguard
competitiveness. As I usually put it, to successfully adopt the euro, one should be a marathoner
rather than a sprinter.
Last, but not least, the third rule might be as follows: when the normalisation wave eventually
hits,  the  magnitude  of  the  impact  will  depend  on  how  vulnerable  emerging  economies  are  to
external  financing. A  contained  current  account  deficit,  a  long  average  maturity  on  public  and
private foreign currency debt and a coherent mix of countercyclical macroeconomic policies and
structural reforms would go a long way in limiting the risks. If proper economic policy actions are
not implemented while there is a window of opportunity, the possibility of a forced resort, in a
more or less distant future, to sub-optimal measures in the face of adversity cannot be ruled out.
To  sum  up,  keeping  domestic  and  external  imbalances  in  check  is  the  only  way  the  CEE
economies will be able to cope with any strong volatility headwinds.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
