Eddie Yue: Remarks at Media Standup
Remarks  by  Mr  Eddie  Yue,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  Media
Standup, Hong Kong, 2 October 2019.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 1.  Today is my first working day as the Chief Executive of the HKMA. Apart from the transition
to a new position, I will also be faced with a challenging external and domestic environment. 
This includes the weakening of global economic momentum, uncertainties over the China-
US  trade  conflict  and  Brexit,  unpredictable  monetary  policy  stance  across  central  banks
especially in the US, and the social events in Hong Kong in recent months.  All these have
presented huge challenges and uncertainties for the Hong Kong economy.
2.  Our  key  priority  in  the  next  few  years  is  to  maintain  Hong  Kong’s  monetary  and  financial
stability.
3.  And, the foundation for this stability is the Linked Exchange Rate System (“the Link”), which
has helped Hong Kong weather different financial storms since 1983. I’ve been involved in
the operation of the Link throughout my career in the HKMA and I have also gone through two
financial crises.  I firmly believe that the Link is the most appropriate monetary system for
Hong  Kong.    We  see  no  need  and  have  no  intention  of  changing  this  well-established
system.
4.  Our  banking  system  is  also  robust  and  sound.  I’m  confident  that  Hong  Kong’s  financial
system is well positioned to cope with market volatilities.
5.  We will also reinforce Hong Kong’s role as a premier international financial centre. One key
driver is the rapid development of Fintech.  While the HKMA has done a great deal in the
past few years in promoting Fintech, there is still room to further apply new technology in
finance in the coming years.  This includes, for example, fostering a better ecosystem for
Regulatory Technology (or RegTech) and Supervisory Technology (or SupTech).  We are
also aware that any new risks associated with the increasing use of technology have to be
managed.    These  include  for  example  cyber  and  data  security.    We  will  work  with  the
industry to address these risks.
6.  We  are  also  committed  to  promoting  market  development  opportunities,  especially  in
strengthening the role of Hong Kong as the gateway to the Mainland’s capital markets, in the
Greater Bay Area development, and also in green finance.
7.  These are rough times. But my colleagues and I will continue to discharge our duties in a
professional manner and do our best to serve the people of Hong Kong.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
