Anita Angelovska Bezhoska: Opening address - Fifth Meeting of the
Regional  Working  Group  for  Financial  Education  of  Southeastern
Europe
Opening  address  by  Ms  Anita  Angelovska  Bezhoska,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the
Republic of North Macedonia, at the Fifth Meeting of the Regional Working Group for Financial
Education of Southeastern Europe, Skopje, 27 September 2019.
 Distinguished representatives of the central banks,
Dear representatives of international institutions,
Dear guests, ladies and gentleman,
It is my great pleasure to give the opening address at the Fifth Meeting of the Regional Working
Group for Financial Education of Southeastern Europe, hosted by our national bank. I am more
than certain that joint fora, such as this one, are important venue for raising our awareness and
knowledge on matters of mutual interest. And, there is no dilemma that financial education, as a
spotlight of this working group, is an issue of mutual interest gaining prominence and importance
among all stakeholders – central banks, regulators, financial services providers, consumers. We
are  all  faced  with  rapidly  evolving  financial  landscape,  in  which  being  knowledgeable  means
being capable of reaping the benefits and mitigating risks.
Now allow me to shed some light on a couple of important dimensions such as relevance of the
financial literacy and the benefits it brings to the society, the specific circumstances that brought
this issue to the fore in the last decade, the role played by the central banks in this segment, the
current state and the challenges ahead for the region and our country.
Why does financial literacy matter? It is more than clear that the absence of understanding of
the basic financial concepts erodes our capability to make proper and well-informed choices in
terms of savings, investment, and borrowing. The costs of these choices are not confined only to
individuals, but they can have systemic implications, eroding the overall financial stability. The
translation of these misinformed decisions into systemic risks is exactly one of the main reasons
why financial literacy became the mainstream in the past decade. The pre-crisis credit boom
was  supported  by  irrational  exuberance  and  overconfidence  of  “never  ending”  rise  in  assets
prices and low financing costs. The credit boom turned into credit bust, and the consequences of
the “bubble – burst” are still with us. According to the latest IMF map of weak spots, heavily
indebted  households  are  still  the  main  source  of  vulnerability  in  many  systemically  important
advanced  and  emerging  economies,  and  potential  source  of  next  financial  crisis. Apparently,
being  financially  literate  and  informed,  can  help  in  preventing,  or  at  least  mitigating  the
occurrence of such “weak spots”. To bring the issue closer to the regional context, let me remind
us of the “episode” of excessive borrowing in Swiss francs that occurred in several countries in
the region (Hungary, Croatia, Serbia, Poland), amidst low interest rates and assumed stability of
the exchange rate. Hence, the last crisis clearly demonstrated  that  many  agents  are  not  fully
aware of the consequences of their financial decisions.
Financial literacy is becoming even more relevant given the last decade’s proliferation
of the innovative services offered by new FinTech companies. The tighter regulatory grip
on traditional sources of finance, on the one hand, and promotion of new alternative sources of
finance underpinned by technology, on the other hand, have been conducive to emergence of
array of new financial products and services. This promotes higher financial inclusion, but also
exposes consumers to new risks. The fact that FinTech solutions can be very complex make the
task of risk identification and mitigation by service providers and/or regulators difficult. According
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
to  “Southeast  Europe  focus  on  Fintech  and  Innovation”  the  FinTech  is  the  fastest  growing  IT
branch and the two largest FinTech segments in the region, each comprising a quarter of all
FinTech companies, are payments services and crowdfunding and peer-to-peer lending. Over
the last couple of years, this trend has even led to discussions for risk of financial exclusion in
case  financial  education  does  not  keep  pace  with  financial  innovations. It  asks  for  a  greater
vigilance, awareness and knowledge by all of the stakeholders on the possibilities it offers, but on
the risks and threats as well.
Going  beyond  the  importance  for  the  well-being  of  the  individuals  and  the  overall
financial stability, financial literacy can play an important role in increasing the domestic
savings, which is one of the key factors in speeding up the real convergence in the
region. Although in the recent period domestic savings has been picking up, still in most of the
economies  in  the  region  it  remains  below  the  adequate  levels  needed  to  support  stronger
investments and increase the long-term potential of the economies. This is particularly relevant
given the changing business models of the banks that imply a lower reliance on external sources
of finance that may pose constraints for stronger credit support. Higher financial knowledge may
also contribute to higher savings in capital market instruments and thus provide more balanced
structure  of  corporate  sector  financing.  Currently,  the  capital  market  depth  in  the  region  is
hovering around 50% of GDP, being far below the EU average of around 200% of GDP.
One  of  the  Vienna  Initiative  reports  highlights  the  importance  of  financial  literacy  for
capital markets not just from the savings point of view (demand side), but also from the
supply side. According to their estimates, financial literacy level is one of the three key factors
that explain the lower use of alternative sources of financing in the region in comparison with the
EU average. This once again proves that the need for financial education regionwide is indeed
widespread, which means necessity of a larger scope of our activities, including the corporate
sector, especially the small and medium-sized enterprises.
Furthermore,  the  financial  literacy  supports  the  ongoing  process  of  raising  financial
inclusion,  which  is  deemed  to  be  an  important  dimension  for  having  stronger,
sustainable  and  more  inclusive  growth  where  the  benefits  are  shared  by  the  wider
community. The  necessity  for  stronger  financial  knowledge  and  financial  inclusion  is
undisputable. It is important for curbing risks, and unleashing the potential of the economies to
grow.
But, what is the current state of play? Data shows that notable gaps exists and there is a
long way to go. International institutions reports indicate that Southeast European countries are
lagging  behind  developed  economies  in  terms  of  financial  literacy  and  inclusion,  despite  their
efforts to actively address these issues. According to the financial literacy surveys pursuant to
the  standard  methodology  of  the  International  Network  on  Financial  Education  at  the  OECD
(INFE-OECD), on average 62% of the population of the OECD countries achieved the minimum
target score for financial knowledge, while in Southeast European region, this percentage was
lower  and  amounted  to  40–55%.  Despite  the  fact  that  the level  of  financial  inclusion,
measured as a percentage of adult population holding a bank account, has been increasing, in
the SEE region it is still lower when compared to some of the more advanced countries in the
wider CESEE region. The data from the Global Findex database of the World Bank, points to a
percentage of 77% in 2017 for our country, lower than that compared to Croatia (86%), Slovenia
(98%), Latvia (93%), Estonia (98%). According to the Standard & Poor’s Global Financial Literacy
Survey,  the  average  difference  in  the  rank  is  around  20  places  between  the  countries  of  the
region and the EU-15 countries.
What role as central banks do we have in elevating financial literacy? Given the lessons
learned from the crisis and the evolving financial innovations, in the last decade central banks
have  played  an  increasing  role  in  the  coordinated  activities  of  the  national  policymakers  tilted
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
towards  financial  education  and  inclusion.  Hence, central  banks  are  active  participants  and
promoters of the financial education process in almost all countries. The benefits are apparent:
educated  entities  estimate  risks  and  understand  monetary  policy  stance  better,  the  better  the
understanding of the economy and finances, the smoother the functioning of financial markets;
the more efficient financial markets; the stronger monetary policy transmission and the credibility
of the central bank.
In this context, let me briefly touch upon several activities our institution has embarked
on in this area. Financial education and financial inclusion have formally become part of our
agenda. We have widened the scope of educational activities, by wider portfolio of educational
articles,  more  inclusive  approach  to  financial  education  and  closer  cooperation  with  other
regulators.  The  National  Bank  supported  the  organization  of  the  European  Money  Quiz  for
teenagers with educational activities for the teaching staff, and has been proud of our high school
students who won the second place in Europe. Very importantly, there is an ongoing process of
preparation of the National Strategy for Financial Education and Inclusion, which we believe will
pave the way for more educated and more inclusive society.
Dear guests,
This  workshop  proves  that  apart  from  national  initiatives  to  elevate  and  promote  financial
knowledge,  regional  initiatives  are  on  board  as  well.  I  think  this  approach  provides  synergy;
employs joint resources and enables more efficient achievement of the vision that we all share.
I am pleased that we will formalize our commitment and readiness for joint action with the first
Memorandum  of  Cooperation  in  the  field  of  financial  education  and  financial  inclusion  in
Southeastern Europe. We must all strive to be strongly committed, not only to declare, but also
to enable efficient implementation in practice. No doubts I have, that this will be the case.
At  the  end  of  my  address,  on  behalf  of  all  the  stakeholders,  I  would  like  to  express  sincere
gratitude  to  INFE-OECD  and  EFSE  for  their  support  all  these  years.  It  is  unquestionable  that
many of the activities we have taken so far would have been difficult to carry out without their
support. I truly hope that we justify the trust given to us.
The mission that we have is important, as by supporting financial literacy, we support provision of
public good. In doing so, we must not forget that “Financial literacy is not an end in itself, but a
step-by-step process. It begins in childhood and continues throughout a person’s life all the way
to retirement” – George Karl. Therefore, we must be consistent, inclusive, committed and patient
while playing our role in the financial education of our society.
I wish you a successful and fruitful meeting.
Thank you. 
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
