Dr.  Duisenberg  assesses  the  future  importance  of  the  euro   Address  by  the
President  of 
the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,
the  Netherlands  Bank  and  of 
Dr. W.F. Duisenberg,  on  the  occasion  of  a  dinner  hosted  by  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the
‘Association  for  the  Monetary  Union  of  Europe’  (AMUE),  at  Kasteel  De  Wittenburg,
Wassenaar, 4/3/97.
1    It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  able  to  address  you  here  tonight  in
Wassenaar. Your Association has  always  been  among  the  strongest  supporters  for  speeding  up
European  integration,  particularly  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU).  This  emphatic
support gives the speaker the luxurious feeling of playing before a home audience.
2    Tonight, I would like to ponder two issues related to the future importance of
the euro. First,  what  are  the  chances  of  the  euro  becoming  an  important  reserve  and  invoicing
currency?  Second,  how  should  the  European  Central  Bank  deal  with  the  external  value  of  the
euro?
Future role of the euro as a reserve and invoicing currency
3    I  know  that  the  first  issue  - the  future  role  of  the  euro  as  a  reserve  and
invoicing currency - has been receiving a lot of attention from your Association over the years.
As a matter of fact, you very strongly believe in a powerful role for the euro. I quote from your
latest  report:  “By  placing  Europe  in  a  much  stronger  position  vis-à-vis  the  United  States  of
America  and  other  countries,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  improves  investor  climate  and
ultimately  favours  employment.  Also,  the  use  of  the  euro  will  rapidly  develop  world-wide,  in
proportion to the external trade of the European Union which already ranks first in the world”.
I very much welcome this positive approach to the euro. The internationalization
of the euro is only partly in the hands of European policy-makers. Policy-makers can provide for
the right incentives by pursuing sound policies, thereby making their currency attractive. But, at
the same time, the success of the euro is also in the hands of the markets. In this respect, I would
encourage  the  European  business  community  to  take  every  opportunity  to  promote  the  private
use of the euro and increase its role as a vehicle currency and store of value.
4    Let me elaborate a little by discussing three major factors that will determine
the future importance of the euro: the stability of the euro, the amount of trade conducted in it,
and  the  depth  of  euro  financial  markets.  Safeguarding  the  stability  of  the  euro  is  the  biggest
responsibility of the European Central Bank. The safest currency for all investors is the currency
of the country with the lowest inflation rate over time. Here, the prospects for the euro are good.
Over the years, inflation in European core countries has been constantly lower than in the United
States, and there is no reason to believe that this would change with the start of EMU. It is also
very  important  that  the  euro  will  be  strengthened  by  the  institutional  independence  of  the
European Central Bank and its objectives of price stability. Furthermore, safeguards have been
put in place, such as the Stability Pact, to prevent EMU countries from pursuing unhealthy fiscal
policies. All in all, I firmly believe that the euro will be a strong currency.
5    As  regards  the  other  major  determinants  of  the  future  importance  of  the
euro - trade and financial markets - the role policy-makers can play is more limited. This is not
to  say  that  the  euro’s  starting  position  is  unfavourable.  On  the  contrary,  over  the  last  twenty
years  international  private  portfolios  have  been  gradually  diversified  in  the  direction  of
European currencies. Also, European currencies have been increasingly used as vehicle and, to a
lesser extent, as invoicing currencies. There is every reason to believe that these trends could be
strengthened  by  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  After  all,  the  euro  will  eventually  cover  an
BIS Review   27/1997
- 2 -
economy whose gross domestic product is larger than that of the United States. If intra-EU trade
is excluded, the EU and the US both account for around 20 percent of world trade. Furthermore,
with  350 million  inhabitants  the  EU  is  the  largest  consumer  market  in  the  OECD  area,
consumers  whose  needs  will  partly  have  to  be  met  by  trading  with  the  rest  of  the  world.
Companies which trade principally with European counterparties may be inclined to invoice and
pay in euros. If the euro is going to be widely used in international trade transactions, exporters
and importers within the European Union will no longer be exposed to exchange rate risks nor
have  to  hedge  against  such  risks.  The  European  business  community  thus  has  ample
opportunities to reap the benefits provided by the introduction of the euro.
6    It  is  more  difficult  to  predict  the  future  role  of  the  euro  in  international
financial  markets.  Fortunately,  at  the  European  level  agreement  has  been  reached  on  legal
provisions  that  guarantee  the  continuity  of  ECU  contracts.  This  provides  a  good  starting  point
for  euro  capital  markets.  Ultimately,  however,  the  choice  of  currency  in  which  to  borrow  and
lend depends on the depth and liquidity of the underlying market. Presumably, some segments of
the  euro  market  will  become  deeper.  For  instance,  government  bond  markets  are  likely  to
become  deeper  and  more  liquid,  and  will  offer  international  investors  more  instruments  than
current national markets. It is also important that experience in the last few years has shown that
financial  markets  can  put  increasing  pressure  on  political  authorities  to  conduct  prudent
macroeconomic  policies.  In  such  an  environment,  governments  can  no  longer  afford  to  outrun
the constable, and credit spreads between different debtors may in practice be rather small.
The external value of the euro
7    Let  me  now  briefly  discuss  the  issue  of  the  external  value  of  the  euro.
Recently, there has been a great deal of attention on this issue. Should the ECB, for instance, set
an exchange rate target vis-à-vis the dollar?
In my view, this is not the appropriate way to go. The primary task of the ECB is
to  guarantee  internal  price  stability.  As  I  have  mentioned  earlier,  the  euro  area  will  have  an
economic and commercial weight comparable to that of the  United  States.  This  means  a  huge,
but relatively closed economy. With a low import ratio, the effect of exchange rate movements
on internal price developments will be limited compared to what currently holds for individual
EU countries. Therefore, it is simply wiser for the ECB to focus on euro-wide indicators, such as
money  growth  for  the  whole  euro  area.  Put  differently,  the  internal  value  of  the  euro  is  the
objective of monetary policy and the external value the outcome.
8    This  is  not  to  say,  of  course,  that  Europe  could  adopt  an  attitude  of  benign
neglect  with  regard  to  the  external  value  of  the  euro.  As  is  the  case  now,  exchange  rate
developments will continue to be informally monitored by the major global players. Indeed, the
introduction of the euro may even enhance the opportunity for strengthened policy coordination.
With Europe speaking with one voice, the  players  on  the  global  field  are  being  put  on  a  more
equal footing. This could add to globally balanced and stable policies, which is in the interest of
the three poles concerned.
Furthermore, there is the relationship between the euro and the currencies of those
countries  which  will  not  participate  in  EMU  from  the  beginning.  A  new  Exchange  Rate
Mechanism  has  been  designed  which  aims  to  ensure  that  the  EU  Member  States  stay  together
and  that  the  working  of  the  Internal  Market  is  not  frustrated  by  exchange  rate  fluctuations
between the euro zone and other EU currencies. It will also help those countries which will not
join  EMU  right  from  the  start  to  orient  their  policies  towards  convergence,  in  order  to  enable
them to qualify for participation as soon as possible.
BIS Review   27/1997
To conclude...
- 3 -
...,  there  are  reasons  to  believe  that  over  time  the  euro  could  develop  into  an
important  reserve  and  invoicing  currency.  Good  opportunities  for  the  euro  arise  from  the  fact
that  the  EU  economy  is  even  larger  than  that  of  the  United  States.  Furthermore,  it  is  the
responsibility  of  European  policy-makers  to  safeguard  the  attractiveness  of  the  European
currency by pursuing sound policies. In this respect, the stability of the euro is in the good hands
of the ECB. At the same time, I would like to emphasize that the success of the euro is also in
the hands of the markets. It should be borne in mind that it took the dollar half a century and two
world  wars  to  replace  sterling  as  the  international  currency,  despite  the  fact  that  the  United
States had been the major economic power since the beginning of this century. All in all, these
are challenging times for Europe. Let me, therefore, propose a toast to the future success of the
euro.
BIS Review   27/1997
