Dr.  Stals  elucidates  the  functions  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank
Presentation by the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, Dr. C.Stals, to the NEDLAC
Executive Council in Johannesburg on 28/2/97.
1. The mandate to the South African Reserve Bank
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  was  established  in  1921  in  terms  of  a  special
Act  of  Parliament.  At  that  time,  central  banks  existed  mainly  in  Europe,  and  the  SA  Reserve
Bank  was  only  the  fourth  central  bank  founded  outside  Europe.  There  already  existed  central
banks in the United States of America, Japan and Java.
Since  its  establishment,  the  Reserve  Bank  was  always  privately  owned.  Today,
the Bank has more than 700 shareholders. The shares of the Bank are listed on the Johannesburg
Stock Exchange and, in terms of the Act, no individual shareholder is allowed to hold more than
one-half per cent of the capital of the Bank. The Bank may also never pay a dividend of more
than 10  per  cent  per  annum  on  the  nominal  value  of  its  capital.  The  market  price  of  the  share
therefore behaves like a government bond with a 10 per cent coupon.
The Bank is managed by a Board of 14 Directors, seven of whom are elected by
the  shareholders  to  represent  them  on  the  Board.  Without  holding  any  shares  in  the  Bank,  the
Government  (President)  has  the  right  to  appoint  the  other  seven  Board  members.  The  seven
appointed by the President includes the Governor and three Deputy Governors, who are full-time
executive members, plus three part-time Directors.
The  functions  of  the  Bank  changed  over  time.  When  the  Bank  was  originally
established  in  1921,  its  main  task  was  to  develop  money  and  capital  markets  and  a  banking
system in South Africa that would be independent of London. Today its main task, as defined in
terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act and in the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa,  is  to  defend  the  value  of  the  rand,  that  is,  to  keep  inflation  as  low  as  possible.  This  is
very  much  in  line  with  contemporary  central  banking  all  over  the  world.  Since  1980,  most
central banks have accepted a similar mission. The latest example is perhaps the People’s Bank
of China, whose mandate has been changed as from March 1995 to maintain the stability of the
Chinese yuan, and in this way to promote economic growth.
The Board of the Reserve Bank has been given an important degree of autonomy
for the execution of its duties. In terms of the Constitution:
“The  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  in  pursuit  of  its  primary  objective,  must
perform  its  functions  independently  and  without  fear,  favour  or  prejudice,  but
there  must  be  regular  consultation  between  the  Bank  and  the  Cabinet  member
responsible for national financial matters”.
In terms of Section 32 of the Reserve Bank Act, the Bank must submit a monthly
statement of its assets and liabilities and an annual report to Parliament. The  Bank  is  therefore
accountable to Parliament. The Governor of the Reserve Bank holds regular discussions with the
Minister of Finance, and appears before the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance from
time to time.
The  Board  of  the  Bank  has  delegated  its  powers  on  important  monetary  policy
decisions to a sub-committee of the Board, known as the Governors’ Committee and comprising
the  Governor  and  three  Deputy  Governors.  There  is  also  an  Audit  Committee  and  a  Human
BIS Review   24/1997
- 2 -
Resources  Committee  of  the  Board  that  meet  regularly  on  aspects  of  internal  finance  and
administration. The full Board meets four times a year.
The Bank has a total staff of about 1900 people and operates from its Head Office
in Pretoria and seven branches maintained in the major cities of South Africa.
2. Why must inflation be controlled?
The  main  task  of  the  Reserve  Bank  is  to  protect  the  value  of  the  currency.  The
business of a modern central bank is the business of money. Central banks are given the right to
issue money by their governments. That is why the Reserve Bank is accountable to Parliament
and why its surplus profits are paid over to the Treasury. The right to issue money (bank notes
and  coin)  makes  the  central  bank  a  very  powerful  institution  that  can  easily  be  misused  for
sectoral interests. That is why it must be able to act in the national interest -- what is good for the
total economy is important, and not what any specific group or sector may desire.
In modern sophisticated financial systems, surrogates for real money (bank notes
and coin) developed, such as bank cheque accounts, credit cards and electronic transfers. Private
banking institutions now create more money (means of payment) than the central bank. In order
to  fulfil  its  task  of  protecting  the  value  of  the  currency,  the  Reserve  Bank  must  therefore  also
have some powers to control the money creation capacity of the banking sector. In South Africa
today, bank notes and coin in circulation account for less than 5 per cent of the money supply.
The  rest  is  money  created  by  banking  institutions  over  which  the  Reserve  Bank  has  but  an
indirect control.
Money serves the purpose of a means of payment. It is also a unit of account in
terms of which the value of goods and services are measured. It serves thirdly as a store of value
for  the  savings  of  the  community.  These  three  functions  of  money  make  it  essential  that  the
value  of  money  shall  remain  as  stable  as  possible.  No  modern  market-oriented  economy  can
function well if the value of its currency is not kept stable.
Inflation is a continuous decline in the value of money. This will be reflected in a
continuous  rise  in  the  prices  of  goods  and  services.  In  a  market  economy,  certain  prices  of
specific  goods  and  services  will  always  change  to  reflect  changes  in  underlying  forces  of
demand and supply. It is indeed essential that relative prices of goods and services will change in
a  market  economy  to  bring  about  equilibrium  and  support  maximum  economic  growth.  It
becomes a problem for the efficient functioning of the economy if all prices generally increase
over  time,  because  this  will  confuse  the  signals  emitted  by  the  market  system  through  the
mechanism of relative price changes. The many disadvantages of inflation therefore include: the
distortion  of  the  efficient  working  of  the  market  system  through  its  disruptive  effects  on  the
price  mechanism;  a  reduction  in  the  usefulness  of  money  as  a  unit  of  account.  You  cannot
properly  measure  and  compare  values  of  goods  and  services  if  you  have  to  use  a  variable  or
elastic yardstick; and an erosion of the value of money as a store of wealth. Savers will not be
prepared to accumulate wealth in an asset that loses its value over time.
Because of these effects of a decline in the value of money, high rates of inflation
inevitably lead to a decline in the efficiency of the market economy, a decline in savings and, in
the  longer  term,  a  lower  rate  of  growth  for  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Other  more  direct
disadvantages of inflation can be summarised as follows:
BIS Review   24/1997
- 3 -
People with fixed incomes, for example salaries or pensions, are affected more by
inflation than the wealthy who can partly protect themselves against inflation, for
example  by  investing  in  property  or  equities.  Inflation  therefore  leads  to  an
increase in the disparity between the “haves” and the “have-nots”. Inflation makes
forward planning more difficult. A person may, for example, save for his whole
working  life  for  a  pension,  just  to  find  at  the  end  of  his  career  that  his  savings
have  been  eroded  by  inflation.  Inflation  in  one  country  at  a  level  higher  than
inflation  in  other  countries  create  many  difficulties  for  international  financial
relations.  The  exchange  rate  of  the  country  that  becomes  out  of  line  because  of
this  difference,  must  depreciate  continuously  to  keep  local  industries  and  other
producers (e.g.  gold  mines)  competitive.  Depreciation  in  itself  can  lead  to  more
inflation  and  a  vicious  circle  of  more-inflation-more-depreciation  can  easily  get
out  of  control  and  destroy  the  whole  economy.  Inflation  is  inclined  to  feed  on
itself. It is almost impossible to keep a little bit of inflation always just a little bit.
As long as there is inflation in the economy, monetary authorities must remain on
their  guard.  Even  if  relatively  low  inflation  can  be  tolerated,  there  is  always  a
danger that the rate of price rises will increase.
Because of all these adverse characteristics of inflation, this illness of the market
economy  often  leads  to  serious  social  disruption  which  brings  with  it  political  instability.  It  is
therefore  in  the  interest  of  the  economy,  the  social  structure  and  the  political  system  that  a
government and its people shall always be prepared and ready to fight inflation.
3. The causes of inflation
Inflation  is  a  rather  complex  phenomenon  of  the  economy.  There  is  no  single
cause of inflation. It can find its origin in the rest of the world,  and  can  therefore  be  imported
from abroad. It can be caused by excess demand, that is,  by  a  desire  of  an  economy  to  absorb
more goods and services than it can afford to supply (from domestic production plus  imports).
The  excessive  demand  can  emanate  from  government  expenditure,  private  sector  consumption
expenditure,  or  even  fixed  investment.  It  can  be  caused  by  wage  increases  in  excess  of
productivity rises that will lead to an increase in the labour cost per unit of production. It can be
generated  by  monopolistic  practices  that  can  be  misused  to  generate  surplus  profits  for
entrepreneurs.
Whatever  the  basic  causes  of  inflation  might  be,  it  is  normally  accompanied  or
accommodated by excessive increases in the money supply. Indeed, inflation may often find its
origin in excessive increases in the money supply when monetary policy is used as a deliberate
instrument to provide artificial stimulation to the economy. In any national programme to keep
inflation down, the control of the money supply must be included as an indispensable component
of  the  total  package.  Restricting  the  growth  in  the  money  supply  will  make  it  impossible  for
inflationary  impulses,  even  of  a  non-monetary  origin,  to  escalate  and  permeate  in  continuous
price rises.
In the South  African  economy,  there  are  many  inflationary  forces  at  work  at  all
times. The task of the South African Reserve Bank is therefore not an easy one. Because of these
many  inflationary  forces,  the  Bank  must  apply  a  policy  that  at  times  seems  to  be
over-restrictive -- an approach that is necessary in order to neutralise the inflationary effects of
many non-monetary actions that are exerting upward pressure on prices all the time.
BIS Review   24/1997
4. The monetary policy model of the Reserve Bank
- 4 -
Most central banks in the world pursue the same prime objective of protecting the
value  of  their  currencies.  Not  all  central  banks,  however,  follow  the  same  model  in  the
implementation of monetary policy. The Reserve Bank’s policy is a “monetarist” approach based
on  the  direct  control  of  the  money  supply.  Controlling  the  money  supply  is  seen  as  an
intermediate objective in reaching the ultimate objective of controlling inflation.
Some  countries  target  inflation  directly  in  the  monetary  policy  model.  Taking
account of the many causes of inflation, direct targeting of inflation requires broad co-ordination
of  macroeconomic  policies  such  as  fiscal  policy,  trade  and  industrial  policies,  labour  policies,
and international economic relations policies. It should indeed be based on a broad accord of a
consistent  macroeconomic  policy  framework  that  will  support  the  need  for  keeping  inflation
down. Low inflation is no guarantee for higher economic growth and development, but it is an
important precondition for attaining better standards of living for all the people of the country on
a sustainable basis.
In  some  other  countries,  monetary  policy  is  anchored  to  a  fixed  or  stable
exchange rate formula, instead of to the money supply. This is perhaps good for countries with a
relatively  open  economy  (such  as  South  Africa  is  now  becoming).  It  is  a  precondition  for  the
successful  implementation  of  this  type  of  model  that  the  country  will  be  able  to  stabilise  the
exchange rate through regular  intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  To  begin  with,  the
central  bank  must  have  access  to  a  substantial  amount  of  foreign  reserves  to  enable  it  to
intervene in the market for foreign exchange in a meaningful way.
The South African model for  monetary  policy  is,  however,  based  on  controlling
the money supply. Within the family of monetarists, there will always be differences of opinion
on  what  the  most  appropriate  definition  is  for  the  money  supply,  on  how  this  money  supply
should  best  be  controlled,  on  when  and  how  actions  by  the  central  bank  must  be  triggered,
etcetera. The basic objective remains, however, to keep the rate of increase in the money supply
within reasonable limits.
The  Reserve  Bank’s  policy  is  seen  to  be  rather  accommodative  and  does  not
comply with the strict money rule of not tolerating any inflation. Guidelines for an acceptable
rate of increase in the M3 money supply are announced at the beginning of each year  on  what
growth in the money supply will be good or tolerable in the South African economy. For 1996,
guidelines were set at between 6 and 10 per cent, providing for real growth of 3 to 4 per cent,
and  inflation  of  6  to  7  per  cent.  Pure  monetarists  would  have  required  growth  in  the  money
supply of not more than 4 per cent (the growth in the real economy in a similar situation).
The  money  supply  guidelines  set  by  the  Reserve  Bank  should  not  be  seen  as
targets that must be achieved at  all  cost.  They  only  serve  as  guidelines  and  contribute  towards
making  monetary  policy  more  transparent.  As  long  as  the  actual  growth  in  the  money  supply
exceeds  the  guidelines,  monetary  policy  must  remain  restrictive.  Scope  for  an  easier  monetary
policy  develops  only  as  and  when  actual  growth  in  the  money  supply  moves  to  within  the
guideline range.
As  previously  indicated,  money  is  created  in  South  Africa  mainly  through  the
actions of private banking institutions. When they give credit to their clients, they create money.
The Reserve Bank’s obligation to control the money supply, therefore, extends to a control over
the total amount of new credit extended by banking institutions.
BIS Review   24/1997
- 5 -
The rate of increase in the total amount of bank credit outstanding is determined
by two sides of a market formula: the amount of credit that banks can supply at any time,  and
the  total  demand  of  funds  emanating  from  the  borrowers  of  funds.  The  supply  side  of  the
formula  depends  on  how  much  liquidity  the  banks  have  at  their  disposal  for  funding  their
lending operations. The Reserve Bank therefore has a vested interest in influencing or managing
the amount of liquidity available to the banks. The Reserve Bank has a number of instruments at
its  disposal  to  influence  the  liquidity  of  the  banking  system,  such  as  open-market  operations,
discount window facilities, and cash reserve requirements.
The demand side of the formula is very much interest rate driven. Higher interest
rates  will  depress  the  demand,  and  lower  interest  rates  will  increase  demand.  The  level  of
interest  rates  is  to  an  important  extent  determined  by  forces  of  demand  and  supply  operating
through financial markets, but can also be influenced by the Reserve Bank’s own intervention in
the  markets.  To  meet  its  obligation  of  controlling  the  money  supply,  the  Reserve  Bank  must
ensure that the amount of liquidity available in the banking system and the level of interest rates
will be such that there will be no excessive increase in the money supply. Excessive increases in
the  money  supply  will  eventually,  after  a  time  lag  which  can  be  as  long  as  two  years,
accommodate rising, or cause higher, inflation with all the disadvantages thereof.
Interest rates therefore play a vital role in the fight against inflation. It is  one  of
the main operational instruments used by central banks to ensure an acceptable rate of growth in
the money supply.
In  summary,  the  monetary  policy  model  followed  by  the  Reserve  Bank  can  be
seen as follows:
To support maximum sustainable economic growth and development; the rate of
inflation  must  be  kept  low  (the  value  of  the  currency  must  be  protected);  to
achieve this objective, the rate of growth in the money supply must be kept within
an  acceptable  range  (the  guidelines);  as  money  is  created,  mainly  through  bank
credit  extension,  monetary  policy  must  be  directed  towards  some  control  over
bank credit extension, which requires some management of the amount of funds
available in the banking system, and a consistent interest rate policy.
If this model is applied consistently and with success, the rate of inflation will be
low,  which  will  lead  to  a  more  stable  exchange  rate  of  the  rand.  The  exchange  rate  therefore
becomes a result of the model and not a starting point.
In such an environment of overall financial stability, it will be possible to achieve
and sustain a maximum real rate of growth and development in the economy.
5. Successes achieved in the past
The  present  model  of  monetary  policy  was  designed  by  the  Commission  of
Inquiry  into  the  Monetary  System  and  Monetary  Policy  (De  Kock  Commission)  during  the
course  of  the  1980’s  and  was  implemented  in  South  Africa  more  vigorously  since  1989.  The
results achieved since then can be summarised as follows:
In 1988 total credit extended to the private sector increased by 28 per cent which
was,  of  course,  far  out  of  line  with  growth  in  the  nominal  value  of  the  total  gross  domestic
BIS Review   24/1997
- 6 -
production  of  South  Africa.  The  M3  money  supply  increased  by  27  per  cent  and  released
massive inflationary pressures in the economy.
Through  a  continuous  and  consistent  restrictive  monetary  policy,  the  rate  of
increase in bank credit extension was gradually reduced, and in 1992 and 1993 it dropped below
10 per cent per annum. The rate of increase in the money supply also declined to 8 per cent in
1992 and 7 per cent in 1993. The rate of inflation followed and declined to below 10 per cent for
the first time in 20 years in 1993. For the past four years, the average annual rate of inflation has
now stayed below the 10 per cent level, and last year inflation of 7.4 per cent (average for the
twelve  months)  represented  the  lowest  annual  average  rate  of  inflation  in  South  Africa  for  the
past 24 years.
Ominous  signs  developed  over  the  past  two  years,  however,  with  the  rate  of
increase  in  bank  credit  extension  escalating  again  to  18.7  per  cent  in  June  1996.  The  rate  of
increase  in  the  M3  money  supply  also  rose  to  16  per  cent  in  October  1996,  while  inflation
gradually crept up from a low of 5.5 per cent over the twelve months up to April 1996, to 9.4
per cent over the twelve months up to December 1996.
The current  stimulus  for  inflation  emanated  mainly  from  the  depreciation  of  the
rand last year, but there is a danger that, if not checked at this stage, it could easily be converted
into a  new  cycle  of  a  continuous  rise  in  the  rate  of  inflation.  The  Reserve  Bank  was  therefore
forced once again during the past year to pursue a more restrictive monetary policy that led to an
increase of approximately 3 percentage points in the level of interest rates.
Towards  the  end  of  1996,  the  more  restrictive  policies  began  to  produce  results
when both the rates of increase in bank credit extension and in the money supply slowed down.
Over the twelve months up to December 1996, bank credit extension to the private sector rose by
15.7 per cent, and the M3 money supply by 13.7 per cent, both marginally down from the peaks
established earlier in the year.
Inflation is, however, still creeping upwards and it will take some time before the
full  effect  of  the  depreciation  of  the  rand  will  work  itself  out.  In  the  meantime,  it  is  of  great
importance  that  all  other  inflationary  impulses  in  the  economy,  such  as  excessive  rises  in
government expenditure or real wage rises in excess of productivity increases, and of course, a
continuation of the excessive rates of increase in the monetary aggregates, must be avoided.
The  depreciation  of  the  rand  can  bring  many  benefits  for  economic  growth  and
development,  provided  the  advantages  for  international  competitiveness  will  not  be  dissipated
very quickly by rising costs of production and a rising rate of inflation in the domestic economy.
The  year  1997  is  indeed  a  testing  period  for  the  Reserve  Bank  and  for  the  monetary  policy
applied by the Bank. Should the Bank fail in its efforts to protect the value of the currency at this
stage,  the  goals  set  by  Government  for  economic  reconstruction  and  development,  and  the
implementation of the Government’s Strategy for Growth, Employment and Redistribution will
not be attainable.
BIS Review   24/1997
