Bank of Japan’s  March  review  of  monetary  and  economic  trends  in  Japan
BANK OF JAPAN, MONTHLY ECONOMIC REVIEW, 18/3/97.
A  moderate  economic  recovery  continues  in  Japan  as  private  demand  shows
increasing firmness. With respect to final demand, public-sector investment has decreased while
net exports have continued on an increasing trend. Housing  investment  has  remained  at  a  high
level  and  business  fixed  investment  is  increasing  steadily.  A  moderate  recovery  in  personal
consumption has continued on the whole, while passenger car sales have increased significantly.
Meanwhile,  inventories  on  the  whole  are  at  appropriate  levels.  Reflecting  these  developments,
industrial  production  has  shown  a  steady  increase  and  labor  conditions  on  the  whole  have
continued  to  improve  moderately.  Meanwhile,  prices  have  stopped  declining,  and  monetary
aggregates have continued to grow at 3.0 - 4.0 per cent.
With regard to personal consumption, sales at department stores and supermarkets
are  improving  moderately,  albeit  with  some  fluctuations  owing  to  such  factors  as  weather
conditions.  Outlays  for  travel  have  continued  to  increase.  Sales  of  electrical  appliances  are
increasing  on  the  whole,  although  the  pace  of  growth  in  personal  computers  and  cellular
telephones has decelerated. Passenger car sales have recorded buoyant two-digit growth year-to-
year for five consecutive months since October 1996.
Among  leading  indicators  of  business  fixed  investment,  machinery  orders  have
increased steadily on average. They rose significantly in the fourth quarter 1996 and  showed  a
marginal decline in January 1997 from the average of the fourth quarter. Construction floor area
has also continued to pick up moderately.
With  respect  to  housing  investment,  housing  starts  in  terms  of  the  seasonally-
adjusted annual rate have continued to be at a high level, although they have decreased for three
consecutive  months  owing  to  the  reversal  of  the  rise  in  demand  ahead  of  the  consumption  tax
rate hike.
Regarding  public-sector 
showing
developments in orders have decreased significantly since the end of 1996 compared to the high
level recorded in the previous year, which reflected the large economic stimulus package. As for
actual implementation of public works, with a time lag after orders, the seasonally-adjusted level
of shipments of public-related goods increased until summer 1996, but has been decreasing since
autumn 1996.
investment,  public  works  contracted 
Real  exports  are  on  an  increasing  trend  reflecting  the  moderate  expansion  of
overseas economies and the effects of the yen’s depreciation since summer 1995. Although real
imports are increasing, reflecting such elements as the rise in domestic demand, the recent pace
of increase has been moderate, a reflection of the depreciation of the yen to date. As a result, the
real trade surplus turned to an increase in the second half of 1996. The nominal current-account
surplus, however, is increasing at a much slower pace compared to the real trade surplus owing
to the fluctuations in the income account and the hike in crude oil prices.
Industrial  production  showed  a  significant  increase  in  January  1997  after  it
increased  by  a  seasonally-adjusted  annual  rate  of  over  10  per  cent  in  the  fourth  quarter  1996.
This  increase  was  caused  by  the  rise  in  final  demand,  particularly  in  those  items  conducive  to
production,  such  as  passenger  car  sales,  machinery  investment,  and  net  exports,  under  the
circumstance in which inventories has been at appropriate levels. Although industrial production
BIS Review   32/1997
- 2 -
is expected to decline in February and March, the figure for the first quarter 1997 on average is
also expected to show a steady increase.
Labor  market  conditions  have  continued  to  improve  moderately  on  the  whole.
Although  the  unemployment  rate  remains  at  a  high  level  and  employment  growth  has  been
moderate,  growth  in  nominal  wages  has  accelerated,  reflecting  the  increase  in  production  and
corporate profits. The ratio of job offers to job applications has continued to improve.
With  respect  to  price  developments,  domestic  wholesale  prices  (adjusted  for
seasonal  electricity  rates)  have  stopped  declining,  although  downward  pressures  such  as  from
competition  with  imports  and  technological  innovation  in,  e.g.,  electrical  machinery,  remain
strong. This development has been supported by the yen’s depreciation to date, the hike in crude
oil prices and the moderate improvement in domestic supply and demand conditions. Corporate
service  prices  have  declined,  particularly  in  rents  and  leasing  charges,  but  the  year-to-year
decrease  has  become  smaller.  Consumer  prices  (nationwide,  excluding  perishables)  have
somewhat  exceeded  the  level  of  the  previous  year,  as  the  decline  in  commodity  prices  has
slowed against the background of the yen’s depreciation and the halt in the decline in domestic
wholesale prices.
Growth  in  monetary  aggregates,  measured  in  terms  of  the  year-to-year  growth
rate of M2 + CDs average outstanding, has continued at 3.0 - 4.0 per cent, as corporate demand
for funds has been increasing at a moderate pace.
Regarding money market rates, the overnight call rate (uncollateralized), together
with the 3-month CD rate, has moved at a low level albeit with small fluctuations. Meanwhile,
3-month Euro-yen futures have shown relatively minor movements at around 0.7 - 0.8 per cent
after market’s expectations for higher interest rates receded at a brisk pace between summer and
autumn 1996. In these circumstances, the long-term government bond yield has moved at about
2.3 - 2.4 per cent since the end of November 1996, but has recently declined to reach a record
low of around 2.2 per cent.
With  respect  to  bank  lending  rates,  the  short-term  prime  lending  rate  has
remained  at  a  record  low  level  of  1.625  per  cent  since  September  1995.  The  long-term  prime
lending rate was lowered three times by a total of 0.8 percentage points since September 1996 in
response to developments in the long-term interest rates, and has been moving at the record low
of 2.5 per cent since December 1996. In these circumstances, short-term and long-term average
contracted interest rates on new loans and discounts have moved at near record low levels.
On  the  stock  exchange,  the  Nikkei  225  stock  average  plummeted  temporarily
between  the  end  of  1996  and  the  beginning  of  1997,  reflecting  the  market’s  concerns  about
Japan’s economic outlook and balance-sheet problems. It has since picked up somewhat.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen depreciated to reach ¥124 - 125 against the U.S. dollar
temporarily  in  February  1997  owing  to  such  factors  as  the  interest  rate  differentials  between
Japan  and  the  United  States.  Recently,  the  yen  has  moved  at  around  ¥122  -  123  as  concerns
about the rapid appreciation of the U.S. dollar strengthened somewhat in the market. Meanwhile,
the yen has been appreciating against the deutsche mark since mid-February and recently moved
at around ¥72 - 73.
BIS Review   32/1997
