Prof.  Tietmeyer  expresses  his  praise  for  Dr.  Duisenberg  as  the  committed
champion  of  stability      Text  of  the  laudatory  address  by  the  President  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank,  Prof.  Hans  Tietmeyer,  in  honour  of  Dr. W.F. Duisenberg,  President  of  the
Netherlands Bank and of the Bank for International Settlements, on the occasion of the award of
the  prize  for  the  “European  Banker  of  the  Year  1996”  by  the  Group  of  20+1  in  Frankfurt  on
3/3/97.
I
Being elected in Frankfurt is something rather special. I am not thinking so much
of yesterday’s local elections. After all, for centuries Frankfurt was the venue of the election of
the German King, and later on of the Holy Roman Emperor. Today, however, we are concerned
not with the Emperor, but with the European Banker of the Year. And the votes were cast not by
the seven princely Electors, but by the 21 margraves of the international economic press.
By electing Wim Duisenberg as European Banker of the Year, the Group of 20+1
landed a triple coup.
   They  honoured  the  individual:  Duisenberg,  the  committed  champion  of
stability.
They honoured  the  institution:  The  Netherlands  Bank,  that  stronghold  of
stability.
And  they  honoured  the  nation.  The  Netherlands  is  today,  in  a  sense,  the
model country - the shining example on the continent.
II
While  others  were  still  moaning  about  the  flood  of  economic  challenges,  the
Dutch were already starting to come to terms with them. They weeded out their social  system.
They  increased  the  flexibility  of  their  labour  market;  they  encouraged  part-time  working,
widened wage differentials, seized the opportunities presented by the services sector.
To be sure, even the Netherlands still has some problems to contend with. But the
adjustments are already paying off. Unemployment is falling. Employment is rising. And despite
the  difficult  environment  (and,  by  the  way,  also  despite  almost  identical  exchange  rate
movements to ours), economic growth has turned out to be exceptionally resilient.
The  long-standing  traditions  of  the  Dutch  are  obviously  still  intact.  After  all,  as
seafarers  and  merchants,  they  have  been  obliged  for  centuries  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of
foreign  markets.  That  is  why  today  they  are  a  good  distance  ahead  of  other  countries  in  the
adjustment process.
I know, of course, that many of the Dutch are not very fond of eulogies of their
success.  Too  much  praise  from  outside  might  impede  the  domestic  reform  process.  And  we
know very well that even long-standing “model pupils” have to take care to see that their marks
remain good. But I believe the Dutch are sufficiently self-assured to be able to cope with praise,
too.
It  is  the  ability  to  adjust  flexibly  that  determines  “the  ascent  and  decline  of
nations”, and thus their currencies as well. The example of the Netherlands, in particular, shows
BIS Review   27/1997
- 2 -
that an internally and externally hard currency helps to create jobs. Admittedly, the political will
to effect domestic adjustments, and the social consensus that they should be carried out, are also
essential.
The erstwhile pegging of the guilder to the D-Mark has long since given way to
coexistence  on  equal  terms.  Nowadays  it  is  not  unfair  to  ask  whether  the  guilder  has  not
meanwhile itself become the new anchor currency in Europe. In a sense it has, at any rate jointly
with the D-Mark.
There are two reasons why the Netherlands has been  able  to  assume  this  role  of
the guilder as the “co-anchor” in the ERM:
  First  of  all,  an  economic  reason:  the  markets  see  that  the  Dutch  are  not
dependent  on  importing  their  stability  through  the  exchange  rate  link.
Their “stability culture” stands firmly on its own feet.
And secondly, a political reason: the Netherlands has played a crucial part
in ensuring that the ERM exists at all in its present shape.
This is because a critical situation arose in the summer of 1993, under the impact
of  upheavals  in  the  ERM.  In  the  monetary  “summer  gales”  of  those  days,  it  was  suggested  at
times  that  Germany  should  be  relegated  to  the  status  of  a  spectator.  But  the  Dutch  refused  to
unpeg the guilder from the D-Mark. And the other member states then felt that the ERM was of
no particular interest without those two.
The  unambiguous  stance  of  Dutch  economic  and  monetary  policy  is  paying
dividends. Today Dutch interest rates are below German rates, at both the short and the long end
of the market, despite the slight increase in the last few days. Whether De Nederlandsche Bank
is  already  the  actual  “interest-rate  leader”  in  Europe  is  a  question  I  would  rather  leave  open.
True, we at the Bundesbank know that we cannot, and do not wish to, permit ourselves any signs
of laxity. But for the time being we do not think that the turning point for an upward interest rate
adjustment lies with us. The Dutch success up to now has not been achieved overnight. It is the
upshot of a long and consistent road which Wim Duisenberg has done a great deal to shape.
III
Wim Duisenberg comes from Friesland. What is puzzling is how he comes by the
name  of  Duisen-berg.  As  you  know,  Friesland  is  so  flat  that  you  only  need  to  stand  on  a
newspaper to be able to overlook the entire countryside.
Frisians are supposed to be very attached to their native locality, which is by no
means  the  same  thing  as  being  “provincial”.  And  they  are  said  to  be,  above  all,  indomitable,
which the uninitiated sometimes interpret as “self-willed”. But that doesn’t matter. As you will
know, such a characterisation is not entirely unknown for a Westphalian, either. That is hardly
surprising. After all, our birth-places are only 120 kilometres apart.
There were signs of Wim Duisenberg’s international vocation at an early age. As
a student he was particularly interested in international economic relations. He wrote his doctoral
dissertation on the topic: “The economic consequences of disarmament”. And he worked for the
International Monetary Fund for five years.
BIS Review   27/1997
- 3 -
But then he responded to the call of his homeland. There was nowhere he was not
needed.  Economic  research  needed  him.  He  became  a  professor  of  macroeconomics  in
Amsterdam. The government needed  him.  He  became  the  Minister  of  Finance  at  an  early  age.
Actually, that’s a contradiction in terms.  Youth,  after  all,  tends  to  be  idealistic  and  impetuous,
whereas age tends rather to be distrustful and wary. And a finance minister needs  to  be  highly
distrustful  and  wary.  The  banking  industry  needed  him.  He  joined  a  commercial  bank.  And
finally  the  central  bank  needed  him.  He  became  its  Governor,  which  elicited  from  him  the
following comment: “It’s the best job ... The pity is that there’s only one such job per country.”
Well,  being  Central  Bank  Governor  in  the  Netherlands  is  a  longer-term
occupation. Anyway, I don’t know any other country that has had  only  three  Governors  in  the
past fifty years. His spell as Governor did not begin  very  auspiciously.  Against  his  advice,  the
guilder  was  devalued  against  the  D-Mark  as  part  of  the  major  realignment  within  the  ERM  in
1983. That was due less to economic calculation than to a political oversight. And at that  time
the youthful Governor was unable to get his way in all respects vis-à-vis the politicians. But the
markets  were  resentful  for  a  long  while  afterwards.  In  the  course  of  the  1980s,  however,  the
markets’ confidence was regained. And Wim Duisenberg played a major role in that, too.
Wim  Duisenberg’s  professional  life  has  meanwhile  come  full  circle.  The
Dutchman  who  was  always  interested  in  the  world  at  large  has  held  a  number  of  important
international offices. For instance, he is now, for the second time, Chairman of the Board of the
BIS  in  Basle.  He  is  also  the  incoming  EMI  President;  specifically,  in  Frankfurt.  (I  know  he
would have been only too glad to be EMI President in Amsterdam. But there his chances would
certainly  have  been  lower.)  The  newspaper  Börsenzeitung  wrote:  “The  new  lion-tamer  for  the
EMI”.  And  that  would  seem  to  make  him  the  obvious  candidate  for  the  office  of  the  future
President of the European Central Bank.
IV
The boat of European monetary policy  needs  a  shrewd  and  experienced  captain.
But, Wim, beware of the song of the sirens. In Europe, as you know, there is an island. There,
some observers are loudly singing the praises of a specific financial culture which is claimed to
be  the  only  culture  for  the  future.  But  that  culture  differs  in  some  respects  from  continental
financial culture. All I can say on that score is: Wim, stay on the continent!
Continental  (or  should  I  say:  German)  financial  culture  is  not  as  out-dated  as
some people make out. Long-termism is not to be equated with immobility or lack of flexibility.
To be sure, the continent needs more flexibility - in the area of social security and on the labour
market  alike.  But  our  financial  sector  is  already  flexible.  After  all,  we  do  not  want  to  mix  up
flexibility  with  volatility.  It  may  well  be  the  case  that  short-termism  sometimes  makes  asset
prices “more flexible”.
But what matters is the financial sector’s capacity to come to terms with changed
requirements  in  the  economy.  Long-  termism  is  certainly  no  obstacle  to  that.  Long-termism
makes  the  seas  less  rough.  That  helps  the  central  bank  to  stay  on  course  and  set  the  sails
properly.  And  one  day  the  European  Central  Bank  will  have  to  do  just  that.  The  expectations
pinned on the courage and navigational skill of the future ECB Governing Council are high.
But  I  am  quite  sure  that,  with  you  as  Captain,  the  ECB  crew  will  manage  to
manoeuvre  the  euro  to  an  anchorage  in  the  safe  haven  of  monetary  stability.  In  Germany  the
politicians  are  vowing  that  the  euro  will  be  as  stable  as  the  D-Mark  has  been.  Actually,  the
BIS Review   27/1997
- 4 -
guilder  ought  to  be  the  reference  point.  For  I  can  tell  you:  the  German  people  will  accept  the
euro  only  if  it  is  every  bit  as  stable  as  the  guilder.  The  fact  that  there  has  long  been  a  virtual
monetary union between our two countries owes much to you. What we envisage is just such a
stable monetary union on a larger scale.
I am sure that that is your objective, too. We Governors of the other central banks
will  give  you  every  assistance  when  you  assume  the  presidency  of  the  EMI  in  a  few  months’
time. I am convinced that you will prove a worthy successor to Alexandre Lamfalussy. And he,
after all, has set a high standard.
Wim, my good friend, I should like to congratulate you sincerely and cordially on
having been elected European Banker of the Year 1996. Seen from the Frankfurt perspective, all
I can add is: Frankfurt is such an interesting and attractive city that I would wish that you may
remain here for longer than some 18 months, not only as European Banker of the Year 1996, but
as central banker of Europe.
BIS Review   27/1997
