Mr.  Bäckström  gives  a  broadbrush  picture  of  the  Swedish  economy  and
monetary policy   Speech by the Governor of the Bank of Sweden, Mr. Urban Bäckström, held
at seminars before the Midland Bank and Merrill Lynch, respectively, in New York on 30/4/97.
Economic developments in recent years
In the past few years Swedish economic policy has achieved tangible results.
  By  an  improvement  in  credibility,  important  progress  has  been  made
towards  greater  economic  stability.  Favourable  economic  growth  in
Sweden has been combined with a rate of  inflation  that  is  the  lowest  for
several decades.
There  is  broad  political  agreement  in  Sweden  on  the  consolidation  of
government  finance.  This  is  manifested  in  the  so  called    convergence
programme that aims  to  eliminate  the  budget  deficit  not  later  than  1998.
The  budget  reinforcements  which  the  Government  and  the  Riksdag
(Sweden’s parliament) have undertaken in recent years are extensive. The
six-monthly  monitoring  arrangement  provides  a  means  of  ensuring  that
government finance is developing as planned. Moreover, in the Economic
Bill  this  spring  the  Government  states  that  the  long-term  target  for  the
general Government budget is a surplus of 2 per cent of GDP as a cyclical
average. The gradual adjustment to this goal is also specified.
The  general  government  financial  balance  has  been  strengthened  from  -
12.3 per cent of GDP in 1993 to -2.5 per cent in 1996. This is a substantial
improvement. The Government calculates that in 1997 the  deficit  will  be
2.1 per cent and that the target of eliminating it in 1998 will be achieved.
• With  the  improved  confidence  in  budget  and  monetary  policy,  together
with the tighter interest rate policy from the second half of 1994 up to the
end  of  1995,  it  has  been  possible  to  check  the  earlier  inflationary
tendencies and  bring  inflation  expectations  down  appreciably.  Sweden  is
now  among  the  countries  in  Europe  with  the  lowest  inflation  rate
regardless of which measure one uses. This, in turn, paved the way for a
gradual lowering of our main instrumental rate - the repo rate - in 1996.
• What  used  to  be  an  almost  chronic  deficit  on  current  account  has  now
been turned into a substantial surplus. This is reducing Sweden’s external
debt, which also contributes to greater financial stability.
 Many  structural  measures  have  been  implemented  since  the  late  1980s.
There are signs that, together with economic policy’s focus on stability,
this has reduced the economy’s inflation propensity and raised potential
output.
Against  this  background,  the  direction  of  Sweden’s  economic  policy  contrasts
sharply  with  the  unstable,  inflationary  path  we  experienced  in  the  1970s  and  ’80s  and  which
contributed to the recession in the early ’90s, which was the worst for over sixty years.
BIS Review   47/1997
A new direction in economic policy
- 2 -
The 1970s and ’80s illustrate how a period of inflation creates an atmosphere of
uncertainty  and  instability,  with  a  speculative  climate  and  “short-termism”  in  economic
decisions. Slowly but surely, production’s long-term conditions deteriorate.
It was partly in the light of  such  experiences  that  Swedish  economic  policy  was
realigned  at  the  turn  of  the  1980s.  Since  then,  the  focus  on  price  stability  has  gained  broad
support in our society, including the political parties.
However,  in  view  of  the  severe  economic  problems  in  the  early  1990s,  with
inflation expectations based on our  historical  record  and  a  massive  budget  deficit,  it  took  time
for  the  new  direction  of  economic  policy  to  acquire  credibility.  This  has  been  evident,  for
instance, in the periods of interest and exchange rate unrest. Financial market trends particularly
in the longer run can be regarded as an indicator of  the  prevailing  degree  of  confidence  in  the
determination and ability to conduct an economic policy that is consistent and oriented towards
stability.
With  the  free  movement  of  capital  and  the  globalisation  of  financial  markets,
economic  policy  decision-makers  need  to  be  highly  disciplined.  In  the  light  of  our  experience
since the policy realignment at the turn of the ’80s, this is a fact that is widely recognised today
in Sweden. Turning the clock back would not be feasible.
Experience from other countries, where the policy realignment had already  been
made in the early 1980s, indicates that the creation of confidence in a low inflation regime takes
time and a lot of hard work. But it also shows that after  a  while,  such  a  process  does  yield  its
reward in the form of low interest rates, a stable currency and ultimately a favourable economic
development.
The price stability target
Following  the  move  to  a  flexible  exchange  rate,  monetary  policy  in  Sweden  is
directed at a quantified inflation target. In this it resembles the situation for monetary policy in
Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the United Kingdom, where inflation targets are also used.
In Sweden the target is formulated as being to limit the increase in the consumer
price  index  to  2  per  cent.  This  target  is  to  be  assessed,  not  in  terms  of  isolated  twelve-month
change  figures  but  in  a  somewhat  longer,  annual,  perspective.  As    monetary  policy  obviously
cannot control price developments exactly, the target is accompanied by a tolerance interval of
±1  percentage  point.  This  tolerance  interval  also  serves  to  absorb  temporary  deviations  from
trend inflation. Such deviations may arise, for instance, from political decisions to alter indirect
taxes and subsidies, changes in interest rates as well as from international price shocks.
For March 1997 the consumer price index showed a twelve-month fall of 0.4 per
cent. However,  this  figure  was  to  a  large  extent  influenced  by  last  year’s  sharp  repo  rate  cuts.
When home owners renew mortgage loans at lower interest rates we get a transitory downward
effect on inflation.
It  is  important  to  distinguish  between  CPI  changes  and  underlying  inflation.
Transitory effects, for example changes in interest rates or in indirect taxes and subsidies, may
cause  the  general  price  level  to  jump  up  and  down.  In  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  it  is
BIS Review   47/1997
- 3 -
therefore  important  to  keep  an  eye  on  underlying  inflation;  the  transitory  effects  are  of
secondary  significance  as  long  as  they  do  not  affect  inflation  expectations  and  thereby  trend
inflation.
Given  the  time  lag  that  applies  to  monetary  policy,  a  central  bank  that  targets
inflation has to monitor the various factors which determine inflation one to two years ahead.
In  a  simple  analysis  of  inflation’s  determinants  one  can  start  from  the  familiar
augmented  Phillips  curve.  The  rate  of  inflation  is  determined  by  two  factors:  the  relationship
between supply and demand in the economy - the output gap - and inflation’s expected rate.
Note, however, that while the output gap is a useful starting point for an inflation
analysis, there is no simple way of measuring it. This makes it necessary to go into more detail
and study a variety of indicators in order to analyse any tensions between  demand  and  supply.
Still, the output gap is a suitable starting point for my present purpose.
The simple model tells us that when the output gap is closed, inflation is constant
and equal to the expected rate. This means that, with normal capacity utilisation and given a low
level of inflation expectations, actual GDP can follow potential output. In such a situation some
form of external shock is needed to shift inflation upwards or downwards. This can mean either
that  production  falls  below  or  rises  above  the  level  for  normal  capacity  utilisation  or  that
inflation expectations move up or down. The latter case is ultimately a matter of confidence in
economic policy’s consistency and its future reactions.
The ability of monetary policy to influence inflation has to do with the impact of
the  instrumental  rate  on  the  path  of  GDP  and  thereby  on  the  degree  of  capacity  utilisation,
together with its  effect  on  inflation  expectations.  In  practice  a  period  of  restricted  demand  has
frequently  been  necessary  for  the  central  bank  to  show  that  expectations  of  high  inflation  are
unfounded. Besides monetary policy, expectations are affected by other factors. One of these is
the budget. Unsustainably large budget deficits are liable to undermine confidence in long-term
price stability.
Our  inflation  forecast  serves  as  a  foundation  for  decisions  about  monetary
conditions. If monetary policy is directed at stabilising inflation at 2 per cent, it will over time
help to stabilise demand so that this is in line with the economy’s available capacity.
In  order  to  clarify  our  line  of  reasoning  and  our  inflation  assessments,  the
Riksbank  publishes  an  inflation  report  four  times  a  year.  A  range  of  indicators  is  reviewed  in
these reports, accompanied by a discussion of risks and opportunities in the field of inflation.
The present situation
In the latest inflation report, published this March, GDP growth in 1997 and 1998
was  expected  to  be  around  2  and  3  per  cent,  respectively.  It  was  also  argued  that  sizeable
capacity  restrictions  should  not  arise  in  the  course  of  the  period.  Given  that,  and  inflation
expectations  being  low,  underlying  domestic  inflation  (measured  with  the  CPI  excluding
transitory effects on inflation) in the coming two years was put at between 1.5 and 2 per cent.
As  we  all  know,  to  forecast  inflation  is  a  complicated  task.  In  view  of  the
shortcomings in such estimates, it is more a matter of assessing the balance of risks. Our latest
BIS Review   47/1997
- 4 -
inflation  report  therefore  includes  a  discussion  of  two  alternatives  in  which  future  inflation
might be either lower or higher than in the main scenario.
One alternative is that inflation could be lower than in the main scenario, mainly
if private consumption were to be weak. The other envisages the opposite - higher inflation - on
account of a weaker exchange rate that stimulates a stronger growth of exports and GDP, leading
to increased inflationary pressure.
What are the economic tendencies that have appeared during the last months?
During winter there were signs of a slowdown in manufacturing. The  December
survey from the National Institute of Economic Research showed an unchanged inflow of orders
and  expectations  of  subdued  production.  The  order  statistics  from  Statistics  Sweden,  which
fluctuate fairly widely from month  to  month,  gave  the  impression  of  relatively  weak  orders  in
the fourth quarter of 1996. In December and January, however, the order inflow has picked up
and more recent survey data likewise paint a brighter picture of activity in manufacturing. The
improvement mainly applies to production for export but even the domestic market is somewhat
optimistic  about  the  future.  Against  this  background,  exports  and  industrial  production  could
develop  somewhat  better  than  expected  earlier.  The  changes  are  not  very  large  but  to  date
various  indicators,  including  the  continued  undervaluation  of  the  krona,  do  point  in  the  same
direction.
In the case of private consumption, the indicators to date are not uniform. On the
one  hand,  in  the  first  three  months  of  1997  the  number  of  new  car  registrations  for  private
individuals  has  risen  in  annual  terms  by  more  than  60  per  cent,  albeit  from  a  low  level.
Moreover, the survey of household purchasing plans by Statistics Sweden shows that  since  the
autumn, household’s economic expectations have become more optimistic. The development of
monetary  aggregates  such  as  M0  is  also  an  indication  of  rising  private  consumption.  On  the
other  hand,  the  lower  than  expected  savings  ratio  in  1996  may  increase  uncertainty  regarding
possible  increases  of  private  consumption  in  1997  and  1998.  Another  indicator  of  a  slower
increase in private consumption could be the weak labour market.
In  summary  it  can  be  said  that,  on  the  one  hand,  exports  seem  to  be  doing
somewhat better than expected, though the differences are not all that great. On the other hand,
the signals about private consumption point either to agreement with the main scenario  or  to  a
somewhat weaker course.
The  conclusion  in  the  latest  inflation  report  was  that  monetary  policy  is  well
balanced. That conclusion still holds true.
BIS Review   47/1997
