Mr.  Chen  discusses  monetary  relations  between  China  and  Hong  Kong
Speech by the Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, Mr. Chen Yuan, at the Bank of
England Seminar held in London on 10/9/96.
INTRODUCTION
In  less  than  three  hundred  days,  China  will  resume  the  exercise  of  sovereignty
over Hong Kong. Given Hong Kong’s role as an international financial centre, it is natural  for
the  international  investment  community  to  be  interested  in  the  future  of  Hong  Kong.  I  am
grateful  to  Governor  George  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  share  with  this  distinguished
audience the Chinese Government’s policy on the monetary relationship  between  the  mainland
of China and Hong Kong after 1997.
By  way  of  introduction,  let  me  first  explain  the  origin  of  the  basic  principle  of
“one  country,  two  systems”,  which  forms  the  backbone  of  China’s  policy  towards  the  Hong
Kong Special Administrative Region as from 1 July 1997. This will  help  people  to  understand
why China is so committed to implementing this very important principle in Hong Kong.
THE “ONE COUNTRY, TWO SYSTEMS” PRINCIPLE
What  does  “one  country,  two  systems”  mean?  It  means  that  after  1997,  the
socialist  system  and  policies  shall  not  be  practised  in  the  Hong  Kong  Special  Administrative
Region, and the previous capitalist system and way of life shall remain unchanged for 50 years.
This  principle  was  not  a  compromise  solution  reached  in  the  Sino-British
negotiations for political expedience. It was not even an idea floated by the British side. It was in
fact  a  paramount  guiding  principle  adopted  by  the  Chinese  Government  for  advancing  the
unification  of  China.  The  principle  was  also  the  outcome  of  intense  research  by  the  Chinese
Government  on  what  factors  contributed  to  the  economic  success  and  stability  of  Hong  Kong
and how they could be preserved beyond 1997. We are convinced that this principle would serve
not only China’s long-term national interest but also that of Hong Kong.
It  was  against  this  background  that  the  Chinese  Government  put  forward  in  the
negotiations the concept of “One Country, Two Systems” and the guiding principles. These were
subsequently  incorporated  in  the  Sino-British  Joint  Declaration  in  1984  and  then  in  the  Basic
Law promulgated by our National People’s Congress in 1990. I should add that the principle of
“one  country,  two  systems”  as  a  fundamental  policy  for  the  unification  and  development  of
China  has  been  written  into  our  country’s  constitution  and  become  a  long-term  irreversible
national policy. The Sino-British Joint Declaration is a treaty registered with the United Nations.
The Chinese Government is committed to implementing fully and faithfully the provisions of the
Joint Declaration and the Basic Law.
My  second  point  is  that  notwithstanding  our  commitment,  there  is  no  lack  of
sceptics  who  doubt  that  the  Chinese  Government  would  abide  by  the  Basic  Law  and  fulfil  its
commitments after 1997. This brings to mind those sceptics who doubted China’s commitment
to the open door policy and the economic reform which China initiated in late 1979. Such critics
thought  that  the  problems  faced  by  China  in  the  reform  process  were  so  huge  that  we  were
doomed to fail. They also doubted how our economic reform could square with China’s socialist
economy. Today, you and I can both see that these critics have been proven wrong.
BIS Review   12/1997
- 2 -
Between 1979 and 1995, China’s GDP has increased by an average of 9.9% every
year  and  the  standard  of  living  has  improved  significantly.  The  economic  and  monetary
conditions  and  the  legal  and  institutional  reform  of  our  financial  sector  have  made  progress
beyond the expectations of  many.  China’s  foreign  reserves  reached  a  record  high  of  US$  90.7
billion in early August 1996.
The  critics  are  right  in  pointing  out  that  China  is  a  vast  country,  with  a  large
population of over 1.2 billion people. It is natural that in the implementation of our reform we
could run  into  difficulties  of  one  sort  or  another.  At  times  we  need  to  adjust  our  pace  a  bit  to
resolve those problems but there is no question that China is firmly resolved to continuing with
economic  reform.  Equally,  China  remains  firmly  and  totally  committed  to  maintaining  the
prosperity  and  stability  of  Hong  Kong,  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Joint
Declaration  and  the  Basic  Law.  I  am  sure  that  the  facts  and  events  will  demonstrate  that  the
sceptics will once again be proven to be wrong.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  now  proceed  to  outline  first  the  legal  and  policy
framework and then the seven basic principles governing the monetary relationship between the
mainland  of  China  and  Hong  Kong.  Finally,  I  will  describe  China’s  policy  on  Hong  Kong’s
participation in international and regional financial institutions and forums.
THE LEGAL AND POLICY FRAMEWORK
According  to  the  Joint  Declaration  and  the  Basic  Law,  Hong  Kong  will  enjoy
autonomy in all areas other than foreign affairs and defence matters. The key provisions on the
monetary and financial sides provide that:
The Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region shall provide
an  appropriate  economic  and  legal  environment  for  the  maintenance  of  its  status  as  an
international  financial  centre.  Hong  Kong  shall,  on  its  own,  formulate  monetary  and  financial
policies,  safeguard  the  free  operation  of  financial  business  and  financial  markets,  and  regulate
and supervise financial activities in accordance with the law.
The Hong Kong dollar, as the only legal tender in Hong Kong, shall continue to
circulate, and the existing currency issue mechanism shall continue. The Hong Kong dollar shall
remain  freely  convertible,  with  free  flow  of  capital  and  no  exchange  controls.  The  Exchange
Fund,  which  holds  Hong  Kong’s  foreign  reserves,  shall  be  managed  and  controlled  by  the
Government  of  the  Hong  Kong  Special  Administrative  Region,  primarily  for  regulating  the
exchange value of the Hong Kong dollar.
The  above  provisions  form  the  foundation  for  defining  and  establishing  the
monetary  relationship  between  the  mainland  and  Hong  Kong  under  the  principle  of  “one
country, two systems”. Under these provisions, this relationship can be best summarised as one
country,  two  currencies,  two  monetary  systems  and  two  monetary  authorities,  under  two
different social and economic systems within a sovereign state.
SEVEN  PRINCIPLES  GOVERNING  THE  MONETARY  RELATIONSHIP  BETWEEN  THE
MAINLAND AND HONG KONG
I  will  now  set  out  the  seven  principles  governing  the  monetary  relationship
between the mainland of China and Hong Kong.
BIS Review   12/1997
- 3 -
The  first  principle  concerns  the  relationship  between  the  two  currencies  and
between the two monetary systems.
According to the Basic Law, Hong Kong will continue to maintain its own system
of currency issuance and management after 1997. The Hong Kong dollar and the renminbi will
circulate  as  legal  tender  in  Hong  Kong  and  the  mainland  respectively.  The  Hong  Kong  dollar
will be treated as a foreign currency in the mainland. Likewise, the renminbi will be treated as a
foreign currency in Hong Kong.
The  three  note-issuing  banks  in  Hong  Kong  will  continue  to  issue  Hong  Kong
dollar bank notes, with 100% backing by US dollars under the linked exchange rate system. The
currency in circulation in Hong Kong is in fact backed over five times by foreign reserves. Here
I would like to stress that China supports Hong Kong’s commitment to the maintenance of the
linked exchange rate system, which has served Hong Kong well by providing monetary stability
since its introduction in 1983.
Corresponding to the two currencies will be two monetary systems. They possess
their  own  characteristics,  reflecting  the  differences  between  the  two  economies.  The  two
monetary systems are of equal importance to China in its reform and liberalisation. One does not
precede or be subsidiary to the other. They will operate in a mutually independent manner.
The  second  principle  relates  to  the  relationship  between  the  two  monetary
authorities. It follows from the two mutually independent monetary systems of the mainland and
Hong  Kong  that  the  two  monetary  authorities  will  also  be  mutually  independent.  The  Hong
Kong  Monetary  Authority  will  be  accountable  solely  to  the  Hong  Kong  government.  The
People’s Bank of China will not take the place of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority and will
not set up any office there.
As Hong Kong and the mainland develop increasingly close economic ties in both
trade  and  investment,  close  co-operation  between  the  two  monetary  authorities  becomes  even
more  important.  The  two  monetary  authorities  must,  therefore,  strengthen  further  the  present
sound  co-operation  of  central  banking  functions,  including  monetary  management,  banking
supervision and the development of the financial infrastructure.
The third principle concerns co-operation in prudential supervision. According to
the  Basic  Law,  the  Hong  Kong  government  will  continue  to  supervise  financial  institutions  in
Hong Kong, including financial institutions from the mainland. Supervision will continue to be
undertaken in accordance with international rules and practices.
Notwithstanding different business practices in the mainland and Hong Kong, we
have  reached  consensus  on  licensing  procedures  and  supervision  of  each  other’s  financial
institutions. It has been agreed that :
Financial institutions based in the mainland and Hong Kong setting up offices in
each other’s territory shall be approved on the same basis as foreign financial  institutions.  The
mainland  offices  of  Hong  Kong-based  financial  institutions  shall  continue  to  enjoy  the  same
preferential treatment in the mainland as other foreign financial institutions. mainland financial
institutions in Hong Kong shall not enjoy any privileges. They shall abide by the law of  Hong
Kong and be regulated by the relevant supervisory authorities in Hong Kong.
BIS Review   12/1997
- 4 -
This arm’s length treatment will certainly help to underscore the implementation
of the “one country, two systems” principle.
The fourth principle is that the People’s Bank of China will support the currency
stability  of  Hong  Kong.  On  behalf  of  the  PBOC,  I  have  early  this  year  signed  a  bilateral
agreement  with  the  HKMA  on  the  repurchase  of  US  treasury  paper.  We  are  prepared  to  offer
liquidity  support  to  the  HKMA  for  the  purpose  of  stabilising  the  exchange  rate  of  the  Hong
Kong dollar. We also stand ready to use our foreign reserves to support the Hong Kong dollar, if
necessary.
However,  I  must  point  out  that  under  no  circumstances  will  China  draw  on  or
resort  to  Hong  Kong’s  Exchange  Fund  or  other  assets  in  any  way  and  for  any  reason.  I
mentioned  earlier  that  the  Basic  Law  states  that  the  Exchange  Fund  shall  be  managed  and
controlled  by  the  Hong  Kong  government.  It  is  also  stated  that  the  financial  revenues  of  the
Hong  Kong  Special  Administrative  Region  shall  be  used  exclusively  for  its  own  purposes.  In
addition,  the  Basic  Law  stipulates  that  the  Chinese  Government  shall  not  levy  taxes  in  Hong
Kong. These triple safeguards are evidence that  China  does  not  have  its  eyes  on  siphoning  off
the resources of Hong Kong.
The  fifth  principle  relates  to  the  treatment  of  financial  business  between  China
and Hong Kong. After 1997, all financial business between the two places will be conducted in
accordance with the rules and practices of international financial activities. Claims and liabilities
between banks and companies from the mainland and those  in  Hong  Kong  will  continue  to  be
regarded as external claims and liabilities. When raising funds  in  Hong  Kong,  Chinese  entities
will  have  equal  treatment  as  other  international  and  local  market  participants,  without  any
special privileges. Disputes relating to contracts between banks and companies of the mainland
and  those  of  Hong  Kong  shall  be  handled  in  accordance  with  international  practice.  Where
China’s  Arbitration  Law  and  other  relevant  laws  and  regulations  are  applied,  the  provisions
relating to arbitration involving foreign parties will apply.
The  sixth  principle  is  about  the  standing  of  mainland  financial  institutions  in
Hong Kong. As discussed earlier, mainland financial  institutions  in  Hong  Kong  must  abide  by
the law of Hong Kong and be regulated by relevant regulatory authorities there. I would like to
stress  that  the  Bank  of  China  group,  though  being  one  of  the  three  note-issuing  banks  and  a
leading commercial bank in Hong Kong, shall not be treated more favourably than other banks.
It shall not carry out any activities beyond the role of a commercial bank.
The  seventh  principle  is  on  the  complementarity  between  Shanghai  and  Hong
Kong.  As  you  know,  Shanghai  used  to  be  China’s  financial  centre.  With  China’s  deepening
reforms  and  open-door  policy,  Shanghai  is  becoming  a  vibrant  city  with  tremendous  potential
for  further  development.  To  a  certain  extent,  Shanghai  has  met  the  conditions  for  reviving
herself as a financial centre. While there are concerns as to whether Shanghai will replace Hong
Kong, I would like to emphasise that these are  groundless  speculations  because  the  Basic  Law
has  already  stipulated  that  Hong  Kong  shall  maintain  its  status  as  an  international  financial
centre.
We are of the view that Hong Kong and Shanghai will have a complementary and
mutually  reinforcing  relationship.  In  the  short  run,  and  at  least  before  the  renminbi  becomes
fully convertible, it will not be possible for Shanghai to become an international financial centre.
Given the size of China’s economy, there is plenty of room for more than one financial centre.
BIS Review   12/1997
- 5 -
Hong  Kong  and  Shanghai  will  likely  become  two  complementary  and  mutually  reinforcing
financial centres that will each develop with its own characteristics.
HONG KONG IN INTERNATIONAL MONETARY RELATIONS
Apart  from  these  seven  principles,  it  is  also  important  for  Hong  Kong  as  an
international  financial  centre  to  continue  to  develop  its  international  monetary  relations  and
participate  in  the  activities  of  international  and  regional  financial  institutions,  central  bank
forums etc.
There  are  therefore  provisions  in  the  Joint  Declaration  and  the  Basic  Law  that
Hong  Kong  may,  on  its  own,  maintain  and  develop  financial  relations  and  conclude  and
implement  agreements  with  other  countries,  regions  and  relevant  international  organisations,
using the name of “Hong Kong, China”.
Some international financial organisations restrict their membership to sovereign
states. In those cases, where negotiations are held on matters involving Hong Kong, the Chinese
Government would normally consult Hong Kong and include its representatives in the Chinese
delegation.  When  entering  into  international  financial  agreements  which  may  involve  Hong
Kong, the Chinese government will first seek the views of Hong Kong before deciding whether
such agreements will apply to it.
Taken  together,  these  provisions  will  enable  Hong  Kong  to  continue  and  also
develop its current international monetary relationship.
PROSPECTS FOR HONG KONG AFTER 1997
I believe Hong Kong will remain prosperous and stable after 1997. Why? This is
because:
First,  the  strong  economic  fundamentals  of  Hong  Kong  and  the  entrepreneurial
and management skills of the people of Hong Kong are the basis for its continued prosperity and
stability.
Secondly,  the  Basic  Law  has  provided  a  legal  safeguard  for  the  maintenance  of
the prosperity and stability of Hong Kong.
Thirdly,  the  economic  development  of  the  mainland  has  created  excellent
conditions for Hong Kong’s continued prosperity and stability. As pointed out by China’s Vice-
Premier  Zhu  Rongji  at  his  meeting  on  29  May  this  year  with  senior  officials  of  four  main
financial  regulators  and  institutions  from  Hong  Kong  including  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority - China is confident in Hong Kong’s maintaining prosperity and stability and its status
as an international financial centre after 1997 because we have full confidence in the economic
development of China.
As  Hong  Kong  will  continue  its  role  as  an  international  financial  centre,  it  will
become the most important funding centre for  China  and  very  likely  for  the  Asian  region  as  a
whole.  With  the  ongoing  reform  and  open-door  policy,  the  mainland  of  China  has  achieved
sustained  and  strong  economic  growth.  Our  target  for  economic  growth  in  1996  is  8%  but  it
could exceed 9%. Inflation should be within the range of 7 to 8% for 1996.
BIS Review   12/1997
- 6 -
The  mainland  of  China’s  growth  will  obviously  benefit  Hong  Kong’s  economy
tremendously  as  we  are  its  largest  trading  partner.  The  mainland  of  China  is  also  one  of  the
leading investors in Hong Kong, with total investment reaching US$ 25 billion last year. At the
same  time,  Hong  Kong  has  also  contributed  greatly  to  the  mainland  of  China’s  reform  and
modernisation, both in terms of investment and know-how. Hong Kong is the largest investor in
the mainland. Total cumulative direct investment from Hong Kong has now reached  US$  78.6
billion, accounting for 58% of total foreign direct investment. In 1995 alone, about half  of  the
foreign direct investment in the mainland came from Hong Kong, which amounted to some US$
20 billion. Also, for the 23 Chinese companies listed on overseas stock markets,  the  trading  of
such  overseas  stocks  is  most  active  in  Hong  Kong.  Out  of  the  23  companies,  21  had  their
primary listing in Hong Kong.
As China continues with its financial and economic reforms, Hong Kong’s role as
a  financial  centre  for  China  will  become  even  more  important.  It  is  therefore  vital  that  Hong
Kong remain the vibrant financial centre with its own economic system that we know now. We
certainly would not do anything which would jeopardise Hong Kong’s prospects.
To conclude, I have no doubt that Hong Kong will continue to do well after 1997 as it has done
in  the  past  three  decades  during  which  Hong  Kong  survived  numerous  shocks  and  market
turbulence. History has shown that Hong Kong has been extremely  resilient  to  external  shocks
and  was  able  to  regain  its  vitality  and  competitiveness  through  swift  internal  adjustments.
Investors who had the foresight and wisdom of capitalising on the opportunities in Hong Kong
have done well and will be able to continue to share in the prosperity of Hong Kong.
Ladies and gentlemen, 1997 is not a time when Hong Kong will need a miracle in
order  to  survive  the  transition.  I  hope  you  will  also  come  to  the  conclusion  that  China,
particularly  Hong  Kong,  offers  tremendous  business  potential  for  investors,  both  local  and
overseas.
BIS Review   12/1997
