Dr. Duisenberg discusses strategies for monetary policy in EMU   Address by
Dr. W.F.  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank  and  of  the  Bank  for  International
Settlements, on the  occasion  of  the  Board  meeting  of  the  Banking  Federation  of  the  European
Union held in Maastricht on 20-21/3/97.
It is with great pleasure that I am addressing you on the European Economic and
Monetary  Union  here  in  Maastricht  today,  the  very  location  where  that  Union  was  pieced
together. It was here that we made a concerted effort some five years ago to lay the foundations
for the economic and monetary stability of Europe in the 21st century. Since then we have been
busily  building  on  these  foundations  with  the  result  that  we  now  have  the  outlines  of  the
European  Central  Bank.  The  framework  for  monetary  policy  contains  three  main  elements:  its
primary  objective,  strategy  and  instruments.  Where  the  first  is  concerned,  there  can  be  no
misunderstanding: the Maastricht Treaty prescribes that the overriding objective of ECB policy
shall  be  price  stability.  Knowing  you  all  to  be  distinguished  financial  and  monetary  experts,  I
need  hardly  point  out  to  you  that  to  attain  this  objective,  strategy  must  be  transparent  and
credible. It is not for nothing that in recent months this issue has been figuring prominently on
the  agenda  of  the  European  Monetary  Institute,  the  precursor  of  the  ECB.  Let  me  give  you  a
brief impression of the consultations held there.
As soon as it has been decided in early 1998 which countries are  to  take  part  in
EMU, the ECB will decide what monetary strategy to pursue. Generally speaking, there are two
aspects  to  such  a  strategy:  internal  decision-making  within  the  central  bank  and,  equally
important, the presentation of its measures to the outside world. In fact both aspects hinge on the
question which variables should underlie the central banks interest rate policy and what weight
should be assigned to each of these variables. After all, monetary policy  is  complicated  by  the
fact that inflation  reacts  to  the  central  bank’s  interest  rate  decisions  with  long  and  varied  lags.
Actual inflation rates are therefore not cut out to be a gauge of monetary conditions. The central
bank  should  focus  on  information  which  provides  insight  into  future  inflation,  and  possibly
formulate  a  number  of  intermediate  objectives,  the  so-termed  intermediate  target  variables:  in
Europe today the money supply and the exchange rate often figure as such. The exchange rate in
particular  plays  a  major  role  in  open  economies,  where  inflation  is  due  largely  to  external
factors. However, EMU will be a large and relatively closed area, where inflation is determined
mainly  by  internal  developments.  There  is  therefore  no  question  of  the  ECB  conducting  an
active exchange rate policy vis-à-vis the dollar or the yen. That is why I will be discussing only
two  possible  strategies  for  future  monetary  policy  in  Europe:  monetary  targeting,  such  as  that
pursued  by  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  for  years  already,  and  direct  inflation  targeting,  the
strategy applied by the Bank of England.
Monetary  targeting  is  underlain  by  the  notion  that  in  the  medium  to  long  term
inflation  is  invariably  caused  by  excessive  money  growth.  In  this  line  of  thinking,  the  central
bank  can  attain  its  objective  of  price  stability  simply  by  keeping  the  expansion  of  the  money
supply under control. That does not mean to say that the central bank will focus exclusively on
monetary  growth.  Other  aggregates  containing  information  about  inflationary  prospects,
especially in the near future, will be monitored as well. These factors act notably as “qualifiers”,
warning  policy-makers  against  relying  excessively  on  their  automatic  pilot.  Apart  from  rules,
this strategy therefore also provides for a certain measure of flexibility. In this context, I wish to
dissociate  myself  emphatically  from  those  who  are  wont  to  accuse  my  colleagues  at  the
Bundesbank of “rigidity” and “monetary dogmatism”. The necessary flexibility is  coupled  to  a
high  degree  of  transparency  as  the  central  bank  explains  to  the  general  public  how  it  has
BIS Review   32/1997
- 2 -
determined its monetary target for the coming period, and goes to great lengths retrospectively
to  set  out  the  reasons  for  any  deviations  from  that  target.  By  stressing  its  responsibility  for
monetary conditions, the central bank subjects itself to a certain discipline.
For  the  central  bank  to  be  able  to  live  up  to  this  responsibility,  the  monetary
aggregate  to  be  chosen  should  meet  three  requirements.  First  of  all,  it  should  be  sufficiently
controllable. Generally speaking, an increase in the short-term interest rate will eventually lead
to  a  decrease  of  the  money  supply.  I  deliberately  say  “generally  speaking”  because  monetary
policy-makers  remember  only  too  well  what  happened  after  German  unification,  when  the
reverse  effect  arose  at  first.  Fortunately  we  now  also  know  that  such  episodes  may  be  short-
lived. Secondly, there must be a sufficiently stable long-term relationship  between  the  demand
for money and its determinants, such as prices, income, interest rates and wealth. I will go into
this in more detail later on. In the third place, the monetary aggregate needs to have predictive
powers  as  to  future  inflation.  If  it  does,  money  growth  can  be  a  useful  indicator  of  future
inflation.
In  the  1980s,  monetary  targeting  was  abandoned  by  several  industrialised
countries notably on the grounds that national money demand was becoming unstable as a result
of  financial  innovations.  It  had  thus  become  difficult  to  assess  to  what  extent  changes  in
monetary  growth  would  be  translated  into  higher  prices.  The  central  banks  of  some  of  these
countries  have  meanwhile  switched  to  a  strategy  aimed  directly  at  the  attainment  of  price
stability. Their switch was, incidentally, often prompted by the implicit desire of policy-makers
to prop up their reputation following years of relatively poor performances in terms of inflation.
In 1989, my colleagues from New Zealand were the first to adopt direct inflation targeting. They
were  followed  by  Canada,  the  United  Kingdom,  Sweden,  Finland,  Spain  and  Australia.
Although  the  name  suggests  otherwise,  direct  inflation  targeting,  too,  makes  use  of  an
intermediate  target,  viz.  expected  inflation.  As  expectations  are  by  definition  hard  to  quantify,
information  variables  are  employed  to  forecast  future  inflation.  If  the  predicted  inflation  rate
deviates from the target, interest rate adjustment is called for.
With a view  to  forecasting,  direct  inflation  targeting  employs,  as  I  have  pointed
out,  several  information  variables.  Such  variables  are,  for  instance,  changes  in  wage  costs,  the
exchange  rate,  commodity  prices,  equity  prices  and  the  money  supply.  As  soon  as  these
indicators  point  towards  rising  inflation,  the  central  bank  needs  to  take  action.  However,  the
explicit  use  of  a  variety  of  indicators  poses  a  threat  to  the  transparency  and  credibility  of
monetary  policy,  because  there  is  then  no  immediate  way  of  knowing  which  information  has
prompted  interest  rate  decisions.  In  order  to  remedy  this  problem,  most  countries  pursuing
inflation  targeting  have  taken  to  publishing  inflation  reports  setting  out  the  backgrounds  to
policy measures. Such reports also enable the public to ascertain whether a central bank can be
held  accountable  if  the  inflation  target  is  not  attained.  After  all,  inflation  may  be  caused  by
factors  which  are  beyond  the  control  of  monetary  authorities.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  most
countries  cite  circumstances  under  which  the  inflation  target  may  be  ignored  or  requires
adjustment.  For  example,  a  number  of  central  banks  are  not  under  any  obligation  to  take
corrective  measures  when  indirect  taxes  are  raised  or  when  exogenous  shocks  such  as  energy
price increases arise.
As you can see, the two strategies are actually not as different as their names would
have us believe. In  practice,  elements  from  both  strategies  are  used,  the  distinction  not  always
being as clear as it is in theory. The two strategies share the following properties:
- both seek the attainment of the same ultimate goal, viz. price stability;
- both are forward-looking;
BIS Review   32/1997
- 3 -
- and both make use of an extensive set of indicators to be able to assess whether the
course pursued is the right one. In fact the different weights assigned to the  money
supply form the main distinction between the two strategies.
If  the  two  strategies  differ  so  little  in  daily  practice,  how  can  we  compare  their
pros and cons? To make comparison possible, it has been agreed within the EMI that the ECB
will  base  its  choice  of  monetary  strategy  on  six  general  criteria,  to  wit  effectiveness,
accountability,  transparency,  medium-term  orientation,  continuity  and  consistency  with  the
independence of the ECB. Obviously the criterion of effectiveness is more general in nature than
the other five, which can be said to contribute to effectiveness each in their own way. Let us take
a brief look at all of them.
Any  assessment  of  monetary  targeting  has  always  stressed  the  criterion  of
effectiveness.  As  I  pointed  out  earlier,  the  effectiveness  of  this  policy  is  determined  by  the
controllability, the stability and the predictive powers of the monetary aggregate selected. In this
context, special attention has always been paid to the stability of money demand. The EMI and
other  institutions  have  already  extensively  studied  the  stability  of  money  demand  for  certain
groups of EU countries. Though perhaps not quite representative of the situation in Stage Three,
the results can be called encouraging so far. It turns out that European money demand functions
evince  greater  stability  than  comparable  relationships  for  individual  countries,  Germany
included. However, the countries concerned must be sufficiently integrated and converged.
Compared  to  monetary  targeting,  direct  inflation  targeting  is  harder  to  assess  in
terms  of  effectiveness.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  interest  rate  measures  work  through  to
inflation via all sorts of complicated macro-economic processes, with inflation right at the end of
the  chain.  Direct  inflation  targeting,  too,  calls  for  a  sufficient  measure  of  stability  of  these
relationships.  Obviously  effectiveness  is  in  any  case  highly  dependent  on  the  quality  of  the
inflation  forecasts.  Moreover,  the  central  bank  must  be  free  to  react  pre-emptively  and
adequately to any deviations between the desired and the predicted rates of inflation.
In the second place, it must be possible to hold the central bank  accountable  for
the consequences of its policy. It must account for its decisions and explain them to the public.
This enhances the confidence which the public at large has in the central bank and contributes to
its  credibility.  As  the  ECB  will  be  equipped  with  an  adequate  range  of  instruments,  it  can  be
held accountable for developments with regard to the money supply. But inflation is determined
by  more  factors,  some  of  which  are  less  amenable  to  central  bank  control.  That  might  let  the
central bank off the hook in the sense that it feels it cannot be considered wholly responsible for
any overshooting of a direct inflation target.
Thirdly, policy must be transparent. That means that the public must be informed
on  both  which  objectives  are  being  pursued  and  how  decisions  have  been  arrived  at.  Those  in
favour  of  direct  inflation  targeting  like  to  point  out  the  fact  that  inflation  is  a  more
comprehensible concept than the money supply. On the other hand, transparency is well served
when communication with the public at large centres on a single aggregate. In the case of direct
inflation targeting, there is the risk that the outside world does not comprehend which indicator
has  been  used  this  time,  a  problem  which  can  be  solved  to  some  extent  by  issuing  inflation
reports.
Fourthly,  policy  should  not  be  tailored  to  individual  developments,  but  should
have a medium-term orientation, providing some breathing space when the target is not met in
the short term. Above all this means that policy should be credible, offering a clear anchor for
inflation  expectations.  Irrespective  of  the  strategy  chosen,  monetary  authorities  do  not  react  to
every news item which comes their way. Wavering monetary policies only create unrest among
both the public and financial market operators.
BIS Review   32/1997
- 4 -
In the fifth place, monetary policy should be characterised by sufficient continuity
while all too frequent policy changes should be avoided.  The  continuity  of  monetary  policy  in
Europe  would  be  best  served  by  monetary  targeting,  the  strategy  applied  for  several  decades
already by the most successful central bank in Europe, viz. the Bundesbank. Moreover, a large
proportion  of  the  other  core  group  countries  have  attuned  their  exchange  rate  policies  to
Germany. One downside of direct inflation targeting as a policy option for the ECB is that little
experience has been gained so far with this strategy in periods of heavy inflationary pressure. At
the same time it should be kept in mind that the inflation performance of countries which have
switched to direct inflation targeting has clearly improved over time.
Finally,  the  policy  strategy  selected  will  need  to  be  consistent  with  the  ECB’s
independence.  By  this  I  mean  to  say  that  the  strategy  chosen  must  not  inspire  outsiders  to
meddle in the discussions on interest rate policy. The Maastricht Treaty is perfectly clear on this
point. It would  be  undesirable  if  any  inflationary  differences  within  the  Union  were  to  lead  to
politicisation of the interest rate policy within the ECB Governing Council. It seems to me that
this  risk  is  greater  in  the  case  of  direct  inflation  targeting  than  if  monetary  targeting  were
pursued.
I  am  approaching  the  end  of  my  address.  I  have  told  you  which  considerations
underlie  the  choice  of  a  monetary  policy  for  the  ECB  and  I  have  outlined  the  differences
between  monetary  targeting  and  direct  inflation  targeting.  The  success  of  either  strategy  is
dependent  on  largely  identical  factors.  Here  a  key  role  is  played  by  vital  concepts  such  as
credibility and transparency. It would be recommendable to inform  the  public  regularly  and  in
general terms of the considerations underlying interest rate measures. Furthermore, the ECB will
in  any  case,  in  the  daily  implementation  of  its  monetary  policy,  have  to  take  into  account  the
various  indicators  which  contain  information  about  future  price  movements.  All  in  all  the
differences between the two strategies should not be exaggerated.
Nevertheless, I profess that the considerations which I have set out lead me so far
to have a certain preference for monetary targeting. The success of the Bundesbank shows that
this strategy underpins the competence of the central bank, thus offering an optimum safeguard
for  its  independence.  Should  you  have  a  different  view,  then  I  hope  that  my  address  has
contributed to a dynamic start-up of the discussion ahead.
BIS Review   32/1997
