Bank of France reports industrial output continued to increase in all sectors
in February 1997   BANK OF FRANCE, MONTHLY BUSINESS SURVEY, 17/3/97.
In February, according to the business leaders surveyed by the Banque de France,
industrial output continued to increase in all sectors.
The capacity utilization rate rose slightly.
Overall  demand  grew  at  a  moderate  pace.    There  was  strong  demand  from
foreign  markets,  particularly  from  northern  Europe,  including  Germany  and  the  United
Kingdom, and from the United States and Asia.  The rise in the dollar and in sterling reinforced
the competitiveness of French products.  Growth in demand on the domestic market was much
more moderate.
Order books  are  deemed  to  be  satisfactory  in  all  sectors,  with  the  exception  of
the  food-processing  industry,  where  they  declined  slightly  and  appear  to  be  insufficient.
Inventories of finished products are still somewhat above normal levels.  In particular, they are
considered to be above desired levels in the food-processing, intermediate goods and automobile
sectors.
In the coming months activity should continue to increase in all sectors, with the
exception of the automobile sector.
Commodity  prices  were  stable  overall.    However,  price  rises  were  recorded  in
certain parts of the intermediate goods industry, such as the rubber and plastics, metal-working,
and wood-processing sectors, and in the  food  processing  industry  owing  to  the  appreciation  of
the dollar.  Intense competition prevented these increases from being passed on to sales prices,
which scarcely changed, except in the automobile sector, where they declined.
The business leaders surveyed continued to be cautious in their investment plans.
There  were  few  plans  for  large-scale  investment,  and  they  mainly  concerned  the  renewal  of
modernization of existing equipment.
Retail sales contracted in February, after posting a substantial rise in January.
Employment levels remained stable in industry, except in the automobile sector,
where  they  declined.    The  retail  and  market  services  sectors  showed  little  change,  but
employment  fell  in  the  building  industry.    Increasing  use  was  made  of  flexi-time,  annualized
working time and part-time working to respond to variations in demand.
BIS Review   32/1997
