Bank  of  France  reports  industrial  activity  increased  in  all  sectors  in
December 1996   BANK OF FRANCE, MONTHLY BUSINESS SURVEY, December 1996.
In  December,  according  to  the  business  leaders  surveyed  by  the  Banque  de
France,  industrial  activity  increased  in  all  sectors,  except  in  the  intermediate  goods  sector,
where  it  remained  stable.    The  food  processing  and  consumer  goods  sectors  were  the  most
buoyant.
The capacity utilization rate remained virtually unchanged.
Overall  demand  firmed  on  both  the  domestic  market  and  the  export  market,
where  the  strongest  flow  of  orders  continued  to  come  from  the  United  States  and  Asia.    The
competitiveness  of  French  products  was  bolstered  by  the  recovery  of  currencies  that  had
weakened earlier, including the United States dollar, sterling and the Italian lira.
Order books approached normal levels in all sectors, except in the intermediate
goods  sector,  where  they  remained  too  low.    Inventories  decreased  with  the  end  of  the  lorry
drivers’ strike, and now appear to be normal in the capital goods and automobile sectors.
In the coming months, most sectors are expected to continue to show moderate
growth.
Commodity prices as a whole showed practically no change.   Finished product
prices held up overall, despite the continuing high level of competition.
Investment  programmes  were  limited  to  renewing  obsolete  equipment  or  to
meeting  the  desire  to  increase  firms’  productivity  in  an  intensely  competitive  international
environment.    There  were  few  plans  for  output  capacity  increases  and  in  all  cases  were
dependent on stronger growth in demand.
Retail sales  in  November  and  December  posted  a  slight  decline  compared  with
the corresponding period of 1995.
Activity  in  the  construction  sector  fell  back  in  the  fourth  quarter  and  posted  a
sharp twelve-month drop.
Employment levels varied little in industry, with the exception of the automobile
sector,  where  they  posted  a  further  substantial  decline.    They  remained  stable  in  the  market
services and retail sectors, but fell sharply in the building industry.
BIS Review   4/1997
