Mr.  George  looks  at  the  prospects  for  the  City  of  London  -  in  or  out  of  EMU
Speech by the Governor of the Bank of England, Mr. E.A.J.George, at the Royal Institute of International
Affairs Conference in London, on 24/10/97.
Prospects for the City -- in or out of EMU
Mr.  Chairman,  you  have  asked  me  to  speak  specifically  about  “the  prospects  for  the
City - or out of EMU”. You -- very kindly in recent circumstances -- did not ask me to discuss the wider
pros and cons, either of the project as a whole, or of UK membership. But perhaps I might nevertheless
begin by making a more general point.
Perfectly reasonable people can legitimately disagree about EMU, both in principle and
about the appropriate timing and pace of monetary integration. On the project as a whole, most analysts
would acknowledge that there are real potential benefits, but that there are also real risks to be set against
them; and most would acknowledge that those risks will increase if the politics of EMU are allowed to
run  ahead  of  the  economics,  so  that  countries  are  allowed,  or  even  encouraged,  to  participate,  without
first having achieved genuine, and sustainable, economic convergence -- in substance and not just some
technical  accounting  form.  On  the  question  of  British  membership  the  new  Labour  Government  has
spoken of ‘formidable obstacles’ to this country joining EMU in the first wave. But one thing is clear:
everyone, in or out, has an unambiguous interest, if EMU does go ahead, in doing everything we can to
make it a success. And it is equally clear that those countries that participate in Monetary Union have a
similar  unambiguous  interest  in  the  economic  prosperity  of  countries  remaining,  at  least  for  the  time
being, on the outside.
Larry  Summers,  the  Deputy  Secretary  of  the  US  Treasury,  writing  about  EMU  in  the
“The  US  is  well  served  when  Europe  is  vibrant  economically  and  working  to  open  its
markets and strengthen its ties with the global economy.”
He might have been speaking for all of us here in Europe, in or out, recognising that we
have a mutual, and reciprocal, self-interest in each other’s economic well-being. So my general point is
this. Whatever the outcome on EMU, it is vitally important that we continue to maintain, and strengthen,
positive and constructive relationships  throughout  the  European  Union  area  --  and  indeed  beyond  --  in
For the UK, in particular, if we were to opt out of the first wave, that certainly means that
during our EU Presidency, over the critical first half of next year, we must -- as I am quite confident we
will -- do everything we possibly can to ensure that the procedures leading up to the historic decisions
run smoothly and that the decisions themselves are timely and, hopefully, harmonious. But beyond that it
certainly  means,  too,  that  “outs”,  or  potential  “pre-ins”,  should  not  attempt  to  exploit  any
perceived -- and certainly short-term -- advantage from the  additional  policy  freedoms  they  might  have
on  the  outside,  but  should,  for  example,  persist  in  macro-economic,  fiscal  and  monetary,  discipline  in
parallel with the EMU countries. But it also means that the “in” countries, for their part, have an identical
self-interest in maintaining an open and constructive relationship with the “outs”/“pre-ins”. Otherwise we
would all be cutting off our nose to spite our face.
I make this general point, Mr. Chairman, because this context seems to me to be relevant
to  any  assessment  of  the  economic  prospect,  of  the  economy  as  a  whole  or  of  any  particular  sector,
within or without the euro-area. In the rest of my remarks I assume that, in or out, we will be operating
within a constructive, co-operative, environment throughout the EU, for the powerful reason that that is
in everyone’s interest.
BIS Review   106/1997
- 2 -
Against that background let me turn to the prospects for the City.
I will, in fact, concentrate on the case in which the UK does not participate in EMU in
the first wave, because in the alternative case, the UK in scenario, while there may be uncertainty about
the overall macro-economic implications, there is little reason to suppose that there would be any adverse
implications  for  the  City  in  particular.  The  only  possible  disadvantage  I  see  would  result  from  the
imposition  of  onerous  regulatory  or  financial  burdens  --  for  example  onerous  minimum  reserve
requirements -- which might act to distort activity within the financial sector and/or drive it outside the
euro-area altogether.
So what then are the prospects for the City if the UK is, initially, out?
The  current  strengths  of  the  City  --  as  a  uniquely  international,  rather  than  simply  a
national or regional European financial centre -- will be familiar to you. They include a vast, critical mass
of  markets  and  financial  services  in  commercial  and  investment  banking,  securities  and  derivatives
activity,  investment  and  fund  management,  insurance  and  commodities  and  so  on,  involving  an
extraordinary concentration of the strongest financial businesses from all around the world. To give just
one example, uniquely  among  the  major  countries  we  have  more  banks  which  are  incorporated  abroad
operating in the City than domestic banks, and over half of the total deposits of the UK banking system
is  denominated 
twelve
noughts -- notwithstanding the current strength of sterling.
in  foreign  currencies,  worth  over  £1 
that’s  a  one  and 
trillion  -- 
The  particular  strengths  that  have  contributed  to  this  massive  concentration  of
international  business  are  many  and  various.  They  include:  the  English  language;  the  convenient  time
zone;  the  ready  availability  of  the  relevant  trading  and  other  financial  skills  as  well  as  professional
support services -- in law, accountancy, tax, property, communications and so on. They include effective
infrastructure.  And  they  include  importantly,  too,  an  adaptive  regulatory  framework  which  has  in  fact
been  remarkably  successful  in  maintaining  confidence  in  financial  institutions  and  markets  without
stifling  innovation  and  risk-taking.  All  of  these  factors  --  and  no  doubt  others  --  help  to  explain  why
some  600,000  people  are  estimated  to  be  employed  in  finance  and  other  business  services  in  Greater
London -- a number which I believe is roughly equal to the total population of Frankfurt.
Now  you  will  have  noticed  that  none  of  these  factors  has  anything  to  do  with  the
question of the national currency used either here in the UK or in Continental Europe.
The main impact of the advent of the euro on financial activity, as I see it, is that it will
encourage the development of broader and deeper and more liquid markets, in financial instruments of all
kinds,  where  they  are  currently  fragmented  because  they  are  denominated  in  the  various  individual
national  European  currencies.  The  City  of  London  thrives  on  liquid  markets  regardless  of  the
currency -- and it will thrive on the euro, whether the UK is “in” or “out”. Measured in these terms the
introduction  of  the  euro  represents  an  opportunity  for  London  rather  than  a  threat.  I  have  no  doubt
whatever that there  will  be  a  vigorous  euro-euro  market  in  London,  come  what  may,  just  as  there  is  a
vigorous market in euro-DM or euro-francs as well as euro-$ and euro-yen at present. The reality is that
the location of financial activity does not depend upon the local currency. It will continue to be carried on
wherever  it  can  most  conveniently,  efficiently  and  profitably  be  carried  on.  And  the  fact  that
foreign-owned  institutions  --  from  Europe  itself  and  from  around  the  world  --  continue  to  build  their
presence here, despite the near universal assumption that the UK will not in fact participate in EMU from
the beginning, suggests that they share this perception.
I would hope that the rest of Europe would positively welcome the contribution that the
City can, and I am confident will, make to the development of markets and other financial activity in the
euro, because it is in their interest too. International or intra-regional trade and investment activity is not,
at the macro-economic level, a zero-sum game. It is a positive sum game. And this is true of financial,
just as much as of any other kind of economic activity. The prosperity of the City -- whether the UK is
“in” or “out” -- is simply a particular case of the general point which I made at the outset. I welcome the
BIS Review   106/1997
- 3 -
prospect of increasing financial activity in Frankfurt, Paris, Milan or Amsterdam or wherever because it
will result in increased activity here too in London. And the converse is equally true. It is in this sense
that the City is a major European, not simply a national asset.
Now some people may argue  that  “offshore”  markets  in  national  or  regional  currencies
complicate  the  conduct  of  national  or  regional  monetary  policy,  with  the  implication  that  national  or
regional currencies should somehow be confined to their national or regional space. I must confess that
this  view  seems  to  ignore  the  fact  that  it  has  in  practice  over  the  past  twenty  or  thirty  years  proved
perfectly  possible  for  monetary  policy  to  be  conducted  successfully  despite  the  existence  of  the
euro-markets. And I do not see how one could realistically expect to contain the use of a major currency,
which the euro will certainly be, within territorial borders in any event.
But  as  I  have  made  clear,  the  UK’s  interest  --  “in”  or  “out”  --  lies  unambiguously  in
doing  all  that  we  can  to  ensure  that  the  single  currency  succeeds.  And  in  this  context  we  would,  of
course,  co-operate  with  the  ECB  in  any  way  we  could,  to  avoid  potential  disturbance  to  European
monetary policy, were it shown to exist.
Mr Chairman, London does not hold its pre-eminent position as Europe’s major financial
centre  as  of  right.  We  must  continue  to  earn  it.  If  we  are  to  take  advantage  --  “in”  or  “out”  --  of  the
opportunity that the euro will bring, then we must be technically well prepared.
We will be.
There is increasing evidence that financial institutions in the UK are now taking the steps
necessary  to  ensure  that  they  are  ready  for  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  whether  or  not  the  UK  joins
EMU.  In  the  early  summer,  we  invited  a  representative  sample  of  firms  to  confirm  whether  their
preparations  were  on  track.  The  response  we  received  was  broadly  reassuring,  though  some  of  their
preparations  are  dependent  on  decisions  about  the  euro  markets  which  have  yet  to  be  taken,  as  I  shall
explain  in  a  moment.  But  the  key  point  is  that  the  urgency  of  the  need  to  prepare  is  now  widely
recognised.
The  Bank  of  England  is  playing  a  substantive  role  in  the  preparations  in  two
complementary ways. Through our very active participation in the work of the EMI, we aim to make sure
that the design of EMU, at least so far as the operations of the ECB are concerned, is capable of being
delivered in a technical sense. That is the test that we have applied, for example, to the work of the EMI
on  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  and  on  the  so-called  changeover  scenario.  John  Townend
talked about this yesterday.
Our  other  role  is  to  co-ordinate  the  preparations  for  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  the
City  of  London,  to  the  extent  that  co-ordination  is  required.  The  Bank’s  role  in  helping  the  financial
sector to prepare for the euro was recognised and reconfirmed by the Chancellor this  summer  when  he
launched  his  complementary  initiative  to  begin  preparing  the  business  community  for  the  euro.  In
addition  to  making  our  own  internal  preparations  at  the  Bank,  we  play  a  co-ordinating  role  in  the
financial community in three main ways:
First,  our  job  is  to  ensure  that  the  necessary  infrastructure  is  developed  in  the  UK  to
allow anyone who wishes to do so to use the euro in wholesale payments and across the financial markets
in London from the first day of EMU.
Second,  we  aim  to  promote  discussion  between  the  EMI,  national  central  banks  and
market  participants  across  Europe  about  practical  issues  on  which  the  market  is  seeking  a  degree  of
co-ordination.
And third, we provide information: for example, through our quarterly series of editions
on  Practical  Issues  Arising  from  the  Introduction  of  the  Euro,  which  is  distributed  to  around  32,000
BIS Review   106/1997
- 4 -
recipients  across  the  City  and  beyond,  including  4,000  directly  abroad.  And  following  the  successful
symposium  we  held  early  this  year,  we  are  planning  to  hold  a  further  symposium,  next  January  at  the
Bank, on London as the international financial centre for the euro. Our theme will be: ‘London will be
ready’.
I shall now turn to the steps that we are taking to ensure that London will be ready for the
euro, whether the UK is “in” or “out”.
(i) Payments and settlement infrastructure for the euro
First  of  all,  the  payments  and  settlement  infrastructure.  We  are  constructing  payments
arrangements in euro in London which we intend to be at least as efficient and cheap as anywhere else in
Europe, even if the UK stays “out”. In the UK, the real-time  gross  settlement  system  which  came  into
operation in the spring of last year is being developed so that it will operate in euro. If the UK joins, the
UK sterling system will effectively become a euro system. And, in case the UK is “out”, a parallel euro
system is under construction to sit alongside the sterling system: it will enable the members of CHAPS
to process euro payments as a foreign currency within the UK and across borders within the EU, through
its link to the pan-European RTGS system -- TARGET -- which is being developed.
The idea behind TARGET is to link together in euro the national RTGS systems of EU
Member States so that large-value payments can be made or received between Member States throughout
the  EU  area,  with  finality  in  real  time,  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  they  can  at  present  be  made  and
received  within  Member  States  with  national  RTGS  systems  denominated  in  their  own  national
currencies. One of the main purposes of TARGET is to support closer European economic and financial
integration by reducing the risks in pan-European payments -- just as national RTGS systems reduce the
risk in national payment  systems.  The  other  main  purpose  of  TARGET  is  to  integrate  the  euro  money
market so as to ensure that the same short term euro interest rate -- determined by the single monetary
policy of the ECB -- prevails throughout the euro area. TARGET is a project which we strongly support.
It has been agreed that all EU Member States may connect their national RTGS systems
to TARGET, whether or not they join EMU. The main policy issue outstanding concerns  the  terms  on
which  the  European  Central  Bank  will  grant  intraday  credit  to  the  “outs”.  We  see  no  monetary  --  or
other -- grounds for any discrimination against the “outs”. If intraday liquidity to the “outs” were to be
restricted the effect would be to increase the cost of using TARGET, and to damage the efficiency of the
system  for  both  “ins”  and  “outs”.  That  would  simply  divert  euro  payments  to  alternative  mechanisms,
including correspondent banking and the EBA’s net end-of-day settlement system. It would be unlikely
significantly to deter the international use of the euro -- if that were the objective -- any more than lack of
direct access to national RTGS systems deters the international use of the dollar or yen or Deutsche Mark
now. Its main impact would be to make intra-European payments less secure. We would regret that.
Besides  payments  systems,  the  preparation  of  securities  settlement  systems  for  the
introduction of the euro is a complex task in its own right. One of the reasons for this is that there are
different approaches to securities settlement between different Member States and financial institutions.
Another is that different approaches may be required to meet issuers’ requirements for re-denomination.
Even in  one  market  in  one  country,  the  introduction  of  major  changes  in  securities  settlement  systems
can lead to teething problems, both in the central IT infrastructure and for individual institutions as they
learn how to apply the changes. Yet in the case of EMU, a number of Member States will switch to the
euro  more  or  less  simultaneously  at  the  start.  That  carries  considerable  risks  of  confusion  and  error,
unless there is an extensive programme across Europe to explain the changes required in detail first. This
is not of course, a particular problem for the UK.
(ii) Market framework for the use of the euro
BIS Review   106/1997
- 5 -
The  second  important  aspect  of  preparation  is  the  development  of  a  comprehensive
market framework for the use of the euro in London. The euro regulations help to provide the legal part
of the framework as I understand you discussed yesterday.
To  make  sure  that  the  euro  market  in  London,  as  elsewhere  in  Europe,  is  as  deep  and
liquid as possible, we also need to harmonise market conventions on new issues of securities in the euro
money  and  bond  markets,  and  conventions  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets.  Market  associations  now
agree  on  the  basis  on  which  conventions  in  these  markets  should  be  harmonised,  and  the  Bank  has
encouraged  their  initiative.  The  problem  has  been  to  see  how  EU-wide  decisions  will  be  taken.
Harmonised practices may develop spontaneously in the markets, but there is no guarantee of this. So it
is  very  helpful  that  the  EMI  Council  decided  with  our  encouragement  in  September  to  ‘welcome  and
support’  harmonised  market  conventions  on  the  basis  proposed  by  the  market  associations.  We  also
welcome the EMI Council’s  decision  in  September  to  prepare  for  the  computation  by  the  ESCB  of  an
effective overnight reference rate for the euro area.
There  remains  however  a  good  deal  to  be  done  everywhere  --  in  co-ordinating  price
sources, for example, as methods of redenomination. But in all of these respects London is well up with
the game.
Conclusion
Mr. Chairman, it is sometimes suggested that a perceived threat to its activity if we were
“out” will cause the City to press for early UK membership of EMU, and that this will be an important
factor in the Government’s decision. I am bound to say that I see very little sign of this. Certainly there
are  those  in  the  City  who  advocate  our  early  participation,  but  there  are  equally  those  who  are  more
hesitant  --  just  as  opinions  are  divided  elsewhere  within  the  country.  But  for  the  most  part,  my
impression  is  that  City  attitudes  to  EMU,  whether  for  or  against,  reflect  a  broader  assessment  of  the
respective pros and cons for the country as a whole rather than strong views about the implications for
the  City  in  particular.  On  the  whole  I  find  that  City  opinion  is  relatively  optimistic  about  its  future
prospects,  “in”  or  “out”.  And,  provided  we  do  indeed  operate  within  a  co-operative  framework,  and
provided we are indeed well prepared, the City has good reason to be optimistic.
BIS Review   106/1997
