Mr. Tietmeyer considers European monetary integration and its implications
for the international monetary system     Lecture  delivered  in  honour  of  Professor  Xenophon
Zolotas,  Honorary  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  by  the  President  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, Prof. Hans Tietmeyer, in Athens on 17/10/97.
I.
The  twentieth  century  does  not  lack  for  experience  or  lessons  derived  from
different  international  monetary  arrangements.  Now  --  just  before  this  century  comes  to  a
close -- Europe  is  about  to  embark  on  a  new  experiment  with  far-reaching  implications:  a
monetary union of nation states with a supranational central bank.
Some economists see this as things coming full circle. The century began with the
gold standard. It will end with a monetary union. As at the beginning of this century, at its end
there will be a “denationalised” currency. Countries cannot produce this money more as they see
fit.  Whereas  earlier  this  century  they  tied  themselves  to  the  availability  of  gold,  in  the  future
European monetary union the guardian of the currency will be a European Central Bank which
is  independent  of  national  decision-making  and  which  is  committed  solely  to  the  objective  of
internal monetary stability.
Those  economists  who  stress  this  historical  connection  generally  take  an
optimistic view of it. They expect the single currency to bring about an economic and political
commitment which is in itself strong enough permanently to compel the participating countries
to abide by the rules of the game. Without the option of altering the exchange rate and without
the option of an autonomous interest-rate policy, national monetary policy will not be available
as an instrument for correcting a current account deficit within the Union. The only possibility
will be an adjustment in the real economy.
According to this view, monetary union will have a strong disciplining effect.  It
will  exert  sufficient  pressure  on  countries  to  tackle  their  real  problems  and  to  solve  them
internally,  too.  To  that  extent,  it  will  carry  on  those  effects  of  the  gold  standard  which  are
regarded as having been successful. This optimistic reference to experience of the gold standard
First of all, one might ask how far that view idealises the way in which the gold
standard worked. That is something which historians may argue over. At all events, that era was
by no means a golden age. Be that as it may -- above all, the conditions for the functioning of
the gold standard were different then. Countries’ government ratios were in the order of scarcely
more  than  ten  per  cent  at  that  time.  The  adjustments  that  were  necessary  given  a  change  in
competitive conditions -- which, naturally enough, primarily concern the private sector -- were
spread comparatively widely over the major part of the economy.
By  contrast,  the  government  ratio  in  many  European  countries  nowadays  is
around  fifty  per  cent  or  more.  Adjustment  in  line  with  market  conditions  is  thus  now
concentrated -- more or less -- on half of the economy. Prices and wages were also more flexible
a hundred years ago; at any rate, more flexible than they are now in the majority of countries on
the  European  continent.  And,  above  all,  the  government  had  a  different  perception  of  its  own
role. Its core tasks at that time were to frame and protect the domestic legal system and to pursue
national interests abroad.
BIS Review   97/1997
- 2 -
Nowadays,  in  the  eyes  of  citizens  and  the  electorate,  the  nation  state  and  the
government  have  a  much  deeper  and  more  general  economic  and  social  responsibility  for
growth, incomes and employment. It is, at any rate, very optimistic under present-day conditions
to assume that monetary commitment by the monetary union and the supranational central bank
would  only  have  to  be  strong  enough  and  that  it  would  then  be  able  to  enforce  any  desired
adjustment needs automatically.
What should not be overlooked is that abiding by the rules of the game depends
on countries having an adequate capacity to  be  correspondingly  flexible,  just  as  it  presupposes
the common political will to submit to those rules of monetary stability on a lasting basis. That
far-reaching  economic  and  political  dimension  of  monetary  union  should  not  be
underestimated -- precisely in the world of today and tomorrow. The abolition of the exchange
rate is, at all events, an occurrence of far-reaching importance.
II.
The exchange rate is a price; one of the most important in an economy. Like all
prices,  its  prime  task  is  to  manage  allocation.  Put  in  simple  terms,  this  means  that  if  the
exchange rate is at a level which is appropriate to competitive conditions and if the fundamental
determinants  --  such  as  differences  in  the  inflation  rate  and  productivity  or  the  conditions  of
demand  --  remain  largely  constant,  then  the  exchange  rate  can  and  should  be  as  stable  as
possible, too. It is then that its information content is at its highest. And this also brings about a
high degree of certainty in planning for economic arrangements.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  change  in  the  fundamental  determinants,  the
exchange  rate  should  realign  as  rapidly  as  possible  --  unless  an  economy  is  in  a  position  to
correct disequilibria quickly and efficiently by virtue of its own adjustment measures. These two
requirements which exchange rates are expected to meet appear at first glance to pose a dilemma
for monetary policy.
On the one hand, the exchange rate should be stable; on the other, it should react
as  quickly  as  possible  to  fundamental  imbalances.  But,  given  appropriate  policies,  this  is  a
pseudo-problem.  It  is  largely  solved  for  a  monetary  policy  which  is  guided  by  the  internal
objective  of  stability;  a  steady  policy  geared  to  monetary  stability  helps  in  both  respects.  It
reduces  volatility  because  it  introduces  calm  into  the  markets.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  the  best
contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to  keeping  fundamentally  forced  exchange  rate
changes at a low level and to strengthening flexibility and market mechanisms domestically.
This  pseudo-dilemma  is  then  essentially  solved  for  exchange-rate  policy,  too.
That is because a country cannot in any case freely decide between exchange-rate systems -- say,
more  fixed  or  more  flexible  rates  --  in  line  with  its  preferences  like  a  visitor  to  a  restaurant
between different dishes on the menu. Fixed exchange rates presuppose the ability to cope with
that arrangement. It is therefore not a matter of whether one finds less flexible exchange rates, or
even their final elimination in a monetary union, “appealing” or  “attractive”.  The  crucial  point
is:  fixed  exchange  rates  must  be  feasible  and,  above  all,  sustainable  under  prevailing  political
and economic conditions.
III.
Post-war  global  and  European  monetary  history  was  inseparably  linked  for  a
quarter of a century with the Bretton Woods system. In origin, it was a gold exchange standard
with fixed but adjustable exchange rates against the US dollar, for which there was an obligation
to exchange currency for gold. At its inception there was, above all, the desire to overcome the
BIS Review   97/1997
monetary conditions of the 1930s. Competitive devaluations, far-reaching import restrictions and
exchange controls seriously hindered world  trade  and  economic  cooperation  between  countries
at  that  time.  Against  that  historical  backdrop,  many  economists  rightly  celebrated  the  Bretton
Woods system as a great success.
Without  doubt,  it  put  in  place  important  groundwork  for  today’s  high  degree  of
openness in the goods and financial markets. Admittedly, a comprehensive assessment must not
overlook  at  least  three  problem  areas.  Firstly,  even  the  Bretton  Woods  system  displayed  the
“vulnerability” of almost all systems of fixed exchange rates. Current account imbalances were
combated  too  hesitantly.  Corrections  of  exchange  rates  were  made  too  late  and  often  brought
about new misalignments.
Secondly,  the  years  in  which  the  system  flourished  have  to  be  seen  against  the
backdrop  of  restricted  convertibility.  It  was  not  until  1961  that  most  west  European  countries
introduced  full  convertibility.  And  precisely  in  the  United  States,  too,  capital  controls  were  a
frequently  deployed  instrument  into  the  1960s.  Incidentally,  even  the  financial  markets
which -- from the present perspective -- were still not very developed at that time showed their
strength  in  that  situation.  There  was,  on  the  one  hand,  the  ability  to  bypass  administrative
regulations. The Euro-dollar market came into being as early as the late 1950s, for example. On
the other, there was the ability to exert speculative pressure on a currency with an exchange rate
that appeared no longer to deserve confidence.
Thirdly, countries with a better domestic stability record than the anchor country
at  that  time,  the  United  States  --  such  as  Germany  in  the  1096s  and  early  1970s  --  imported
inflation through the fixed rate system. The expression “dollar inflation machine” was in use for
a time. A firm anchor and a timely realignment of parities -- those are the basic requirements of
any stability-oriented system of fixed exchange rates.
The  European  Monetary  System  established  at  the  end  of  the  1970s  has
performed better than the Bretton Woods system in a number of respects. It has provided a better
solution for the question of the nominal anchor -- without officially designating the D-Mark for
that  role.  Rather,  it  is  a  role  which  the  D-Mark  has  acquired  on  account  of  its  long-standing
stability and its early convertibility.
The parity-grid system permits the currency which is most stable on a long-term
basis to set the standard. The anchor in the ERM is a position which can be recalled, however.
Admittedly,  even  in  the  ERM  there  have  been  times  when  exchange  rates  that  had  become
doubtful  have  not  been  corrected  in  time  --  as  the  events  of  1992  and  1993,  in  particular,
showed. At all events, it was possible to guide the ERM out of the crisis by a formal widening of
the fluctuation margins and largely stabilise it in the ensuing period.
IV.
Despite a number of earlier reform efforts, the Bretton Woods system eventually
collapsed in 1973. Since then, the exchange rates of most European countries and of Japan have
floated  against  the  US  dollar.  By  abandoning  the  fixed  rates  against  the  US  dollar,  monetary
policy  gained  new  freedom.  From  that  time  onwards,  it  has,  above  all,  been  able  to  pursue  a
domestic goal.
The  initial  phase  in  the  era  of  flexible  exchange  rates  was  clearly  marked  by
differences in the domestic stance of monetary policy in a large number of countries. That was
apparent  particularly  in  the  1970s  when  most  countries  were  hit  hard  --  although  to  differing
BIS Review   97/1997
- 4 -
degrees  --  by  oil  price  movements.  A  number  of  countries  --  including  Germany  --  were
principally  concerned  with  restoring  domestic  monetary  stability  or  with  ensuring  that  it  was
jeopardised  as  little  as  possible  in  the  long  term.  Others  attempted  to  use  a  relaxed  monetary
policy to cushion the adjustment needs of their economies caused by the oil price shocks.
In line with that, there came to be wide differences between inflation rates. Those
differences had the following results. Firstly, the countries which gave priority to safeguarding
monetary stability adapted more quickly to the new conditions and also achieved better results in
the  medium  term  with  regard  to  the  goal  of  employment.  Secondly,  a  disparity  arose  between
individual  countries  in  terms  of  the  reputation  and  credibility  of  their  anti-inflationary
stance -- some of the effects of which are still felt today. Thirdly, the plan to realise a European
monetary  union  which  was  initiated  at  the  end  of  the  1960s  at  the  Hague  Summit  foundered
before a real political decision had been taken.
The  initial  phase  of  world-wide  flexible  exchange  rates  thus  up  to  now  has  two
crucial messages. Firstly, the best contribution that monetary policy can make to lasting growth
and employment is a clear anti-inflationary stance. In the long term, jobs cannot be “bought” by
higher inflation. That was already true even in the 1970s when unemployment -- at least in many
industrial  countries  --  was  still  predominantly  cyclical  in  nature.  That  is  all  the  more  the  case
today  when  unemployment 
largely  structural  causes.  The  permanent
anti-inflationary  stance  of  the  monetary  union  is  therefore  an  essential  condition  for  Europe’s
future success in creating and safeguarding jobs.
in  Europe  has 
Secondly,  it  would  be  disastrous  for  the  monetary  union  if  political  differences
concerning the role of monetary policy were to emerge as they did in the 1970s. That is because
countries cannot pursue different monetary policies in the  monetary  union.  That  would  lead  to
political  conflicts -- with  the  European  Central  Bank,  which  operates  supranationally,  and
probably also between the political opinions that prevail at the national level.
V.
That  first  phase  with  --  in  some  cases  --  high  rates  of  inflation  initially  brought
the system of flexible exchange rates into disrepute. The 1980s taught new lessons, however -- at
least following the change of course in domestic policy starting in France  after  1983.  Inflation
rates  gradually  receded  in  many  countries.  This  was  a  broad  process.  It  took  place  in  the
European  countries  which  belonged  to  the  European  Monetary  System.  It  also  took  place  in
countries  without  fixed  exchange  rates,  however.  Obviously,  many  countries  changed  their
orientation. External exchange  rate  pegging,  such  as  to  the  D-Mark  in  the  European  Monetary
System,  certainly  made  that  easier  for  some  countries.  But  it  also  became  apparent  that  what
mattered crucially in the final analysis was the political will for monetary stability.
This reorientation was  undoubtedly  in  part  a  reaction  to  the  negative  experience
of an inflation-accommodating monetary policy in the 1970s and early 1980s. At the same time,
it was made easier by the fact that over the years, together with a clear-cut target, a number of
central banks had also gained greater independence. For that reason, the system of flexible (or, at
least,  sufficiently,  flexible)  exchange  rates  is  now  regarded  in  a  certain  way  as  having  been
rehabilitated. It is precisely on the condition of free movement of capital and financial markets
which nowadays largely operate internationally that it can indeed exert pressure for a monetary
policy geared to stability.
Another  hope  of  the  supporters  of  flexible  exchange  rates  is  likely  to  remain
unfulfilled,  however:  the  hope  that  speculation  will  always  have  only  a  stabilising  impact  and
BIS Review   97/1997
that, following a change in the fundamentals, the exchange rate will glide smoothly and gently to
a  new  equilibrium  level.  In  actual  fact,  the  path  taken  by  exchange  rates  is  often  quite  bumpy
and  cannot  always  be  explained  convincingly  even  ex  post.  Overreactions  are  not  infrequent.
Obviously,  expectations  of  future  economic  and  political  trends  play  a  major  role  in  the
formation of exchange rates. Not only do they contribute to higher volatility because swings in
mood often set in abruptly. They can apparently also superimpose themselves on current data so
strongly  that  misalignments  may  occur,  at  least  for  a  while.  The  sharp  appreciation  of  the
D-Mark against the US dollar in spring 1995 was a development of that kind.
Admittedly, a fair critic has to concede two mitigating arguments to the system of
flexible  exchange  rates.  First  of  all,  it  is  undoubtedly  too  simplistic  to  blame  the  system  for
every  obviously  excessive  exchange  rate  movement  of  currencies  whose  rates  are  formed
flexibly.  There  are  some,  for  example,  who  regard  the  excessive  trend  of  the  US  dollar  in  the
1980s  as  the  nightmare  of  the  present  global  monetary  system.  But  one  has  to  recognise,  of
course,  what  lay  behind  this.  It  was  during  that  period  that  the  resolute  reversal  in  the  Fed’s
monetary policy under Paul Volcker coincided with the expansionary fiscal policy of the Reagan
administration. In particular, US fiscal policy stood in marked contrast at that time with German
fiscal policy, which was on a course of moderate consolidation.
It  is  quite  possible  to  ask  the  question:  “What  other  exchange  rate  arrangement
would  have  actually  withstood  those  tensions?”  If  anything,  fixed  exchange  rates  would
probably  have  increased  those  tensions  or  would  at  least  have  politicised  them  more  strongly.
The Plaza and Louvre cooperation initiatives were probably the most that could be achieved at
that time, although it has to be said in passing that the results were  by  no  means  only  positive
ones -- as is shown by the example of the development of asset price inflation in Japan, which
was encouraged at that time by an expansionary monetary policy, and its consequences -- from
which that country is still suffering.
As a second line of defence it can be pointed out that world trade is developing at
a furious pace despite flexible exchange rates  between  the  major  international  currencies.  That
may be due to the fact that incorrectly valuated exchange rates tend to correct themselves in the
medium  term.  It  may  also  be  due  to  the  fact  that  good  possibilities  are  now  available  for
guarding against sharp exchange rate fluctuations.
This can take the form of hedging operations in the financial markets. It can also
take the form of a diversification of production centres. To that extent, highly volatile exchange
rates  can  influence  not  only  trade  but  also  direct  investment.  And  that  undoubtedly  has
longer-term effects which should not be underrated. For that reason, exchange rates which are as
stable  as  possible  are,  of  course,  important  --  but  more  in  terms  of  real  rather  than  nominal
stability. However, the question remains of how the objective of real exchange rate stability can
be achieved as comprehensively as possible. There is unlikely to be an answer which is valid for
all countries and their relations with each other.
VI.
In the current debate in Europe the question is also asked repeatedly whether the
future euro/dollar exchange rate will be more stable than, say, the present relationship between
the D-Mark and the dollar. Ultimately, this is an empirical question, of course. It can really be
answered only in the light of the monetary union. There are a number of considerations which
point in differing directions.
BIS Review   97/1997
- 6 -
The  euro  will  probably  have  a  larger  and  deeper  financial  market  than  the
D-Mark. That means, first  of  all,  that  the  price  effects  will  tend  to  be  slighter  when  assets  are
switched  by  the  individual  investors  and  that  the  exchange  rate  will  also  be  moved  less  as  a
result.  The  larger  euro  financial  market  might,  however,  also  lead  to  investors  generally
regarding the euro -- more than the D-Mark now -- as a substitute for the US dollar. That might
increase  the  desire  to  switch  funds  in  certain  situations.  In  that  case,  the  exchange  rate  would
tend to fluctuate more.
At  times,  one  also  encounters  the  argument  that  the  euro  area  --  as  a  large
economic and currency area -- will be relatively less dependent on foreign trade, particularly as
the structure of exports is heavily diversified. The outcome would be -- at least, according to the
standard  textbooks  --  that  the  euro/dollar  exchange  rate  is  not  as  important  for  Europe.  This
argument  is  undoubtedly  fundamentally  correct  and  also  of  significance.  The  comparison  with
other major currency areas -- such as the dollar area -- has only limited validity, however. The
high share of domestic transactions is not the only reason why the United States can, if anything,
neglect the dollar’s exchange rate. It can also do that because its own currency area corresponds
to its national boundaries. In the United States, not only is there a comparatively high degree of
labour  mobility  and  flexibility  in  labour  costs,  there  are  also  compensatory  and  cooperative
mechanisms in the area of public finance at the level of national government. These are able to
cushion remaining regional and sectoral tensions which cause major exchange rate fluctuations.
The supranational monetary union in Europe has neither comparable mobility and
flexibility  nor  compensatory  mechanisms  in  the  area  of  public  finance.  This,  too,  reveals,  the
particular  conditions  of  monetary  union  in  Europe.  In  the  European  monetary  union
asymmetrical effects will probably tend to lead more quickly to a need for real adjustment in the
countries or regions concerned.
VII.
The  present  world  monetary  system  is,  of  course,  not  just  characterised  by  the
major  international  currencies  floating  against  each  other.  At  the  same  time,  many  countries
have entered into arrangements to peg exchange rates of varying intensity. There are essentially
two motives for this:
Firstly -- particularly in the case of smaller economies -- the foreign trade motive.
Countries want to strengthen their international economic integration with a fixed exchange rate.
Secondly,  the  stability  motive.  By  pegging  the  exchange  rate,  countries  want  to
import  credibility  for  an  anti-inflationary  stance  --  particularly  one  which  is  to  be  newly
established.
The record of these arrangements is as varied as the forms of pegging themselves.
A  number  of  emerging  countries  and  countries  in  transition  have  had  mixed  experiences  of
pegging  their  exchange  rates  to  other  currencies.  However  useful  it  was  for  them  in  an  initial
phase  to  gain  confidence  in  the  international  markets  by  pegging  their  exchange  rate,  it  has
almost always  been  the  case  that  tensions  have  arisen  and,  unfortunately,  often  erupted  after  a
few  years  if  the  trend  in  domestic  competitiveness  was  not  able  to  keep  up  with  the  anchor
country  on  a  long-term  basis.  That  has  become  apparent  not  only  for  some  countries  in  Latin
America  and  in  eastern  Europe  but  only  just  recently  in  South-East  Asia,  too  --  especially  if
exchange rates have not been adjusted  quickly  enough  to  changed  competitive  conditions.  The
prospects of a pegging of exchange rates being successful have to be seen in the context of the
BIS Review   97/1997
present-day  international  financial  markets.  Their  impact  on  the  permanence  of  exchange  rate
pegging is an ambivalent one.
On  the  one  hand,  the  international  financial  markets  can  make  arrangements  of
this kind obsolete more or less overnight if the conviction disappears that the pegging will hold.
On the other hand, they encourage strategies of this kind since they offer the countries the option
of financing quite sizeable current account deficits. Mainly two problems arise when pegging the
exchange rate. Firstly, it may be that a country is currently achieving a comparatively high level
of monetary stability but the markets still doubt the country’s determination to persist with that
strategy. In that case, real interest rates  --  at  least  in  a  transitional  phase  --  are  relatively  high.
Doubts  about  sustainability  threaten  to  become  a  kind  of  self-fulfilling  prophecy.  That  was  at
certain periods the French problem with its franc fort policy. Secondly, it may be that a country
achieves  a  significant  fall  in  inflation  by  pegging  the  exchange  rate.  But  a  certain  --  if  only
slight -- inflation  differential  vis-à-vis  the  reference  currency  often  stubbornly  remains
nonetheless.  That  may  be  due  to  inflation  expectations  from  the  past  which  are  not  entirely
eliminated. That may  also  be  due  in  part  to  a  political  deficit;  a  fiscal  policy  that  fails  to  give
adequate  support  to  the  pegging  of  the  exchange  rate  or  an  overgenerous  domestic  monetary
policy in the light of capital inflows.
Be that  as  it  may,  the  outcome  is  that  the  currency  gradually  appreciates  in  real
terms. The current account  shows  a  chronic  deficit.  In  a  situation  of  that  kind,  a  country  must
consider a strategy to find its way out. The fixed parity is not sustainable on a lasting basis, even
if the financial markets go along with it for a time.  This  implies  an  important  message  for  the
envisaged  monetary  union  in  Europe  since  monetary  union  does  not  offer  the  possibility  of  a
way out.
The  requisite  ability  to  achieve  lasting  domestic  and  external  stability  must  be
established and proven before entry in all the member states. That is what the entry criteria aim
for.  It  would  be  a  risk  to  hope  that  a  country’s  necessary  ability  to  achieve  stability  will
gradually  come  about  after  entry  into  monetary  union.  Even  if  this  were  achieved  over  time,
price competitiveness might already have been seriously impaired by then. And the catching-up
process  would  be  even  more  ambitious.  There  will,  in  fact,  be  certain  regional  differences  in
inflation  rates  within  the  monetary  union.  That  is  a  normal  process,  to  the  extent  that  it  will
reflect  differing  trends  in  productivity  or  shifts  in  patterns  of  demand.  Enormous  economic
tensions would occur, however, if it were also a reflection of varying ability to achieve stability
and hence to accept the supranational monetary policy. Sufficient anti-inflationary convergence
must  therefore  precede  entry  into  monetary  union,  not  the  other  way  round.  At  all  events,  the
reverse order would not be without considerable risks.
VIII.
It is desirable and beneficial to have as high a degree of exchange rate stability as
possible  against  the  currencies  of  other  EU  and  non-EU  countries,  too.  Stable  exchange  rates
need convergence -- either in the sense that fundamental deviations do not occur or in the sense
that existing imbalances are rapidly eliminated owing  to  a  high  level  of  flexibility  in  domestic
prices and in the structure of the economy. In principle, that is a valid statement irrespective of
the exchange rate system, in fact.
It just happens to be the  case  that  in  the  reverse  situation  --  if  there  is  a  lack  of
convergence  --  the  exchange  rate  system  plays  a  major  role.  If  exchange  rates  are  flexible,
divergence  in  anti-inflationary  policy  can  increase  volatility  but  it  is  less  dramatic  overall.  In
turn, the degree of convergence is also lower, of course. The degree of convergence tends to be
BIS Review   97/1997
- 8 -
higher  with  fixed  but  adjustable  exchange  rates.  If  there  is,  nevertheless,  no  adequate
convergence,  costs  will  depend  on  whether  there  is  a  timely  realignment.  If  prompt  action  is
taken, the consequences will be contained. By contrast, if the realignments take place only under
pressure  from  the  markets,  high  costs  can  easily  arise  --  not  just  for  the  country  itself,  by  the
way.
A “case” like this can easily negate the credibility of a whole system or make the
unilateral pegging of other countries -- even those in other continents -- more difficult. For that
reason the fact that the alignment of the exchange rates in ERM II is to be made easier than in
the present system is a positive development. It is  to  be  hoped  that  this  will  prove  its  value  in
practice, too, in future.
The choice of the exchange rate system must, at any rate, be consistent with  the
economic  and  political  conditions  which  obtain  in  the  participating  countries.  A  mixed  world
monetary  system  --  with  floating  key  currencies,  on  the  one  hand,  and  regional  integration
through  monetary  union  and  fixed  exchange  rates,  on  the  other  --  might  not  be  the  best  of  all
hypothetical  worlds.  But  that  system  is  probably  the  one  that  corresponds  most  closely  to
conditions  in  the  real  world.  It  is  not  inherently  a  badly  designed  structure  or  a  non-system.
There can indeed be appropriate graduations of flexibility that are in line with the realities.
IX.
Understandably, the question is now frequently being asked: “What place will the
euro take in the future world monetary system?” The answer which is often given is the notion
of a future tripolar system consisting of the dollar, the yen and the euro. That vision is, at least,
not very accurate. If one wants to speak of a tripolar system at all, the weights in it will differ
quite  considerably.  Even  now,  it  is  becoming  apparent  that  the  yen’s  potential  relative  to  the
other two currencies will, if anything, remain limited. At all events, in the foreseeable future it
will probably lack the regional base in Asia itself which the euro is likely to have in Europe.
But the euro  will  first  have  to  earn  its  position.  That  is  because  an  international
currency essentially needs three properties:
 a high level of lasting stability
a strong base in the real economy
and efficient financial markets.
The euro has the potential to fulfil those three conditions. But that will not occur
automatically. For that to happen, the preconditions have to be right.
Replacing  the  dollar  as  the  leading  currency  is,  however,  probably  not  on  the
agenda. Monetary history has shown that a key currency being superseded is ultimately due to an
internal crisis in the country in question. The former leading country loses the confidence of the
markets. The capacity for domestic stability diminishes. The economy becomes less competitive.
That was also the history of the decline of the pound sterling as a global key currency following
the Second World War.
There are no indications whatsoever of a comparable development in the case of
the US dollar. On the contrary, the dollar is a strong currency and -- despite  a  current  account
deficit  and  growing  external  debt  --  the  US  fundamentals  do  not  point  to  a  change  in  that
situation.
BIS Review   97/1997
X.
The euro and  the  dollar  can  enter  into  fruitful  competition,  however.  The  world
monetary  system  as  a  whole  will  be  able  to  benefit  from  healthy  competition  between  two
currencies which are geared to stability. There are three particular factors which would promote
productive competition of this kind:
Firstly,  that  the  current  high  degree  of  correspondence  in  the  anti-inflationary
stance of the United States and Europe continues; secondly that fiscal policy in both the Unites
States and Europe remains on a similar course of consolidation and -- particularly in Europe --
achieves  further  progress;  and  thirdly,  that  both  the  United  States  and  Europe  fulfil  the
expectations of meeting the economic challenges which they face.
The  United  States  must  demonstrate  that  its  high  debtor  position  and  hence  its
future financial obligations are covered by the dynamism, efficiency and innovative potential of
its  economy.  The  Europeans  must  show  that  they  are  making  structural  changes  to  tackle  the
problem of unemployment and that they are improving their competitiveness in global markets.
Productive competition of this kind does not imply a rejection of greater world-wide cooperation
in economic and monetary policies with the aim of contributing to higher exchange rate stability.
On the contrary, it is precisely in the future, too, that cooperation of this kind will be meaningful
and desirable.
In  saying  this,  what  should  not  be  overlooked  is  that  exchange  rates  are  not  the
actual  operational  parameters.  Rather,  they  are  the  result  of  economic  developments  and
economic policy in the participating countries. For that reason, there is one lesson which should
conclude  this  lecture.  It  is  perhaps  as  old  as  monetary  history  itself.  A  suitable  monetary
framework  can  help  a  country  to  carry  out  the  structural  reforms  which  are  needed.  Being  a
substitute for the adjustments which an economy has to make to changed conditions, however, is
something which monetary policy -- however good it is -- cannot do.
BIS Review   97/1997
