Mr.  Yam  gives  a  broadbrush  picture  of  Asian  monetary  co-operation      Per
Jacobsson  Lecture  given  by  Mr.  Joseph  Yam  J.P.,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority in Hong Kong, on 21/9/97.
Introduction
1. Good afternoon. On behalf of the people of Hong Kong, particularly those of us atthe Hong Kong Monetary Authority, let me extend my warmest welcome to all of you to Hong Kong.
For those of you who have visited Hong Kong before, perhaps many times, I hope you are pleased to
see that Hong Kong, as a Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China, remains
as  vibrant  and  dynamic  as  you  have  known  in  the  past,  retaining  much  of  its  free  market
characteristics, under the principle of “one country, two systems”.
2.  It  is  a  great  honour  and  privilege  for  me  to  be  invited  to  give  this  year’s  Per
Jacobsson  Lecture.  As  a  Managing  Director  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  Mr  Per
Jacobsson  led  a  life  that  was  dedicated  to  the  promotion  of  both  European  and  later  international
monetary co-operation. It is only befitting that a lecture  held  in  Asia  in  memory  of  this  great  man
should address the topic of Asian monetary co-operation. This is also a subject that has been brought
to sharp focus in the light of the recent turmoil in the currency markets of Asia.
3.  What  I  intend  to  do  this  afternoon  is  first  to  define  what  international  monetary
co-operation is about, and in this connection, survey the attitudes of the parties that should have an
interest in such co-operation and discuss the form of this co-operation. I wish to point out that these
attitudes have, perhaps unintentionally, led to international monetary co-operation being regionalized.
I shall then focus specifically on Asian monetary co-operation, covering the history, or the lack of it,
and the monetary problems, current and potential ones, that Asian economies face. I shall then make
a case for much greater monetary co-operation in Asia. I shall also suggest a way forward for Asian
monetary co-operation, with a strategy and a list of issues to be addressed in such co-operation.
4.  Let  me  start  now  by  attempting  a  definition  on  what  monetary  co-operation  is
about.  The  Oxford  Dictionary  defines  “co-operation”  as  “working  together  to  the  same  end”.  So  I
Monetary Co-operation
suppose monetary co-operation can simply be defined as working together to the same monetary end.
This then leads to the questions as to what that same monetary end should be, who should be working
together and the form in which they should best work together, particularly when one is talking about
monetary co-operation across monetary systems on a global or regional dimension.
5. The Articles of Agreement of the IMF provide some guidance on what that same
monetary end should be. In defining the purposes of the IMF in Article I to be, among other things,
“to  promote  international  monetary  co-operation”,  the  term  “consultation  and  collaboration  on
international monetary problems” is used. So it would be appropriate to describe that same monetary
end  as  the  prevention  and  cure  of  monetary  problems.  Indeed,  the  rapid  pace  of  financial
liberalization  and  the  associated  globalization  of  financial  markets  have  meant  that  monetary
problems,  when  they  arise,  can  be  highly  contagious  on  the  global  and  particularly  on  a  regional
dimension. And if they are to be properly handled, by way of prevention or cure, there is a clear need
for international monetary co-operation.
6. As to who should be working together, it is quite obvious that the interested parties
would  necessarily  include  the  monetary  authorities  of  economies  facing  or  potentially  exposed  to
monetary problems. The increasing realization of this need to work together has led to the formation
of various, mostly regional, forums where monetary authorities gather to discuss issues of common
interest.
BIS Review   91/1997
- 2 -
7.  Insofar  as  the  Asian  region  is  concerned,  these  forums  are  proving  to  be  quite
useful, but there is regrettably also some resistance in making further and the much needed progress
because of, believe it or not, turf issues between ministries of finance and central banks, or perceived
excessive  rivalry  on  the  part  of  individual  economies  in  vying  for  the  lead  and  influence  in  the
co-operative effort. But these are facts of life that hopefully should not stand too much in the way of
progress for the benefit of all in the longer term. It is also a fact of life regrettably that minds do not
normally become adequately focused until they are jostled by damaging crises.
8.  There  are  of  course  the  multilateral  institutions  like  the  IMF  and  the  Bank  for
International Settlements (BIS), and a number of international groupings of experts, who have a clear
mandate  or  a  keen  interest  in,  among  other  things,  promoting  international  monetary  co-operation.
They have been invaluable in providing the necessary support and guidance to monetary co-operation
in Asia.
9.  Nevertheless,  some  in  this  region  have  felt  that  such  support  and  guidance,
particularly from the multilateral institutions, have been less forthcoming than they would have liked,
comparing for example the support given to Thailand  with  Mexico.  They  also  feel  that  the  special
circumstances and interests of economies in the region have not been adequately taken into account.
Nor do their voices count for enough.
10. Whether or not this feeling is justified, one consequence is for regional initiatives
to surface. This is no bad thing and perhaps the pragmatic way forward, given the need realistically to
address regional disparities in financial markets, infrastructure and degrees of financial liberalization.
But the down side risk which all of us should be aware of is the possibility that the global financial
market may then become segmented into regional blocs which may result in more competition and
friction, rather than co-operation.
11. On the form of monetary co-operation, there is a wide spectrum of experience on
the basis  of  current  practice.  There  is  on  the  one  extreme  the  simple  exchange  of  information  and
expertise amongst monetary authorities helpful to the management of the domestic monetary system
generally, covering the whole range of central banking functions in the management of the currency,
the  supervision  of  financial  institutions,  the  development  of  the  financial  infrastructure,  the
management  of  foreign  reserves,  etc.  On  the  other  extreme,  there  is  monetary  co-operation  to  the
extent of achieving monetary union or integration.
12. In between the two extremes there are arrangements for policy co-ordination at the
macro  level  initiated  on  the  realization  of  increasing  international,  particularly  regional,  economic
interdependence. There are also the more focused schemes for mutual assistance in the provision of
liquidity to facilitate effective monetary management, which may or may not involve the assumption
of credit risks between governments. There have also been considerable efforts spent in supervisory
co-operation  towards  the  standardization  of  supervisory  practices  in  order  to  promote  international
financial stability, again in recognition of the possibility of the damaging contagion effect of financial
crises  across  financial  systems.  Then  there  are  the  more  forward-looking  arrangements  for  the
development and linkages of elements of the financial infrastructure to facilitate the efficient and safe
financial intermediation across monetary systems.
13.  Obviously  no  one  point  on  this  wide  spectrum  of  international  monetary
co-operation can be considered as the ideal situation. Much depends on the needs  arising  from  the
circumstances, and the circumstances are changing all the time. But along with financial liberalization
and the globalization of financial markets, the trend, to the extent that one can be ascertained, seems
clearly  to  be  one  of  increasing  monetary  co-operation.  As  is  well  known,  European  monetary
co-operation  is  aiming  for  monetary  integration  by  1999,  having  moved  in  the  past  50  years  from
BIS Review   91/1997
- 3 -
information exchange  to  policy  co-ordination.  Whether  this  could  be  achieved  on  time  or  not,  and
whether  monetary  integration  should  necessarily  then  be  considered  as  the  final  goal  of  monetary
co-operation in other regions, we shall have to wait and see. But one has to admire the vision of the
pioneer thinkers. I understand that the French economist Jacques Rueff actually declared way back in
the 1950s that “Europe will be created via a currency or not at all”.
14.  By  contrast,  Asian  monetary  co-operation  is  considerably  less  well  structured.
There is traditionally  some  exchange  of  information,  mostly  on  a  bilateral  basis,  through  meetings
conducted annually, and largely prior to a game of golf or even on the golf course. There is little, if
any,  policy  co-ordination  amongst  Asian  economies,  not  to  mention  any  interest  in  monetary
integration.  It  is  not  clear  whether  this  is  a  reflection  of  reluctance  to  subject  domestic  policy
decisions  to  external  influence.  Indeed,  until  recently  the  majority  of  the  economies  in  the  region
seemed  happy  to  concede  their  sovereign  right  over  monetary  policy  to  the  central  banks  of  their
major trading partners, notably the United States, through maintaining a stable exchange rate against
the  US  dollar  by  varying  degrees.  But  whatever  the  reason  for  the  relative  lack  of  monetary
co-operation  in  the  past,  there  have  been  significant  changes  recently,  spurred  by  the  events
surrounding Mexico which affected the region and those of Thailand which is right in the middle of
our region. There is serious and continuing discussion on the subject of Asian monetary co-operation.
Hong  Kong  stands  ready  to  contribute  to  this  discussion  and  I  very  much  hope  that  a  long  term
strategy could come out of this.
History of Asian Monetary Co-operation
15. Let me now describe briefly to you the history of Asian monetary co-operation. In
the  post-war  period,  many  Asian  central  banks  evolved  from  colonial  currency  boards,  which
practised  the  virtue  of  stable  money  fixed  to  an  international  reserve  currency.  As  a  result  of  this
monetary discipline, supported by sound fiscal discipline, Asia has enjoyed stable growth with low
inflation. As Asian economies gradually opened their markets to international trade and competition,
with Hong Kong setting a good example of how free markets work, the existence of stable exchange
rates,  largely  linked  to  the  US  dollar,  formed  the  anchor  of  Asian  growth.  The  need  for  monetary
co-operation amongst Asian economies, therefore, did not matter much as long as each traded mainly
with Europe or America using the US dollar as the main currency of trade.
16.  This  was  the  reason  why  the  work  of  the  principal  forum  for  central  bank
discussions in the late 1950s called SEANZA (South East Asia, New Zealand and Australia) focused
mainly at providing training for central bankers. The 18 members of this group cover a geographical
area that spans the whole of Asia-Pacific from India to New Zealand. Training and research was also
the primary focus of another central bank forum founded in 1966. This is SEACEN (Southeast Asian
Central Banks), comprising ten central bank members with a research and training  centre  in  Kuala
Lumpur.
17. In the 1990s, the number of Asia Pacific groupings increased, partly as a result of
accelerating intra-regional trade. The establishment of APEC (Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation)
in  1989  promoted  trade  and  investment  amongst  the  18  member  economies,  but  there  were  only
ancillary  discussions  on  monetary  co-operation.  In  February  1991,  nevertheless,  Asian  monetary
co-operation  took  a  quiet  but  significant  step  forward  with  the  creation  of  EMEAP  (Executives’
Meeting of East Asia Pacific Central Banks). This 11-member group of central banks was initiated by
the Bank of Japan. At the beginning, EMEAP concentrated on the exchange of information on market
developments in the economies of members and was the forum for the Bank of Japan to brief others
on G-7 discussions. But it has since evolved into quite a productive, and certainly the most active,
forum for central banking discussions in the region to date through its biannual meetings of deputy
governors and an annual meeting of governors.
BIS Review   91/1997
- 4 -
18.  The  discussion  in  EMEAP  now  has  a  sharp  focus  on  Asian  monetary
co-operation.  This  need  was  perhaps  crystallized  by  the  Mexican  crisis,  which  rippled  to  Asian
currencies in January 1995. In its wake, I convened an informal meeting of several EMEAP central
banks that experienced speculative activity. There was immediate agreement that it would be useful
to  exchange  market  intelligence  and  to  share  knowledge  and  techniques  on  monetary  operations
helpful  to  the  maintenance  of  monetary  stability.  Out  of  this  meeting  also  evolved  the  package  of
bilateral repurchase agreements of US Treasuries signed by five central banks in Hong Kong on 20
November 1995 and aimed at the enhancement of the liquidity of the foreign reserves that they hold
-- a  historic  landmark  in  Asian  monetary  co-operation  that  eventually  expanded  to  cover  all  the
eleven EMEAP members.
19.  In  this  connection,  I  should  pay  tribute  to  the  foresight  of  Bernie  Fraser,  then
Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  who  called  for  the  establishment  of  a  new  regional
institution -- for want  of  a  better  name,  an  Asian  BIS  --  to  promote  Asian  monetary  co-operation.
Bernie  saw  quite  rightly  that  “globalisation  is  elevating  the  international  dimension  of  monetary
co-operation”. In response to his call, EMEAP convened a working group to study the proposals and,
at its first Governors’ Meeting in Tokyo in July 1996, further established two working groups and a
study  group  to  share  knowledge  and  expertise  on  financial  market  development,  central  bank
operations and banking supervision issues respectively. Although the question on the establishment
of a regional institution to further Asian monetary co-operation has been put aside for the time being,
the progress achieved by the various groups was commendable, with ambitious plans to produce the
Asian equivalent of the Green Book on banking supervision, the Red Book on payment systems and
a Gold Book on reserve management practices.
20.  Meanwhile,  greater  international  monetary  co-operation  involving  the  Asian
economies was also advanced when the BIS admitted the People’s Bank of China, the Reserve Bank
of India, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, the Monetary Authority of Singapore and the Bank of
Korea,  among  others,  to  its  membership  in  1996,  the  first  new  Asian  members  after  the  Bank  of
Japan.
21. All these initiatives were unfortunately overshadowed by the advent of the Thai
crisis,  which  erupted  in  May  this  year.  But  it  was  still  to  EMEAP’s  credit  that  in  the  second
Governors’  meeting  in  Shanghai  in  July,  the  group  called  for  the  creation  of  an  Asian  facility  to
supplement  the  IMF  in  providing  assistance  to  member  economies  in  Asia  to  make  structural
adjustments. That historic decision paved the way for the smooth meeting organized by the Fund in
Tokyo  two  weeks  later  in  August  when  more  than  US$10  billion  out  of  a  total  package  of
US$17 billion  facility  to  Thailand  was  amassed  from  EMEAP  members  with  almost  no  fuss.
Meanwhile,  the  call  for  an  Asian  facility  is  still  being  considered.  Discussions  are  continuing
amongst the interested parties, whenever opportunities present themselves.
Asian Monetary Problems
22.  It  is  perhaps  one  of  the  ironies  of  the  post-Bretton  Woods  era  that  the  modern
world  is  no  longer  generally  short  of  liquidity,  and  indeed  is  arguably  at  present  overflush  with
liquidity. Yet amidst all this liquidity and prosperity, liquidity crunches can even test the solvency of
nations. The currency turbulence in Asia has prompted a realization of this irony and consequently
much  soul  searching  on  the  appropriateness  of  exchange  rate  and  other  monetary  arrangements,
macroeconomic and structural adjustment policies, the adequacy of financial market regulation  and
banking  supervision,  the  pace  of  financial  liberalization,  etc.  Many  words  of  wisdom  are  being
offered. While some are critical of the wisdom of fixed exchange rate systems, others blame volatile
capital flows and currency speculators for the currency crises in rather strong and emotive terms. Still
others fault inappropriate government policies and perhaps complacency in not taking early  action.
BIS Review   91/1997
- 5 -
All  in  all  a  rather  confusing  picture.  At  the  risk  of  causing  even  greater  confusion,  let  me  try  to
identify and articulate the monetary problems that Asian economies have been facing.
23. Capital inflow must be at the top of the list. At the beginning of the decade, net
capital inflow to emerging markets was less than US$50 billion a year. By 1996, however, this had
increased to US$245 billion. Asia has received roughly half of this capital inflow, thanks to the rather
attractive basic economic fundamentals. These  fundamentals,  incidentally,  have  remained  attractive
today, notwithstanding the recent turmoil in Asian financial markets. The key factors that contributed
to the surge in capital flows into the region include Japan’s willingness to export capital as a result of
sustained  and  large  current  account  surpluses.  The  rising  costs  of  production  in  Japan,  associated
with the appreciation of the yen have forced many Japanese firms to relocate their production to the
rest  of  Asia.  Also  contributing  was  the  low  interest  rate  policy  in  the  industrial  economies,
particularly in Japan in the post-bubble  phase,  which  has  flooded  the  global  market  with  liquidity.
Increasing amounts of mutual funds and pension funds of these economies looked for higher returns
in the emerging markets. Clearly, Asian economies have benefited much from such capital inflows,
but at the same time they have exposed themselves to the threat of a sudden loss of market confidence
and  hence  large  outflows  of  funds  due  to  policy  mistakes  or  shifts  in  the  international  economic
environment. This is particularly true if a large proportion of inflows are volatile portfolio investment
or short-term borrowing.
24. The next monetary problem concerns current account deficits. A number of Asian
economies were able to run larger than normal current account deficits in the balance  of  payments
because they were easily funded by capital inflows. The bad news about large capital inflows is that
they  might  allow  investment  and  even  consumption  to  expand  without  enduring  the  pain  of
overheating or loss of competitiveness. Higher  levels  of  domestic  credit,  consumption,  investment,
growth and even budget revenues can be sustained at the cost of rapid accumulation of foreign debt.
To make matters worse, over 80% of the current account deficits of selected Asian economies was
funded from short-term bank debt. In hindsight, the ready availability of short-term external financing
might have delayed the necessary policy adjustments in face of cyclical and structural changes in the
domestic  and  international  economic  environment.  In  short,  we  can  all  easily  make  the  mistake  of
taking capital inflows for granted.
25.  Then  there  is  asset  price  inflation  which  is  a  rather  common  consequence  of
capital inflows. In an open economic environment, capital inflows may not lead to  consumer  price
inflation, since imports would alleviate excess demand. However, if the domestic financial system is
underdeveloped  and  financial  institutions  are  not  adequately  supervised,  as  external  hot  money
increases  the  deposit  base  of  domestic  banks  they  may  be  lured  into  fueling  domestic  asset  price
bubbles. These have two major consequences. First, asset price inflation eventually leads to domestic
inflation and erodes external competitiveness. Second, excessive lending concentration in real estate
exposes financial institutions to large non-performing loans  when  oversupply  of  property  emerges.
Indeed, banks are absorbing credit risk on top of interest rate and exchange rate risks. In some Asian
economies, weakness of the financial system has constrained the ability of the monetary authorities to
raise interest rates to defend their currencies when the exchange rates are under pressure. Conversely,
to allow the currency to depreciate exposes banks and other borrowers to exchange losses on their
unhedged foreign currency liabilities.
26. At the same time, the external environment has been changing. Whilst Asia was
enjoying an unprecedented boom, the global competitive environment was subtly but surely shifting,
which led to portfolio rebalancing by global  asset  managers.  The  adjustments  in  the  US  economy,
through  fiscal  and  monetary  tightening,  and  technology  and  corporate  restructuring,  had  brought
substantial benefits in the form of lower budget deficits, and the lowest levels of unemployment and
inflation  for  decades.  In  case  anyone  forgets,  the  US  equity  market  has  in  the  last  three  years
outperformed almost all Asian equity markets with the exception of that of China. Funds have been
BIS Review   91/1997
- 6 -
attracted back to the US markets which at the same time strengthened the US dollar, adding to the
momentum of that flow. It was a pure case of risk versus return.
27.  In  addition,  growing  competition  at  the  low-wage  end  of  industries  came  from
other Asian and non-Asian  economies.  In  Europe,  cheaper  production  came  from  the  restructuring
economies of Eastern Europe. Competition came from the revival of Latin American economies with
improved access to the US market through NAFTA. In Asia, India and China are emerging as major
exporters. As a result, exports in Asia suffered a downturn, while imports continued to rise, leading
to growing levels of current account deficits.
28. Then came problems on the exchange rate front. The volatility of key exchange
rates, particularly that of the yen against the US dollar, has placed the balance of payments of some
Asian economies under considerable stress. For instance, since most Asian currencies are explicitly
or  implicitly  linked  to  the  US  dollar,  the  appreciation  of  the  US  dollar  severely  squeezed  the
exporters, who have to compete with their rivals in Japan and the emerging economies in other parts
of the world. The weakness of the yen revived Japanese exports, placing Japan in direct competition
with  its  major  trading  partners  in  Asia,  as  the  cheaper  yen  stimulated  exports  of  Japanese  durable
goods and capital goods to Asia, while reducing imports from the region. It did not make sense to
export out of the subsidiaries in ASEAN when it was cheaper to buy directly from the plant in Japan.
The weaker yen also has a tendency to slow foreign direct investment from Japan, as it is no longer
so expensive to produce in Japan.
29. As we are all aware, this combination of Asian monetary problems has recently
put tremendous pressure on the financial markets, in particular the foreign exchange markets, in the
region. This was compounded by speculators who took advantage of these market developments to
set up their attacks, resulting in the currency turmoil in Asian currencies that we have seen.
30. Here I cannot possibly resist the temptation to offer a few comments. There is a
common perception that the adoption of more flexible exchange rate regimes by a number of Asian
economies  implied  a  failure  of  fixed  exchange  rate  systems.  This  is  in  my  view  a  mistaken
perception. As all central bankers are aware, there is no one perfect exchange rate regime. One of the
dilemmas of any exchange rate regime is how the exchange rate can reflect the underlying economic
conditions,  which  are  constantly  changing,  so  that  external  balance  can  be  achieved.  A  fixed
exchange rate regime can function well if there is strict financial and fiscal discipline, and flexibility
of domestic goods and services markets to adjust for any structural changes in the economy. On the
other hand, a flexible exchange rate regime can also work, provided that the policy package is correct
and there is a well functioning foreign exchange and financial market. But it would be a mistake to
think devaluation  can  substitute  for  fundamental  policy  adjustments  to  correct  a  structural  external
imbalance. Competitive devaluations are “beggar-thy-neighbour” policies that are self defeating.
31.  Indeed,  the  adoption  of  more  flexible  exchange  rate  systems  by  some  Asian
economies has not meant they can avoid the adjustments that are currently being undertaken. With a
fixed  exchange  rate  under  a  very  strong  and  disciplined  regime  in  the  form  of  a  currency  board
system, Hong Kong focused precisely on our underlying productivity, maintaining strict financial and
fiscal discipline, and also prudent banking supervision, in order to enhance the resilience of the linked
exchange rate system, and minimize and manage the downside risks of overheating in the economy.
32. Let me also put the currency adjustments in their proper perspective. In the  last
few years, the currencies with the greatest adjustments and volatility have been the G-3 currencies,
rather than the Asian currencies. The yen has depreciated by 50% against the US dollar from its peak
in  1995.  The  deutschemark  has  likewise  fallen  by  over  30%.  In  comparison,  the  Asian  currencies
have  until  recently  remained  relatively  stable.  The  Hong  Kong  dollar  has  been  the  most  stable  of
BIS Review   91/1997
- 7 -
Asian  currencies,  moving  less  than  1%  against  the  US  dollar.  It  is  the  greater  volatility  of  G-3
currencies that ultimately contributed to, if not caused, the volatility in smaller regional currencies.
33. There is yet another Asian monetary problem and this is one of a different nature.
It  concerns  the  effectiveness  of  financial  intermediation  in  this  region.  Asia  needs  substantial
investments in the economic infrastructure to prevent bottlenecks from hindering sustained growth.
The World Bank has estimated that for East Asia alone, projected infrastructure investments amount
to US$1.5 trillion between 1995-2004. If other forms of capital investment are included, the figure
rises to a staggering $8 trillion. At the same time, Asian economies also have very high savings rates,
some as high as 30% to 50%. The aging population in Northern Asia, for example, will be ploughing
increasing savings into institutionalized retirement funds, which are risk-averse and would need to be
invested  in  markets  generating,  other  things  being  equal,  higher  returns,  lower  risks  and  greater
liquidity. Japan, for example, has an estimated ¥1200 trillion outstanding in private savings that must
be  invested.  When  the  Hong  Kong  Mandatory  Provident  Fund  comes  into  operation  by  the  year
2000, about 4% of Hong Kong’s GDP would be added annually to institutional investments. But the
question is why Asian savings do not seem to have been adequately and effectively channeled into
Asian investments in a manner more conducive to ensuring monetary and financial stability.
34.  Much  of  Asian  savings,  in  particular  official  sector  savings  and  private  sector
savings that have been institutionalized, are still invested in assets of OECD countries, although the
trend has been a gradually falling one. I cannot speak for other economies, but insofar as Hong Kong
is concerned, in excess of 95% of our US$85 billion of foreign reserves are invested outside Asia.
Specifically, in the management of our foreign reserves, we work against a preferred neutral position
of about 75% in US dollar assets, mostly in US Treasury securities. I understand also that more than
80% of total Asian foreign exchange reserves amounting to US$600 billion are invested  largely  in
North  America  and  Europe.  At  the  same  time,  there  has  been  much  foreign  direct  investment  and
foreign portfolio investment from OECD countries  in  Asia.  It  can  be  argued  therefore  that  Asia  is
financing much of the budget deficits of developed economies, particularly the United States, but has
to try hard to attract money back into the region through foreign investments. And the volatility of
foreign  portfolio  investments  has  been  a  major  cause  of  disruptions  to  the  monetary  and  financial
systems of the Asian economies. Some have even gone as far as to say that the Asian economies are
providing the funding to hedge funds in non-Asian centres to play havoc with their currencies and
financial markets.
35.  This  comment  is  perhaps  a  little  unkind,  given  the  important  role  that  is  being
played  by  the  international  financial  community  in  the  globalized  financial  environment.  But  there
certainly  is  a  problem  with  the  effectiveness  of  financial  intermediation  in  this  region  which  is
inhibiting  the  flow  of  long-term  savings  into  long-term  investments.  I  believe  an  important  factor
behind this is the perceived or actual risks inherent in dealing with the products, the intermediaries
and the market that are part of the process of financial intermediation. I also believe that monetary
authorities have a responsibility, through concerted efforts in prudential regulation and supervision,
and the development of the financial infrastructure, to contain these risks to levels more acceptable to
those concerned, including themselves as managers of official foreign reserves.
The Case for Asian Monetary Co-operation
36. These Asian monetary problems which I have described can seriously undermine
the ability of Asian monetary authorities to deal with shocks, and so when shocks do come they will
cause much agony in terms of economic disruptions and painful adjustments. The problems are also
highly contagious, transmitted through sudden shifts in the same direction in the perception of risks
by international investors, as they looked for worrisome similarities amongst Asian economies, as the
recent turmoil in Asian currency markets has shown. The fall in one market may also lead them to
look for liquidity in other markets, thus contributing further to the contagion.
BIS Review   91/1997
- 8 -
37.  We  are  living  in  an  ever  more  interdependent  region.  Increasing  trade  and
investment flows, made possible by trade and financial market liberalization, have  bound  our  fates
together.  A  decade  ago,  we  relied  heavily  on  markets  outside  Asia  for  our  products,  sending  over
three-quarters of exports to those markets. That reliance has been reduced sharply. In 1996, around
35% of trade in East Asia was conducted within the region, compared with the share of 28% with
NAFTA countries and 20% with the European Union.
38.  On  investment  and  capital  flows,  the  story  is  similar.  As  recently  as  in  1989,
equity  flows  within  the  Asian  region  amounted  to  only  US$24  billion.  In  1995,  the  flows  had
increased three-fold to almost US$80 billion. According to the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the
share  of  foreign  direct  investment  from  North  America  and  the  European  Union  in  East  Asia  had
fallen  from  40%  of  the  total  fifteen  years  ago  to  25%  by  1993.  Now  over  50%  of  foreign  direct
investment comes from within the region. This trend can only grow, as the population giants of China
and India increasingly become more engaged in trade and investment (see Table 5).
39. Much greater interdependence of course means that policies in one economy can
have  important  implications  for  others.  A  more  liberalized  financial  environment  also  means  that
policy mistakes can be punished almost instantaneously by the market and that monetary problems in
one economy can easily spread to others. So, referring again to one of the purposes of the IMF, as
defined  in  its  Articles  of  Agreement,  there  is  a  clear  need  “to  promote  international  monetary
co-operation” through “consultation and collaboration” on these  “international  monetary  problems”
that we now face in the Asian region.
The Way Forward
40. I  would  like  now  to  spell  out  how  I  think  monetary  co-operation  in  this  region
should proceed. In order to have effective monetary co-operation, we must have clearly defined and
realistic goals. Over-ambitious goals may not be credible, and may even be counterproductive. In any
case, they may not be politically acceptable to the individual economies. Monetary co-operation, and
indeed any type of co-operation, is meaningless when you do not have common goals.
41.  Notwithstanding  increasing  economic  integration,  one  has  to  accept  reality,  and
this is that the economies in Asia are a very diverse group. There are dramatic differences with regard
to political institutions, economic systems, basic infrastructure and any aspect you care to think of. In
terms of economic structure, for example, they range from some of the largest agricultural economies
in the world to the most urban economies. In terms of economic philosophy, they range from some of
the freest economies in the world to economies where there is considerable central planning. In terms
of  the  stage  of  economic  development,  they  range  from  economies  with  the  highest  per  capita
incomes  to  those  still  with  a  large  part  of  their  population  living  in  poverty.  In  terms  of  financial
sector development, they range from sophisticated international financial centres with deep financial
markets and robust financial infrastructures to those which have just begun building  their  financial
systems.
42. Reflecting such diversity, there are also dramatic differences in policies, in terms
of the objectives pursued and the approaches to achieving those objectives. Focusing specifically on
monetary  policy,  although  there  seems  to  be  a  clear  consensus  on  the  desirability  of  maintaining
currency  stability,  there  is  great  diversity  on  the  degree  of  clarity  with  which  this  is  defined.  For
some, currency stability is what the government thinks is politically expedient at the time. For others,
currency stability is defined in the clearest of terms. Associated with this, there is also great diversity
in the degree of independence of the monetary authorities and the degree of discretion available to
them arising from the different monetary or exchange rate regimes practised. Nothing can be more
polar than, for example, the currency board version of a fixed exchange regime in Hong Kong and
BIS Review   91/1997
- 9 -
the totally free float of New Zealand. Given differences in the economic and financial structure on the
one  hand,  and  differences  in  policy  objectives  and  approaches  on  the  other,  the  monetary
transmission  mechanism  of  Asian  economies  and  their  monetary  reactions  to  internal  and  external
shocks are also quite different.
43.  How  then  should  Asian  economies  pursue  Asian  monetary  co-operation?  The
extent of the diversity  of  economies  in  Asia  points  quite  clearly  to  one  conclusion  and  this  is  that
monetary  integration  is  inappropriate,  at  least  for  the  time  being.  One  can  perhaps  get  a  better
appreciation of this argument by attempting to apply the Maastricht criteria for European monetary
union  to  Asia.  Thus  realistically  Asian  monetary  co-operation  will  have  to  be  pursued  under  a
multi-currency  environment.  Asian  monetary  co-operation  is  not  about  monetary  integration.  The
situation argues for monetary segregation, even to the extent, in the case of China, of maintaining two
currencies in one country: the Renminbi for the Mainland of China and the Hong Kong dollar for the
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. Again apply the Maastricht criteria to the Mainland of
China  and  Hong  Kong  and  you  will  come  quickly  to  the  conclusion  that  the  “one  country,  two
currencies” arrangement is a sensible one. It is essential if Hong Kong is to continue to be stable and
prosperous as an international financial centre, as provided for in the Basic Law of Hong Kong.
44. Moving along the spectrum  for  monetary  co-operation  from  the  extreme  end  of
monetary integration, we could consider whether some form of monetary policy co-ordination in Asia
is appropriate. So far, however, there seems to be a lack of interest amongst monetary authorities in
Asia in promoting this.  Perhaps  there  has  been  no  such  need  identified.  Monetary  sovereignty  has
been  carefully  guarded  in  this  region.  There  is  also  concern,  I  suppose,  on  the  likelihood  of
dominance  in  such  co-ordination  by  the  more  influential  economies  in  terms  of  size  and  financial
clout.  There  has  therefore  been  no  attempt  to  identify  the  pros  and  cons  of  monetary  policy
co-ordination  in  Asia.  The  subject  has  not  even  featured  in  any  of  the  discussions  amongst  the
regional  central  bank  groups  that  I  know  of.  But  one  must  of  course  keep  an  open  mind  on  the
subject.  The  contagious  turmoil  in  the  currencies  and  financial  markets  of  Asia  will  I  am  sure
stimulate some interest in it. Without pre-judging the outcome, I expect some initiative in putting the
matter on the agenda for future discussions amongst monetary authorities in the region.
45. By contrast, there is a great deal of enthusiasm amongst monetary authorities of
the  region  to  promote  Asian  monetary  co-operation  when  this  does  not  inhibit  the  freedom  to
determine domestic policies. I am sure for example that we would be keen to talk to each other about
how to strengthen our monetary defensive mechanisms against attacks on our currencies, and how to
enhance the pain tolerance level of our financial systems so that we can absorb financial shocks more
effectively. There is also considerable interest in building more robust financial infrastructures on the
one hand to facilitate effective financial intermediation and on the other hand to limit the contagion
effect of financial crises domestically and on  a  regional  basis.  I  believe  that  this  is  a  sensible  way
forward, at least for the time being. At the EMEAP forum, monetary authorities have, as I mentioned
earlier, examined the whole spectrum of central banking functions quite comprehensively and have
identified issues where monetary co-operation would be beneficial.
46. Before going  into  these  issues,  let  me  just  make  two  points  about  the  approach
that  should  be  adopted  in  Asian  monetary  co-operation.  First  is  that  Asian  monetary  co-operation
must be considered within the context of global monetary co-operation. In other words, we  should
not, and I believe we are not trying to, build Fortress Asia. I do not believe that this is in the best
interest  of  Asia.  It  is  essential  that  we  work  within  the  international  monetary  and  institutional
framework as much as possible. Let us not forget that the international monetary order is still largely
determined  by  the  G-3  currencies.  Asian  economies  cannot  on  their  own,  or  without  the  help  of
others, determine the fate of the G-3 currencies, even though we  may  have  views  about  the  future
system.
BIS Review   91/1997
- 10 -
47. Second is that, given the great diversity of the economies in the region, being at
very  different  stages  of  financial  development,  Asian  monetary  co-operation  should  proceed  with
flexibility and at a pace comfortable to those wishing to take part in it. It would be pragmatic to build
monetary co-operation and establish links, perhaps first at the bilateral level, between those who are
ready  and  willing,  and  are  operating  compatible  systems:  for  example,  bilateral  repurchase
agreements  of  US  Treasury  securities  to  enhance  each  other’s  liquidity  of  foreign  reserves,  or
bilateral  linkages  of  real  time  payment  systems  and  clearing  systems  for  securities  to  facilitate
effective financial intermediation across the cooperating economies. These bilateral  linkages  would
serve  to  set  targets  and  standards  for  others  in  the  region  who  are  not  quite  ready.  And  when
eventually  the  majority  of  the  bilateral  linkages  have  been  established,  we  would  then  have  a
network, an Asian monetary network, of considerable strength, which would hopefully enable Asian
monetary  problems  to  be  tackled  effectively.  It  should  also  be  a  network  that  is  capable  of  being
linked  up  with  monetary  systems  outside  the  region,  with  a  view  to  building  the  global  monetary
framework.
Issues for Asian Monetary Co-operation
48. Let me now turn to specific issues for Asian monetary co-operation. There are five
areas.  These  are  information  exchange,  resource  provision,  market  infrastructure  development,
banking supervision and financial regulation, and policy consultations.
49.  As  the  experience  of  EMEAP  has  shown,  information  exchange  has  been  the
easiest  area  of  monetary  co-operation.  The  use  of  the  EMEAP  Virtual  Secretariat,  using  Internet
technology,  has  greatly  facilitated  the  exchange  of  information,  helping  the  sharing  of  market
intelligence, techniques and experience in all areas of central banking. The benefits are quite evident
and I will not therefore dwell on this issue other than to mention the need  perhaps  to  consider  the
removal  of  legal  or  other  inhibitions  to  information  exchange  and  sharing  amongst  central  banks.
Confidentiality provisions in domestic legislation may need to be suitably adapted in this context.
50. Let me quickly turn to resource provision. Here we can distinguish between the
provision of liquidity and the provision of credit. On the provision of liquidity, I have mentioned the
network  of  bilateral  repurchase  agreements  of  US  Treasury  securities  amongst  EMEAP  central
banks. But, as has been pointed out, the contagious nature of Asian monetary problems is such that
when  one  of  us  is  short  of  liquid  foreign  reserves,  others  may  be  in  the  same  boat.  It  may  be
beneficial therefore if the network could be cast wider, involving possibly non-Asian economies also
holding substantial foreign reserves in US Treasuries. There is of course the New York Fed itself, as
the custodian of the paper and the settlement agency of US dollar cash balances, which could play a
supportive  role  in  providing  the  service  required.  Yet  another  possibility  is  for  the  network  of
bilateral  repurchase  agreements  to  be  multilateralized  into  a  much  more  liquid  pool,  which  could
further  be  institutionalized  so  as  also  to  facilitate,  perhaps  with  leveraged  arrangements,  monetary
co-operation through the provision of credit.
51.  Asian  monetary  co-operation  took  quite  a  significant  step  forward  when  the
financial package for Thailand organized by the IMF was met with ready willingness by a number of
Asian  economies,  including  ourselves.  This  I  believe  is  the  first  significant  arrangement  involving
Asian monetary co-operation through the provision of credit. As an international financial centre and
an economy  with  significant  interest  in  the  Asian  region,  Hong  Kong  is  willing  to  play  its  part  in
helping  to  maintain  international  and  regional  financial  stability.  This  is  ultimately  in  our  own
interest.  This  accounts  for  our  willingness  to  join  the  New  Arrangements  to  Borrow  (NAB)  to
provide additional funding for the IMF. But the credit risks must be acceptable and manageable, and
the case justifiable to the public in the overall public interest. Asian monetary co-operation through
the  provision  of  credit  should  therefore  be  on  a  multilateral  basis  and  conditional  upon  the
implementation of credible structural adjustment programmes.
BIS Review   91/1997
- 11 -
52. At this point, we may well ask whether the present multilateral arrangements to
handle international financial crises are totally satisfactory. It has been argued that economies in need
should go earlier to the IMF for assistance. However, given the tough medicine that the Fund is well
known to prescribe, there may have been a reluctance to approach the Fund, given also the limited
resources  available  for  a  cure,  thus  delaying  the  whole  process  of  crisis  prevention  and  damage
control.  While  the  Thai  package  showed  how  neighbours  are  willing  to  help  supplement  Fund
resources, this has the tendency to reinforce regional arrangements rather than dealing with the issue
on a global basis.
53.  We  hope  that  a  precedent  has  not  been  set  that,  if  the  Mexican  crisis  was  an
American  problem,  the  Thai  crisis  an  Asian  one,  the  next  case  will  be  for  whichever  region  to
resolve.  Such  regionalism  does  not  auger  well  for  international  monetary  co-operation.  We  feel
therefore  that  the  resources  of  the  Fund  should  be  strengthened  considerably  and  access  level
reviewed in the light of recent developments. This also applies to monitoring and enforcement efforts
by  the  Fund.  It  would  clearly  not  be  efficient  for  regional  groupings  to  duplicate  the  role  of  the
existing international organizations such as the IMF and the BIS, with recognized expertise and the
machinery  to  deal  with  these  issues.  In  any  case,  a  regional  crisis  is  quite  often  not  limited
geographically, but has global ramifications. In dealing with a crisis, the Fund should also have the
mechanism  and  authority  in  place  to  negotiate  with  private  sector  lenders  to  ensure  that  equitable
burden sharing remains, and that the burden of adjustment does not fall only on official creditors.
54.  Another  important  area  for  Asian  monetary  co-operation  is  the  building  of  the
market infrastructure. In trying to draw attention to this area, I have often said that while billions of
dollars are spent in building highways and airports as part of the physical infrastructure, in order to
move people around efficiently and safely, there is by comparison very little money spent in building
the  financial  highways  and  airports  to  move  money  around  efficiently  and  safely.  As  a  result,  the
money does not move, at least not as much as one would like to see. Consequently, effective financial
intermediation  domestically  and  across  economies  in  the  region  is  inhibited,  notwithstanding  the
rather attractive returns offered by the prosperity of this region. Financial markets remain fragmented
along  with  geographical  fragmentation  of  the  region,  and  there  is  a  lack  of  liquidity  because  the
regional critical mass has not yet been formed.
55. Another common complaint about Asian financial markets is the inefficiency of
settlement and clearing processes for money and financial products. As a result, the tendency is for
many of the Asian economies to make use of established clearing and settlement systems in Europe
and America. For example, Asian trading of Euro-yen paper has to be cleared and settled in European
time.  There  is  of  course  no  logical  answer  to  the  question  why  trading  of  Asian  paper  by  Asians
cannot be settled and cleared in Asian time. I am often reminded that the Eurodollar and Eurobond
market took off when Euroclear was established in the late 1960s. Furthermore, technology has now
improved to the extent that we do not really need centralized clearing and settlement systems. I have
long supported the concept of Asiaclear as a network of linkages of domestic clearing, settlement and
depository systems.
56.  Again,  we  in  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  made  a  start  in  building  this
network through establishing bilateral linkages between our clearing system for debt securities called
CMU and other systems. Our system is now linked up with Euroclear and Cedel, and we are working
on linkages with corresponding systems in Australia, New Zealand and the Mainland of China. Once
the  matrix  of  bilateral  linkages  is  filled  up,  the  network  of  Asiaclear  would  be  formed,  like  the
Internet.  There  is  no  need  for  a  centralized  system  or  even  a  location.  There  is  no  centre  for  that
network  and  so  we  do  not  need  to  get  into  the  politically  difficult  question  of  where  the  network
should be headquartered. We have also expressed our interest to other central banks in the region to
establish similar linkages of payment systems. Our payment system in Hong Kong is already on the
BIS Review   91/1997
- 12 -
real time gross settlement (RTGS) mode. Others are proceeding with building their RTGS systems
and  as  soon  as  they  are  ready  we  are  happy  again  to  work  on  establishing  bilateral  linkages  to
facilitate  risk  management  of  large  value  financial  transactions  across  the  two  monetary  systems.
Once  linked  up,  Herstatt  risk  of  foreign  exchange  transactions  involving  the  two  currencies
concerned  will  immediately  be  eliminated.  Payment  versus  payment  (PvP)  and  delivery  versus
payment (DvP) within Asian time will become a reality.
57.  The  fourth  area  for  Asian  monetary  co-operation  is  banking  supervision  and
financial  regulation.  As  financial  markets  are  further  liberalized  and  integrated,  the  growth  of
cross-border banking activities and other financial transactions is accelerating, increasing the risk of
contagion.  As  ultimately  monetary  problems  surface  in  the  banking  system,  it  is  important  for
regulators in different economies to co-operate to safeguard the integrity of the banking and financial
systems  in  the  region.  Part  of  the  work  will  involve  the  harmonization  of  supervisory  practices,
including  the  adoption  of  the  Core  Principles  for  effective  supervision  advocated  by  the  Basle
Committee.
58. Through working closer together, such as the collaboration of the EMEAP Study
Group on Banking Supervision, supervisory authorities in the region would be able to improve their
understanding of  each  others’  banking  systems  and  supervision  framework  and  approach.  We  will
also review practices in the region against the existing Basle Committee benchmarks, identify reasons
for any differences and thus help to raise the quality of supervision in the region. Over time, it may be
possible to move on to the setting of standards.
59.  Last,  but  not  least,  in  Asia  monetary  co-operation  concerns  policy  consultation.
Clearly,  there  is  scope  to  improve  mutual  understanding  of  each  other’s  policy  framework  and
priorities.  This  may  or  may  not  be  a  prelude  to  policy  co-ordination,  as  the  case  has  not  yet  been
established. But a regular channel of communication  on  policy  issues  is  still  needed.  The  EMEAP
forum is a good start, but needs to be strengthened. The IMF and the BIS have demonstrated how
closer relations and deeper appreciation of the issues can only be fostered through a system of formal
and  informal  channels  of  communications  and  regular  discussions.  Such  discussions  not  only
promote appreciation of the issues facing individual  economies,  but  also  regional  and  international
matters. We look forward to their playing a more significant role in this region.
Conclusion
60. Ladies and gentlemen, the road to international monetary co-operation has never
been straight and smooth. The European experience suggests  that  there  are  many  bumps  along  the
way.  With  much  more  diverse  needs  and  perspectives  in  Asia,  we  must  allow  Asian  monetary
co-operation  to  take  shape  gradually  and  in  a  flexible  way,  starting  with  less  ambitious  goals  and
proceed  at  a  pace  and  with  arrangements  comfortable  to  all.  I  believe  the  approach  of  building  an
Asian monetary network capable of further linkages to form a global monetary network is the correct
one.  It  is  based  on  voluntary  participation  and  accommodates  each  participant’s  unique
circumstances. We do not have the visionaries of Europe that saw the need for a single currency, nor
do we believe that a single global institution would be adequate in providing solutions to all Asian
monetary problems. In the  Asian  pragmatic  and  patient  way,  and  using  the  wise  words  of  the  late
Deng Xiaoping, we cross the river by groping for the stones. I am confident that in the end, we will
be able to build a robust and efficient Asian monetary network that would contribute to monetary and
financial stability, and economic prosperity in Asia, and in turn contribute to global financial stability
and prosperity.
61.  I  cannot  end  this  lecture  without  paying  tribute  to  the  tremendous  support  and
co-operation that the Hong Kong Monetary Authority has received since its formation only four and a
half  years  ago.  I  want  specifically  to  acknowledge  the  unstinting  support  of  the  People’s  Bank  of
BIS Review   91/1997
- 13 -
China and the Bank of England. Without their guidance the Hong Kong Monetary Authority would
not have become a reality. The Bank of Japan, the Bundesbank and the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York  have  also  been  generous  in  their  support  when  we  went  around  the  international  financial
centres  to  explain  the  unique  concept  and  practice  of  “one  country,  two  systems”.  All  our  fellow
central banks and monetary authorities in EMEAP, SEANZA, and BIS showed us great kindness and
support during the sensitive transitional period to the resumption of sovereignty by China in 1997.
Indeed, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority is itself the fruit of monetary co-operation.
62. When asked what comes after 1997, we used to give the very simple reply: what
comes after 1997 must be  1998. As you can see for yourself, with goodwill and co-operation, the
prosperity of Hong Kong has been ensured, both before and after the resumption of sovereignty to
China. You have my assurance, and the assurance of China, that Hong Kong will continue to play its
role as an international financial centre. We will work hand in hand with all central bankers around
the world to build a safer and more robust international monetary system.
Thank you.
BIS Review   91/1997
