Mr.  Macfarlane’s  statement  to  the  House  of  Representatives  Standing
Committee on Financial Institutions and Public Administration   Statement by the Governor
of the Reserve Bank of Australia, Mr. Ian Macfarlane, to the House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Financial Institutions and Public Administration in Sydney on 6/11/97.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is a pleasure to be here in front of your Committee
for  the  second  time  under  the  new  arrangements  set  out  in  the  Statement  on  the  Conduct  of
Monetary Policy. On the basis of the first hearing, we think the new arrangements are working
very  well.  On  that  occasion,  we  received  some  very  penetrating  and  constructive  questioning
from  Committee  members,  and  there  seemed  to  be  quite  a  lot  of  public  interest  in  the
proceedings.
Of  course,  we  should  always  be  trying  to  improve  our  procedures,  but  the  only
improvement we have been able to make on this occasion is to get our half-yearly report to the
Committee  two  hours  ahead  of  the  hearing,  compared  with  one  hour  last  time.  You  will
appreciate  that  in  order  to  follow  due  process  we  cannot  finalise  the  document  until  after  our
Board Meeting which was on Tuesday. I should also say that I was hoping that we might have
been able to have this hearing somewhere other than Sydney. While it is very convenient for us
to  be  meeting  again  in  the  New South  Wales  Parliament  House  about  100  metres  from  my
office,  we  see  merit  in  this  hearing  moving  to  other  State  capitals  and  Canberra  on  a  regular
basis if that is possible.
The main reason for these hearings is to improve the accountability of the Reserve
Bank, both directly to Parliament, and via the press coverage to the public more generally. In the
spirit  of  increased  accountability,  I  should,  I  suppose,  be  accountable  for  what  I  said  to  this
Committee  at  the  previous  hearing,  as  well  as  for  what  I  am  going  to  say  today.  I  covered  a
number of subjects at the previous hearing which I thought were important for an understanding
of  how  the  economy  was  going  to  perform  over  coming  years.  I  also  mentioned  a  couple  of
outcomes  we  expected  for  1997.  It  is  those  which  will  probably  be  of  the  most  immediate
interest. I  said  that,  after  a  sluggish  1996  where  GDP  had  grown  at  about  3  per  cent  --  at  one
point, it got to not much more than 2 per cent on a 12-months-ended basis, we should expect it
to pick up to about 4 per cent in 1997. I also said that I expected inflation to stay at the bottom
of the 2-3 per cent range, with the possibility that it could go a little lower for a while.
Now I think I could be excused for wanting to walk away from earlier forecasts as
a result of the current turmoil in Asian and world financial markets. While I intend to say quite a
lot about those events later on, I do not propose to invoke that excuse at this stage, because they
have not had any effect on the economy to date. They have affected financial markets, but not
the economy yet. Instead, I want to start by saying that the baseline we have to work from, i.e.,
the growth of the economy in the first three quarters of 1997, has been at least as good as I was
pointing to in May, if not a little better.
 We now have the GDP growth rates for the first two quarters of 1997, which show  the
economy  grew  at  an  annual  rate  of  nearly  4  per  cent  during  that  time.  And  we  have
further  monthly  figures  for  the  September  quarter  which  are  somewhat  stronger  than
those  recorded  during  the  first  half  of  the  year.  This  is  true  for  the  major  monthly
indicators such as retail trade, imports and exports. It is also true for the labour market,
especially for vacancies, and to some extent also for employment. There is also evidence
from the business surveys that confidence is picking up, but these surveys were generally
compiled before the Asian headlines of a fortnight ago.
BIS Review   103/1997
- 2 -
 On  inflation,  the  outlook  changed  a  little.  New  figures  brought  underlying  inflation
below  2  per  cent,  and  our  on-going  assessment  caused  us  to  lower  our  forecasts.  As  a
result, we have had two further easings of monetary policy -- one in May and one in July.
An important reason for  the  lower  inflation  forecasts  was  the  better  outlook  for  wages.
You may recall that shortly after the previous hearing in May we received revised figures
on earnings from the ABS that suggested not only that they were lower in the quarter in
question -- the March quarter of 1997 -- but that an upward trend had been revised away.
This better  picture  was  confirmed  again  in  the  June  quarter  figures,  but  the  picture  has
been  muddied  somewhat  by  the  recent  September  quarter  figures  which  show  an
unexpectedly strong rise.
On  balance,  therefore,  we  at  the  Bank  judged  that  the  information  becoming
available  over  the  past  six  months  was  tending  to  confirm  this  relatively  benign  view  of  the
future -- GDP growth of about 4 per cent (enough for some further reduction in unemployment
from the 8.8 per cent we had at the time of the last hearing) and inflation a little below 2 per cent
(enough to justify the May and July easings in monetary policy).
The picture was not all rosy -- the slower output growth of 1996 was still making
its presence felt in the form of sluggish employment growth in the first half of 1997, there were
some doubts about the strength of investment, and the effects of El Niño were around the corner.
But  economies  nearly  always  present  a  mixed  picture,  and  this  mixture  was  a  lot  better  than
most.  In  addition,  financial  conditions  had  become  clearly  easier  than  in  May.  The  overnight
cash rate had come down from 6 per cent to 5 per cent as a result of the two easings of monetary
policy, and yields on 10-year bonds were down from 7¾ per cent to 6 per  cent.  The  exchange
rate  against  the  US  dollar  has  come  down  from  77.7  US  cents  to  70.3  US  cents;  against  the
trade-weighted index, it has come down from 60.2 to 57.0.
I  come  now  to  the  point  where  I  should  say  a  few  things  about  what  has  been
happening in Asia and the rest of the world. I will do my best to be specific, but you should bear
in mind that the ground is constantly changing. The first thing I would like to say is that in the
long run I am still very optimistic about Asian growth prospects. These countries still retain a set
of characteristics that are conducive to long-run growth:
     they  can  still  achieve  rapid  productivity  growth  through  technology  transfer,  i.e.,  they
have started from a long way behind and have a fair way to go;
they are oriented towards international trade;
they  have  high  savings  rates  and  high  investment  and  a  relatively  small  government
sector;
they  have  generally  sound  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  --  although  they  have  got  some
way to go in terms of the soundness of their banking and financial sectors; and
they have great respect for, and devote considerable effort to, education.
I do not see the end of the Asian miracle, partly because I do not think it ever was
a miracle; it was just the application of some tried and tested rules of good economic policy. It is
still fortunate for our long-run prosperity that we have strong links to Asia.
BIS Review   103/1997
- 3 -
Having declared my optimism about the long run, I should now turn to the short
run.  Clearly,  there  are  going  to  be  difficulties  here,  in  particular  among  four  ASEAN
countries -- Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines. From the moment the Thai baht
was  floated  on  2  July,  attention  quickly  broadened  to  encompass  these  four.  Their  currencies
have  fallen  sharply,  as  have  their  stock  markets  and  property  prices.  These  countries  are
battening down the hatches -- in two cases with the help of the IMF -- to sort out their problems.
The  principal  problem,  it  is  now  apparent,  concerns  how  to  handle  the  fall  of  previously
over-inflated  asset  prices,  undisciplined  lending  by  local  banks  and  foreigners,  and  some  very
opaque  inter-relationships  between  business  and  government  which  have  obscured  the  true
financial  position  of  a  lot  of  companies  and  banks.  There  also  appears  to  have  been
over-investment in some areas. Property played its usual major role, but on this occasion  there
were also more contemporary avenues, particularly electronics and semi-conductors, where there
is  clear  over-capacity  and  intense  competition  among  these  countries  (and  with  Korea  and
Taiwan).  Of  course,  these  problems  have  been  around  for  years  --  they  did  not  just  start  on  2
July.
A part of this adjustment must inevitably involve a sharp curtailment of growth in
the short run and a contraction of credit. Imports will  fall,  and  so  the  effects  will  be  spread  to
other countries. The good news for Australia is that these four countries account for only 10 per
cent of Australia’s exports. If the difficulties remain confined to these four countries, the effect
on Australia’s exports, and hence our growth, would be modest.
The rest of Asia is, in fact, a lot more important to Australia. Japan -- our largest
market -- has been limping along at an average annual growth rate of about 1 per cent now for
about five years. Our exports to Japan have virtually not increased at all during that period. The
other  big  Asian  markets  for  Australia  are  Korea,  China,  Taiwan  and  Hong  Kong.  These  are
collectively  much  more  important  than  the  ASEAN  four.  Of  course,  some  of  the  underlying
problems  that  afflict  the  ASEAN  four  also  apply,  although  more  modestly,  to  some  of  these
countries. For a time, it looked as though the ASEAN problems would spill over to these in a big
way, but that seems less likely now, although we should not speak too soon. Even so, we should
build in the assumption of some slowing in aggregate for these countries.
To  judge  the  effects  on  Australia,  we  should,  in  principle,  have  a  view  on  how
each  country  will  fare  in  regard  to  economic  growth,  imports  and  the  health  of  their  banking
systems (and we should look outside Asia, which I will do later). It is never easy and some sure
bets  turn  out  to  be  wrong.  For  example,  virtually  everyone  thought  the  simultaneous  share
market crash of 1987 and associated company failures would presage at least a slowdown, if not
a  recession.  In  the  event,  1988  turned  out  to  be  a  boom  year  for  the  OECD  economy  and  for
Australia.
Let us hope we can be a little closer to the mark this time. Most analysis to date
has consisted of a relatively mechanical application of lower growth and lower  imports  among
the ASEAN four to lower Australian exports and lower Australian GDP growth. The orders of
magnitudes are quite small and the most commonly cited figure for GDP growth in Australia is a
reduction  of  about  a  quarter  of  a  percentage  point.  According  to  press  reports,  the  OECD  has
recently suggested figures of 0.3 per cent for Australia in 1997 and 0.4 per cent in 1998. Quite
how they got an effect on 1997, which we are already 80 per cent through, I do not know, but, as
I said, I am only relying on newspaper reports. These sorts of figures can become considerably
larger if we also bring in lower growth rates for Korea, China, etc., but we are getting into the
realms of speculation if we do so.
BIS Review   103/1997
- 4 -
The  only  guide  that  we  have  is  that  this  will  not  be  the  first  time  that  it  has
happened.  In  1984  and  1985  we  saw  a  big  drop  in  Asian  currencies  and  a  big  drop  in  their
growth  rates.  It  had  the  predicted  effect  and  our  exports  to  Asia  for  a  time  were  quite  weak.
Again, last year -- in calendar 1996 -- there was zero growth of imports in the ASEAN four, and
our  exports  to  them  slowed.  I  think  we  will  have  to  put  up  with  a  period  of  weakness  again.
Frustrating  as  this  instability  may  be,  it  seems  to  be  an  inevitable  part  of  an  open  competitive
economic system which is the only type capable of achieving strong growth in the long run.
So far I have only talked about Asia, but the outcome for the world economy will
depend  on  more  than  Asia.  We  have  to  bring  in  two  bigger  regions  --  North  America  and
Europe.  North  America  (mainly  the  United  States  but  also  including  Canada  and  Mexico)  is
growing quite strongly. The recent disturbances in financial markets which were  imported  into
North  America  from  Asia  do  not  seem  to  have  had  a  lasting  impact.  If  anything,  their  main
effect  seems  to  have  been  to  hose  down  some  overheated  asset  markets  slightly,  and  hence  to
reduce the likelihood of an imminent tightening of US monetary policy. Such a tightening in the
next six months cannot be ruled out, however.
Europe  is  finally  recording  some  gains  after  years  of  disappointingly  slow
recovery  from  the  early  1990s  recession.  In  fact,  European  growth  has  picked  up  to  the  point
where  six  European  central  banks  recently  tightened  monetary  policy  slightly  to  head  off
possible inflationary pressures down the track.
So far, I have talked about Asian and world economic events as though their only
effect  on  Australia  was  via  our  exports.  Of  course,  that  is  only  part  of  the  story.  The  other
important part is that we now have to face the possibility of further financial market instability.
For  better  or  for  worse,  through  knowledge  or  through  fear,  the  international  investment
community is taking a more sceptical look at things Asian, and that includes all countries in the
Asian  region,  including  Australia.  That  means  they  have  become  more  risk-averse,  and  more
likely to judge countries and their policies harshly. We have already seen some of the effects on
some Asian countries:
    falling exchange rates;
falling share prices;
rising risk margins in interest rates;
downgrades by rating agencies.
We are in a better position to handle this financial instability than we have been at
any  stage  in  the  last  30  years.  We  formerly  had  a  reputation  as  a  boom-bust  economy,  and
investors  used  to  build  in  quite  a  large  premium  for  risk  when  holding  Australian  assets.  We
have  come  a  long  way  in  convincing  investors  that  this  is  largely  a  thing  of  the  past.  A  good
example of this is that our bond yields are now virtually the same as US  bond  yields,  whereas
five  years  or  ten  years  ago  it  was  not  uncommon  for  the  gap  to  be  as  high  as  five  percentage
points; some of this was a risk premium and some of it reflected our  higher  inflation.  Another
example is that the Australian dollar used to be one of the most volatile currencies in the world,
whereas  in  the  1990s  it  has  been  no  more  volatile  than  the  major  currencies  such  as  the  US
dollar, the yen or the Deutsche Mark.
BIS Review   103/1997
- 5 -
Over the past four or five  months,  this  has  served  us  well.  While  the  Australian
dollar  has  gone  down  a  fair  amount  against  the  US  dollar,  it  remained  relatively  steady  in
trade-weighted terms. It is true that over the last fortnight the Australian dollar has declined in
trade-weighted  terms,  but  it  has  done  this  in  a  relatively  orderly  fashion,  and  it  is  not  an
unreasonable market response given that our export markets have weakened.
This new-found reputation for stability may surprise some  people,  because  there
is  still  a  tendency  to  read  so  much  into  the  small  month-by-month  or  quarter-by-quarter
variations  in  economic  statistics.  But  if  we  take  a  longer  sweep,  we  can  see  how  many  of  the
economic problems that used to concern us have now been eliminated, or are at least under some
reasonable sort of control. The headlines are no longer full of stories about the current account
deficit or the level of foreign debt. The budget deficit is small. High inflation and its inevitable
twin, high interest rates, no longer fill the papers. This does not mean, of course, that we have
solved  all  our  economic  problems,  but  we  have  clearly  narrowed  them  down.  This  has  also
tended to concentrate minds on the one that remains -- namely, the level of unemployment.
This  is  a  reasonable  priority  because  less  progress  has  been  achieved  on
unemployment  than  on  the  other  imbalances  in  the  economy  that  came  to  the  fore  in  the
mid-1970s and persisted through the 1980s. It is not as though no progress has been made -- the
unemployment rate has come down from a peak of 11.2 per cent to its present 8.6 per cent -- but
it has been disappointing progress. With six years of the expansion now behind us at an average
growth rate of 3.6 per cent per annum -- the third highest in  the  OECD  area  --  we  could  have
hoped for more. I think some further progress can be made over the next year, although we have
to accept that it will probably be slow, and monetary policy will only be part of the story -- in
the long run, only a small part. History suggests this will remain the case.
Australia moved from 2 per cent unemployment to over 10 per cent in the decade
from  1973  to  1983.  The  damage  was  really  done  during  that  period.  Despite  good  output  and
employment  growth  in  the  1980s  expansion,  the  unemployment  rate  was  back  to  11  per  cent
following the 1990 recession. So in net terms no progress had been made in a decade.
What  we  want  this  time  is  good  growth  in  output  and  employment,  with  a
difference  --  we  want  it  to  last  a  lot  longer.  The  six-and-a-half  years  that  the  previous  two
economic  expansions  lasted  was  not  good  enough.  Although  progress  was  made  in  reducing
unemployment -- particularly in the second one -- it was all lost in the ensuing recession.
This time around we must make sure we have a much longer expansion, reducing
the likelihood and severity of any future slowdown as much as possible. I do not know how that
will be possible, but the surest way of ameliorating the business cycle in this way is to avoid the
imbalances occurring during the later stages of the expansion. The main imbalance in Australia,
as  elsewhere,  has  always  been  the  emergence  of  inflation.  The  story  is  never  exactly  the
same -- inflation  can  be  accompanied  by  a  wage  push,  an  asset  price  boom  or  an  external
imbalance -- but  the  result  has  been  the  same  following  each  of  the  past  three  booms.  That  is
why we need to have a more medium-term focus in our monetary policy and why the inflation
target is such a central part of it. The inflation target is not anti-growth; low inflation is not an
end  in  itself,  we  are  interested  in  sustaining  a  good  inflation  performance  because  we  are
interested  in  growth  and  employment.  Keeping  inflation  in  check  is  the  key  to  longer
expansions.
It  has  sometimes  been  said  that  we  are  too  cautious  in  following  this  policy.  I
think  that  is  a  little  unfair.  Of  course,  we  are  cautious  in  that  we  like  to  look  at  a  range  of
BIS Review   103/1997
- 6 -
information and think carefully before we  make  a  move  on  monetary  policy.  But  we  try  to  be
forward  looking  and  pre-emptive.  For  example,  we  did  not  wait  till  measured  inflation  was
below 2 per cent before easing -- in fact, it was 3.1 per cent when we first eased in July last year.
Similarly,  there  have  been  suggestions  that  the  Reserve  Bank  has  a  speed  limit
above which the economy cannot be allowed to grow (the figure usually cited was 3½ per cent).
Such  a  suggestion  is,  of  course,  incorrect  and  I  have  pointed  this  out  on  several  occasions.  In
case there is still any doubt, you only have to look at our behaviour in 1997. As I said earlier, the
economy has been growing at 4 per cent per annum so far in 1997, yet it did not stop us easing
monetary policy twice this year. If we are getting reasonable news on inflation and our inflation
forecasts are in good shape, we have no objection to the economy growing by 4 per cent or 4 per
cent plus.
When looking at the whole picture of employment and unemployment, monetary
policy  is  only  a  small  part  of  the  story,  and  it  mainly  concerns  the  cyclical  aspect  of
unemployment.  If  you  look  at  the  really  big  changes  in  employment  or  unemployment  over
decades,  rather  than  years,  monetary  policy  plays  a  very  small  role.  The  biggest  change  in
employment  performance  of  which  I  am  aware  is  the  contrast  between  the  United  States  and
continental  Europe.  In  the  United  States,  the  unemployment  rate  is  back  to  its  1960s  level,
whereas in Europe it is about five times as high as it was in the 1960s. A few European countries
have done better than that -- including the United Kingdom -- but others have done worse.
If  you  try  to  explain  the  superior  US  employment  result  by  faster  economic
growth you get nowhere. Europe has grown as fast as the United States over three decades -- it
just  has  not  generated  jobs.  The  explanations  for  the  poor  European  performance  on  jobs  all
centre around various types of rigidities, especially in wages and conditions of employment, but
also  the  social  security  system  and  the  difficulties  involved  in  starting  businesses  and  the
subsequent lack of entrepreneurship.
I do not intend to go into this in any depth because it is a huge topic. I only raise
it to point out that there is much more to the story than the growth of demand, and the role that
monetary policy plays in it. In other words, even if we succeed in having good economic growth
and  sustaining  it  for  a  longer  period  than  in  earlier  expansions,  it  will  not  solve  all  our
unemployment problems. We will make some progress, but it is too optimistic to think that we
will be able to emulate the Americans and return to  the  1960s  level  of  unemployment  through
macro-economic policies alone.
I saw in the paper yesterday someone from ACOSS saying that the big challenge
for  Australia  was  to  achieve  US-style  economic  growth  and  low  unemployment  without
US-style  inequality  and  poverty.  I  think  this  is  a  realistic  way  of  looking  at  it.  It  shows  an
awareness of the current trade-off, and I suspect a hope that, with some ingenuity, we might be
able to improve on it somewhat. My only quibble is that we already have achieved US growth
rates  --  in  fact,  exceeded  them  --  it  is  the  US  unemployment  rate  that  has  eluded  us.  This  is
something that people like myself, who studied economics in the 1960s, find surprising. In the
1960s it was the United States that was always criticised by countries like Australia and most of
Europe for their high unemployment. Now the boot is on the other foot.
There is a lot more that I could talk about, but I will confine myself to only one
further topic. That is the subject of bank lending and bank margins, particularly bank lending to
small business. This is a subject that this Committee has taken a particular interest in. In fact, the
first  large-scale  inter-country  study  of  Australian  banks’  margins  and  banks’  profitability  was
BIS Review   103/1997
- 7 -
undertaken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  at  the  request  of  this  Committee  in  August  1994.  We  did
another study at the Committee’s request recently which was published in our October Bulletin.
As Committee members also know, the Reserve Bank has been meeting with its Small Business
Finance Advisory Panel since 1993 to discuss the provision of finance to that sector. We formed
this  Panel  because  we  were  worried  that  banks  had  become  excessively  risk-averse  and  were
reluctant to lend to small business in the early part of the recovery from the 1990/91 recession.
It has been a slow process, but competitive pressures have been gradually working
their  way  into  banks’  margins,  i.e.,  the  difference  between  the  average  rate  they  earn  on  their
loans and the average rate they pay on their deposits. These margins are now lower than at any
time since we have been collecting the statistics, and the biggest fall has occurred over the past
two  years.  Clearly,  the  entry  of  mortgage  originators  into  the  housing  market  was  a  very
important development, and it led to the margin on housing lending falling from a level which
was high by international standards to one which is about average. We are now beginning to see
hotter competition in lending to small and medium-sized businesses. Partly this is a result of the
need felt by many banks, particularly the regional ones, to reduce their reliance on the now much
less profitable mortgage market. In this sense, it shows how  competition  slowly  works  its  way
through the system. I confess that it has taken longer than I expected, and longer than I hoped,
but we are finally getting there. That brings me to the end of my introductory remarks. We have
certainly had a very eventful period in the month leading up to this meeting and we have all been
working hard to keep up with events, particularly in the international scene.
BIS Review   103/1997
