Mr.  Rangarajan  addresses  a  special  convocation  of  the  Indian  Institute  of
Management   Address by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Dr. C. Rangarajan, at a special
convocation held to confer upon him the honorary title of Fellow of the Indian Institute of Management
at Ahmedabad on 3/10/97.
It gives me immense pleasure to be on the campus of the Indian Institute of Management.
I  accept  in  all  humility  the  award  of  the  title  “Fellow  of  the  Indian  Institute  of  Management”,
Ahmedabad. What can be a greater honour than the recognition by one’s own peers and family? I look
back  with  immense  satisfaction  on  the  years  that  I  spent  on  the  campus  here.  Those  fourteen  years
marked  the  most  productive  period  of  my  academic  life.  It  is  no  mean  task  to  have  created  here  an
institution of world-class excellence. All those who have been associated with IIMA can take legitimate
pride  in  this  achievement.  This,  however,  makes  the  task  of  the  current  faculty  members  and  students
even harder. The race of excellence is a perpetual one and is, therefore, very demanding. I am sure that
IIMA will always remain ahead.
We are celebrating this year the Golden Jubilee of India’s Independence. As a nation, we
have  accomplished  much  during  this  period.  We  have  moved  from  the  status  of  dependent  country
stricken at periodic intervals by famine and shortages to that of an independent nation with a high degree
of  stability.  But  the  unfinished  agenda  is  still  long.  Our  rate  of  growth,  though  high  in  relation  to  our
own performance in the previous fifty years, has fallen short of our expectations and that of what certain
other countries have been able to achieve. The miracle of East Asian countries may to some extent have
been dimmed by the recent crises in these countries. Nevertheless, they have shown that it is possible for
countries to grow at a sustained rate of 7 per cent or more for several decades. We need to set our goals
high.
We  have  over  time  created  the  wherewithal  for  progress.  The  real  task  today  is  to  use
these advantages for further growth. All of us are conditioned by history. History is a great teacher if we
can draw appropriate lessons. The present is an extension of the past. We should not, however, become
prisoners  of  the  past.  Where  changes  are  called  for,  we  must  be  willing  to  make  them.  It  is  only  by
making such changes that a nation can progress. In the recent period we have made some basic changes
in our approach to economic development and the means to achieve the desired results. The fundamental
objectives  of  economic  development  in  our  country  remain  the  same:  growth  and  social  justice.
Instrumentalities to achieve these will have to change in tune with our experience and according to the
demands of the time and the responses of the society.
In bringing about faster growth we need to address many issues. Perhaps one that is most
relevant in the context of work that is going on at IIMA is the issue of productivity. In ensuring a higher
growth rate, there is no doubt that we must bring about an increase in the saving rate and, consequently,
the  investment  rate.  But  at  the  same  time  one  cannot  over-emphasise  the  need  for  improving  the
productivity  and  efficiency  of  input  use.  Economists  in  fact  talk  about  total  factor  productivity,  which
identifies the contribution to the increase in output of influences other than increase in factor inputs. The
total factor productivity growth thus encompasses the effect not only of technological progress but also
of  better  utilisation  of  capacities,  improved  skills  of  labour,  etc.  In  fact  during  the  period  1960-87  the
total factor productivity growth of East Asia was 1.9 per cent per productivity and efficiency. Contrary to
the  general  impression,  the  natural  resources  of  our  country  are  not  large.  From  the  point  of  view  of
long-range sustainability, the need for greater efficiency in the management of natural resources of land,
water, minerals, etc. has become urgent. In a capital-scarce economy like ours, there can be no excuse for
under-utilisation of capacity. Macro-policy framework and micro-management practices must be such as
to  bring  about  the  desired  increase  in  productivity.  While  the  policy  framework  must  be  supportive,
industrial structure must be such as to compel firms to continually innovate and to cut costs. The policy
environment, the organisational structure and the  attitude  to  work  and  technology:  all  these  have  to  be
right.  Needless  to  say,  institutes  of  management  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  bringing  about  this
improvement in productivity by sharpening the skills and the vision of managers.
BIS Review   96/1997
- 2 -
The recent development experience has clearly shown that  countries  which  have  grown
fast  are  those  which  have  made  very  heavy  investment  in  education.  Even  as  we  aim  at  creating  a
broad-based educational system, including compulsory education at the primary and secondary levels, we
also  need  institutions  of  excellence.  Living  as  we  are  in  a  complex  and  globally  competitive  world,
institutions of excellence in all disciplines are required to meet the challenges of competition, which in
effect is the competition in skills and techniques.
We are living in a fast-changing world. One analyst has compared these changes to the movement of the
continental plates under the surface of the earth -- “plate tectonics” as geologists call it. The same analyst
has  also  compared  the  dramatic  changes  using  an  analogy  from  evolutionary  biology:  “punctuated
equilibrium”.  In  these  periods,  the  environment  undergoes  such  significant  changes  that  the  dominant
species is replaced by another one and evolution takes a quantum leap. Whether such a description fits
the  changes  that  are  occurring  today,  history  alone  can  tell.  There  is,  however  little  doubt  that  we  are
living in exciting times. India missed the first Industrial Revolution. We cannot afford to miss the second
one.  All  of  our  institutions  of  higher  learning  have  an  important  responsibility  in  this  regard.  IIM,
Ahmedabad has played a major role in improving the managerial practices in this country in the last three
decades. In the current  phases  of  industrial  development,  when  Indian  firms  are  subject  to  competitive
forces, both domestic and global, the role of IIM is even greater. If the past is any guide, I am sure it will
fulfil this historic role.
BIS Review   96/1997
