Mr.  Grenville  considers  Asia  and  the  financial  sector      Talk  given  by
Mr Stephen Grenville, a Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 10th Annual
Australasian Finance and Banking Conference in Sydney, on 4/12/97.
The Managing Director of the IMF described the Mexican economic problems of
1994/95 as “the first crisis of the 21st century”, with the implication that this was something new
and,  more  ominously,  perhaps  there  would  be  more  of  them.  Before  the  new  century  has
dawned,  there  has  now  been  a  series  of  similar  problems,  concentrated  in  the  region  of  most
interest to us -- East Asia.
This  is  relevant  to  a  conference  on  finance  and  banking,  because  the  financial
sector  in  each  of  these  countries  has  been  the  key  factor  in  the  crisis  and  is  central  to  its
resolution.  Those  who  spend  time  thinking  about  financial  sectors  and  how  they  evolve  over
time  may  find  some  interest  in  examining  what  went  wrong,  why  it  went  wrong,  and  how  it
might be put right. It is also of considerable importance to Australia -- not just for the effect on
our economy (which is hard to quantify at this stage), but also for the opportunity it presents for
Australia to deepen its engagement with the region.
What went wrong?
The  problems  in  Asia,  like  the  Mexican  crisis  of  1994,  exhibit  a  variety  of
symptoms, with the most prominent being large falls in exchange rates and equity markets. But
exchange  rate  changes  of  this  size  are  not  unknown  in  other  countries  which  have  not
experienced the trauma currently underway in Asia. In Australia in the mid-1980s the exchange
rate  fell  by  35 per  cent,  and  in  the  early  1990s  it  fell  by  close  to  25 per  cent.  Nor  is  this
uncommon internationally. Even the mighty US dollar went up and down by amounts like this in
the  mid-1980s.  More  recently,  Japan,  between  April 1995  and  April 1997,  experienced  a
depreciation of similar size. These exchange rate changes may well have been a trigger which set
off a chain reaction of other events. But by themselves, the exchange rate changes would have
been an uncomfortable policy problem, not a crisis.
An uncomfortable problem became a crisis because the weakness in the exchange
rate infected the financial sector. This occurred through a  variety  of  channels -- in  some  cases,
banks had borrowed heavily in foreign currency; more often, the borrowers were the non-bank
business sector. As the exchange rate fell, their burgeoning foreign exchange obligations pushed
the enterprises under water, and they defaulted on their debts to the domestic banking sector. At
the same time, foreign lenders, who had felt protected by the foreign currency denomination of
the  loans,  now  realised  that  a  fall  in  the  exchange  rate  increased  their  credit  risk,  and  so  they
pulled credit lines or failed to roll over short-term debt.
This  exchange  rate  shock  impinged  on  financial  systems  which  already  had
fracture lines and structural tensions. There were a number of specific weaknesses -- connected
lending, government-directed loans, poor credit evaluation, lack of transparency, and inadequate
prudential  supervision.  The  situation  was  sustainable  if  growth  and  capital  flows  were
maintained,  but  was  not  sustainable  in  the  harsh  world  in  which  we  live,  where  confidence  is
fragile,  capital  flows  are  flighty,  and  the  stabilising  forces  of  the  “fundamentals”  are  slow  to
assert themselves.
BIS Review   113/1997
Why did it happen?
- 2 -
The first point that should be made is that the  praise  which  had  been  heaped  on
these  countries  for  several  decades  is  entirely  understandable.  These  countries  have  been  high
savers, budgets have been balanced or in surplus, inflation has been reasonably well contained,
and  exports  had  been  the  dynamic  driving-force  of  growth  (with  the  globalisation  that  this
implies). They ran high current account deficits because, however much they were saving, they
were investing even more. Who could, ex ante, have criticised the broad-brush developments in
the  financial  sector?  Open  capital  markets  were  a  merit-badge  of  economic  maturity  and  a
requirement for entry into the industrial-nations’ economics club -- the OECD.
Not only were these markets generally opened up and linked in with international
capital  markets,  they  embraced  this  eagerly,  including  the  latest  sophisticated  products  of  the
financial sector. Equity markets burgeoned and the arcane products of Wall Street were readily
available.  International  agencies  urged  further  and  faster  deregulation,  commercial  financial
interests (domestic and foreign) were eager to stake out a role for themselves in the fast-growing
sector,  and  sophistication  in  financial  products  was  seen  as  being  as  important  as  having  the
latest in industrial technology.
While  it  is  easy  enough  now  to  see  the  fracture  lines  and  lack  of  resilience  of
these financial sectors, it was less easy to predict the outcomes beforehand. The transition from a
regulated financial system to a deregulated financial system  is  intrinsically  difficult.  Under  the
best  of  circumstances,  it  was  inevitably  going  to  be  accompanied  by  false  starts  and  mis-cues.
The pace of growth of credit is difficult to evaluate in a world where you would expect it to be
growing  quickly  because  financial  repression  (McKinnon’s  phrase)  is  ending.  The  transition
leaves the financial system quite fragile during the process. There is a fair  bit  of  evidence  that
problems  have  arisen  for  almost  every  country  during  the  transition,  with  the  problem  usually
taking  the  form  of  excessive  lending  as  each  institution  in  the  deregulated  financial  sector
competes vigorously for its share in the new world. In the process, poor loans are made and asset
prices are bid up.
These two things come together in mutual reinforcement when the problems come
to  a  head.  Lenders  who  had  used  collateral  as  their  main  loan-evaluation  technique  find  their
security to be illiquid and inadequate. At the same time, it is almost inevitable that the process of
financial  deregulation  will  run  ahead  of  the  capacity  of  the  prudential  supervisors  to  devise  a
suitable regulatory framework. To start with, the climate of deregulation is often inimical to the
regulators. This was certainly our experience in Australia during the 1980s: as we tried to put in
place  the  basis  of  some  “rules  of  the  game”  for  the  new  deregulated  financial  sector,  many
people  who  should  have  known  better  were  calling  this  “re-regulation  by  the  back-door”,  and
criticising us for being out of sympathy with the brave new world of deregulation.
This  experience  seems  to  have  been  repeated  elsewhere.  Managers  at  all  levels
have been dealing with products and systems with which they are unfamiliar (but to admit this
would  disqualify  them  from  participating  in  this  exciting  new  world),  and  commercial
imperatives encouraged them “to boldly go where no man has gone before”. As we look at the
problems of foreign currency borrowings in some of our Asian neighbours, one might recall the
similar  experience  with  Swiss  franc  loans  in  Australia  during  the  1980s,  with  the  (fortunate)
difference that these were, in a macro sense, quite small for Australia.
There is another difficult issue here for the authorities. Even when problems were
identified, there was the classic dilemma well known to prudential supervisors -- do you “blow
BIS Review   113/1997
- 3 -
the whistle” on the problem and precipitate a crisis (for which you will surely be blamed), or do
you quietly work behind the scenes to try to avert the perceived problem, in the hope that you
will succeed or the problem will go away of its own accord, but knowing that if it doesn’t, it will
be a bigger problem than if you had precipitated it early on. No credit is given for precipitating a
crisis early, but there is plenty of blame for being present at the scene of the crime. So it is not
surprising that there was, beforehand, a certain amount of hand-wringing about financial sector
weaknesses, but this was muted background noise in the general enthusiasm to embrace the new
world.
What might be done?
The first point that should be made here is that the main burden for getting things
sorted out again clearly rests with these countries themselves. The related point here is that, for
some, (to borrow the catch-cry from positive-thinking management texts) “this isn’t a problem,
it’s an opportunity”. For some of these countries, the process of institutional reform may be like
punctuated development in evolutionary theory, where progress takes place in jerky stages, with
a crisis such as this causing people to focus on the issues and to reform weaknesses. In this view,
countries  can  come  out  of  this  trauma  stronger  than  before.  It  seems  quite  likely  that  some
countries will be better than others at turning these problems into opportunities.
While part of the reaction to these problems must be institutional strengthening of
the financial system, there remains a question whether the broad  thrust  of  macro  policy -- and,
by implication, the spanking rates of growth which these countries have achieved over the past
couple  of  decades -- is  sustainable.  To  put  this  more  specifically,  is  it  possible  to  achieve  the
sorts of integration with international markets, the large inflows of capital which went with this
and  the  rapid  transformation  of  economies,  without  leaving  these  economies  vulnerable  to  the
sorts of changes of sentiment that we have seen in recent months? The constraint on growth is
not the conventional one of resources and technology. The constraining factor here is just how
resilient  can  the  financial  sector  be  made:  the  more  robust  it  can  be  made,  the  faster  these
countries will be able to travel.
We  know  the  historical  experience  of  Singapore,  which  ran  current  account
deficits averaging 10 per cent of GDP for more than two decades. We know, too, that this was
an  important  element  in  the  extraordinary  progress  that  Singapore  has  made.  We  know,
however,  that  large  current  account  deficits  were  one  of  the  elements  which  made  the  other
ASEAN countries vulnerable in recent years (and this vulnerability has always been a concern in
Australia,  too,  despite  the  academic  case  that  current  account  deficits  resulting  from  private
sector  decisions  were  matters  between  “consenting  adults”  and  therefore  not  something  with
which policy should concern itself).
Analysts  have  pointed  to  the  problems  caused  by  the  US-dollar-fixed  exchange
rates that prevailed in these countries until recently. They argue that, if exchange rates had been
allowed to appreciate, credit growth would have been better contained and the economy held on
a tighter rein. Greater exchange rate flexibility is surely an element in the new policy regimes.
But the lesson of recent months is that, once a fixed exchange rate is freed, it can move by large
amounts.  Over-shooting  is  par  for  the  course.  All  the  more  reason  why  a  resilient  and  robust
financial sector must be in place if flexible exchange rate regimes are now the norm.
institutional
improvement -- making accounting systems better, tightening up legal and bankruptcy systems,
involves  careful,  slogging, 
time-consuming 
Much  of 
this 
BIS Review   113/1997
- 4 -
improving  disclosure,  and  strengthening  and  deepening  experience  in  prudential  supervision.
One point that might be noted is that some capital flows seem to create more vulnerability than
others,  so  there  is  a  case  for  discouraging  short-term  flows  and  encouraging  direct
investment/equity and longer-term bond flows.
in 
talent 
The  best 
these  countries  should  go 
the  core  financial
institutions -- principally banks -- even if this means that the latest whiz-bang innovation of the
financial  rocket  scientists  remains  unexploited.  This  is  not  to  argue  for  stepping  back  from
financial development -- on the contrary, these countries must move forward to deepen markets.
But  the  resources  should  go  into  design  and  implementation  of  a  robust  financial  architecture
and -- to continue the analogy -- useful design parameters are simplicity, a strong basic structure,
and attention to detail.
into 
One  useful  objective  is  to  put  the  banking  system  in  a  central  position  as  the
guardians on the gateway of investment. If a project has to pass the scrutiny of a bank which will
hold the loan on its balance sheet, there is still no guarantee of success, but maybe the chances
are  improved.  What  is  clear  is  that  private  businesses  have  mis-assessed  the  risk  they  faced,
tempted  by  attractively-lower  foreign  currency  interest  rates  but  not  sufficiently  aware  of  the
need  to  worry  about  the  variance  of  the  prospective  cash  flows.  An  experienced  banker  might
have  helped.  Of  course,  this  will  only  work  if  the  banking  system  is  allowed  to  do  its  job,
untrammelled by connected or directed lending. Banks cannot provide “due diligence” scrutiny
on loans which they were required to make.
The  first  priority,  always,  is  to  get  the  banks -- the  core  of  the  financial
system -- sorted out quickly. The need is to keep the process of financial intermediation flowing:
it is the life-blood of the real business sector. The problems are not, in fact, examples of some
new “crisis of the 21st century”: they are, at heart, the  old  problems  of  bank  collapses  and  the
remedy is, in principle, well established. Restoring confidence is the critical factor and for this
(as  Bagehot  observed)  central  banks  should  “lend  freely,  but  at  a  penalty  rate”.  Insolvent
institutions  must  be  separated  from  the  solvent,  dealt  with,  and  the  remaining  institutions
supported.
None of this is easy. Intractable  problems  of  moral  hazard  exist,  but  this  should
not  be  allowed  to  paralyse  action.  Serious  money  will  be  required  to  fix  the  problems.
Experience  over  the  past  couple  of  decades  shows  just  how  expensive  these  financial  sector
rescues can be. The 1994 Mexican problems have cost about 12-15 per cent of GDP; the Nordic
countries spent 4-8 per cent of their GDP fixing their problems a few years ago; even the S&L
problems  in  the  United  States  (merely  a  small  sub-group  of  the  financial  sector)  cost  around
3 per cent of GDP to sort out. But the cost of failing to address these problems decisively can be
more painful still -- a long drawn-out period of financial introspection and inertia which severely
retards real activity. A positive point is the strong fiscal positions (and therefore low government
debt outstanding) of these countries, so the capacity to fund the restructuring exists.
All this is, clearly, largely a matter of domestic policy, with the costs to be borne
mainly by taxpayers in these countries. In a more speculative vein, let me return to the idea that
what we are witnessing is a problem of the 21st century, and acknowledge that, while what we
see  has  many  of  the  characteristics  of  an  old-fashioned  financial  sector  crisis,  it  has  one
important  new  element --  the  major  role  played  by  international  capital  flows.  Domestic
financial  intermediation  takes  place  within  a  broad  set  of  “rules  of  the  game”,  laid  down  by
prudential  regulators.  There  is  no  international  analogue  of  this.  Over  time,  it  can  develop,  as
countries  implement  consistent  rules  of  prudential  supervision,  perhaps  along  the  lines  of  the
BIS Review   113/1997
- 5 -
BIS Core Principles. This might -- together with better information on private capital flows and
cross-country  position-taking -- provide  a  response  to  this  new  element  of  the  current
problems -- the role of large-scale capital flows.
What relevance is it to Australia, and to this audience (Australian and overseas)?
We  acknowledge  our  stake  in  the  outcome,  with  two-thirds  of  our  exports  going  to  East  Asia
(including  Japan).  Australia  is  taking  part  in  the  IMF-co-ordinated  facilities  for  Thailand,
Indonesia  and  Korea.  These  funds  help  restore  confidence  and  help  the  process  of  adjustment.
We  will  use  our  relationships -- via  our  regional  central  bankers  group  EMEAP  and,  in  due
course,  the  newly-formed  Asian  Surveillance  Group -- to  provide  examples  of  how  prudential
systems  work  elsewhere,  analysis  of  how  the  specifics  might  be  done  in  particular  countries,
technical  assistance  where  it  can  be  useful,  and -- the  most  difficult  and  subtle  task  of
all -- understated  and  understanding  support  for  the  reform  elements  who  have  the  task  of
fashioning a stronger financial sector.
A  last  word  directed  specifically  at  this  audience.  Some  of  you  come  from  the
countries involved: I wish you well in the vital task ahead. For the rest of us, is this, too, not a
problem  but  rather  an  opportunity?  The  countries  to  our  near  north  are  going  to  be  devoting
considerable  resources  to  strengthening  their  financial  sectors.  I  hope  some  of  you  will  find  a
role for yourselves in this process, and by doing so will look back on this as an opportunity to
strengthen our links with our northern neighbours.
BIS Review   113/1997
