Mr. Bäckström reports on inflation and the interest rate in Sweden   Speech
by the Governor of the Bank of Sweden, Mr. Urban Bäckström, at a conference organised by the
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce and Veckans Affärer in Stockholm on 27/1/98.
Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  talk  at  this  conference  about  the  outlook  for
inflation  and  the  interest  rate.  It  is  now  five  years  since  the  inflation  target  was  instituted;  so
before  considering  the  current  situation  for  monetary  policy,  I  should  like  to  say  something
about the intervening period.
Five years with an inflation target
In  January  1993  the  Riksbank’s  Governing  Board  decided  to  adopt  an  explicit
target for inflation and  specified  that  as  of  1995  and  measured  in  terms  of  the  consumer  price
index,  the  rate  of  inflation  was  to  be  limited  to  2  per  cent,  with  a  tolerance  interval  of  ±1
percentage point.
The commitment to an inflation target originated from the Riksbank but both the
Government and the Riksdag (Sweden’s parliament) expressly support monetary policy’s focus
on  price  stability  as  well  as  the  inflation  target.  Last  year  five  of  the  political  parties  in  the
Riksdag agreed that the Riksbank’s objective, to safeguard the value of money, should have the
force of law;  a  Government  bill  with  provisions  to  this  effect  was  presented  to  the  Riksdag  in
November.  In  recent  years,  monetary  policy’s  commitment  to  low  inflation  has  thus  been
established increasingly firmly.
Inflation target and transparency
When the Riksbank originally decided to adopt an inflation target, time was short
and did not permit extensive analyses. In my opinion, experience to date of the inflation target
policy has been favourable.
One  major  advantage  of  having  an  established  and  distinct  inflation  target  for
monetary policy is that this can be combined with transparency. Market agents can form a clear
picture  of  the  grounds  for  the  Riksbank’s  actions.  It  is,  moreover,  comparatively  easy  to
understand how the policy functions, which should help in gaining public support for the target.
The inflation target is an instrument for stabilising expectations about the conduct of monetary
policy;  a  lack  of  transparency  and  distinctness  in  monetary  policy  makes  it  more  difficult  for
inflation expectations to adjust to the target. This in turn can make it more difficult  to  achieve
high, stable growth.
In  recent  years  the  Riksbank  has  accordingly  been  aiming  for  greater
transparency. A highly qualified staff has been built up, intensive efforts have been devoted to
developing  models  and  analyses,  routines  have  been  constructed  for  monetary  policy
preparations and decisions, and a new interest rate management system for monetary policy has
been launched.
The endeavour to promote transparency is evident in the Riksbank’s participation
in public hearings  by  parliamentary  committees,  in  inflation  reports,  speeches,  discussions  and
seminars of various kinds, and in the publication of specialist reports. This has led, I believe, to a
BIS Review   5/1998
- 2 -
better  awareness—among  market  agents  as  well  as  a  wider  public—of  how  monetary  policy
works.  One  indication  of  this  is  that  agents’  expectations  about  monetary  policy  have  become
increasingly  congruent  with  the  Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  intentions.  In  addition,  the
five-party agreement on the new Riksbank Act is a manifestation of broad political support for
the  low-inflation  policy.  It  is  our  ambition,  moreover,  to  continue  the  process  for  increased
transparency as far as is reasonable and feasible.
Criticism of monetary policy
Monetary  policy  has,  of  course,  come  in  for  some  criticism.  A  common  issue
initially  was  whether  striving  for  2  per  cent  inflation  was  reasonable  and  feasible.  That
discussion seems to have dried up. Inflation is currently around 2 per cent and more and  more
people understand the advantages of this.
Another question has been why the Riksbank does not have the task of promoting
other objectives, growth,  for  example.  Here,  too,  there  is  a  growing  awareness,  though  it  does
not  include  everyone.  In  the  long  run  monetary  policy  is  only  capable  of  influencing  inflation
and  there  is  absolutely  no  long-term  trade-off  between  inflation  and  growth.  If  anything,  high
inflation tends to impair real economic development.
In the short run, however, the situation is somewhat different. In this perspective,
inflation  and  growth  are  largely  two  sides  of  the  same  coin,  at  least  as  long  as  inflation
expectations  are  stable  around  the  target.  Weaker  growth  implies  a  diminishing  risk  of
inflationary impulses from demand, which normally warrants a less restrictive monetary stance.
Conversely,  demand  that  is  excessively  strong  in  relation  to  potential  output  implies  a  risk  of
rising inflation and a need to raise the repo rate.
The  current  discussion  seems 
the  Riksbank  acts
symmetrically. In other words, is the Riksbank as concerned about under-shooting the inflation
target as it is about preventing inflation from exceeding the target? My answer to that question is
definitely “Yes”. The Riksbank aims to keep the rate of inflation at 2 per cent, neither more nor
less.
to  be  about  whether 
The  issue  of  monetary  policy  asymmetry  seems  to  be  linked  mainly  to  two
matters. One is the question of monetary policy’s central concern. Is this inflation’s prevailing
rate or the rate that assessments point to one to two years ahead? The answer is that the Riksbank
is guided by the assessment of future inflation. If inflation is currently running at 2 per cent and
the predicted rate (based on  an  unchanged  instrumental  rate)  one  to  two  years  ahead  is,  say,  1
per cent, then the instrumental rate should be lowered. The  reason  for  this  is  quite  simply  that
monetary policy acts with a time lag of one to two years. Using the prevailing rate of inflation as
a  guide  would  involve  adjusting  the  instrumental  rate  more  frequently  and  markedly,  thereby
entailing  undesirable  economic  instability.  But  how  can  we  be  sure  that  the  assessments  are
always correct? Of course we cannot. But the Riksbank does not simply assess the future, adjust
the  instrumental  rate  and  then  sit  back  and  wait  two  years  for  the  outcome.  Instead  the
assessments  are  continuously  reconsidered  in  the  light  of  new  information  and  the  monetary
stance  is  adjusted  accordingly.  In  this  way  we  work  systematically  to  fulfil  the  2  per  cent
inflation  target  and  aim  to  avoid  unnecessarily  large  changes  in  the  repo  rate.  Even  so,  the
monetary  stance  may  have  to  be  altered  more  markedly  from  time  to  time  if  a  situation  arises
that is considered to call for this.
BIS Review   5/1998
- 3 -
The  other  matter  that  may  underlie  the  discussion  about  monetary  policy
asymmetry is, I believe, the question of transitory effects on inflation. Such effects may come,
for example, from changes to taxes and subsidies, rising or falling house mortgage interest costs
in connection with monetary policy measures, or external shocks that  affect  the  price  level  via
sudden  changes  in  the  price  of  oil,  for  instance.  Such  changes  in  the  price  level  show  up  as  a
temporary increase or decrease in the rate of inflation; with the methods that are used to measure
inflation, the impact on the price level will last for twelve  months.  The  Riksbank  has  declared
that such transitory effects should be of secondary importance for monetary policy in so far  as
they do not affect inflation expectations and thereby generate a more lasting impact on inflation.
Two episodes with transitory effects
The issue of transitory effects first arose around the turn of 1994, when the effects
had  to  do  with  altered  indirect  taxes  and  subsidies  in  connection  with  the  consolidation  of
government finances. This entailed a transitory increase in inflation.
In a number of addresses that  winter  I  considered  the  issue  at  some  length.  In  a
speech  to  the  Economics  Association  in  February  1995,  for  instance,  I  noted  that  there  are
shocks,  such  as  altered  indirect  taxes  and  subsidies,  which  may  affect  the  price  level  at  short
notice  and  cause  inflation  to  deviate  from  the  target.  While  such  effects  are  usually  absorbed
inside  the  tolerance  interval,  they  may  sometimes  be  so  pronounced  that  inflation  fluctuates
more widely. In such situations it is up to monetary policy to ensure that the deviations from the
target do not have  permanent  consequences  for  the  rate  of  inflation  and  inflation  expectations.
While drastic countermeasures might produce quick results, they would destabilise the economy,
which is not desirable.
In  various  contexts  I  made  it  clear  that  monetary  policy  would  be  conducted  so
that price effects from the consolidation of government finances would be left to materialise in
the price level. At the same time, it was important to ensure that the transitory effects were, in
fact, temporary and did not colour inflation expectations.
At  that  time,  however,  survey  data  indicated  that  the  level  of  inflation
expectations  was  already  around  4  per  cent.  The  overall  assessment  of  inflation,  based  on  an
unchanged instrumental rate, accordingly pointed to a risk of the inflation target being exceeded
as economic activity became stronger. Moreover, the high inflation expectations contributed  to
excessively high wage settlements in the spring of 1995. It was partly this—not the price effects
from budget consolidation—that warranted the upward adjustments of the instrumental rate from
August 1994 to July 1995.
Transitory  effects  again  conditioned  the  rate  of  inflation  during  1996  and  1997
but  now  in  a  downward  direction  via  falling  house  mortgage  interest  costs.  The  krona’s
appreciation,  in  connection  with  the  rapid  enhancement  of  confidence  in  budget  policy,  also
tended to lower the CPI.
Had the Riksbank continued to reduce the instrumental rate—after the earlier cuts
had  had  a  transitory  downward  effect  on  inflation’s  current  rate—it  would  have  tended  to
destabilise the economy. The Riksbank would, as it were, have been chasing  its  own  tail,  with
interest rate cuts that became increasingly large  and  frequent.  Inflation  expectations  and  actual
inflation would ultimately have risen, obliging the Riksbank to swing to a markedly  restrictive
stance.  As  interest  rate  increases  also  have  transitory  effects  on  inflation,  the  Riksbank  would
BIS Review   5/1998
- 4 -
again start to chase its own tail but now in an upward spiral. This illustrates how absurd it would
be to raise or lower the instrumental rate as a response to the direct, but transitory, effects of the
Riksbank’s own monetary measures. As long as inflation expectations are unaffected, there is no
reason to suppose that the effects on inflation will be permanent.
Transitory effects account for inflation target deviations
An  explicit  inflation  target  has  the  advantage  of  enabling  us  to  evaluate  how
monetary  policy  is  conducted.  Consequently  the  Riksbank  cannot  implement  an  asymmetric
approach to the inflation target without this being detected.
Two curves are presented in the diagram below. One represents CPI inflation and
the other is one of the various indicators of underlying inflation, in this case the CPI excluding
transitory  effects  from  house  mortgage  interest  costs,  changes  in  indirect  taxes  and  subsidies,
and prices of imported goods.1
Actual and underlying
inflation 1995 – 1997
12-month change figures, per cent
4
3
2
1
0
CPI
"Underlying" inflation
95
96
97
98
Source: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank.
Note.
Underlying inflation is represented here by one of the indicators (UNDINH) used by the
Riksbank;  it  shows  the  CPI  excl.  changes  in  indirect  taxes  and  subsidies,  house
mortgage interest costs and prices of goods and services that are mainly imported.
                                                  
1The use of this indicator in the present context does not signify that it is particularly significant or the best
approximation  of  underlying  inflation  in  every  case;  instead,  it  happens  to  be  the  indicator  where  all  the
excluded items had a marked influence on price movements in the period 1995–97. The reason for excluding
import prices here is that the exchange rate fluctuations in this period mainly reflected rapid changes in the
degree of confidence in the consolidation of government finances.
BIS Review   5/1998
- 5 -
Since 1995, when the inflation target first applied, the annual increase in the CPI
averaged 1.5 per cent. This outcome is thus relatively close to the targeted rate and well inside
the tolerance interval. Underlying inflation, as measured in the diagram, has averaged 2 per cent.
In other words, the transitory effects that lowered inflation have been somewhat stronger than th
upward  effects.  In  the  absence  of  any  transitory  effects,  inflation  would  accordingly  have
fluctuated around 2 per cent.
After  only  three  years  with  an  inflation  target  policy,  it  is  too  early  for  a  final
evaluation. But when allowance is made for transitory effects, it is difficult to demonstrate that
the Riksbank has acted asymmetrically.
What this does show is that CPI inflation sometimes deviates from the target and
may even move outside the tolerance interval. It is then important that the Riksbank can make it
credible that inflation will gradually return to 2 per cent. This can be done either by showing that
the  forces  at  work  have  been  mainly  transitory  effects  or,  if  the  effects  in  question  are  more
permanent,  by  using  the  instrumental  rate  to  pilot  inflation  back  to  the  target  rate  in  the  time
frame with which monetary policy operates.
At  times  during  1996  and  1997  the  12-month  change  figure  for  the  CPI  was
below the tolerance interval’s lower limit of 1 per cent. On a number of occasions the Riksbank
pointed out that this was mainly an effect of the repo rate cuts during 1996. In that it was not a
question  of  more  permanent  effects  and  the  inflation  assessment  pointed  to  a  future  increase,
there was no need for further repo rate cuts. During the summer and  autumn  of  1997  inflation
did,  in  fact,  move  up  fairly  rapidly,  as  expected,  in  that  these  transitory  effects  successively
dropped  out  of  the  12-month  figures.  As  a  result,  actual  inflation  has  moved  closer  to  the
underlying rate. In describing this tendency, the Riksbank has been far from alarmist.
The latest inflation report
This brings me to the future development of inflation and the current situation for
monetary policy.
Our  December  inflation  report  provides  a  natural  point  of  departure.  The
assessment  there  was  that  during  1998  inflation  would  somewhat  exceed  the  target,  with  a
gradual acceleration to a rate of  about  2.5  per  cent  in  1999.  Underlying  inflation  was  likewise
expected to move up and reach just over 2.5 per cent at the end of  1999.  This  assessment  was
broadly in line with the more or less concurrent forecast from the National Institute of Economic
Research,  for  example,  as  well  as  with  the  figures  that  forecasters  in  general  presented  last
November and December.
The  basis  for  the  Riksbank’s  assessment  included  the  prospect  of  a  continued
strengthening  of  economic  activity,  now  with  increased  support  from  domestic  demand.  GDP
growth was put at about 3 per cent in 1998 and over 3 per cent in 1999. Inflation expectations
were considered to be largely in line with the inflation target.
Compared  with  the  September  report,  the  Riksbank’s  assessment  in  December
represented  a  minor  upward  adjustment  (by  some  tenths  of  a  percentage  point)  of  inflation  in
1999,  mainly  in  view  of  higher  wage  costs  and  lower  productivity.  Of  greater  practical
importance  for  monetary  policy  was  the  forward  shift  of  the  time  perspective  by  one  quarter,
which  meant  that  the  inflation  forecast  now  included  a  period  when  capacity  utilisation  and
BIS Review   5/1998
- 6 -
inflationary pressure were calculated  to  be  somewhat  higher.  The  picture  of  the  real  economic
future had not changed appreciably during the autumn.
The December report also presented two alternative scenarios that were judged to
be equally probable. One envisaged stronger inflationary pressure due to higher wage increases
and  weaker  productivity  growth.  The  other  involved  stronger  effects  than  expected  from  the
Asian crisis and consequently a smaller increase in inflation.
It has been claimed in the public debate that the Riksbank played down the Asian
crisis.  That  is  not  so.  Certain  effects  were  allowed  for  in  the  main  scenario  for  the  December
report.  But  above  all,  the  risk  of  the  crisis  becoming  more  profound  was  highlighted  in  a  risk
scenario as an important factor for monetary policy to consider.
A general assessment was that in the Swedish economy’s present cyclical phase, it
is  important  that  monetary  policy  does  not  remain  expansionary  for  too  long.  Considering  the
time lag associated with monetary policy’s effects, a change to a less expansionary stance must
be made in good time before resource utilisation becomes excessively high. The stated aim was
that  this  would  provide  better  conditions  for  more  sustained  increases  in  production  and
employment.
Against  this  background,  when  the  inflation  report  had  been  presented,  the  repo
rate was increased in December by 25 basis points, from 4.10 to 4.35 per cent.
In  periods  of  financial  unrest  in  international  markets  there  is  often  a  “flight  to
quality”; savers and investors experience uncertainty and rearrange their portfolios in favour of
what are perceived as secure assets. In connection with the Mexican crisis in the spring of 1995,
Sweden’s  currency  depreciated  sharply  and  bond  rates  rose  substantially;  this  amounted  to  a
flight from Sweden. In view of the krona’s recent weakening tendency, it would be going too far
to talk of a flight to Sweden but the fact remains that the situation differs from earlier occasions
with  international  financial  unrest.  Even  so,  a  correction  of  the  present  under-valuation  of  the
krona would be a good thing.
The  conclusion  from  this  is  that  the  increased  confidence  which  Swedish
economic policy has earned in recent years must be nurtured continuously, not least to make us
resilient to turbulent times. All those with a say in  price  and  wage  formation  must  also  realise
that the Riksbank’s endeavour is to fulfil the inflation target. The repo rate increase in December
was  therefore  important  when  the  overall  assessment  of  future  inflation  pointed  to  the  target
being exceeded.
Inflation outlook somewhat more favourable
Information of some relevance for the assessment of future inflation has become
available since the December report. It concerns the crisis in Asia, the early stages of the wage
negotiations, and the rent negotiations.
The crisis in Asia has deepened both in terms of its  effects  on  financial  markets
and  as  regards  its  probable  consequences  for  global  economic  growth  and  inflation  in  the
coming  years.  The  extent  of  the  effects  cannot  yet  be  assessed  reliably  but  there  are  many
indications  that  they  will  be  greater  than  most  people  envisaged  at  the  end  of  last  year.  This
BIS Review   5/1998
- 7 -
suggests that in the coming months the statistics will point to a more subdued growth of Swedish
exports and industrial production.
Some wage agreements have been concluded, for instance for the paper industry.
They still cover just a small segment of the labour market but many observers consider that the
existing  settlements  will  serve  as  a  guide  elsewhere.  It  is  difficult  to  arrive  at  a  definite
assessment  of  what  these  settlements  imply  for  total  wage  increases  but  a  cautious  conclusion
could be that the outcome will be somewhat below the Riksbank’s estimate in the main scenario,
at least for 1998. It should be added, however, that agreements are still pending in many cases
and the degree of wage drift in various industries also has to be considered. Still, the probability
of the report’s alternative scenario with higher inflation should have decreased.
Rent costs account for 11 per cent of the CPI and are the largest main item. For
1998 and 1999, final agreements are in place for about 65 and 25 per cent, respectively, of the
stock  of  rented  dwellings.  They  give  average  increases  of  just  over  2  per  cent  for  1998  and
almost 3 per cent for 1999. The 1998 figure is somewhat lower than expected. There are signs,
moreover, that rents for 1998 may be re-negotiated, which has some downward implications for
the assessment of inflation this year.
No reason at present to alter the repo rate
All in all, then, in the period of relevance for monetary policy, global  economic
development  will  probably  be  somewhat  weaker  than  estimated  earlier.  For  this  reason  the
outlook for inflation is somewhat more favourable. To some extent, stronger competition from
imports  has  a  similar  effect.  Somewhat  lower  inflation  in  1998  may  also  result  from  a  lower
increase in rents.
For  the  construction  of  monetary  policy  it  is  equally  important  at  present  to
consider  the  altered  spectrum  of  risks.  The  probability  of  an  outcome  for  wages  that  is
appreciably above the main scenario has diminished. At the same time, the effects of the Asian
crisis are highly uncertain. Much depends on how the crisis is managed. On the other hand, the
fundamentals for growth are in place, particularly in Europe.
The conclusion is that at present there is no reason to alter the repo rate.
BIS Review   5/1998
