Mr. Carse reports on the initiatives taken concerning financial industries in Fujian,
Hong  Kong  and  Taiwan      Speech  by  the  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority,  Mr. David  Carse,  at  the  Symposium  on  the  Financial  Exchange  and  Cooperation  of  Fujian,
Hong Kong and Taiwan, held on 8/8/98.
I am pleased to be here this morning to welcome you to this Symposium. The Chinese
Banks’ Association is to be congratulated for organizing this important initiative with the co-sponsorship
of the Fujian Provincial Government and Chinatrust Commercial Bank. The idea of the Symposium, as I
understand it, is to facilitate the exchange of ideas concerning the financial industries in the three regions
and the exploration of cooperative opportunities between them.
2. Such an initiative could not have come at a better time. The current financial crisis is
creating havoc among the Asia economies. Initially, the damage was felt in the financial sector. But the
full  impact  is  now  being  seen  in  the  real  economy  as  output  and  trade  are  crippled  by  higher  interest
rates,  the  burden  of  foreign  currency  borrowing  and  the  credit  crunch.  The  Mainland  of  China,  Hong
Kong and Taiwan have survived the crisis in better shape than most other economies in the region. But
they have not been unaffected as events of this week have demonstrated in Hong Kong where we have
witnessed further speculative pressure on the Hong Kong dollar.
3. In this kind of uncertain economic environment, it is all the more important that we
should  be  trying  to  maximize  the  opportunities  to  develop  trade  and  investment  links  between
neighbouring economies. That is why this Symposium is timely and important. The existing economic
links between Fujian, Hong Kong and Taiwan provide a solid platform on which to build for the future.
Taiwan  and  Hong  Kong  are  already  major  trading  partners  with  Taiwan’s  exports  to  Hong  Kong
accounting for 23.5% of its  total  exports  in  1997.  Visitors  from  Taiwan  also  account  for  a  significant
proportion of the total number of visitors to the territory and thus make a major contribution to the tourist
industry in Hong Kong which, as you will know, currently needs all the help it can get.
4. Trade between Hong Kong and Fujian is also growing rapidly in both directions and
both Hong Kong and Taiwan are a major source of overseas investment into the Province. There are over
10,000 Hong Kong enterprises in Fujian.
5.  The  Hong  Kong  presence  in  Fujian  includes  a  number  of  banks  from  Hong  Kong,
including Bank of East Asia. The same bank also maintains a branch in Taiwan which puts it in a good
position to take advantage of the triangular trading links between Fujian, Hong Kong and Taiwan. In its
role as an international financial centre, Hong Kong is also the host to a number of banks from Taiwan.
The  Taiwanese  presence  here  consists  of  4  licensed  banks,  2  restricted  licensed  banks  and  3
representative  offices.  There  are  also  a  significant  number  of  other  Taiwanese  banks  which  have
expressed the intention to establish representative offices here. We are processing these applications in
an orderly fashion on a “first-come first-served” basis. It has long been our policy not  to  allow  in  too
many banks from the same region or country too quickly. As in the case of the Japanese regional banks
and  the  Korean  banks  we  therefore  operate  a  queuing  system.  I  know  that  this  can  sometimes  be
frustrating to those who are at the back of the queue. But I would like to made it clear that these is no
reluctance on our part to admit banks from Taiwan, as the existing presence here clearly demonstrates. I
am sure that Dr. Jeffrey Koo will also testify to this.
6.  Hong  Kong  is  currently  going  through  tougher  times  as  a  financial  centre.  Some
foreign  banks  have  cut  back  their  lending  here  and  a  few  banks  have  actually  left.  This  has  reflected
problems back home rather than discontent with Hong Kong. However, it is true that Hong Kong must
reduce  the  cost  of  doing  business  in  order  to  remain  competitive,  and  that  is  why  the  current  fall  in
property prices and rents, while painful, is also necessary. I am confident that Hong Kong will emerge
from the current crisis with a better-balanced economy and with even stronger fundamentals. Above all,
it can continue to rely on its main strategic advantage as a financial centre - namely, its proximity to the
Mainland  of  China.  This  places  it  in  an  ideal  position  to  intermediate  the  trade  and  investment  flows
between places like Fujian and Taiwan.
BIS Review  66/1998
- 2 -
7. In conclusion, I would like to repeat my welcome to you and to express my hope that
your discussions today will lay the foundation for even greater cooperation between Fujian, Hong Kong
and Taiwan in the future.
BIS Review  66/1998
