Mr.  Issing  discusses  the  European  Central  Bank  as  a  new  institution  and  the
problem of accountability   Paper delivered by Prof. Otmar Issing, a member of the Directorate of
the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Symposium on “Challenges for Highly Developed Countries in the
Global Economy” in Kiel on 20/3/98.
Preliminary remarks
European monetary union is an important milestone on the road to Europe. The long
and winding road of European integration is accurately described by Siebert and Koop (1993, p. 1)1
as follows:
“The road Western Europe took from the end of World War II to its current state has
been one with lots of steep and sometimes blind curves, with harsh speed limits and frequent detours.
But still it has been one that attracted more and more traffic.”
Siebert and Koop interpret the competition among governments in a fashion similar to
Tiebout (1956)2, as a market for institutional arrangements. In institutional competition, the national
governments strive to find ever better institutional  arrangements  in  order  to  keep  mobile  factors  at
home or to attract them.
With the establishment of the European Central Bank (ECB), competition among the
participating countries to have the “best central bank constitution” will be over; the introduction of
the euro will eliminate competition to see which one has the “best currency”. The political decision in
favour of this radical institutional change was taken when the Maastricht Treaty was ratified. As is
shown not least by the debate on the ECB’s accountability which has just begun, the new institution
will not find it easy to hold its own in a critical environment.
I. The Bundesbank model
Exactly fifty years ago, on March 1, 1948, the Bank Deutscher Länder was created as
a central banking system for post-war western Germany - to be succeeded in 1957 by the Deutsche
Bundesbank.  No  one  could  possibly  have  had  an  inkling  at  the  time  what  a  success  story  this
institution would become. The D-Mark has become one of the most  stable  currencies  in  the  world
and, to that extent, the Bundesbank has set a standard for monetary policy.
It thus seemed fitting to investigate the reasons for this success. Time and again, it has
been shown to be the case that the stability of the D-Mark is founded on two factors: first, the statute
of the central bank, and second, the Germans’  especially  marked  aversion  to  inflation,  considering
that the currency had been destroyed twice within a generation.
                                                       
1
Siebert, H. and M.J. Koop (1993): Institutional Competition versus Centralization: Quo Vadis  Europe?,
Kiel Institute of World Economics, Working Paper No. 548 .
2
Tiebout, C.M. (1956): „A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures“, Journal of Political Economy, Vol    64,
pp. 416-24.
BIS Review   25/1998
Independence
- 2 -
For  a  long  time,  this  marriage  of  statute  and  public  support  was  perceived  to  be  a
typically German, and thus specific, phenomenon, no importance being attached to it as an example
for  others  to  follow.  This  assessment  only  changed  significantly  in  the  wake  of  the  worldwide
acceleration of inflation during the 1970s. Soon, whole libraries were full of studies on the causes and
effects of inflation and how to combat it. Finally,  interest  also  became  focused  on  the  institutional
background of monetary developments. The degree of central bank independence was soon found to
be a key variable for real-life monetary policy action.
The findings of a wealth of studies boil down to the following two generalities (for an
overview, see Eijffinger and de Haan, 1996):
- The higher the degree of central bank independence, the lower the rate of inflation
generally is.
- The  higher  degree  of  price  stability  does  not  necessarily  have  to  be  bought  at  the
price of losses in economic growth or major fluctuations in output.
For  a  long  time,  institutional  questions  were  quite  generally  neglected.  It  has  now
become evident that institutions do matter - not least in the area of monetary policy, too. In a standard
volume  on  this  subject,  the  author  tersely  states:  “Institutions  such  as  the  legal  framework  within
which policy operates are important determinants of policy outcomes. In particular the independence
of central banks from their respective political authorities can influence the degree of policy activism
and the distribution of inflation.” (Cukierman, 1992, p. 5.)
That  realisation  was  already  common  knowledge  in  Germany.  However,  in  an
international context, central bank independence was for a long time neither widespread in practice
nor popular among economists - i.e., if they were interested in the subject in the first place. There was
thus  a  fundamental  change  in  the  second  half  of  the  1980s.  When  preliminary  work  on  the
establishment  of  European  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  started,  the  intellectual  environment  for  an
appropriate solution had already been prepared. Very soon thereafter, attention came to be focused on
the Statute of the European Central Bank. Lest we forget, when the Conference of Maastricht took
place  in  December  1991,  the  national  central  banks  of  most  of  the  signatory  countries  were
institutions that were more or less dependent on their governments. Bearing that in mind, the decision
in favour of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) and the European Central Bank (ECB) is
all the more remarkable.
II. The new institution
Mistrust of the currency is inevitably reflected in corresponding risk premiums in the
interest rate, and thus costs a country dearly. The Statute assumes particular significance precisely in
the case of a new currency and a new central bank - it is an important signal of what monetary policy
and  what  money  the  public  can  expect.  “Institutions  reduce  uncertainty  by  constraining  human
action.  Thereby,  they  enable  economic  actors  to  form  expectations  about  the  actions  of  others.”
(Streit et al., 1997, p. 688.)
Will the Statute of the European Central Bank meet these requirements? Is it suited to
creating credibility for the institution even before its start?
BIS Review   25/1998
Credibility
- 3 -
Credibility  and  reputation  have  been  developed  out  of  a  neo-classical  concept  of
monetary  policy-making,  based  on  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  and  rational  expectations
(Spahn, 1997, p. 235). Barro and Gordon (1983) argued that central banks are likely to suffer from a
credibility problem. This credibility problem stems from the assumed goal of increasing employment
above  its  natural  rate  by  means  of  inflationary  surprises.  Rational  private  agents  anticipate  this
outcome  and  react  by  increasing  the  expected  rate  of  inflation.  The  result  is  an  inflationary  bias
without any effect on employment.
However, in a multi-period setting, precommitment of monetary policy to  adhere  to
price stability may be possible. If the public is decidedly averse to inflation, it would be difficult to
break inflationary expectations after a surprise inflation had been triggered deliberately. This would
make the subsequent process of disinflation more costly and thereby effectively discourage monetary
policy-makers from using the means of “surprise inflation” in the first place.
Inspired by Rogoff (1985), some have suggested that credibility problems of optimal
monetary policy could be mitigated by delegating monetary policy to  an  independent  central  bank.
The  role  of  the  government  is  then  to  determine  the  institutional  framework  of  monetary
policy-making with the central bank actually implementing the policy. However, Jensen (1997) has
raised the question of why delegating monetary policy should be more  credible  than  implementing
optimal  monetary  policy  itself.  He  has  shown  that  delegation  improves  sub-optimal  outcomes,  but
only  to  the  extent  that  there  are  important  costs  of  “reappointment”.  With  reappointment  costs  of
delegation the inflation bias is reduced, but not completely eliminated.
The  central  bank  gains  credibility  if  an  announced  action  coincides  with  the
expectation  of  market  agents  about  this  action,  i.e.  if  the  targeted  money  growth  rate  equals  the
expected growth rate. Reputation is more similar to a capital good,  growing  slowly  by  means  of  a
series  of  credible  actions  and  eroding  quickly  if  the  central  bank  attempts  to  deceive  the  public
(Cukierman, 1992, p. 205 ff.).
As a general principle, credibility facilitates interpersonal relationships. Credibility is
capable of substantially reducing transaction costs. Experience shows that those central banks which
have a successful track record of stability are most likely to enjoy credibility. Very broadly, such a
successful track record is characterised over the long term by low inflation with very little fluctuation.
Positions  supported  by  the  Bundesbank  for  a  long  time  are  now  widely  accepted  among  policy
makers  and  in  the  literature:      “...  deliberate  attempts  to  exploit  any  short-run  trade-offs  between
output and prices are likely to  result  in  a  permanently  higher  and  more  variable  rate  of  inflation,
with  significant  adverse  consequences  for  resource  allocation,  long-run  output  and  productivity
growth.” (Lamfalussy, 1997, p. 12.)
When  prices  rise,  the  crucial  factor  is  the  underlying  cause.  A  fundamental
consideration in building up and defending an anti-inflationary track record is that the central bank
should  never  resort  to  the  instrument  of  unanticipated  inflation.  If  the  public  feels  duped  by  the
central bank, that central bank forfeits its credibility for many years to come. If, on the other hand,
prices rise for exogenous reasons, the subsequent anti-inflationary policy course can actually enhance
the central bank’s reputation. The phase following German reunification is a case in point.
Obviously, the new ECB will have no established track record to inspire confidence.
To  what  extent  the  accumulated  credibility  of  national  central  banks  which  will  make  up  the
European System of Central Banks from the beginning of Stage Three can be transferred to the new
BIS Review   25/1998
- 4 -
institution is an open question. “Reputation has its roots in decisive and goal-oriented action; it is
bound  to  an  institution  and  cannot  be  simply  bequeathed.”  (SVR,  1997,  p.  353,  translation.)  One
must therefore resort to theoretical insights and empirical lessons in seeking to  predict  the  level  of
credibility  that  will  be  enjoyed  by  the  ECB.  The  main  criteria  for  making  this  prediction  are  the
ECB’s Statute, leading personalities and strategy.
The Statute
Article 105 of the Maastricht Treaty gives the European System of Central Banks a
clear mandate: “The primary objective of the ESCB shall be to maintain price stability.” Its support
for the general  economic  policies  in  the  Community  must  be  without  prejudice  to  the  objective  of
price  stability.  Article 107  guarantees  the  decision-making  bodies  independence  in  making  their
decisions. The members of the Executive Board are to be appointed for eight years, and that term of
office shall not be renewable (Article 109a). By contrast, the governors of the national central banks,
who  are  to  be  appointed  for  at  least  five years,  may  be  reappointed  (Article 14,  Protocol  on  the
Statute of the ESCB and the ECB).
Relatively long terms of office and the fact that the term of office is not renewable are
integral parts of a central bank statute based on the independence of the persons appointed. Academic
study  and  research  have  dealt  extensively  with  this  issue  and  emphasised  the  significance  of  the
independence  of  the  appointees.  Seen  from  that  viewpoint,  the  eight-year  term  of  office  for  the
Members of the Directorate would tend to be at the lower end of the scale. For the same reason, the
member states should make use of the possibility of making appointments for longer than five years.
(For an analysis of the length of terms of office, see Waller and Walsh, 1996.)
I think it goes without saying that an independent central bank is not free to choose its
own  objectives.  But  the  mandate  of  price  stability  has  to  be  defined  more  precisely;  an  initial
consensus  has  already  been  reached.  “While  theory  does  not  provide  a  precise  definition  of  price
stability and while measurement  problems  exist,  there  has  been  a  broad  consensus  among  central
banks for several years that a range of 0%-2% inflation per annum would be appropriate.” (EMI,
1997, p. 12.)
To this extent, therefore, the theoretical insights and empirical lessons are adequately
reflected in the Statute. Does that mean that the credibility problem has automatically been solved?
Many  politicians  -  but  also  quite  a  few  economists  -  think  so.  In  Germany,  for  instance,
commentators  incessantly  point  out  that  the  ECB  Statute,  especially  as  regards  its  constitutional
status, is even more rigorous than the Bundesbank Act. They conclude that the euro will be as stable -
a frequently heard phrase is “at least as stable” - as the Deutsche Mark.
Nevertheless,  hardly  anyone  will  expect  that  the  ECB  will  be  able  or  even  want  to
keep  the  inflation  rate  below  2%  perpetually  and  under  all  circumstances.  Additional  efforts  will
therefore  be  needed  to  establish  credibility  convincingly  from  the  outset.  This  is  all  the  more
necessary as, given the high unemployment in most European countries, pressure will be exerted on
the  ECB  right  from  the  start  to  tone  down  the  priority  of  price  stability  in  favour  of  boosting
employment. This is the tenor of demands for making a relevant amendment to the Statute.
Incidentally, the provision giving  the  power  to  make  exchange  rate  arrangements  is
likewise a potential source of vulnerability. Pursuant to Article 109, the EC Council may, subject to
certain  preconditions,  conclude  formal  agreements  on  an  exchange  rate  system  in  relation  to
non-Community  currencies.  Subject  to  similar  conditions,  the  Council  may  formulate  ‘general
orientations’ for exchange rate policy in relation to non-Community currencies.
BIS Review   25/1998
- 5 -
This  certainly  opens  up  the  risk  that  the  ECB  might  have  to  take  measures  which
could endanger its own objectives. However, action by the Council to enter into formal agreements
would  require  unanimity  and  would  have  to  be  based  on  a  recommendation  of  the  ECB  or  the
Commission, in the latter case after consultation with the ECB “in an endeavour to reach a consensus
consistent with the objective of price stability.” Moreover, the ECB will not be obliged to follow any
‘general orientations’ which it judges inconsistent with achieving price stability.
A formal exchange rate agreement already agreed upon within the European Union is
“ERM  II”.  Most  EU  countries  outside  the  euro  area  participating  in  the  new  exchange  rate
mechanism (ERM) will have central rates for their currencies expressed in euro with 15% fluctuation
margins on either side. The ECB will be able to suspend its intervention and financing obligations if
it  believes  that  this  runs  counter  to  its  monetary  policy.  Moreover,  the  ECB  will  have  the  right  to
initiate proceedings regarding currency realignments.
Personalities
The ECB Statute does not seek to establish a currency standard excluding all and any
scope  for  discretionary  action.  Consequently,  the  personalities  responsible  for  formulating  and
implementing  monetary  policy  will  play  a  role.  That  applies  especially  to  an  institution  which  is
completely new.
In his survey of the history of the Bank of England, the US Federal Reserve System
and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, F. Capie (1997, p. 47) recently concluded “ ... that whatever
was on the statute book personalities almost always had a powerful part to play in practice.”
Up to now, academic study and  research  have  failed  to  come  up  with  a  convincing
proposal for a  “foolproof”  institutional  arrangement.  All  standards  used  in  practice  so  far  (e.g.  the
gold  standard)  have  run  up  against  criticism,  as  have  approaches  which  have  not  left  the  drawing
board  (for  example,  an  index  currency,  or  a  commodity-reserve-currency).  Therefore,  for  good
reasons, this path was not embarked on for EMU.
If  no  standard  is  established  which  precludes  all  scope  for  action,  then  the  persons
who act also matter. An effective institutional arrangement and appointing the right persons are thus
complementary  pillars  of  a  functional  monetary  system.  “It  is  not  just  the  case  that  the  design  of
institutions  necessitates  major  personnel  decisions:  the  functioning  of  even  the  best  institutions  ...
always  depends  to  a  considerable  degree  on  the  persons  working  within  the  framework  of  those
institutions. Institutions are like fortresses; they must be well-planned and well-manned.”  (Popper,
1957, p. 177; translation.)
Public  controversies  about  the  filling  of  top  posts  damage  credibility.  For  the
forseeable future, there will be no political union in Europe to bolster monetary union. The leading
personalities will therefore be associated almost inevitably with their respective nation-states, yet in
the end they have to carry out a common policy, namely a single European monetary policy, and to
stand up to political pressure. The same applies, incidentally, to the Governors of the national central
banks.  Misgivings  are  therefore  called  for  if,  for  example,  there  are  intentions  to  introduce
accountability to national parliaments.
Strategy
For the ECB, as a new institution, it is imperative to enter into a precommitment to the
general public, to which its policy is bound and which makes it accountable. The preparatory work
BIS Review   25/1998
- 6 -
undertaken by the EMI has reduced the number of possible options to just two strategies: monetary
targeting and inflation targeting. The EMI has thus, for convincing reasons, ruled out exchange rate
targeting as a nominal anchor for monetary policy in the euro area.
A  monetary  target  emphasises  the  central  bank’s  responsibility  for  monetary
conditions  and  demarcates  its  responsibility  vis-à-vis  other  policy  areas  and  exogenous  shocks.
Monetary targeting informs the public about the central bank’s fundamental orientation and can thus
help to stabilise inflation expectations. By adopting such a precommitment, the ECB would expose
itself to strict discipline; it will have to justify any deviations from the target path to the public. “A
monetary target would also provide  the  ECB  with  the  advantage  of  continuity  with  the  framework
used by the dominant central bank of the ERM, the Bundesbank, and it might thereby facilitate the
transfer of credibility.” (IMF, 1997, p. 54.)
Empirical studies so far indicate that the money  demand  in  the  euro  area  should  be
sufficiently  stable  for  a  strategy  of  monetary  targeting  (and  more  stable  than  in  the  individual
countries).  There  is  thus  a  good  chance  that,  from  a  “technical  point  of  view”,  monetary  targeting
might  fulfil  the  prerequisites.  “Until  the  opposite  is  proved,  the  European  Central  Bank  should
assume  that  there  are  sufficiently  stable  underlying  monetary  relationships  in  the  single  currency
economic area and that unexpected instabilities can be brought under control.” (SVR, 1997, p. 356;
translation.)
On the other hand, we should remember that the initial phase of monetary union, in
particular, will be burdened by a number of imponderables. These could clearly have an impact on
the growth of the money stock. It is thus advisable to supplement the strategy of monetary targeting
pragmatically  (but  not  arbitrarily)  by  including  some  elements  of  direct  inflation  targeting.  The
multitude of additional information could be compressed in this sense into a formal inflation forecast.
Another issue regarding the prospects for successful operation of a common monetary
policy in EMU is the extent to which there will be differences among countries in the transmission
mechanism. For example, there are differences in the use of floating-interest-rate instruments versus
fixed-rate debt instruments, in the importance of bank lending relative to other form of financing, and
in  the  households’  financing  of  housing  investments.  Such  differences  are  likely  to  add  to  the
challenges facing the ECB in its early years.
Accountability
Greater  central  bank  independence  in  many  countries  has  also  led  to  heightened
interest  in  the  accountability  of  a  central  bank.  In  a  democracy,  the  independence  of  an  executive
organ cannot be viewed in isolation from its mandate. The independence of a central bank is not an
end  in  itself  but  only  a  means  of  achieving  an  objective  set  by  the  legislature.  The  associated
purpose-oriented transfer of responsibility implies that the central bank is to be held accountable for
its decisions. In particular, it has to disclose and justify the progress it has made in attaining its final
goal,  its  monetary  policy  strategy,  and  its  ongoing  monetary  policy  measures.  This  is  designed  to
ensure  that  the  central  bank  carries  out  its  prescribed  tasks  as  well  as  possible  and  does  not,  for
instance, pursue its own agenda.
For  the  ECB,  as  a  new  institution,  a  suitably  designed  commitment  to  hold  itself
accountable  is  crucial  in  order  to  quickly  establish  credibility.  It  is  in  the  situation  of  having  to
acquire credibility before being able to establish a track record of policy results over a period of some
years. It is therefore in the ECB’s own best interests to convey, in a clear and convincing manner, the
intentions behind the monetary policy being pursued.
BIS Review   25/1998
- 7 -
Hence,  there  is  no  disputing  the  need  for  a  commitment  to  accountability.  But  to
whom  should  the  ECB  be  accountable?  The  Bundesbank,  which  has  always  attached  great
importance  to  accountability  despite  the  absence  of  formal  requirements,  has  practised  continous
accountability  particularly  to  the  general  public  in  Germany.  The  associated  public  debate  on  its
monetary policy strategy and its measures has proved to be fruitful: the social consensus backing a
stability-oriented monetary policy has been strengthened, and the Bundesbank’s credibility has been
enhanced. In principle, this might be also an advisable course for the ECB to follow. However, it is
difficult to identify a “European public”- at least for now.
Therefore, accountability at the supranational parliamentary level - which is explicitly
enshrined  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty - will  be  all  the  more  important  right  from  the  outset.  The
Governor of the ECB will present an annual report to the European Parliament, on the basis of which
the European Parliament can hold a general debate. Furthermore, the members of the ECB Executive
Board  can  be  called  to  speak  before  the  responsible  committees  of  the  European  Parliament.  This
ensures that accountability is broadly and institutionally enshrined at the European level. By contrast,
accountability  at  the  national  level,  i.e.  of  the  central  bank  governors  to  their  respective  national
parliaments,  would  run  counter  to  the  exclusively  European  mandate  of  the  European  System  of
Central Banks. This European mandate applies not just to the members of the Executive Board, but to
all members of the Central Bank Council. This European orientation, the responsibility for a single
monetary policy, determines the institution’s self-identity.
Besides  defining  obligations  to  provide  information  and  explanations,  the  monetary
policy strategy also has implications for the accountability of the central bank. In the academic debate
on  this  topic,  the  impression  is  often  given  that  inflation  targeting  is  clearly  superior  to  monetary
targeting  in  those  terms  (see  Tabellini,  1998  and  Dornbusch  et  al.,  1998).  According  to  the
proponents of inflation targeting the difference between the two strategies is that one sets a target for
inflation, the other a target for monetary growth. It is mostly argued that the “man on the street” can
make more sense  of  inflation,  and  thus  of  an  inflation  target,  than  he  can  of  monetary  aggregates.
This  line  of  argument  is  misleading,  though,  as  it  confuses  two  different  levels  of  monetary
policy - that of the final objective and that of the strategy. What is more to the point is making a clean
distinction between these two concepts.
The accountability of a central bank ultimately hinges on the degree to which it has
achieved the final objective it has specified - in the case of the ECB, this means the objective of price
stability. The strictness of accountability thus hinges on the clarity of the target which has been set
and  the  degree  of  the  central  bank’s  responsibility  for  the  actual  trend  in  the  target  variables.  The
EMI’s aforementioned proposal to set a narrow margin is a good idea. However, contrary to the first
impression,  such  an  inflation  target  is  independent  of  the  central  bank’s  monetary  policy  strategy.
Admittedly, it is an explicit part of inflation targeting. However, in principle, it can be combined with
any other strategy - it is implicitly contained in a monetary targeting strategy (King, 1997b, p. 435.)
Owing to the long time lag between the deployment of monetary policy instruments
and  the  achievement  of  the  inflation  rate,  however,  the  central  bank’s  accountability  for  ongoing
monetary  policy  cannot  focus  on  the  current  inflation  rate.  Rather,  what  is  needed - on  the  part  of
both the central bank and the general public - is to observe variables which contain information on
the future outlook for inflation. In monetary targeting, the monetary aggregate, which is used as an
intermediate  target,  serves  as  a  reference  point.  The  inflation  forecast  performs  this  function  in
inflation targeting.
If one considers that the inflation forecast - and not the current inflation rate - is  the
essential focus of accountability in inflation targeting, then the viability of this strategy’s suitability
BIS Review   25/1998
- 8 -
for the general  public’s  assessment  of  monetary  policy  becomes  a  much  more  complex  issue.  The
inflation forecasts published by each central bank are an amalgam of complex econometric models,
individual indicators and a healthy portion of subjective assessments.
Therefore - despite  careful  inflation  reports - the  inflation  forecasts  are  virtually
impossible for the general public to comprehend. It is not easy to say with any certainty how good the
quality  of  the  forecast  provided  by  the  central  bank  is,  nor  is  it  possible  to  tell  to  what  extent  the
central bank should actually publicly reveal the problems it encounters when preparing the forecast.
A  solution  often  given  by  proponents  of  inflation  targeting  is  that  a  “forecast
competition”  exists  between  the  central  bank  and  outsiders,  which  forces  the  central  bank  to
formulate the best inflation forecasts it can and to publish them together with a description of their
forecasting method. This would enable the public to examine  ex  ante - i.e.  before  the  inflation  rate
has  been  achieved - the  method  and  assumptions  on  which  the  inflation  forecast  is  based.
Furthermore,  there  would  be  inflation  forecasts  by  third  parties  which  the  public  would  take  into
account when judging the central bank’s inflation forecast. However, it is rather difficult to imagine
the public understanding such an ex ante judgement of the central bank’s inflation forecast, as it lacks
expert knowledge of possible forecasting methods and can neither judge nor compare the quality of
the central bank’s or other agencies’ forecasts.
In addition to such an ex ante comparison of the central bank’s inflation forecast with
that of alternative forecasts or forecasting methods, it is also possible to make an ex post comparison
of the achieved inflation rate with that previously forecast. However, a comparison of this kind is, by
its nature, only possible after some time has elapsed. Another factor is that it involves a number of
difficulties:    Basically,  there  are  two  ways  the  central  bank  can  make  its  inflation  forecast:  it  can
either take its future actions into account or not do so. In the first case, if the inflation forecast derived
in this way differs from the inflation target, the central bank will take relevant measures in line with
its inflation targeting strategy. But this means its forecast will automatically turn out to be wrong. In
the  latter  scenario  -  if  the  central  bank  adheres  strictly  to  a  strategy  of  inflation  targeting  -  no
difference can arise between the inflation forecast and the inflation target.
As opposed to the inflation forecast, the money stock is a clearly observable statistical
variable.  In  the  case  of  monetary  targeting,  the  statement  that  the  monetary  target  has  been  either
achieved or missed thus has unequivocal credibility. For that reason, the monetary targeting strategy
is transparent and is suitable for communication with the public. It therefore forms a good focus of
central bank accountability.
However - as previously mentioned - it is precisely at the start of monetary union that
instabilities in the demand for money, and possibly even turbulence, cannot be ruled out. If that is the
case,  a  comparison  of  monetary  growth  and  the  target  value  cannot  be  used  directly  to  derive  the
price movements to be expected nor the necessary extent of monetary policy action. The public must
additionally base its assessment on the interpretation given by the central bank of monetary growth,
of other indicators considered to be relevant, and possibly even a model-based inflation forecast. In
this case the problems relating to the quality of the central bank  analysis  and  the  credibility  of  the
central  bank’s  statements  with  the  resulting  implications  mentioned  in  the  preceding  comments  on
inflation targeting also impact upon monetary targeting. Nevertheless, the advantage of the monetary
targeting strategy may lie in the fact that these problems only appear in the event of instabilities in the
demand  for  money,  whereas  they  are,  in  a  sense,  inherent  to  the  system  in  an  inflation  targeting
strategy.
BIS Review   25/1998
The stability policy system
- 9 -
The  step  towards  a  common  currency  in  Europe  is  viewed  with  scepticism  on  the
other  side  of  the  Atlantic:  “The  shift  to  a  single  currency  for  all  of  Europe  would  be  an
unprecedented event. There is no sizable country anywhere that does not have its own currency. A
national  currency  is  both  a  symbol  of  sovereignty  and  the  key  to  the  pursuit  of  an  independent
economic and budget policy.” (Feldstein, 1997, p. 3.)
A special feature of European monetary union will, in fact, be that it will not have a
complementary political union - at least in the foreseeable future. The principle of “one country, one
currency” runs like a thread throughout monetary history. In EMU, this link is being broken for the
first time and replaced by the principle of “one market, one money”. (King, 1997a, p. 237.)
From a constitutional perspective, this is certainly an unusual and historically unique
event.  What  is  more:  the  Bundesbank’s  independence  was  based  on  a  simple  Act - one  which
theoretically could have been amended any time by a simple one-vote majority. To that extent, the
right of policy makers to intervene could be invoked at all times. The legal securing  of  the  ECB’s
independence  even  goes  beyond  being  enshrined  in  the  national  constitutions - the  EU  Treaty  can
only  be  amended  unanimously  by  all  member  states  (see  Böckenförde,  1997,  p.  33  ff.).  The  same
applies to the objective of giving priority to monetary stability. Hence, the reappointment costs, i.e.
the  costs  of  changing  the  conditions  under  which  monetary  policy  operates  (Jensen,  1997),  seem
likely to be very high in EMU.
That gives the supranational institution ECB a special standing. It is not for nothing
that  there  are  repeated  calls  for  a  political  “counterweight”.  Yet  the  necessary  coordination  of
economic policy within the EU should not be allowed to become an instrument which undermines the
European Central Bank’s independence.
Objections to this final and irrevocable “abdication by policy makers”  are  surfacing
throughout  Europe.  There  is  already  talk  of  a  future  ”dictatorship”  of  the  ECB;  there  are  also
warnings of “centralbankisation”, i.e.  that Europe will be shaped in the image of the central bank.
However, the priority accorded to stable money is precisely what was agreed in the
Maastricht Treaty, and an independent central bank has been given the mandate to keep this promise.
Only now do some seem to be getting the picture that this monetary arrangement has implications for
many other  policy  areas,  too.  Now  it  will  inevitably  be  revealed  to  what  extent  all  the  other  areas
comply with the conditions set by the objective of “stable money”.
The  euro  will  have  to  demonstrate  a  large  measure  of  stability  if  it  is  to  contribute
successfully towards integrating Europe and not towards dividing it. In the past, various individuals
have vowed emphatically that this will indeed be the case. However, public statements in favour of a
stable euro hardly constitute a copper-bottomed guarantee on their own.
A broad base of public  support  for  the  ECB’s  clear,  stability-oriented  policy  stance
will be a crucial factor. Unlike the Statute, the “stability culture” (Richter, 1994) of which so many
speak  cannot  be  established  by  fiat.  That  does  not  mean  that  both  phenomena  are  mutually
independent  (also  noted  by  Neumann,  1997,  p.  27).  Permanent  confidence  in  the  stability  of  the
currency can be instilled only within the context of a well-conceived status and its implications for
monetary  policy;  this  is  confidence  which,  in  turn,  underpins  monetary  policy  measures  geared  to
stability.
BIS Review   25/1998
Uncertainties
- 10 -
The  Maastricht  Treaty  has  largely  laid  the  foundations  for  a  stability-oriented
monetary policy as far as the institutional arrangements are concerned. As I have pointed out, those
foundations need to be complemented by an appropriate strategy and a convincing decision regarding
the choice of the leading personalities.
The  launching  of  a  new  central  bank  and  a  new  currency  is  accompanied  by
uncertainty.  The  associated  risk  premium  in  the  interest  rate  can  be  kept  down  by  choosing  an
appropriate  strategy  and  by  appointing  suitable  top  executives.  The  financial  markets  will  keep  a
critical eye on the ECB right from the start. The initial monetary policy course thus takes on crucial
importance. Some people are therefore already advising the ECB to pursue a particularly restrictive
course right from the outset so as to nip any mistrust in the bud, as it were.
Such an uncompromising approach would inevitably give rise to tensions within the
Council. It is also hard to imagine that the ECB would meet with general approval for such a course
among the people of Europe, given the high level of unemployment. At the moment we do not even
know whether there is a stable European consensus on the acceptable or optimal rate of inflation. The
trend towards the convergence of inflation rates at a low level is a good omen. In a monetary union
without a flanking political union, we shall simply have to wait and see whether this convergence of
preferences will prove to be a lasting phenomenon.
The  consensus  regarding  the  preference  for  stable  money  -  the  common  “stability
culture” - is all the more important as monetary union will have to survive for the foreseeable future
without the additional support of  a  political  union.  For  this  reason,  the  right  choice  of  participants
based on the convergence criteria assumes overriding importance. The public finance situation plays
a particular role in this assessment. The fiscal criteria have to be met on a sustainable basis, in other
words, not just at the beginning of Stage Three. Finally, the member states must implement the labour
market reform which is urgently needed and, in general, significantly  cut  back  the  dense  jungle  of
overregulation. Without a far higher degree of flexibility at the microeconomic level, it will not be
possible  for  monetary  union  to  yield  the  desired  benefits,  nor  will  the  ECB  encounter  broad  and
lasting  acceptance  for  a  monetary  policy  geared  to  ensuring  price  stability  in  accordance  with  the
Maastricht Treaty.
In an overall favourable assessment of the EMU Project, the IMF critically remarks
that “... the failure to recognize explicitly the importance of flexible labor markets was an important
omission from the Maastricht framework.” (IMF, 1997, p. 64) The decision  on  what  countries  are
eligible to enter Stage Three will not focus on whether countries have developed sufficiently flexible
labour and product markets  to  make  up  for  the  loss  of  the  exchange  rate  instrument.  However,  “a
failure  to  address  labor  market  problems  would  prevent  Europe  from  realizing  its  full  growth
potential,  and  could  also  weaken  the  credibility  of  the  euro  if  financial  markets  perceive  that
persistent  unemployment  is  eroding  support  for  prudent  macroeconomic  policies.”  (IMF,  1997,  p.
68.)
In a simulation using its multi-country econometric model (MULTIMOD), the IMF,
in one scenario, illustrates the implications of lagging structural reforms. In this scenario real wage
flexibility remains low, the natural rate of unemployment gradually  increases  to  the  level  of  actual
unemployment  in  the  EU  and  national  governments  attempt  to  offset  the  effects  of  deteriorating
labour  market  conditions  on  output  and  employment  by  additional  government  spending.  With
inflexible labour markets and rising structural unemployment, the price level is estimated to increase
by 2.3% over the medium term, and the level of real GDP declines by 2.5% relative to the baseline.
BIS Review   25/1998
- 11 -
The  government  debt-to-GDP  ratio  rises  by  more  than  10  percentage  points.  This  worsening  of
economic performance raises the risk premium on euro-denominated assets by 40 basis points in the
simulation.
The  meaningfulness  of  such  approaches  is  debatable;  however,  at  any  rate  this
simulation  does  make  clear  the  magnitude  of  negative  trends  which  are  to  be  expected  if  the
necessary reforms are not implemented. It is not possible to identify the psychological damage and
the political repercussions in this manner, anyway.
III. Conclusion
The  Maastricht  Treaty  has  provided  the  blueprint  for  a  strong  ECB,  able  to  act
independently as a credible guardian of a stable euro. The euro will mean price transparency across
the board and across borders.
However, the importance of legal independence may have been overstated. Not even
an independent central bank can lastingly defend monetary stability against  a  ‘society  of  excessive
demands’ - in other words, every society ultimately gets the rate of inflation it deserves and basically
wants.  Of  course,  this  statement  does  not  mean  that  institutions  are  irrelevant  or  that  central  bank
independence is unimportant. Precisely the contrary holds true: in principle, resistance to making the
central  bank  an  independent  institution  with  the  single  goal  of  price  stability  always  reflects  the
intention  of  reserving  access  to  influencing  monetary  policy  whenever  a  currency  loses  value.
Governments  seeking  re-election  often  have  an  incentive  to  achieve  short-term  benefits  through
inflation without considering its long-term costs. In view of the temptations inherent in the political
process, a society can signal its determination to safeguard the stability of its money only by choosing
the appropriate institutional arrangement. In this context, the independence of the  central  bank  is  a
necessary, but not sufficient, condition.
 Bibliography
Barro, R.J. and D.B. Gordon (1983): “Rules, Discretion and  Reputation  in  a  Model  of
Monetary Policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 12, pp. 101-21.
Böckenförde,  E.-W.  (1997):  Welchen  Weg  geht  Europa?,  Carl  Friedrich  von  Siemens
Stiftung, Munich.
Capie, F. (1997): “Central Bank Statutes - the Historical Dimension”, in: Die Bedeutung
der  Unabhängigkeit  der  Notenbank  für  die  Glaubwürdigkeit  der  europäischen  Geldpolitik,
Volkswirtschaftliche  Tagung  1997  der  Oesterreichischen  Nationalbank,  May  13/14,  Vienna,
pp. 43-55.
Cukierman,  A.  (1992):  Central  Bank  Strategy,  Credibility,  and  Independence:  Theory
and Evidence, The MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Dornbusch,  R.,  C.A.  Favero  and  F.  Giavazzi  (1998):  “A  Red  Letter  Day?”,  Paper
delivered at the BIS and CEPR convention “Asset Prices and Monetary Policy” in Basle on January
26-27, 1998.
BIS Review   25/1998
- 12 -
Eijffinger,  S.C.W.  and  J.  de  Haan  (1996):  The  Political  Economy  of  Central  Bank
Independence,  Special  Papers  in  International  Economics,  No.  19,  May,  International  Finance
Section, Dept. of Economics, Princeton University.
EMI (1997): The Single Monetary Policy in Stage Three - Elements of the Monetary
Policy Strategy of the ESCB, February, European Monetary Institute, Frankfurt am Main.
Feldstein,  M.  (1997):  The  Political  Economy  of  the  European  Economic  and
Monetary  Union:  Political  Sources  of  an  Economic  Liability,  National  Bureau  of  Economic
Research, Working Paper 6150.
IMF  (1997):  World  Economic  Outlook,  October,  International  Monetary  Fund,
Washington, DC.
Jensen,  H.  (1997):  “Credibility  of  Optimal  Monetary  Delegation”,  The  American
Economic Review, December, pp. 911-920.
King, M. (1997a): “Roundtable on Lessons of European Monetary Integration for the
International  Monetary  System”  in:  P.R.  Masson,  T.H.  Krueger  and  B.G.  Turtelboom  (eds), EMU
and the International Monetary System, International Monetary Fund,  Proceedings  of  a  conference
held in Washington, DC on March 17/18, 1997, pp. 237-253.
King, M. (1997b): “The inflation target five years on”, in: Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin, November 1997.
Lamfalussy, A. (1997): “The European Central Bank: Independent and Accountable”,
in:  Die  Bedeutung  der  Unabhängigkeit  der  Notenbank  für  die  Glaubwürdigkeit  der  europäischen
Geldpolitik,  Volkswirtschaftliche  Tagung  1997  der  Oesterreichischen  Nationalbank,  May  13/14,
Vienna, pp. 11-17.
Neumann, M.J.M. (1997): “Central Bank Independence and Price Stability”, in: Die
Bedeutung  der  Unabhängigkeit  der  Notenbank  für  die  Glaubwürdigkeit  der  europäischen
Geldpolitik,  Volkswirtschaftliche  Tagung  1997  der  Oesterreichischen  Nationalbank,  May  13/14,
Vienna, pp. 19-29.
Popper, Karl. R. (1957): Die offene Gesellschaft und ihre Feinde, Der Zauber Platons,
Vol. I, Bern.
Richter, R. (1994): “Stabilitätskultur als Problem der Institutionen-Ökonomik”, in: H.
Hesse and O. Issing (eds.), Geld und Moral, Munich, pp. 73-90.
Rogoff,  K.  (1985):  “The  Optimal  Degree  of  Commitment  to  a  Monetary  Target”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, Vol. 100(4), pp. 1169-89.
Spahn,  H.-P.  (1997):  “Credibility,  Reputation,  and  the  Instability  of  the  EMS”,  in:
A.J.  Cohen,  H.  Hagemann  and  J.  Smithin  (eds.),  Money,  Financial  Institutions  and  Macro-
economics, Boston, pp. 235-251.
BIS Review   25/1998
- 13 -
Streit, M.E., U. Mummert and D. Kiwit (1997): “Views and Comments on Cognition,
Rationality, and Institutions”, Editorial Preface, Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics,
Vol. 153, No. 4, pp. 688-691.
SVR  (1997):  Wachstum,  Beschäftigung,  Währungsunion  -  Orientierungen  für  die
Zukunft, Annual Report 1997/98, November 1997, Council of Economic Advisers.
Tabellini,  G.  (1998):  Inflation  targeting  and  the  accountability  of  the  European
Central Bank, Statement prepared for the public hearing on “Democratic accountability in the third
phase of EMU”, organised by the European Parliament, Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs, January
6, 1998.
Waller,  Ch.  J.  and  C.E.  Walsh  (1996):  “Central  Bank  Independence,  Economic
Behavior and Optimal Term Length”, American Economic Review, Vol. 86, pp. 1139ff.
BIS Review   25/1998
