Bank of Japan’s annual review of monetary and economic developments   BANK
OF JAPAN COMMUNICATION, the Bank of Japan Annual Review 1998.
Annual Review of Monetary and Economic Developments in Fiscal 1997
Summary
Japan’s economic growth slowed during fiscal 1997.1 The economy, which had been
on  a  recovery  path,  began  to  decelerate  with  the  turn  of  the  new  fiscal  year  in  April  1997,  and
became increasingly sluggish toward the end of the fiscal year.
Final demand deteriorated toward the end of fiscal 1997. Until recently, net exports
generally  followed  an  upward  trend  and  underpinned  Japanese  economic  activities.  In  detail,  real
exports  expanded,  reflecting  firm  business  conditions  overseas  -  particularly  in  Europe  and  the
United  States  -  and  also  by  the  depreciation  of  the  yen,  while  real  imports  remained  virtually
unchanged. However, net exports peaked out toward the end of fiscal 1997, owing to a decrease in
exports to other Asian countries against the background of the ongoing economic adjustments in the
region. Meanwhile, public-sector investment basically trended downward because of tight budgets at
both  the  central  and  the  local  government  levels.  Business  fixed  investment  maintained  a  gradual
increase during the first half of fiscal 1997, particularly in the manufacturing industry. However, in
the  second  half  of  the  fiscal  year,  it  seemed  to  have  peaked  out  reflecting  factors  such  as
deterioration in corporate profits. Private consumption and housing investment were depressed from
April 1997 mainly in reaction to the surge in demand ahead of the rise in the consumption tax rate
from 3 to 5 percent.2
The stagnation became evident from autumn 1997 partly against the background of
the deterioration in household confidence despite a moderate recovery temporarily observed around
summer 1997. The stagnation in final demand adversely affected production, corporate profits, and
employment condition. Accumulation of inventories was followed by an adjustment in production,
resulting in a decrease in output in the last two quarters of fiscal 1997. Inventories in final-demand
goods,  including  construction  goods  and  consumer  durables,  began  to  accumulate  in  spring  1997,
and this development expanded to producer goods in autumn 1997. Corporate profits plunged in the
second half of fiscal 1997 resulting in a turn to decline for the fiscal year as a whole. Profits declined
even at large manufacturing firms that had maintained steady growth up until that time. Under these
circumstances, corporate sentiment worsened rapidly across a wide range of firms especially during
the second half of the fiscal year, as indicated by the Bank’s Tankan - Short-Term Economic Survey
of Enterprises in Japan and other statistics. Labor market conditions deteriorated in fiscal 1997. The
number  of  new  job  offers  turned  to  a  decline  particularly  in  the  manufacturing  and  construction
industries. The unemployment rate reached and remained around a historically high level in line with
the  increase  in  involuntary  unemployment.  In  the  meantime,  the  growth  in  wages  and  salaries,
particularly  overtime  compensation  and  bonuses,  decelerated,  reflecting  reduced  production  and
worsening corporate profits.
Consequently,  the  positive  cycle  of  production,  income,  and  expenditures  that  had
supported  the  economic  recovery  during  fiscal  1996  weakened  from  the  beginning  of  fiscal  1997,
exerting  downward  pressure  on  the  overall  Japanese  economy.  With  respect  to  final  demand
components, the primary factor that weakened this positive cycle was the sluggishness of household
expenditures.
                                                     
1 Fiscal year starting in April and ending in March.
2 The consumption tax rate was raised on April 1, 1997.
BIS Review   70/1998
- 2 -
Household expenditures began to show a clear downward trend in early autumn 1997
despite a slight rebound in summer 1997 after fluctuations resulted from the rise in the consumption
tax rate in April 1997. The decline in real disposable income due to the rise in the consumption tax
rate and the discontinuation of the special income tax reduction can be cited as a factor behind the
sluggish household expenditures. In  the  past,  when  constraints  on  household  income  intensified,  a
mechanism often functioned whereby growth in expenditures was maintained by the increase in the
households’  propensity  to  consume  (the  ratio  of  expenditures  to  household  income).  This  time,
however, household expenditures were restrained reflecting cautious household sentiment, and this
added to the sluggishness in final demand, leading to excessive inventory and its adjustment in the
corporate sector. This development worsened labor market and income conditions in the household
sector.  It  is  difficult  to  quantify  and  verify  the  factors  that  have  weakened  household  confidence.
However, it is likely that the following factors contributed: (1) mounting anxiety regarding the future
employment and income conditions as a result of a series of large financial institution failures; and
(2) growing uncertainty regarding the future burden on households amid the recent active debate on
the budget deficit and the reform of national pension systems.
The  stagnation  of  household  expenditures  also  affected  corporate  sentiment  and
business  fixed  investment  through  the  sluggish  domestic  final  demand  and  deteriorating  corporate
profits due to inventory adjustment. Prior to the collapse of the “bubble” economy, brief periods of
stagnant  domestic  demand  were  overcome  through  (1)  active  export  drives  by  firms  especially  in
manufacturing industry, which compensated for the weak domestic demand; and (2) an improvement
in cash flow as a result of monetary easing and the positive lending attitude of financial institutions,
which facilitated corporate financing and business fixed investment especially in nonmanufacturing
industry.  However,  after  autumn  1997,  business  conditions  became  severe  due  to  the  economic
turmoil  in  other  Asian  economies,  especially  in  Korea  and  the  ASEAN  nations,  and  the  cautious
lending  attitude  of  financial  institutions,  due  in  part  to  weak  stock  prices  and  market  concerns
regarding credit risk.3
In  addition  to  the  weak  household  expenditures,  various  strong  and  persistent
structural  adjustment  pressures  on  the  economy  can  be  cited  as  another  fundamental  factor  in  the
economic stagnation. With such pressures, the economy, unable to resume a self-sustained recovery
which started in fiscal 1996, stagnated, a result that was triggered directly by factors such as fiscal
restraint and cautious household sentiment. The attitude toward expenditure and investment at large
manufacturing  firms  facing  so-called  “mega-competition”  remained  selective.  Nonmanufacturing
firms  were  pressed  to  boost  their  productivity  -  which  was  said  to  be  behind  that  of  the
manufacturing  sector  -  amid  the  ongoing  deregulation  in  addition  to  the  balance-sheet  adjustment
following  the  collapse  of  the  “bubble”  economy.  Turning  to  the  industrial  structure,  the  Japanese
economy  seemed  to  be  still  in  the  process  of  transition.  There  appeared  to  be  no  leading  industry
raising  productivity  and  thereby  creating  additional  employment,  while  in  some  industries
employment adjustment pressure was intensifying.
Prices  (excluding  the  effects  from  the  rise  in  the  consumption  tax  rate)  remained
stable  on  the  whole  during  fiscal  1997,  although  they  softened  slightly  during  the  second  half.4
Import  prices  rose  sharply  in  1996  but  turned  to  a  decline  in  the  first  half  of  1997  reflecting  the
fluctuations  in  crude  oil  prices  and  the  exchange  rate  of  the  yen.  The  prices  remained  relatively
stable until the end of 1997, but began to trend downward once again reflecting the weakening of
international commodity prices due to the economic crisis in Asian economies. Domestic wholesale
prices seemed to be bottoming out during the second half of 1996 and the first half of 1997. Prices
then  softened  from  summer  1997,  reflecting  the  weakening  market  conditions  in  materials-related
                                                     
3 ASEAN comprises Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, the Philippines, Brunei, Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos.
4 Price data presented in this report exclude the effects of the rise of the consumption tax rate from 3 to 5 percent effective from
April 1, 1997.
BIS Review   70/1998
- 3 -
goods due to stagnant domestic final demand and the accumulation of inventories, in addition to the
fall in import prices. Corporate service prices in fiscal 1997 narrowed their rate of decline following
the ongoing downward trend and have recently moved around zero compared to the level of a year
earlier.  Consumer  prices  (nationwide,  excluding  perishables)  increased  at  a  slightly  higher  rate
during  the  first  half  of  fiscal  1997.  This  is  because  commodity  prices  declined  more  slowly  as  a
result of a decelerated influx of low-priced foreign goods. In the second half of fiscal 1997, however,
the softening of commodity prices reflecting the decline in domestic wholesale prices dampened the
increase. Furthermore, the 12-month increase in consumer prices has recently fallen almost to zero,
excluding the effects of the rise in medical service charges caused by the medical insurance system
reform of September 1997.
With respect to factors affecting prices, the price decline phase of the second half of
fiscal  1997  differed  from  that  of  around  1994-1995.  During  the  1994-1995  period,  downward
pressure  on  the  overall  prices  of  import-competing  domestic  goods  intensified  owing  to  the  rapid
increase  in  the  penetration  ratio  of  imports,  particularly  in  manufactured  goods.  This  occurred
against the background of the industrialization of Asian countries other than Japan and the continued
appreciation of the yen. On the other hand, in the second half of fiscal 1997, downward pressure on
overall prices resulted mainly from the stagnant domestic final demand. There did exist downward
pressure  on  domestic  wholesale  prices  caused  by  the  drop  in  import  prices,  owing  to  the  price
declines in international commodity markets triggered by the crisis in Asian economies. However,
the penetration ratio of imports did not increase since the value of the yen was significantly lower on
the whole than it was in 1994-1995. As for the effects of price declines on corporate activities, the
decline in the prices of crude oil and other raw materials in international commodity markets in the
second half of 1997 worked rather favorably for Japanese firms by improving their terms of trade,
unlike the first period during which the import penetration ratio of final goods increased. It should be
noted, however, that there were signs of a squeeze on corporate profits as unit labor costs and labor’s
relative  share  in  income  distribution  increased  against  the  background  of  the  exceptionally  low
nominal  GDP  growth  rate,  and  the  expansion  of  the  domestic  output  gap  accelerated  due  to  the
stagnation  of  final  demand.  It  therefore  became  important  to  carefully  monitor  the  effects  of  the
sluggish domestic demand on corporate activities and employment conditions.
As for land prices, commercial land prices generally showed a smaller decline as a
clear  distinction  in  profitability  existed  between  land  whose  price  had  stopped  falling  and  land
whose  value  continued  to  fall  from  fiscal  1996  through  the  first  half  of  fiscal  1997.  Meanwhile,
residential  land  prices  virtually  stopped  declining.  In  the  second  half  of  fiscal  1997,  however,
commercial  and  residential  land  prices  both  began  to  weaken  slightly  once  again,  reflecting  the
stagnant economy.
As for financial developments, while the Bank maintained its easy stance in monetary
policy, some disturbances occurred in the financial system. Causes of the disturbances included the
further drop in stock prices affected by a number of failures  of  banks  and  securities  companies  in
November  against  the  background  of  the  prolongation  of  the  efforts  to  dispose  of  nonperforming
loans. As a result, there  were  some  unstable  developments  in  the  market  such  as  the  rise  in  some
interest rates reflecting pressure coming from intensified market concerns over credit and liquidity
risks. Around the fiscal year-end, however, the market gradually regained stability as a result of an
ample  supply  of  funds  injected  by  the  Bank  and  implementation  of  financial  system  stabilization
measures involving the use of public funds worth ¥30 trillion.
Developments in market interest rates showed that both short and long-term interest
rates increased slightly for a while after the beginning of the fiscal year and then turned to a decline
through  the  summer,  as  the  outlook  for  the  economy  became  increasingly  unclear.  Then,  in
November  1997,  market  awareness  of  credit  risk  heightened  sharply  with  a  number  of  failures  of
BIS Review   70/1998
- 4 -
banks  and  securities  companies.  Fund-raising  costs  of  private-sector  institutions  -  namely,  interest
rates on  CDs  and  CP  in  the  markets,  and  corporate  bond  yields  in  the  capital  markets  -  increased
reflecting  the  expansion  of  the  risk  premium.  On  the  other  hand,  yields  on  safer  assets  such  as
government  bonds  declined.  The  difference  between  rates  offered  in  the  interbank  market  also
expanded according to banks’ creditworthiness, and the so-called “Japan premium” was imposed on
Japanese  banks  in  overseas  markets.  In  response  to  such  a  rapid  rise  in  interest  rates,  the  Bank
provided ample funds to the market in an effort to stabilize interest rates through various operations
including the new bond-borrowing (“repo”) operations introduced in late November. As a result, the
overnight  call  rate  (uncollateralized,  weighted  average)  regained  stability  at  the  end  of  November
and  interest  rates  on  term  instruments  began  to  decline  from  late  February.  Yields  on  long-term
government  bonds,  on  the  other  hand,  declined  to  a  historical  low  of  1.49  percent  in  late  March
reflecting releases of weak economic indicators. During the same period, stock prices (Nikkei 225
Stock Average) fell around early January once marking  ¥14,664, reflecting  the  cautious  economic
outlook  and  mounting  uncertainty  about  the  future.  Stock  prices  later  rebounded  with  fluctuations
and recovered to ¥16,527 at the end of March 1998, reflecting implementation of the government’s
stimulus measures including the use of public funds.
Financial  indicators  such  as  monetary  aggregates  and  lending  also  showed  erratic
movements after November 1997 reflecting intensified awareness of credit and liquidity risks among
firms and households. The growth of M2+CDs, a representative indicator of monetary aggregates in
Japan,  remained  stable  at  around  the  annual  growth  rate  of  3  percent  until  early  autumn,  but  rose
sharply after November, marking an annual increase of 5 percent in February 1998, the first time in
the approximately seven years.5 This reflected the shift of funds into M2+CDs from financial assets
outside  M2+CDs  such  as  investment  trusts,  and  also  the  buildup  of  corporate  deposits  as  firms
deposited the funds raised in advance by bonds and CP to secure liquid funds. From early March,
however, the annual growth in M2+CDs fell slightly. Meanwhile, private-sector financial institutions
showed stronger movement to reduce risk assets including lending in the second half of fiscal 1997,
as  capital  constraints  were  intensified  by  the  fall  in  stock  prices  just  when  risk  management  was
being  strengthened  prior  to  the  introduction  of  the  Prompt  Corrective  Action.  Nevertheless,  a
massive reduction in lending did not occur with a slight pickup in stock prices and the decisions on
the injection of public  funds  toward  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year.  The  amount  outstanding  of  private
bank  lending,  however,  decreased  substantially  after  March,  partly  due  to  loan  write-offs  and
liquidation.
With  respect  to  corporate  financing,  a  rapid  contraction  in  overall  fund-raising  by
firms did not occur owing partly to the increase in fund-raising in the capital markets by firms with
good  business  performances.  However,  from  a  microeconomic  perspective,  the  unbalanced
allocation of funds among firms intensified. In particular, firms with low ratings and small firms that
are usually unable to access the capital market were considered to have experienced tighter financial
conditions partly due to deteriorating business performances reflecting the staggering economy. As
for  lending  by  private-sector  financial  institutions,  the  lending  attitude  became  increasingly
restrictive due partly to intensified constraints on capital in view of capital adequacy requirements,
and  as  a  result  exerted  downward  pressures  on  the  economy  through  its  effects  on  corporate
sentiment  and  firms’  investment  and  spending  activities.  The  significant  influence  of  financial
factors on the economy was one of the characteristics of the economic developments in fiscal 1997.
                                                     
5 M2+CDs = cash currency in circulation + deposit money + quasi-money + certificates of deposit.
(Cash currency in circulation = the amount of bank notes issued and coins in circulation - the amount of cash currency held by
financial institutions surveyed.
Deposit money = the total of demand deposits among private and public deposits with financial institutions surveyed - the checks
and bills held by these institutions.
Quasi-money = the total of private deposits, public deposits less demand deposits with financial institutions surveyed.
Certificates of deposit = those of private corporations, individuals and the public with financial institutions surveyed.)
BIS Review   70/1998
- 5 -
In  the  “Annual  Review  of  Monetary  and  Economic  Developments  in  Fiscal  1996,”
the Bank pointed out that the momentum of the economic recovery firmed  gradually  during  fiscal
1996, but this was not necessarily accompanied by an improvement in private-sector confidence.6 In
fiscal  1997,  in  addition  to  the  fiscal  drag,  the  Japanese  economy  experienced  diverse  negative
impacts  such  as  failures  in  the  financial  system  and  the  financial  and  economic  crises  in  Asian
economies. Thus, the recovery which had been proceeding since the end of 1993 was interrupted. It
cannot  be  denied  that  economic  entities’  confidence  was  damaged  further.  Results  of  various
business surveys indicated that the recovery of economic entities’ confidence was  further  delayed.
Factors  behind  the  weak  recovery  in  the  private  sector’s  confidence  were  anxiety  and  uncertainty
regarding the economic and social systems of the country, in addition to factors related to persistent
aftereffects  of  the  collapse  of  the  “bubble”  economy  such  as  the  financial  institutions’
nonperforming-loan  problem.  The  anxiety  related  to  whether  the  current  systems  can  adapt  to  the
major structural changes facing the Japanese economy - such as intensified global competition and
demographic changes in Japan toward fewer children and an increasing  aged  population  -  and  the
growing uncertainty caused by the unclear direction of future economic developments.
In  light  of  the  above,  there  are  several  issues  which  must  be  dealt  with  for  the
Japanese  economy  to  regain  a  self-sustaining  growth.  First,  the  critical  task  for  the  Japanese
economy  to  be  dealt  with  without  delay  is  to  avoid  falling  into  a  deflationary  spiral  induced  by
decrease in demand. In view of this aim, the government set out a comprehensive economic package
on  April  24,  1998  including  special  income  tax  reductions.  Expeditious  implementation  of  these
measures and significant results are expected.
The second task is to solve various problems that surfaced after the bursting of the
economic “bubble” as quickly as possible and to restructure and enhance the mechanism of Japan’s
financial  system.  During  fiscal  1997,  the  government  implemented  measures  to  stabilize  the
Japanese  financial  system,  which  included  the  use  of  public  funds.  In  addition,  the  recently
announced  comprehensive  economic  stimulus  package  incorporated  measures  to  enhance  asset
securitization  and  real  estate  liquidation,  and  a  systematic  framework  for  the  disposal  of
nonperforming  loans  was  consolidated.  Also,  the  Japanese  “Big  Bang”  financial  deregulation  is
being implemented beginning with the amendment of the law on foreign exchange and foreign trade,
which came into effect on April 1, 1998. Under these circumstances,  it  is  imperative  for  financial
institutions  to  dispose  expeditiously  of  their  nonperforming  loans  as  well  as  to  reallocate  their
resources,  in  order  to  efficiently  provide  financial  services  that  meet  the  needs  of  firms  and
households.  Along  with  the  efforts  to  review  and  to  improve  the  indirect  financing  system,  it  is
necessary  to  reinforce  direct  financing  through  the  expansion  of  risk  capital  offered  in  the  capital
markets,  thereby  encouraging  the  optimal  allocation  of  funds  in  the  economy.  Thus,  the
infrastructure for corporate accounting, disclosure of information, the system of taxation for financial
services, and payment and settlement systems must be reviewed and improved expeditiously.
The third task is to make steady progress in the reform of Japan’s economic structure
through  measures  such  as  deregulation  and  revision  of  the  taxation  system.  The  relaxation  and
abolition  of  various  economic  regulations  would  bring  about  higher  productivity  and  economic
growth rates in the long run by creating demand and promoting effective resource allocation among
industries  and  firms.  Also,  a  revision  of  the  taxation  system  aimed  at  improving  the  return  on
investment  and  supporting  the  optimal  allocation  of  capital  should  have  positive  effects  on  the
overall economy. Restructuring of other economic systems is also required in order to smoothly shift
resources. For example, the current employment system should be reviewed to promote mobility in
the labor market. In addition, while efforts should be made to achieve greater efficiency in the public
                                                     
6  For  details,  see  “Annual  Review  of  Monetary  and  Economic  Developments  in  Fiscal  1996”  in  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  Annual
Review 1997.
BIS Review   70/1998
- 6 -
sector, a nationwide consensus regarding the direction of the social security system reform should be
reached  as  quickly  as  possible  to  ease  the  deep-rooted  concerns  in  the  household  sector  over  the
future burden of social security costs.
The  diverse  events  that  the  Japanese  economy  experienced  in  fiscal  1997
demonstrated  the  importance  of  influencing  expectations  of  various  economic  entities  and  to  gain
confidence among market participants in managing economic policy. In this regard, policy makers
should  strive  to  reduce  the  uncertainty  concerning  the  outlook  for  the  economy  through  improved
transparency and consistency in their policy, while initiating effective measures in order to support
economic activities of private-sector entities.
BIS Review   70/1998
