The Bank of Japan’s April report of recent economic and financial developments   Bank of
Japan communication, 13/4/98.
Japan’s  economy  remains  stagnant  reflecting  weak  domestic  demand,  such  as
household  expenditures.    In  addition,  corporate  sentiment  has  been  deteriorating  across
industries, indicating strong downward pressures on economic activities.
With respect to final demand, growth in net exports, which had been underpinning
the economy, has slowed and business fixed investment seems to have started declining.  Private
consumption  has  continued  to  stagnate  despite  the  implementation  of  the  special  tax-cut
measures.  Housing investment has also continued to be weak and public-sector investment is on
a decreasing trend.  Against the background of significant accumulation of inventories reflecting
weak  final  demand,  industrial  production  has  continued  to  decline.    Consequently,  negative
impacts  on  corporate  profits  as  well  as  on  employment  and  income  conditions  have  been
intensifying, and are leading to a further deterioration of domestic demand.
As regards the outlook for the economy, growth in net exports is unlikely to be
strong enough to prevent the deterioration of the economy, partly reflecting further adjustments
in other Asian economies.  Business fixed investment will continue to decrease due mainly to the
decline in corporate profits and is likely to enter an  adjustment phase.  With regard to  private
consumption, distinctive recovery can not be expected against the background of the weakening
of income formation, although consumer confidence may cease to wane.  Downward pressures
on economic activities, particularly on production, are likely to continue to be strong for the time
being, because the level of inventories is high and a conspicuous recovery in domestic private
demand  is  unlikely.    However,  following  the  implementation  of  measures  to  stabilize  the
financial system and the special tax-cut measures, additional economic stimulus package is now
being  discussed.    The  details  of  the  package  and  their  effects  on  corporate  and  household
confidence should be carefully monitored.
With regard to prices, wholesale prices have continued to decline reflecting weak
supply  and  demand  conditions  of  goods  in  domestic  and  overseas  markets.    The  year-to-year
increase in consumer prices (excluding the effects of institutional changes such as the rise in the
consumption  tax  rate)  has  been  declining  close  to  zero  .    As  for  the  future,  prices  overall  are
likely to soften reflecting the continuous expansion of the output gap in the domestic economy
and  the  decline  in  overseas  commodity  prices.    These  price  developments,  which  might  have
further negative impacts on corporate activities, may require close monitoring.
Financial  markets  have  shown  the  following  developments.    In  the  money
markets,  interest  rates  on  term  instruments  and  the  so-called  “Japan  premium”  declined
substantially from the end of February through the middle of March and have generally remained
steady thereafter.  This reflects the Bank of Japan’s ample provision of funds through contracts
that mature after the fiscal year-end as well as the progress in implementing the financial-system
stabilization  measures.    It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  the  levels  of  the  above  rates  and
premium  are  still  high  compared  with  those  prevailing  before  autumn  1997,  which  can  be
attributed  to  the  continuing  cautious  attitudes  of  market  participants  toward  credit  risk.
Meanwhile, with the releases of weak economic indicators, long-term  government bond  yields
have fluctuated in a historically low range and stock prices have been declining since the end of
March.
BIS Review   32/1998
- 2 -
With respect to monetary aggregates, the growth in money stock continued to be
rather  high  in  February  due  to  the  substantial  shift  of  funds  away  from  investment  trusts.
Meanwhile,  private  bank  lending  remains  sluggish.    However,  with  an  increase  in  corporate
financing via the capital market, a substantial fall in overall corporate fund-raising seems to have
been avoided.
Banks remain cautious in extending loans with a view to improving their medium-
term  profitability  and  financial  soundness.    Fund-raising  costs  of  firms  continued  to  be  high
according  to  their  credit  standing.    In  such  circumstances,  some  firms,  especially  small  and
medium-sized  firms,  have  been  facing  difficult  financing  conditions  and  this  effect  on  the
economy continues to warrant a careful monitoring.
BIS Review   32/1998
