Mr. Meister discusses the future of money and financial services   Statements by
Mr. Edgar Meister, a member of the Directorate of the Deutsche Bundesbank, to be put forward at
the Generation Bridge Symposium “Money tomorrow” in Eltville on 11/9/98.
First statement:
Supervisors  are  open  to  innovations  in  banking  business — but  banks  and
financial  intermediaries  in  general  must  be  able  to  manage  the  risks  arising  from  new
techniques.
Supervisors have never stood in the way of innovations in banking, but instead have
always worked hard to give entrepreneurs in this field a reliable legal basis for product development.
For example, the legal definition of banking operations in Germany was extended to include prepaid
card business and network money business by amending the Banking Act.
Yet attention must always be paid to sensitivity in confidence and to possible dangers
for  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  Disruptions  in  payment  transactions — even  the
defaulting  of  a  financial  market  participant — can  rapidly  affect  financial  markets  adversely  and
even hamper the development of the real economy.
Things are only in their infancy. The issuance of electronic money should generally
be restricted to banks. That is primarily for reasons of safety; banks as issuers of electronic money
are regulated and monitored according to prudential guidelines. To keep monetary  policy  efficient
the option to introduce minimum reserves on electronic money makes sense.
Second statement:
Recent  financial  crises  have  proven  again:  progress  in  information  technology
and new risk management techniques cannot replace solid capital requirements for banks.
Internal risk models for the calculation of capital requirements  for  market  risks  are
important innovations in the field of risk management - supervisors respect such developments. But
risk models are not infallible. Against the background of recent
financial crises there are some doubts whether short-term high market volatility has
always been covered adequately by the assumptions of the models (which use 250 days averages for
volatility).
Credit risk models which are developed now can help to measure credit risks more
exactly. Capital requirements however must cover all risks of a bank, i.e. operational and legal risks,
too. Consequently a licence to use credit risk models or generally new risk management techniques
must  not  result  in  weaker  capital  requirements  for  banks  considering  generally  rising  risks  in  the
financial world.
Precisely the recent financial crises demonstrate how difficult it is to determine bank-
specific  risks  with  sufficient  accuracy.  Own  capital  as  a  cushion  for  losses  is  therefore  a  modern
prudential requirement.
Third statement:
BIS Review   70/1998
- 2 -
The  banking  world  will  be  changing  even  faster  -  but  neither  the  size  of  a
financial institution by itself nor applying modern strategies are guarantees of quality.
The  process  of  concentration  in  the  banking  industry  will  continue  and  probably
result in fewer banks as well as a general increase in the size of units.
Mergers  in  Germany  are  in  many  cases  welcome,  as  they  improve  the  viability  of
institutions. The idea here is to safeguard the diversified nature of business inherent in the universal
banking concept through suitably sized banks. The situation is different in the United States, where
mergers  sometimes  take  place  in  order  to  surmount  the  restrictions  on  business  imposed  by  the
specialised banking system and to achieve a higher level of diversification.
Mega-mergers  have  the  disadvantage  of  making  structures  less  transparent  and
groups more difficult for management to control. On the whole, the number of institutions which, in
terms of systemic risks, are “too big to fail”, will rise.
Alternatively or complementary to the massive growth we are seeing in many places
at  present,  specialisation,  the  return  to  core  business  or  measures  denoted  by  the  term  „lean
banking“, i.e. the attempt to reduce costs by outsourcing activities, shrinking the range of in-house
banking  services  or  purchasing  outside  services.  From  an  economic  point  of  view  these  may  be
important  strategies  for  the  banks  in  the  future,  but  outsourcing  must  never  affect  regularity  of
business  or  the  possibility  to  control  business  for  the  management  as  well  as  for  the  supervisory
authorities.
Fourth statement:
Changes  in  the  banking  scenery  also  affect  supervisors  -  supervision  must  be
kept efficient, time has not come for an „outsourcing“ of core functions of supervision.
Supervisors must also react on global integration. One proposal to reform supervision
is  to  leave  supervision  and  development  of  supervisory  concepts  to  a  large  extent  to  the  market,
respectively to a small group of global players. Supervisors are open to new approaches. There are,
however, some fundamental reservations against this proposal.
The  current  proposals  of  self  regulation  do  not  respect  the  context  between
stipulating  risk  control  norms  and  the  responsibility  for  preventing  systemic  risks.  More  self
regulation would simultaneously require that market participants take over major responsibility for
preventing  systemic  risks  and  therefore  setting  up  private  agencies  to  intervene  during  liquidity
crises. But as long as private institutions are not prepared to install such agencies and to take over
responsibility  for  systemic  risks,  time  for  outsourcing  of  essential  elements  of  supervision  has  not
come.
Fifth statement:
In  the  information  age,  central  banks  can  operate  as  an  anchor  of  prudential
supervision owing to their “natural” presence in the market.
The central bank establishes contacts with market participants and receives valuable
information almost automatically by virtue of its market presence; similar to a seismograph, it may
record tremors in the financial system at  an  early  stage  and  react  accordingly.  Moreover,  in  many
BIS Review   70/1998
- 3 -
cases  the  central  bank  is  in  a  good  position  to  strive  for  market-enhancing  and  prudentially
justifiable deregulation and technical innovations.
However,  during  liquidity  crises,  central  banks  should  not  assume  an  official,
predetermined function of “lender of last resort” because of the associated problem of moral hazard.
Instead, liquidity crises should be solved by private or semi-private agencies before they reach the
central bank. In Germany the Liquidity Consortium Bank serves as an example for such strategy in
case of liquidity problems.
BIS Review   70/1998
