Mr.  Stals  discusses  the  transformation  of  the  national  payment  and
interbank settlement systems   Address by the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,
Dr. Chris Stals, at the Fifteenth Payment Systems International Conference, Sun City, 1/4/98.
1. Background
The political reforms in South Africa over the past five years opened up the way
for major changes in the South African financial sector.  With the removal of sanctions, boycotts,
disinvestment  campaigns  and  the  withdrawal  of  foreign  loan  funds  from  South  Africa,  the
challenge  was  extended  to  reintroduce  the  South  African  financial  markets  in  the  world
environment.    This  reintegration  took  place  at  a  time  when  the  international  markets  also
changed drastically, and when the trend towards financial globalisation gained momentum.
During  the  past  four  years,  many  international  financial  institutions  established
themselves in South Africa to participate in the expansion of the South African markets.  Today,
there  are  about  25  foreign  banks  with  established  branches  or  subsidiaries,  and  about  60  with
representative offices operating in South Africa, competing with and supplementing the activities
of  about  40  local  banks.    Many  other  international  fund  managers  and  financial  brokers  also
entered the South African market.  Many South African banks and other financial institutions, on
the other hand, established themselves in other African countries and in the rest of the world.
Explosive increases occurred in the volume of transactions in the South African
financial markets.  Total turnover in the secondary bond market increased from R2,300 billion in
1995  to  R4,600  billion  in  1997.    The  total  value  of  shares  traded  on  the  Johannesburg  Stock
Exchange  increased  from  R63  billion  in  1995  to  R207  billion  last  year.    The  average  daily
turnover in the South African market  for foreign exchange  last  year  exceeded  US  $10  billion.
During the first three months of 1998, non-residents increased their holdings of South African
securities (shares and bonds) by about R17 billion.
These greater volumes brought with them greater risk exposures, and therefore a
need for more sophisticated and modern risk management procedures.  Financial regulation and
supervision  in  South  Africa  had  to  introduce  internationally  recognised  principles  and
procedures,  e.g.  the  Basle  Committee  directives  for  bank  regulation.    Modern  electronic  data
processing  and  communication  systems  had  to  be  introduced.    It  also  became  necessary  to
review the national payment, settlement and clearing system.
Against  this  background,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  took  the  initiative  in
April 1994, together with the banking industry, to reform the South African National Payment
System.  The  problem  was  approached  on  an  all-inclusive  national  level  and  a  strategy  was
formulated  to  upgrade  the  existing  South  African  payment  system  to  comply  with  world-best
standards.
In  May  1994,  a  strategy-formulation  team,  consisting  of  representatives  of  the
Reserve Bank and the banking community, was established.  A collaborative consensus building
approach  was  adopted.    The  Reserve  Bank  acted  as  facilitator,  and  it  took  the  task  force
approximately 14 months to produce a first draft of a proposed strategy for the upgrading of the
NPS.    This  document  was  intensely  discussed  amongst  the  many  stakeholders  before  it  was
finally presented to the South African Council of Banks (COSAB), for approval.  The document,
entitled  the  South  African  National  Payment  System:    Framework  and  Strategy,  which  has
become known as the blue book, is widely recognised as a product of the South African banking
BIS Review   31/1998
- 2 -
industry and its recommendations are accepted as the basis for the official strategy for the reform
of the payment system.
The  National  Payment  System  Framework  and  Strategy  identified  the  lack  of  a
sophisticated electronic settlement process as a major shortcoming in the South African payment
system.    To  this  end  a  strategy  was  formulated  to  introduce  an  online  central  bank  settlement
system that would enable banks to effect interbank fund transfers electronically and in real time,
when required.
2. Development of a new electronic interbank settlement system
The  project  to  implement  a  new  electronic  interbank  settlement  system  was
identified  as  the  cornerstone  for  the  introduction  of  a  new  national  payment-processing
infrastructure.  The South African Multiple Option Settlement (SAMOS) system, introduced on
 9 March 1998, was developed over a period of two years as a collaborative venture between the
Reserve Bank, private banking institutions, and the technology suppliers.  The system ushered in
a new era in electronic payment and settlement in South Africa and will have a major impact on
the  future  development  of  the  national  payment  system.    Furthermore,  the  new  system  has
already enabled the Reserve Bank to introduce new operational procedures for the execution of
monetary  policy.    Under  these  new  arrangements,  banks  now  participate  in  a  daily  tendering
system,  based  on  repurchase  agreements  (repos),  to  obtain  funds  from  or  repay  funds  to  the
Reserve  Bank.    To  this  end,  the  settlement  system  became  a  convenient  vehicle  to  establish
market liquidity needs and to facilitate payment flows, resulting from repo transactions, between
the Reserve Bank and the banks.
2.1 Features of the new settlement system
The  introduction  of  the  new  interbank  settlement  system  represents  a  major  re-
engineering  of  the  way  in  which  banks  exchange  value  amongst  themselves.  It  provides
participating banks with a range of additional functions and business opportunities, including:
•  Online real-time link between participating banks
All  banks  participating  in  the  new  system  are  linked  to  an  online  real-time
network provided by the Reserve Bank.  These banks are able to link to the
Reserve  Bank  service  either  directly  or  via  Swift,  the  highly  secure
international  funds  transfer  mechanism.    The  system  enables  banks  to
exchange payment messages with the Reserve Bank and, through the Reserve
Bank, between themselves.
•  Secure high value fund transfers between participating banks
The  SAMOS  system  processes  all  fund  transfer  messages  received  by  the
Reserve Bank.  SAMOS will eventually enable banks to effect their payments
in  real  time  through  a  fully  auditable  and  robust  system.    The  system  will
provide  a  highly  secure  vehicle  for  interbank  payment  flows  and  ensure  the
authenticity and non-repudiation of all transactions.  All fund transfers will be
final and irrevocable and processed successfully by the system.  This will be
accomplished  by  effecting  payment  transactions  directly  on  the  settlement
accounts of banks held in the Reserve Bank.
BIS Review   31/1998
- 3 -
•  Settlement risk reduced by prefunding
The  risk  of  settlement  failure  by  any  individual  participating  bank  is  avoided
through  application  of  the  principle  of  prefunding.    A  request  to  the  system  to
transfer  funds  will  therefore  be  carried  out  only  if  the  bank  issuing  the  fund
transfer  instruction  has  sufficient  funds  in  its  settlement  account;  otherwise,  the
instruction will be rejected.  This implies that banks cannot build up exposures to
one  another  within  the  system.    All  funds  transferred  are  irrevocable,  and  the
underlying  transactions  can  thus  be  finalised  during  the  course  of  the  business
day, as and when the bank and the customer require.
•  Collateral managed dynamically
The system operates on the principle of full collateralisation of all intraday loans.
Banks  can  reserve  financial  instruments  to  be  used  as  collateral  should  they
require  additional  funding  during  the  day.    These  instruments  have  to  be  in
electronic  form,  that  is  immobilised  at  either  the  Central  Depository  (CD)  or  in
the Financial Instrument Register (FIR) of the Reserve Bank.  Should a bank not
have sufficient funds in its settlement account to carry out a fund-transfer request,
the  system  will  automatically  determine  whether  the  bank  has  any  financial
instruments available to be pledged as collateral for a Reserve Bank loan.  If this
is  the  case,  the  system  will  automatically  raise  a  loan  of  the  required  amount
against this collateral and transfer the funds necessary to process the fund-transfer
instruction  from  the  bank’s  loan  account  (or  marginal  lending  facility)  into  its
settlement account.  The SAMOS system will now be able to effect the transfer of
funds to the receiving bank’s settlement account.  This process will be completed
without any manual intervention.  The borrowing bank can revert to the next repo
tender  opportunity  to  redeem  the  out-standing  amount  on  its  marginal  lending
facility.
The  introduction  of  the  new  system  will  have  a  significant  impact  on  payment,
clearing  and  settlement  transactions  in  South  Africa.    Numerous  changes  have
already been made to existing practices, processes, arrangements and agreements
and many will be made during the further implementation phases of the system.
Banks,  clearing  houses,  other  payment  system  intermediaries  and  corporate
customers of banks will need to modify and enhance their systems if they wish to
obtain maximum benefits from the new payment processing architecture.
2.2 The implementation schedule
The system will be implemented in a number of phases. The following dates have
been set for the implementation of major milestones:
Date
9/3/98
Phase
Introduction of electronic end-of-day settlement through SAMOS
The  SAMOS  system  and  the  interbank  settlement  network  SARBLINK  to
facilitate the end-of-day settlement process were activated as from 9 March 1998.
Although  the  system  is  now  fully  functional  and  the  banks  are  able  to  transfer
funds during the day, settlement finality as at this stage is only achieved at the end
BIS Review   31/1998
- 4 -
of  each  day.  For  the  time  being,  end-of-day  positions  will  still  be  settled  in  the
morning of the next day.
9/3/98 to 
3/10/98
Determining the liquidity impact of real time gross settlement
The banks will use the system during this interim period to monitor their liquidity
requirements for a trial period prior to the introduction of intraday finality. Banks
will also be able to bring their back-office systems in line with SAMOS in order
to enable them to capitalise on the opportunities provided by the new settlement
options.
5/10/98  
Introduction of immediate intraday finality
The switch to intraday finality will mean that all settlement instructions received
by the SAMOS system  will  become  final  and  irrevocable  as  and  when  they  are
received, if processed successfully. The main implication of this step will be that
banks would need to monitor their positions in the SAMOS system carefully and
ensure  at  all  times  that  they  have  sufficient  funds  or  financial  instruments
available to process their settlement instructions.
To be  decided
Move  of  the  end-of-day  settlement  process  to  same  day  To  bring  the  South
African settlement practices in line with international best practice the final end-
of-day settlement process needs to be effected on a same day basis. The date of
this  change  will  be  negotiated  with  the  banks  taking  due  consideration  of  the
impact this would have on their customers and operations.
2.3 Impact on the financial system
The new settlement arrangements and the SAMOS system have placed the South
African  settlement  practices  on  par  with  international  best  practice  and  presented  many  new
challenges and opportunities to the banking and non-banking sector. Major changes include:
 Increased participation
In line with the philosophy of the new NPS, the interbank settlement system
has  been  opened  to  enable  more  participation.  All  registered  South  African
banks  are  eligible  to  participate  in  SAMOS.  The  number  of  participating
banks in the settlement process has already increased from 11 banks in the old
system to 21 banks in the new system. The number of participants will most
probably increase significantly over the next few months.
•  Exposures monitored in real time
A participating bank can monitor its balances  in  the  SAMOS  system  in  real
time.  In  other  words,  the  effect  of  any  payments  made  or  received  by  a
participant will immediately be reflected on the banks’ position monitor. The
bank will thus be fully informed at all times of the position in its settlement
account, intraday-loan account and the utilisation of collateral provided. The
BIS Review   31/1998
- 5 -
Reserve Bank will be able to monitor the positions of all participating banks
and the system as a whole.
•  Early warning signals of potential systemic crisis
Various system indicators will enable the Reserve Bank to ascertain whether
any  particular  bank  is  experiencing  difficulty  in  meeting  its  payments
commitments.  This  will  enable  the  Reserve  Bank  to  take  pro-active  steps  to
address a potential systemic crisis before it destabilises the payment system.
•  Synchronisation of payment and delivery
The fact that the SAMOS system will eventually provide intraday finality of
settlement between banks will enable the  financial markets to intro-duce  the
practice  of  delivery  against  payment.  The  finality  of  payment  achieved
through SAMOS can be synchronised with the delivery of immobilised scrip,
thereby providing safe and secure financial market transactions.
•  Customer-to-customer funds transfers in real time
Finally,  the  implementation  of  the  SAMOS  system  and  the  interbank
settlement network provides  a key building block in the enhancement of the
payment  services  and  products  available  to  business  and  the  general  public.
The  new  technological  architecture  introduced  provides  a  vital  link  which
could enable the interlinking of payment networks and services on a national
basis in future, thereby creating endless permutations of payment services and
products.  The  opportunity  for  banks  and  non-banks  to  co-operate  and
collaborate in order to exploit the potential of SAMOS introduces a new era in
the provision of payment products and services in South Africa.
3. Payment system of the future
The key to establishing the envisaged architecture was to create  a highly secure
and efficient settlement network between the Reserve Bank and banks. The settlement network
as  introduced  enables  banks  to  transfer  funds  to  one  another,  through  their  accounts  at  the
Reserve Bank, in real time. It can also be used to expand the national payments infrastructure by
interlinking the payment networks of banking institutions to the settlement network. This could
enable corporate customers of banks, for example, retailers, to link their networks to the national
payment infrastructure. Other institutions such as the Post Office or any other entity wishing to
provide  payment  services  to  the  public  could,  through  the  intermediation  of  a  bank,  link  their
technological infrastructure to the national network. This could theoretically allow a member of
the public frequenting a point-of-sale device of a payment-service provider to transfer funds and
make payments to any other authorised participant who has access to the infrastructure.
The introduction at a later stage  of  such  an  integrated  payments  network  would
represent a major step towards safe and secure payments for the broad public and would enable
the further modernisation of the financial system in South Africa.
BIS Review   31/1998
