Mr.  Thiessen  reports  on  globalized  financial  markets  and  monetary  policy
Notes for remarks by Governor of the Bank of Canada, Mr. Gordon Thiessen, before La Conférence
de Montréal, in Montréal, on 27/5/98.
Globalization  -  that  is,  the  growing  integration  and  interdependence  of  national
economies - is changing dramatically the economic landscape. Countries are trading more goods and
services,  an  increasing  number  of  firms  now  operate  across  national  borders,  and  savers  and
borrowers  have  greater  access  than  ever  before  to  global  financial  markets.  Over  the  past  decade,
world trade has grown twice as fast as world output, foreign direct investment three times as fast,
and both currency trading and share trading about ten times as fast.
Not everyone agrees that all this is good for individual national economies or for the
world community at large. Among those who take a dimmer view of globalization, one concern is
that  the  increased  influence  of  international  financial  markets  is  eroding  the  ability  of  national
governments  to  set  their  own  macroeconomic  policies.  They  also  worry  that  powerful  financial
markets may be the main cause of crises such as those in Mexico in 1994-95 and in Southeast Asia
in 1997.
You will probably not be surprised to hear that I do not share these negative views.
And  today,  I  would  like  to  discuss  one  particular  aspect  of  globalization  -  how  national  monetary
policies  work  in  an  environment  of  globalized  financial  markets.  I  will  draw  heavily  on  Canada’s
own experience to support the view that monetary policy can continue to function effectively in this
increasingly integrated world.  Canada has a long history of being open to global markets for goods,
services and capital. This interaction  with  the  rest  of  the  world  has  proven  very  successful,  in  my
view, and has benefited Canadians and our foreign partners enormously through the years.
With open international markets, Canadians have been able to sell their products and
services abroad and to enjoy a wide variety of imported goods, some of which could not readily be
produced at home. And we have been able to set up businesses and pursue investment opportunities
abroad.  Even  more  importantly,  we  have  been  able  to  use  foreign  savings  to  finance  the  large
investment projects that were necessary to develop our industrial infrastructure and to increase our
production potential, especially in the resource and manufacturing sectors. We have also had access
to  technological  innovations  and  processes  developed  elsewhere.  This  has  allowed  us  to  combine
new capital  equipment  and  a  skilled  labour  force  more  efficiently,  thereby  improving  productivity
and, thus, our incomes and standards of living.
Nonetheless,  there  are  concerns  in  Canada,  as  well  as  elsewhere,  about  the  rapid
increase in international financial flows and the implications thereof. How does the free movement
of capital affect the conduct of national monetary policies?
Capital mobility and the implications for monetary policy
The growing integration of national financial markets, as evidenced by the dramatic
growth in the volume of cross-border capital flows since the early 1970s, has no doubt changed the
environment in which national economic policies are conducted. Globalization tends to bring such
policies under closer market scrutiny and to uncover and draw attention to any deep-seated economic
problems that may exist. But I would not conclude from this that we have become captives of the
markets and that we have lost control of our national monetary policies, as some argue.
First,  let  us  be  clear  as  to  what  “having  control”  over  one’s  own  monetary  policy
actually means. When people talk about an independent or autonomous monetary policy, they often
take it to mean the ability of a central bank to set domestic interest rates without being influenced by
BIS Review   49/1998
- 2 -
developments outside national borders. This is not realistic - unless of course a country is completely
cut off from the rest of the world! The moment a country wants to make use of foreign savings, or
invest a portion of its domestic savings abroad, a link between domestic and foreign interest rates is
inevitable.  As  a  major  user  of  foreign  capital,  Canada  has  long  lived  with  interest  rates  that  are
closely related to those in the United States and other foreign financial markets.
But  even  with  integrated  financial  markets,  there  is  still  room  for  monetary  policy
independence  via  exchange  rate  movements.  Thus,  monetary  policy  autonomy  requires  a  flexible
exchange  rate  regime.  With  a  fixed  exchange  rate,  the  national  authorities  essentially  adopt  the
monetary  policy  of  another  country  -  the  country  whose  currency  serves  as  the  anchor.  If  interest
rates  go  up  in  the  anchor-currency  country,  interest  rates  will  also  have  to  rise  sufficiently  in  the
country with fixed exchange rates to ensure that the peg is maintained. Thus, if monetary policy is
focused  on  a  fixed  exchange  rate,  the  central  bank  cannot  at  the  same  time  pursue  a  domestic
objective.
In the case of the European Union, where member countries have decided to adopt a
single currency - the euro - they have essentially opted to give up the potential for an independent
national  monetary  policy  and  to  transfer  the  policymaking  power  to  a  supranational  agency  -  the
European Central Bank (ECB). Of course, the ability of the ECB to follow an independent European
monetary policy will require that the euro float against other major outside currencies, such as the
US dollar and the Japanese yen.
Thus,  in  a  world  of  open  and  integrated  financial  markets,  the  exchange  rate  is  a
major channel through which monetary policy actions are transmitted to the economy. Moreover, it
is movements in the exchange rate that permit domestic interest rates to diverge from their foreign
counterparts  for  a  period  of  time.  For  example,  an  increase  in  official  interest  rates  by  the  central
bank, in response to demand and inflation pressures in the economy, leads  to  a  stronger  currency,
which  also  works  to  restrain  those  pressures.  At  the  same  time,  the  appreciation  of  the  currency
creates the conditions for other domestic rates to follow the rise in official rates, to levels that may
now be above those prevailing abroad. This is because the exchange rate is now seen to be above its
expected  value  and  is  thus  likely  to  decline  in  the  future.  Under  these  circumstances,  financial
markets will bid up domestic interest rates to compensate for the anticipated decline in the external
value of the currency.
Having  clarified  the  issue  of  monetary  policy  independence,  I  would  now  like  to
discuss the effects of increased capital mobility on the conduct of monetary policy. A higher degree
of capital mobility enhances still further the role of the exchange rate in the monetary transmission
process. This is not a bad thing. It just means we have to ensure that we always take the exchange
rate into account when considering the monetary policy stance that is appropriate for our domestic
economic  circumstances.  That  is  why  in  Canada  we  have  developed  the  concept  of  “monetary
conditions” to keep track of the combined effect on the economy of movements in both interest rates
and the exchange rate.
With a flexible exchange rate system, the increased role of the exchange rate in the
monetary transmission mechanism also means that it is crucial that investors’ expectations of future
currency movements are firmly anchored by clear and credible domestic macroeconomic policies.
Thus,  the  central  bank  must  have  a  strong  commitment  to  preserving  the  internal
value  of  the  currency  by  keeping  inflation  low.  That  is  why  in  Canada  we  have  adopted  explicit
targets for inflation-control. But this is not enough. The fiscal situation must also be seen to be under
control. Otherwise, as fiscal deficits and debts keep accumulating, investors will come to fear that
inflationary policies will be used in the future to reduce the burden of debt.
BIS Review   49/1998
- 3 -
Canada’s  experience  during  the  Mexican  currency  crisis  of  1994-95,  and  more
recently through the Asian problems, is very instructive in this regard. The Mexican crisis focused
the spotlight on our fiscal problems at the time, consequently driving risk premiums in our interest
rates  sharply  higher.  During  the  recent  Asian  crisis,  however,  with  our  public  finances  in  better
shape,  and  with  clear,  strong  policy  commitments  by  both  the  fiscal  and  monetary  authorities,
financial markets have been more stable and our longer-term interest rates have been falling.
Of  course,  pressures  on  the  exchange  rate  can  also  be  triggered  by  so-called  “real
shocks”. In Canada, such shocks are frequently  associated  with  swings  in  world  prices  of  primary
commodities. In cases like these, a flexible exchange rate can act as a “shock absorber”, allowing
some of the necessary adjustments to the shock to take place through movements in the value of the
currency.
Canada’s long-standing preference for flexible exchange rates has been driven largely
by the benefits such rates offer in facilitating adjustments to external shocks. This is  an  important
consideration for us, given our strong reliance on international trade and foreign savings. As a major
exporter of primary commodities, Canada has often been hit by sharp swings in the world prices of
these products which, in turn, have caused large capital movements.  Indeed,  the  decisions  to  float
our  exchange  rate  in  1950  and  again  in  1970  (after  a  short  period  of  fixed  exchange  rates),  were
related  to  strong  inflows  of  foreign  capital  associated  with  a  surge  in  commodity  prices.  In  both
cases, we chose to allow the Canadian dollar to float up, rather than try to maintain a fixed exchange
rate and risk a destabilizing inflationary monetary expansion.
Overall,  I  am  persuaded  that  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  is  the  best  way  for  a
country to take advantage of today’s integrated capital markets and to deal with the external shocks
that arise from time to time.
Exchange rate fluctuations: Is taxing currency transactions the solution?
Some  critics  have  argued  that  integrated  international  financial  markets  have  given
rise  to  large,  short-term  speculative  flows  of  capital  that  can  cause  unwarranted  exchange  rate
pressures. Such speculative transactions, they say, disrupt domestic macroeconomic policies, result
in  temporary  misallocations  of  resources,  discourage  trade,  and  encourage  further  unproductive
financial transactions as businesses and individuals seek to protect themselves.
Based  on  these  arguments,  some  people  have  resurrected  the  idea  of  discouraging
currency transactions using a tax similar to the one proposed by Professor James Tobin in the 1970s.
The case for taxing global financial transactions rests on  the  notion  that  such  a  tax
will discourage short-term flows, which are viewed  as  destabilizing,  without  affecting  longer-term
flows that are presumed to be desirable and based on fundamentals.
But short-term flows are by no means all undesirable and destabilizing. And there is
no  way  of  discriminating  between  useful  flows  and  destabilizing  speculative  ones.  For  example,
because foreign trade and investment inflows and outflows are not always fully offsetting, short-term
capital flows are typically needed to balance out a country’s external accounts. These capital flows
occur  in  response  to  actual  and  anticipated  movements  in  the  exchange  rate,  and  thus  serve  to
smooth out exchange rate fluctuations. Because such flows are often driven by small differences in
perceived rates of return at home and abroad, they could well be discouraged by a transactions tax.
On the other hand, speculative flows that actually “bet” on a sharp movement in a currency, have
rather large expected returns and are unlikely to be discouraged by the tax. In the end, a transactions
BIS Review   49/1998
- 4 -
tax  would  likely  increase,  rather  than  decrease,  exchange  rate  volatility,  as  well  as  reduce  market
liquidity and raise the cost of capital.
Needless  to  say,  where  financial  market  fluctuations  reflect  changes  in  domestic
macroeconomic  policies  that  put  investors  at  greater  risk  than  before,  the  tax  would  be  aimed  at
treating the symptoms rather than the cause of the problem.
In all, I find the case for a tax on currency transactions completely unconvincing.
Promoting greater financial market stability
If a tax is not a good idea, how else can we promote greater stability in international
financial markets and reduce potential disruptions to domestic policymaking?
I have already talked about the value of a flexible exchange rate system in facilitating
adjustment  to  “real”  shocks  and  allowing  national  authorities  to  pursue  an  independent  monetary
policy.  Flexible  exchange  rates  can  also  be  helpful  in  moderating  the  size  of,  and  aiding  in  the
adjustment to, capital flows.
In addition, governments are increasingly coming to the realization that the issue of
international financial stability is best addressed not by retreating into isolation or by falling back on
distorting, costly restrictions, but rather through sound and transparent domestic economic policies.
International  co-operation  can  also  help.  It  can  help  by  encouraging  countries  to
pursue national policies that lead to economic stability, thereby reducing the risk of sudden changes
in market sentiment and sharp exchange rate fluctuations. And it can help by setting widely accepted
standards  for  transparency  and  disclosure.  Such  standards  should  support  more  informed  market
judgments  about  the  riskiness  of  investments,  especially  in  emerging  market  economies,  and  thus
help avoid the crises that can be triggered by the sudden uncovering of problems.
Following  the  G-7  Halifax  Summit  in  1995,  a  series  of  international  initiatives  to
improve the functioning of financial markets have been undertaken, mainly under the auspices of the
International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements.  These  initiatives  seek  to
enhance the transparency and disclosure of economic and financial data, strengthen the surveillance
of  national  and  global  financial  systems,  develop  mechanisms  for  support  in  times  of  crisis,  and
provide training in financial sector supervision.
Recognizing  the  importance  of  these  efforts,  Canada  has  recently  proposed  the
creation of a new international process to provide “peer review” of national financial regulatory and
supervisory  systems.  Efficient  and  prudently  managed  national  financial  systems  can  reduce  the
risks, and maximize the benefits, of international capital flows. In this regard, national supervisory
authorities  need  to  ensure  that  financial  institutions  have  appropriate  risk-management  systems  in
place to help minimize risks, particularly with respect to mismatching of maturities and currencies.
This would make it easier to cope in the event that short-term inflows switched to outflows. One of
the  main  problems  in  Asia  was  that  domestic  financial  institutions  were  borrowing  short-term,  in
foreign currency, to invest in illiquid domestic assets.
Concluding thoughts
To  summarize,  globalization  has  been  broadly  beneficial  to  the  world  economy.
International financial markets have facilitated access by borrowers to a larger pool of global savings
and have enhanced investment opportunities for savers worldwide.
BIS Review   49/1998
- 5 -
Yes,  international  capital  flows  have  at  times  disrupted  national  financial  markets.
But such episodes more often than not were caused by unsustainable domestic policies and pointed
to the need for adjustment.
In view of the overall benefits of greater access to global capital markets, it would not
serve us well to restrict the free flow of funds. The best way to maximize the benefits of financial
globalization and reduce the risks of disruptions to national macroeconomic policies is to ensure that
these policies are sound and sustainable. In addition, financial systems need to be prudently managed
and supervised - both nationally and internationally.
Here  in  Canada,  we  are  following  this  advice  in  our  domestic  macroeconomic
policies.  And  we  are  also  strongly  supporting  and  contributing  to  global  initiatives  designed  to
promote financial market stability worldwide.
BIS Review   49/1998
