Mr. McDonough discusses the importance of sound financial systems   Remarks
by  the  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  Mr.  William  J.  McDonough,  at  a
presentation in Mexico City, Mexico on 22/7/98.
Introduction
 I am delighted to be here today in my second-favorite country in the world to address
you on the very timely subject of the importance of sound financial systems. Having worked closely
with my friends in the public and private sectors here over the years, I know the importance of these
issues  to  them.  Judging  by  the  attendance  here  today,  this  interest  appears  very  broad  indeed,  a
positive sign for the continued revitalization and strengthening of Mexico’s banking sector.
 My  remarks  today,  necessarily,  reflect  my  perspective  as  president  of  the  Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, which supervises the majority of domestic and foreign bank assets in
the  United  States,  and  as  Chairman  of  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  a  position  I
accepted last month. These positions allow me a front-row seat on the wide range of developments
taking place in international banking and banking supervision, a perspective which I hope to share
with you today.
To understand the importance of sound financial systems, one need only look at the
impact  of  financial  system  breakdowns,  of  which,  unfortunately,  there  are  many  recent  examples.
Indeed, prior to the onset of the Asian crisis, the IMF had estimated that fully three-quarters of its
member  countries  had  experienced  significant  banking  sector  problems  since  1980.  Banking
problems  have  afflicted  both  industrial  and  emerging  market  countries,  including  the  US,  which
weathered the savings and loans and banking problems of the 1980s and early 1990s.
Crises  around  the  world  have  exacted  a  high  price,  with  direct  fiscal  costs  of
associated resolutions typically starting at roughly 5 percent of GDP (in the US case, such costs ran
more than $100 billion). To these substantial sums, one must add the less quantifiable, but no less
real, consequences for the economy and financial system. A weakened financial sector cannot serve
its role as intermediary - as banks seek to repair their balance sheets, restrict new lending, and shore
up capital - leading to diminished growth prospects. In a number of Asian countries today, exporters
have  difficulty  obtaining  trade  financing  from  domestic  banks,  delaying  the  process  of  economic
recovery  and  raising  fears  of  a  credit  crunch  in  which  even  sound  companies  are  driven  into
bankruptcy.  Banking  sector  problems  reduce  depositor  confidence  in  the  banking  system  and  can
trigger capital flight. Banking system problems, significant in their own right, can cause distortions
in monetary policy, render monetary policy tools less effective, and put at risk the integrity of the
payments system. In an integrated international financial system, it is increasingly difficult to contain
a banking crisis within a country’s borders. Finally, we must not forget the human consequences of a
financial and broader economic crisis, which disproportionately fall on those least able to weather
the storm.
Clearly we need to learn what we can from recent history and take steps now to make
domestic  and  international  financial  systems  more  resilient.  Crises  are  opportunities  for
implementing change, and in the US and internationally, significant reforms traditionally have been
born  of  crisis.  To  effect  meaningful  and  appropriate  reform,  however,  we  must  fully  understand
cause and effect and the broader trends of international financial intermediation. Today, I would like
to  share  with  you  my  perspective  on  these  issues  based  on  US  and  international  experience,  with
special emphasis on the need for additional preventive measures.
BIS Review   64/1998
Importance of sound banking systems
- 2 -
 Over  the  long  run,  a  nation  must  be  able  to  mobilize  domestic  savings  and  other
sources of funds needed to finance investment and other productive expenditures. This requires the
development  of  an  effective  banking  system  that  transfers  surplus  funds  of  households  and
businesses  to  borrowers  and  investors.  Fair  and  impartial  allocation  of  credit  accommodates  the
economic  development  that  results  in  improved  national  living  standards.  Notwithstanding  broad
changes in the intermediation process which have reduced the role of banks in favor of the capital
markets, banks retain a critical role in direct intermediation and as managers of financial risk. Sound
financial institutions, and banks particularly, remain integral to a sound economy.
Effective  financial  intermediation  is  particularly  important  in  the  context  of  most
emerging  market  countries  given  the  relative  scarcity  of  savings,  a  relatively  underbanked
population, and large-scale investment needs. The banking sector in emerging market countries also
tends  to  be  more  concentrated  and  represents  a  larger  share  of  the  domestic  financial  system,
suggesting that problems there will have an amplified effect on the economy and on the fiscal costs
associated with bank rescues.
Causes of banking system problems
Banking  system  crises  have  many  and  complex  causes,  both  macro  and
microeconomic.  Macroeconomic  causes  include  exogenous  shocks,  sustained  or  sharp  declines  in
real  growth,  accelerating  inflation,  deterioration  in  the  terms  of  trade,  and  changes  in  the  policy
regime. Macroeconomic shocks also typically expose underlying microeconomic deficiencies in risk
management  practices  and  internal  controls  at  financial  institutions  such  as  weak  underwriting
standards,  insider  lending,  excessive  credit  growth  and  credit  concentrations,  interest  rate  and
exchange  rate  mismatches,  and  fraud.  They  also  tend  to  reveal  weaknesses  in  financial  system
supervision and regulation. The threats to financial system stability are many and interact in complex
ways.
Policy responses
Reflecting  the  many  causes  of  financial  system  distress  and  differences  in  country
conditions and institutional settings, responses to financial system crises typically have been varied
and hybrid. Banking sector restructurings are art as well as science, and can be influenced by a host
of  factors,  such  as  the  depth  and  breadth  of  problems  in  the  banking,  corporate  and  household
sectors. Other critical factors include the existence of adequate enforcement mechanisms to achieve
corrective  action  and  of  financial  markets  that  are  deep  enough  to  permit  the  orderly  disposal  of
problem bank assets. Indeed, there is no “one size fits all” solution, and individual countries must
tailor  their  approach  to  their  own  conditions.  Moreover,  crises  typically  evolve  in  unpredictable
ways, and policy must be sufficiently fluid to adjust to changing conditions. Nonetheless, past crises
have taught us important lessons applicable to the current situation worldwide.
First,  it  is  imperative  that  bankers  and  authorities  be  realistic  about  the  size  of  the
problems they face. While it is often difficult to accurately gauge the scale of problems at the outset
of  the  crisis,  history  shows  that  problems  usually  are  much  larger  than  they  first  appear,  and
estimates often are subject to frequent and significant upward revision. While pressures to muddle
through may, at times, be almost irresistible, policymakers and bankers must realize that the costs of
inaction and denial are substantial and that problems left unaddressed grow rapidly over time.
Second,  it  is  important  to  recognize  that  financial  system  distress  typically
encompasses weaknesses in many individual areas, and effective solutions need to be comprehensive
BIS Review   64/1998
- 3 -
and  multidimensional.  Solutions  usually  involve  complex  tensions  and  trade-offs:  improving  the
condition of the banking sector, for example, may have the effect of worsening the condition of the
corporate  and  household  sectors,  which  may,  in  turn,  negatively  affect  the  banks.  Similarly,
liquidating  problem  banking  assets  may  put  additional  downward  pressure  on  a  broader  range  of
asset markets and further exacerbate banking sector problems. However, asset retention more often
than not erodes values and freezes market liquidity. Policymakers face difficult choices in managing
problem bank restructurings, and there is a great need for creativity in devising solutions.
Third,  crisis  situations  cry  out  for  solutions  to  be  adopted  quickly  to  stem  further
deterioration. At the same time, however, solutions adopted in the short term need to account for the
long-term consequences for market efficiency, particularly with respect to moral hazard. The highest
priority at the outset of a crisis is usually to restore confidence in the banking system. To this end,
authorities in a number of countries have implemented guarantees of bank deposits or broader bank
liabilities, in some cases both domestic and foreign, followed by concrete actions to make deposit
insurance  schemes  more  explicit  and  bolster  the  insurance  fund.  To  minimize  the  moral  hazard
implications of such arrangements, however, it is critical that guarantees be established for a defined
transitional period, and that supervision of financial institutions simultaneously be stepped up.
 Issues of moral hazard also need to be considered in authorities’ actions in cases of
financial  institution  insolvency.  Supervisors  have  adopted  varying  approaches  to  insolvent
institutions,  including  mergers,  purchases  and  assumptions,  nationalization,  and  liquidation.  While
the  authorities  should  have  a  general  bias  toward  writing-off  existing  shareholders  and  removing
management  and  directors  of  troubled  institutions,  such  actions  may  need  to  be  balanced  against
arguments  that  current  owners  and  management  may  be  best  positioned  to  achieve  an  effective
work-out.
Fourth, I think we should bear in mind that banking sector crises often are not just
short-term aberrations, but usually are manifestations of longer-term structural problems. Therefore,
it is crucial that policymakers address not only the immediate stock of problem assets through “bad
bank/good bank” vehicles, but also structural problems, or weaknesses in core profitability stemming
from  high  overhead,  low  margins,  and  excessive  regulatory  costs.  To  the  extent  that  underlying
problems are not addressed, the banking sector will remain vulnerable to future instability.
Thus,  at  the  same  time  as  authorities  seek  to  battle  a  crisis,  they  also  may  be
compelled to undertake a range of longer-term reforms to banking sector infrastructure, most notably
in  areas  of  accounting,  disclosure,  capital,  and  supervision  and  regulation.  These  changes  often
involve  bringing  domestic  standards  in  line  with  international  standards,  and  can  involve  difficult
trade-offs,  in  that,  for  example,  fuller  disclosure  of  problem  loans  may  undermine  depositor
confidence.
 Finally,  the  scale  of  banking  sector  problems  in  a  number  of  countries  has
necessitated  opening  up  the  sector  to  significant  foreign  investment.  Clearly,  such  a  course  brings
political  tensions  and  possible  domestic  backlash.  Notwithstanding  these  concerns,  foreign
ownership  is  both  inevitable  and  positive  as  foreign  capital  brings  not  only  additional  financial
strength to a domestic banking sector, but also frequently needed technology and skills transfer.
Overall summary of initiatives
 What  has  been  the  success  of  responses  to  recent  banking  crises?  While  it  is  still
premature to draw firm conclusions, based on the experience in Latin America and early indications
from  Asia,  I  believe  that,  on  the  whole,  policy  responses  have  been  meaningful  and  have
BIS Review   64/1998
- 4 -
strengthened domestic safety and soundness considerably. Let me briefly review the new, post-crisis,
financial landscape in Latin America.
 Crises have left perhaps their greatest imprint on domestic financial system structure.
Financial systems have generally experienced significant consolidation - leading to a less fragmented
banking market - as weaker and more marginal players have been forced to exit. Foreign capital now
accounts for a noteworthy share of banking assets across a number of countries, bringing additional
financial strength and know-how. Many governments have sought to reduce their direct role in the
financial system through the privatization of state banks, although this will likely remain a longer-
term policy objective for many countries.
Authorities  also  have  made  tremendous  strides  in  improving  system  infrastructure.
Disclosure standards have been greatly improved, and in some Latin American countries, disclosure
standards are now comparable to that of G-10 countries. Recognizing the greater historical volatility
in emerging market economies, minimum capital requirements have also been raised to levels above
Basle  minima,  and  now  incorporate  additional  sources  of  risk,  such  as  market  risk.  Financial
supervision and regulation has been improved, with additional resources dedicated to the hiring and
training  of  examinations  staff  and  to  investments  by  regulators  in  information  technology.
Authorities  have  been  tested  and  have  established  more  effective  mechanisms  for  addressing
problem bank situations.
Financial  institutions  have  undertaken  a  range  of  measures  themselves  to  improve
risk  management  practices,  operational  controls,  and  core  profitability.  Some  institutions  have
attempted  to  comply  with  international  standards,  notwithstanding  lower  domestic  requirements.
These reforms are especially important in light of the fact that the obligation to  promote  financial
soundness rests mainly with financial institutions themselves.
Taken  together,  these  reforms  indicate  progress  toward  reduced  systemic  risk,
heightened competition, increased banking services provided to the domestic population, and higher
standards of conduct better approximating international standards.
Work Ahead
 Notwithstanding  this  progress,  much  work  remains  ahead.  While  crises  have
motivated a great deal of reform in individual countries, and standards are approaching international
norms, the international financial system remains a patchwork of varying standards and guidelines.
While international disclosure standards have improved markedly in recent years, greater disclosure
still  is  required,  particularly  with  respect  to  bank  asset  quality,  both  in  emerging  and  industrial
countries  alike.  In  seeking  to  make  these  improvements,  however,  we  should  avoid  a  “checklist”
approach which may not address the risks of a given country and may soon become outdated.
 Improved  disclosure  will  require  more 
than  a  comprehensive  framework.
Accounting standards also need to be upgraded to reflect innovations in financial products and risk
management techniques. The process of upgrading accounting standards, in turn, would benefit from
greater harmonization of accounting standards that  would  facilitate  comparison  of  global  financial
institutions and result in more uniform capital standards across countries.
At  a  fundamental  level,  I  wonder  whether  the  crisis  has  engendered  the  most
important reform of all – the development of a true credit “culture”. While necessarily a longer-term
process, the existence of a sound credit culture is the sine qua non of long-term financial stability.
Improved disclosure requirements for nonperforming loans, for example, will be meaningless to the
BIS Review   64/1998
- 5 -
extent that credit standards are weak to begin with, or that there is widespread tolerance regarding
the  restructuring  of  past-due  loans,  motivated  by  an  unwillingness  to  admit  that  the  loans  are
troubled.  Further  enhancements  to  the  bankruptcy  and  legal  codes  to  increase  the  efficiency  and
transparency of collateral recovery are equally necessary.
tremendous  strides 
While  supervisors  have  made 
to  effect  comprehensive,
consolidated  supervision  globally,  significant  work  remains  to  be  done  (and  perhaps  always  will).
The rapidly evolving international financial system, in which institutions operate to a greater degree
across national borders through a variety of entities and, increasingly, in combination with securities
underwriting  and  insurance  businesses,  poses  continued  challenges  to  supervisory  frameworks
organized  primarily  on  a  national,  legal-entity,  and  business-specific  framework.  The  existence  of
parallel, offshore, and other unregulated structures also will continue to present obstacles to the full
implementation of comprehensive, consolidated supervision on a global basis. Managing these issues
will require intensified coordination and information-sharing among international supervisors.
Authorities  need  to  ensure  that  capital  adequacy  guidelines  keep  pace  with
developments in internal risk measurement techniques and changes in the business of banking. To
that  end,  the  Basle  Capital  Accord’s  market  risk  amendment,  which  went  into  effect  at  year-end
1997, represents a significant shift in  capital  supervision,  moving  away  for  the  first  time  from  the
prevailing  approach  of  a  mandated  and  rigid  regulatory  formula  or  ratio.  The  amendment  also
represents a major step toward a more market-based approach to supervision that draws on banks’
internal  methodologies  for  risk  measurement,  places  greater  emphasis  on  promoting  sound  risk
management  and  control  processes,  and  encourages  further  innovation  and  improvement  in  the
banks’ internal models.
 While the market risk amendment is a major step in the right direction, we need to
begin  thinking  now  about  a  conceptual  framework  for  the  next  generation  of  capital  rules,
particularly given the long lead times involved. The original Basle Capital Accord took about five
years to develop, and almost seven more years were required to reach agreement on the market risk
amendment.  I  intend  to  do  whatever  I  can  as  chairman  of  the  Banking  Supervision  Committee  to
raise  the  relevant  issues  and  promote  the  development  of  new  approaches  to  capital  adequacy  as
early as possible.
In discussing the challenges ahead, I should also note some recent accomplishments,
particularly the work of the BIS Committee on Payments and Settlements Systems, of which I was
the  former  chair,  on  reducing  Herstatt  risk  in  foreign  exchange  settlements.  Previous  work  by  the
Committee, embodied in a March 1996 report, recognized that settlement risk depends not only on
the payments system infrastructure, but also  on  the  way  market  participants  use  this  infrastructure
and manage their internal processes. A follow-up report was issued one week ago that applauded the
progress  made,  while  noting  that  there  were  further  opportunities  for  private  sector  initiatives  in
reducing  settlement  risk.  The  central  banks,  of  course,  are  ready  to  work  closely  with  the  private
sector in achieving this goal.
Closing
 Preventing  future  banking  crises  poses  difficult  issues  for  policymakers.  Given  the
indispensable role that banks play in a nation’s economic well-being, all governments have found it
important  that  financial  institutions  be  subject  to  regulation  or  oversight.  It  is  important  to
understand from the start, however, that there are limits to the supervisory process. Supervisors have
limited ability, for example, to detect fraud. Most important, in a market-oriented banking system,
bank  directors  and  management  must  have  the  ability  to  set  the  bank’s  overall  course,  to  seek  a
BIS Review   64/1998
- 6 -
reasonable profit, and to innovate and experiment with new banking activities and products. In other
words, supervision can not be so heavy-handed as to stifle competition and innovation. As such, the
supervisory  process  has  an  inherent  tension  between  the  freedom  banks  need  in  order  to  earn
reasonable profits and the latitude to take such large risks that their future could be endangered. In
seeking  reforms  to  supervision  and  regulation  in  response  to  financial  system  crisis,  we  need  to
ensure a proper balancing of these trade-offs.
 While  I  am  broadly  encouraged  by  the  international  policy  responses  to  recent
financial crises,  I  recognize  fully  that  more  work  remains  to  be  done.  I  look  forward  to  taking  up
these challenges in my new position on the Banking Supervision Committee, and to our continued
cooperation as we work together toward building a sounder international financial system.
BIS Review   64/1998
