Mr. O’Connell reports on the Irish economy and different aspects of the Central
Bank of Ireland’s activities  Statement by the Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, Mr. Maurice
O’Connell, to the Joint Committee of the Oireachtas (Parliament) on Finance and the Public Service
in Dublin on 18/2/97.
I thank you for your invitation and I welcome the opportunity to appear  before  this
Committee.
Internationally, the economic outlook remains generally good. While the crisis in Asia
has reduced forecasts, there is still optimism that reasonable growth with low inflation will continue.
Worldwide, there is a strong consensus on the merits of price stability and reduced budget deficits as
the best platform for growth and employment.
In Europe, the picture is mixed. In general, there has been some improvement in the
past half year and a growth rate not far off 3 per cent on average is predicted for 1998. The prospects
for substantial reductions in unemployment in the short term remain disappointing. Unemployment in
Europe is seen largely as a structural problem that can only be resolved over an extended period. On
the positive side inflation has been subdued and interest rates are relatively low. As we move towards
the deadline for decision on membership of EMU, there is a great awareness everywhere, in shaping
policy, of the requirements to satisfy the entry conditions.
The Irish economy
Ireland’s position is unique at the moment by European standards. Economic growth
has continued to exceed expectations. The Central Bank expects that growth this year will be of the
order of 7 to 8 per cent. Others might put the figure higher. While growth will probably slow down in
the years ahead, it should remain well above the European average. The Central Bank estimates that a
long-term  growth  pattern  of  the  order  of  4-5  per  cent  is  within  our  capability,  if  the  international
environment  remains  benign.  This  will  depend  on  a  number  of  factors,  not  least  continuing  low
inflation. The current national wage arrangements provide a solid basis for cost competitiveness and
it is most important that these terms are not diluted. Unemployment is below the European average.
The progress on job creation in recent years is impressive and the outlook is good.
In its quarterly report published in December the Central Bank forecasted an average
inflation rate for this year of 2½ per cent, which is relatively low in absolute terms and is within the
threshold  for  qualification  for  EMU.  The  subsequent  decline  in  the  Irish  pound  has  increased  the
prospect  of  a  somewhat  higher  figure.  There  are  other  factors  such  as  asset  price  increases  and
tightening  conditions  in  the  labour  market,  which  also  carry  the  potential  for  overheating  of  the
economy and higher inflation. These are a source of concern because they could ultimately damage
the economy.
One feature of the strong performance of the economy is the growth in private sector
credit. The cumulative growth in the past three years was over 50 per cent and it is now increasing at
an  annual  rate  above  20  per  cent.  As  we  started  from  a  level  of  indebtedness  relatively  low  by
international standards, growth on this scale may not be a cause of immediate alarm. On all previous
experience, however, it would be unsustainable in the longer term without inflationary consequences.
The ready availability of credit at relatively low interest rate levels has been a contributory factor to
the excessive rises last year in house prices which are now at historically high levels in real terms and
by reference to average earnings. House prices have risen by 40-50 per cent since 1994. There are
BIS Review   16/1998
- 2 -
predictions  that  a  further  substantial  rise  in  prices  this  year  is  likely.  We  may  not  be  far  from  a
situation where home ownership will be beyond the reach of persons on average incomes.
There  seems  to  be  a  perception  that  the  Central  Bank  can  exercise  some  legal
authority  in  restricting  credit.  It  has  no  such  authority.  Any  restriction  would  be  inconsistent  with
European  Union  practice.  Besides,  it  would  be  unworkable  as  demand  would  probably  be  met  by
overseas lenders. The introduction of the single currency will facilitate access by  overseas  lenders.
The Bank continues to monitor the conditions applied by the credit institutions in lending for house
purchase. It has warned these institutions repeatedly of the dangers  inherent  in  high  rates  of  credit
growth  and  any  relaxation  of  lending  standards.  Insofar  as  the  Bank  can  establish,  100  per  cent
mortgages  have  been  issued  only  in  exceptional  cases  where  properties  were  being  purchased  for
investment.  The  Bank  would  not  encourage  this  practice  and  the  credit  institutions  have  been  so
advised.
Economic and monetary union
Preparation  for  EMU  is  a  dominant  feature  of  the  work  of  the  Central  Bank  at  the
moment. Our duty is to ensure, as best we can, that Ireland continues to fulfil the entry requirements,
in particular the requirement on inflation, and that the banking and financial system in general is well
prepared for the single currency.
It now seems virtually assured that EMU will start on schedule on 1st January 1999
and that a substantial majority of European Union countries will participate from the outset. Control
of monetary policy will pass immediately to the Governing Council of  the  European  Central  Bank
and  decisions  will  be  made  on  the  basis  of  European  requirements.  We  will  no  longer  be  able  to
adjust the exchange rate or interest rates to correct domestic problems. The priority of the European
Central  Bank  will  be  price  stability.  Besides,  the  conditions  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact
effectively require that member countries run a balanced budget over a complete economic cycle.
The preparations for monetary union at operational level are well advanced, under the
aegis of the European Monetary Institute. Much of this work is of a detailed technical nature relating
to business between the individual central banks. The EMI has recommended two possible monetary
policy strategies for the European Central Bank -  monetary  targeting  and  direct  inflation  targeting.
Among  the  other  important  strategic  issues  are  the  extent  of  decentralisation,  management  of
reserves, pooling of reserves and monetary income and linking of payment systems. There are some
awkward issues yet to be resolved. The definition of monetary income for instance is a problem.
In the single currency regime there will be a deliberate policy of decentralisation and
the  day-to-day  activities  of  the  Central  Bank  will  be  conducted  within  this  framework.  We  will
continue  to  manage  reserves  and  to  provide  liquidity  to  the  banks.  We  will,  however,  work  to
guidelines or benchmarks determined  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank.  In
certain  areas  of  the  Bank  the  working  day  will  be  extended.  Our  preliminary  arrangements  for
production and stockpiling of euro banknotes and coin are well under way. While the deadline of 1st
January 2002 may seem distant, we must begin production far in advance.
There have been reports to the effect that the Central Bank will have a large surplus of
reserves when we join EMU. This is misleading. At the end of 1997 the Bank had total assets of £6½
billion.  These assets were matched by corresponding liabilities of £5 billion, leaving net assets, or
internal reserves, of nearly £1½ billion. The Bank will continue to need internal reserves. I would not
speculate on an appropriate level. We may not need the present level of reserves in due course but it
BIS Review   16/1998
- 3 -
is too early to make a judgement on this until we have experience of the new system. All of the other
national central banks participating in EMU will be in a similar position. Our internal reserves as a
proportion  of  total  assets  are  about  average  by  European  Union  standards.  I  might  add  that  any
transfer of internal reserves would reduce future earnings and profit transfers to the Exchequer.
From 1st January next onwards, all Central Bank business  will  be  conducted  in  the
new  currency,  the  euro.  All  accounts  with  the  Bank,  whether  held  by  credit  institutions,  the
Government  or  international  institutions,  will  be  in  euro.  Existing  notes  and  coin  will  become
constituent  parts  of  the  euro.  The  banks  generally  must  be  ready  to  make  any  banking  service
required in Ireland available in euro. From January next, they will process lodgements and payments
in Irish pounds or euro, as required. It would be reasonable to anticipate that Irish business in general
will move to the euro faster than the official timetable requires.
The  National  Changeover  Plan,  published  some  weeks  ago,  draws  attention  to
arrangements for the period of transition pending the introduction of euro banknotes and coin. During
this period banknotes of the member States participating in EMU must be  exchanged  at  par  value.
From January the Central Bank will provide an inward exchange service free of charge.
Exchange rate/interest rate
I am under the usual constraints in regard to comment on current exchange rates and
interest rates for the Irish pound. These issues are highly sensitive. Determination of exchange rate
policy is the prerogative of the Minister for Finance. It has been decided that the method for arriving
at  the  conversion  rates  for  the  different  currencies,  including  the  Irish  pound,  will  be  settled  and
announced at the time of decision on EMU membership. This decision, it now appears, will be taken
on 3rd May. Nothing further has been decided at this stage in relation to fixing of exchange rates.
The intention to pre-announce bilateral rates in May is driven by the general concern
throughout  Europe  to  avoid  market  speculation  as  we  move  closer  to  the  January  1999  deadline.
While  national  authorities  will  continue  to  be  responsible  for  the  exchange  rate  of  their  respective
currencies  up  to  this  deadline,  the  May  agreement  should  have  a  decisive  influence  and  should
diminish the possibility of considerable fluctuations.
There has been substantial convergence of interest rates in Europe in recent months.
Irish interest rates, at the short end of the scale, though low by historic standards, remain substantially
above  levels  across  much  of  Europe.  There  has  been  a  good  reason  for  this.  It  reflects  domestic
conditions  here  as  the  economy  has  continued  to  be  exceptionally  buoyant  and  the  threat  of
overheating remains. If we were not on the doorstep of EMU, our interest rates would now be higher.
Wholesale interest rates must converge, among the countries participating in EMU, by January 1999.
This  points  to  the  expectation  of  reductions  in  Irish  rates,  even  if  European  rates  were  to  move
upwards further in the meantime. I cannot quantify reductions precisely nor can I outline a timepath.
It is evident, however, that some reductions of significance are likely. In the meantime, Irish interest
rate policy will be influenced by the requirements of the domestic economy. The Central Bank will
retain the discretion to adjust rates for as long as possible.
I  might  also  draw  the  attention  of  members  to  the  impact  on  savings.  In  a  lower
interest rate regime some deposit rates must inevitably come down. The returns on call deposits in
particular are already at very low levels. It would be unwise to assume that interest rates will remain
permanently low once the euro area is established. As with the US dollar, successful management of
the euro will require periodic interest rate adjustments to secure the objective of price stability.
BIS Review   16/1998
- 4 -
In the context of EMU, the relationship with sterling is of obvious concern to us. We
now know that the UK will not join EMU for some time ahead. It would be better for us, if it joined
at the outset. I cannot predict future movements of sterling  relative  to  the  euro.  I  would,  however,
point to the Treaty requirements that all member States should treat exchange rate policy as a matter
of common interest. This applies as much to the UK as to anybody else. The Bank of England will
participate in the General Council of the European System of Central Banks and will be subject to the
obligations that this imposes. I would further suggest that the decision last year to give operational
independence to the Bank of England is significant in this context. It is working to an inflation target
and this arrangement should reduce the likelihood of large-scale fluctuations of sterling vis-à-vis the
euro.
It is  vitally  important  that  the  credibility  of  the  euro  is  established  immediately.  To
achieve  this  the  new  currency  must  be  supported  by  a  solid  economic  background  and  political
consensus. There is considerable speculation about the merits of a hard or a soft currency. The critical
factor is that the currency be stable in terms of European prices so that its international role will be
secure and that, in time, it will challenge the dominance of the US dollar. The external value of the
euro will be largely determined by the monetary policy implemented by the European Central Bank
and by developments in the foreign exchange markets for the major industrial currencies.
Supervision
May I now turn to a different aspect of our activities.
The Central Bank’s approach to supervision reflects European legal requirements and
is in line with best international practice. The basic objectives of supervision of banks and building
societies  are  to  protect  depositors  and  investors  and  to  ensure  as  far  as  possible  that  risks  to  the
financial  system  as  a  whole  are  minimised.  Insofar  as  the  Bank  examines  individual  customer
accounts, its focus is always on the solvency of the institution. Our main attention is focused on the
quality of loans and other assets and good management. We frequently come across breaches of the
rules. Many of these would be of a minor nature. Most are dealt with by administrative action. We
discourage  applications  for  banking  licences  unless  we  are  fully  satisfied  as  to  the  status  of  the
applicant.
No system of supervision, however comprehensive, can give a one hundred per cent
guarantee  against  abuse.  Effective  supervision  requires  the  co-operation  of  the  entity  that  is  being
supervised.  Despite  the  improvements  in  controls,  and  international  co-operation,  bank  failures
continue. The ultimate objective worldwide is to avoid systemic problems.
Arising from the Tribunals of Inquiry and other recent developments, there has been
some confusion about the confidentiality exercised by the Central Bank in relation to its functions.
May  I  say  at  the  outset  that  we  are  co-operating  to  the  fullest  extent  possible  with  Tribunal
investigations.
Members  are  aware  that  the  Central  Bank  is  conducting  an  investigation  following
recent allegations against National Irish Bank. I am precluded from discussing individual cases.
The  Bank  is  bound  under  law,  to  observe  strict  rules  of  confidentiality.  It  may  not
disclose information about individual entities or persons to any third parties, other than in exceptional
circumstances. These include criminal proceedings in court, providing information to the Gardai on
money laundering and other criminal activity, including tax evasion, and transfer of information  to
BIS Review   16/1998
- 5 -
other regulatory authorities. The Bank is prohibited from communicating information to the Revenue
Commissioners.  We  are  not  tax  investigators.  It  is  the  duty  of  individual  financial  institutions  to
report  to  the  Gardai  suspicions  of  criminal  activity  (including  tax  evasion)  by  their  customers.  I
understand that such reports to the Gardai are not infrequent. If we become aware of tax abuse, by an
institution that we supervise, it is our duty to notify the Gardai.
These requirements derive from and are consistent with European Union laws. Other
banking supervisors in the European Union are subject to similar confidentiality requirements. Our
situation is in no sense unique. If the Irish authorities attempted to abandon these requirements, not
only would we be in breach of EU law but we would forfeit the co-operation of other supervisors in
exchanging  information.  This  exchange  of  information  is  vital.  Without  it,  we  simply  could  not
operate as a competent supervisory authority and operations by Irish banks abroad would be called
into question.
The supervisory duties of the Central Bank have been extended considerably in recent
years. The International Financial Services Centre continues to expand. Last year responsibility for
all investment intermediaries was assigned to the Bank. In  response,  we  have  contacted  more  than
one  thousand  intermediaries  in  order  to  compile  a  register  and  to  develop  a  code  of  conduct.  The
supervision of small retail operations is a new departure for the Bank and it may take some time yet
to settle on a definite pattern of operation. A further complication is that a majority of intermediaries
are  also  engaged  in  insurance  and  other  activities  which  are  not  the  responsibility  of  the  Central
Bank. It makes little sense to examine  investment  operations  without  taking  some  overview  of  the
total business of an intermediary.
Exchange controls have also been in the news. In operating these controls up to their
abolition in 1992, the Central Bank acted as agent for the Minister for Finance. The Bank may give
information on these matters to the Minister only.
Irish financial institutions
Irish banks and financial institutions generally have been returning consistently strong
profits.  This  is  unsurprising  in  view  of  the  favourable  conditions  for  lending  and  minimising  bad
debts. At the same time, operating margins have been reducing  significantly  in  the  face  of  sharper
competition. All indications suggest that competition will intensify further in the years ahead. There
will be expensive technological developments and competition from outside will be facilitated by the
single  currency  in  EMU.  It  would  be  reasonable  to  predict  that  there  may  be  significant
rationalisation  within  our  financial  system  in  the  period  ahead.  It  would  be  disappointing  if  this
resulted  in  a  situation  where  the  great  proportion  of  Irish  banking  was  controlled  from  outside.  I
should also mention the impressive overseas expansion by a number of Irish financial institutions in
recent years.
We live in a world of large-scale movement of funds across borders and Ireland is no
exception. Given the open nature of the Irish economy, it is no surprise that cross-border holdings of
funds in our case are relatively high.
The total volume of deposits, excluding interbank deposits, with banks and building
societies in Ireland is estimated to be in the region of £60 billion. Roughly one third of these deposits
are  held  by  non-resident  companies  and  individuals.  This  proportion  is  quite  high  by  international
standards.  On  the  other  hand  deposits  held  abroad  by  Irish  residents  -  again  excluding  interbank
figures - are in the region of £11 billion. This figure is high by international comparison. The figure
BIS Review   16/1998
- 6 -
has quadrupled in the past  ten  years,  reflecting  the  growth  in  Irish  trade,  the  removal  of  exchange
controls  in  the  context  of  the  single  European  market  and  the  development  of  the  International
Financial Services Centre.
This  covers  only  the  deposit  side  of  the  picture.  Borrowing  by  Irish  residents  from
overseas banks has also grown rapidly in the past decade. It is now estimated to be of a similar order
of magnitude to overseas deposits. Access to credit abroad at competitive interest rates, growth in the
multinational sector and the IFSC have contributed to this development.
This  is  by  no  means  a  comprehensive  picture.  It  does  not  incorporate  cross-border
flows  in  securities  and  other  investments  such  as  equities,  for  which  we  do  not  have  specific
information. The Central Bank is aware throughout every day of the broad quantities of funds moving
in and out of Irish pounds across the foreign  exchange  market.  It  does  not  have  knowledge  of  the
movement of funds on behalf of individual bank customers.
Conclusions
Before I conclude, may I refer again briefly to monetary policy. In the implementation
of monetary policy the first objective of the Central Bank at all times is price stability. This will also
be  the  first  objective  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  this  is  made  abundantly  clear  in  the
Maastricht Treaty. Price stability is the best foundation for a growing  economy  and  for  continuing
improvements in employment. This has been demonstrated consistently, not just in the Irish situation
but worldwide.
BIS Review   16/1998
