Mr. Duisenberg reports on the outcome of the second meeting of the Governing
Council of the European Central Bank   Introductory statement by the President of the European
Central Bank, Dr. W. Duisenberg, at the press conference held in Frankfurt on 8/7/98.
The Governing Council first assessed current economic developments in the euro
area. The general picture is one of  continued  economic  expansion  combined  with  broadly  low
inflation.
Several  forecasts  made  during  spring  1998  have  even  suggested  slightly  lower
rates  of  inflation  for  1998-99  compared  with  expectations  in  autumn  1997.  As  far  as  price
developments  are  concerned,  inflation  as  measured  by  the  harmonised  consumer  price  index
(HICP) is estimated to have risen slightly in April, to 1.4%, but has not increased further in May.
Output  growth  has  remained  strong  in  recent  quarters,  with  annual  growth  rates
close  to  or  even  exceeding  3%.  Economic  growth  has  been  driven  increasingly  by  domestic
demand  rather  than  net  exports,  as  might  be  expected  at  this  stage  of  the  cycle.  Private
consumption and stockbuilding have been the main factors underlying domestic demand to date.
The favourable conjunctural situation has started to feed through into the labour
market,  although  improvements  here  have  in  some  countries  been  too  slow  to  appear.  It  is
evident,  however,  that  economic  growth  alone  will  not  reduce  the  urgency  to  proceed  with
structural adjustments in order to tackle unacceptably high rates of unemployment.
As  regards  monetary  and  financial  developments  in  the  euro  area,  the  annual
growth rate of the broad money supply (M3H) accelerated in April to around 6% from 5.5% in
March. The growth rate of M1, the narrow money supply, also picked up, to around 10%. We
shall monitor these developments very carefully.
In  principle,  the  economic  performance  I  have  just  described  provides  a
favourable  environment  for  continued  fiscal  consolidation.  It  is  with  some  concern  that  we
observe that in a number of member countries the prospects for this to actually develop seem to
be, to put it mildly, rather subdued.
In  this  respect,  I  should  like  to  underline  three  aspects.  First,  any  “growth
dividend”  resulting  from  the  current  cyclical  upturn  should  be  used  to  bring  deficit  and  debt
levels down, rather than relaxing control over expenditure. Second, most Member States need to
go a step further, and indeed improve structural balances as they are not yet in compliance with
the obligations under the Stability and Growth Pact. This implies that the benchmark for fiscal
policy must now be a budget close to balance or in surplus - in surplus especially in countries
with high ratios of debt to GDP. Third, further structural adjustments in fiscal policy would also
help to improve the policy mix in some countries and in the euro area as a whole from the start of
Stage Three.
I would not at the present time want to try to convey too strong an impression of
the implications of these various economic developments for the appropriate stance of monetary
policies in euro area Member States. Although the responsibility for these policies remains with
national  central  banks  until  the  end  of  this  year,  the  Governing  Council  had  an  extensive  and
thorough  discussion  on  a  euro  area  perspective  of  monetary  policy.  We  will  continue  to  study
this issue closely before we enter the regime of a single monetary policy. For the time being, it is
encouraging  to  see  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  being  reflected  in  the  exchange  rates  of
BIS Review   60/1998
- 2 -
euro countries. There is currently no sign of exchange rate tensions among euro area currencies.
Forward exchange rates are expected to be virtually identical to central rates, suggesting that the
pre-announced rates are considered credible. I consider this a remarkable achievement.
Following its review of economic developments, the Governing Council settled a
number of organisational issues.
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
It  adopted  the  Rules  of  Procedure  of  the  European  Central  Bank.  These
will be published in the Official Journal of the European Communities;
It approved, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure, the establishment
of eleven ESCB committees to assist in the work of the European System
of  Central  Banks  (ESCB).  The  committees  are  as  follows  (listed  in
alphabetical  order):  Accounting  and  Monetary  Income  Committee,
Banking  Supervision  Committee,  Banknote  Committee,  External
Communications  Committee, 
Information  Technology  Committee,
Internal  Auditors  Committee,  Legal  Committee,  Market  Operations
Committee,  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  Payment  and  Settlement
Systems Committee, and Statistics Committee;
It formally adopted a budget for the European Central Bank for the second
half of 1998 and agreed on the establishment of a Budget Committee to
assist the Governing Council in ECB budget-related matters;
It  laid  down  specific  rules  applicable  to  staff  transferring  from  the
European  Monetary  Institute  to  the  European  Central  Bank.  ECB
Decisions relating to the Conditions of Employment will be published in
the Official Journal of the European Communities.
The  Governing  Council  also  took  a  number  of  decisions  relating  to  various
aspects of its preparatory work for Stage Three.
(a) Monetary policy issues
The Governing Council decided on the introduction of a minimum reserve system
by the ESCB at the start of Stage Three. Among the three main functions that a minimum reserve
system could usefully perform, the Governing Council attaches particularly high importance to
its contributions to the stabilisation of money market interest rates and to the enlargement of the
demand  for  central  bank  money  by  creating  or  enlarging  a  structural  liquidity  shortage  in  the
market.
In the light of the potential burden which a minimum reserve system could impose
on the private sector and the effects it might have on the financial activity of credit institutions in
the euro area, the Governing Council has decided on features which fulfil the two money market
management purposes outlined above, while at the same time allowing an adequate remuneration
of minimum reserves.
A  number  of  details  of  the  minimum  reserve  system  that  will  be  applied  were
already  specified  in  previous  documents  published  by  the  European  Monetary  Institute.
Additional features agreed upon yesterday include the liability base, the lump-sum allowance and
the rate of remuneration. With regard to the latter, the ECB will remunerate minimum reserve
holdings at a level corresponding to the rate of its main refinancing operations. The Governing
Council intends to decide on the exact specification of the minimum reserve system in November
BIS Review   60/1998
- 3 -
1998  at  the  latest.  This  decision,  in  particular  as  regards  the  reserve  ratio  (which  is  currently
defined within a range of 1.5% - 2.5%), will be based on the early data from the new system for
money and banking statistics.
Further details are provided in the separate press release that is being issued to you
this morning.
It  is  intended  that  the  precise  features  of  the  minimum  reserve  system  will  be
published  in  the  form  of  an  EU  Council  Regulation.  For  this  purpose,  the  Governing  Council
adopted an ECB Recommendation for an EU Council Regulation on the application of minimum
reserves by the European Central Bank. In accordance with the provisions of the Statute of the
ESCB,  the  EU  Council,  acting  by  a  qualified  majority  and  after  consulting  the  European
Parliament and the Commission, is expected to adopt this Regulation.
The  Governing  Council  also  adopted  ECB  Recommendations  for  EU  Council
Regulations concerning the collection of statistical information by the ECB and concerning the
powers of the ECB to impose sanctions. All three ECB Recommendations will be published in
the Official Journal of the European Communities for general notice.
(b) Foreign exchange issues
The  Governing  Council  decided  on  the  size  and  form  of  the  initial  transfer  of
foreign reserve assets to the European Central Bank from the national central banks participating
in the euro area. This transfer is to take place on the first day of 1999. It has been decided that the
initial transfer will be to the maximum allowed amount of EUR 50 billion, adjusted downwards
by deducting the shares in the ECB’s capital subscription key of the EU central banks which will
not  participate  in  the  euro  area  at  the  outset.  The  transfer  will  thus  be  equal  to  78.9153%  of
EUR 50 billion, i.e. approximately EUR 39.46 billion.
The Governing Council furthermore agreed that this initial transfer should be in
gold in an amount equivalent to 15% of the sum I have just mentioned, with the remaining 85%
being transferred in foreign currency assets. I should stress that the decision on the percentage of
gold to be transferred to the ECB will have no implications for the consolidated gold holdings of
the ESCB.
The precise modalities of the initial transfer will be finalised before the end of the
year.
Before the end of the current year the Governing Council will also have to adopt
an  ECB  Guideline  pursuant  to  Article  31.3  of  the  Statute  of  the  ESCB,  which  will  subject  all
operations in foreign reserve assets remaining with the national central banks - including gold -
to approval by the ECB.
In  connection  with  the  setting-up  of  common  market  standards,  the  Governing
Council also reached agreement on a number of issues related to the quotation and publication of
reference  exchange  rates  for  the  euro.  Specifically,  it  was  agreed  to  recommend  to  market
participants 
the  euro
(i.e. 1 euro = X foreign  currency  units)  and  to  have  daily  reference  exchange  rates  for  the  euro
computed and published by the ECB.
the  “certain”  method 
the  exchange 
for  quoting 
rates 
for 
BIS Review   60/1998
- 4 -
Further details are provided in the separate press release that is being issued to you
this morning.
(c) Payment systems issues
The  Governing  Council  decided  on  the  conditions  for  the  participation  of  the
non-euro  area  EU  central  banks  and  credit  institutions  in  the  TARGET  (Trans-European
Automated  Real-time  Gross  settlement  Express  Transfer)  system.  In  TARGET  the  ESCB  will
provide  central  bank  liquidity  in  the  course  of  the  day  (i.e.  intraday  liquidity)  to  the  extent
necessary  to  avoid  delays  in  the  execution  of  payment  orders.  If  intraday  liquidity  is  not
reimbursed at the end of the day it becomes overnight credit granted by the ESCB, which, for
evident  monetary  policy  reasons,  cannot  be  offered  to  institutions  outside  the  euro  area.
Nonetheless,  non-euro  area  EU  central  banks  and  institutions  in  those  countries  will  be
connected to TARGET.
The Governing Council considered that giving such institutions outside the euro
area  unlimited  access  to  intraday  credit  would  have  created  risks  for  the  conduct  of  monetary
policy that it was not ready to take. A facility will therefore be put in place to enable the non-euro
area EU central banks to provide collateralised intraday credit in euro to their credit institutions,
subject to a ceiling both at the level of the non-euro area EU central banks and at that of non-euro
area credit institutions. There will also be a liquidity deadline, set at 5 p.m., for non-euro area
credit institutions so that they do not incur an overnight overdraft in euro.
Further details are provided in the separate press release that is being issued to you
this morning.
The  Governing  Council  also  agreed  that  a  report  on  recent  developments  in  the
field  of  electronic  money  -  and  their  monetary  policy  implications  -  would  be  published  in
September 1998.
(d) Legal protection of euro banknotes
Finally, the Governing Council agreed on a number of legal instruments aimed at
enhancing  the  protection  of  euro  banknotes.  In  particular,  an  ECB  Decision  on  the
denominations,  specifications,  reproduction,  exchange  and  withdrawal  of  banknotes  has  been
adopted,  as  well  as  an  ECB  Recommendation  regarding  the  adoption  of  certain  measures  to
enhance the legal protection of euro banknotes and coins. Both documents will be published for
general information in the Official Journal of the European Communities.
BIS Review   60/1998
