Mr.  Greenspan  analyses  further  the  roots  of  the  current  crisis  in  Asia
Testimony  by  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  the  US Federal  Reserve  System,  Mr.  Alan
Greenspan,  before  the  Committee  on  Banking  and  Financial  Services  of  the  US  House  of
Representatives on 30/1/98.
The  global  financial  system  has  been  evolving  rapidly  in  recent  years.  New
technology has radically reduced the costs of borrowing and lending across traditional national
borders, facilitating the development of new instruments and drawing in new players. One result
has been a massive increase in capital flows. Information is transmitted instantaneously around
the world, and huge shifts in the supply and demand for funds naturally follow.
This  burgeoning  global  system  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  a  highly  efficient
structure  that  has  significantly  facilitated  cross-border  trade  in  goods  and  services  and,
accordingly, has made a substantial contribution to standards of living worldwide. Its efficiency
exposes and punishes underlying economic weakness swiftly and decisively. Regrettably, it also
appears  to  have  facilitated  the  transmission  of  financial  disturbances  far  more  effectively  than
ever before.
As I testified before this Committee three years ago, the then emerging Mexican
crisis was the first such episode associated with our new high-tech international financial system.
The current Asian crisis is the second.
We  do  not  as  yet  fully  understand  the  new  system’s  dynamics.  We  are  learning
fast, and need to update and modify our institutions and practices to reduce the risks inherent in
the  new  regime.  Meanwhile,  we  have  to  confront  the  current  crisis  with  the  institutions  and
techniques we have.
Many  argue  that  the  current  crisis  should  be  allowed  to  run  its  course  without
support from the International Monetary Fund or the bilateral financial backing of other nations.
They  assert  that  allowing  this  crisis  to  play  out,  while  doubtless  having  additional  negative
effects on growth in Asia, and engendering greater spill-overs onto the rest of the world, is not
likely to have a large or lasting impact on the United States and the world economy.
They  may  well  be  correct  in  their  judgment.  There  is,  however,  a  small  but  not
negligible  probability  that  the  upset  in  East  Asia  could  have  unexpectedly  negative  effects  on
Japan,  Latin  America,  and  eastern  and  central  Europe  that,  in  turn,  could  have  repercussions
elsewhere, including the United States. Thus, while the probability of such an outcome may be
small, its consequences, in my judgment, should not be left solely to chance. We have observed
that  global  financial  markets,  as  currently  organized,  do  not  always  achieve  an  appropriate
equilibrium, or at least require time to stabilize.
Opponents  of  IMF  support  also  argue  that  the  substantial  financial  backing,  by
cushioning  the  losses  of  imprudent  investors,  could  exacerbate  moral  hazard.  Moral  hazard
arises  when  someone  can  reap  the  rewards  from  their  actions  when  things  go  well  but  do  not
suffer  the  full  consequences  when  things  go  badly.  Such  a  reward  structure,  obviously,  could
encourage excessive risk taking. To be sure, this is a problem, though with respect to Asia some
investors  have  to  date  suffered  substantial  losses.  Asian  equity  losses,  excluding  Japan,  since
June  1997  worldwide  are  estimated  to  have  exceeded  $700  billion  of  which  more  than  $30
billion  has  been  lost  by  U.S.  investors.  Substantial  further  losses  have  been  recorded  in  bonds
and real estate.
BIS Review   6/1998
- 2 -
Moreover,  the  policy  conditionality,  associated  principally  with  IMF  lending,
which dictates economic and financial discipline and structural change, helps to mitigate some of
the  moral  hazard  concerns.  Such  conditionality  is  also  critical  to  the  success  of  the  overall
stabilization  effort.  As  I  will  be  discussing  in  a  moment,  at  the  root  of  the  problems  is  poor
public  policy  that  has  resulted  in  misguided  investments  and  very  weak  financial  sectors.
Convincing a sovereign nation to alter destructive policies that impair its own performance and
threaten contagion to its neighbors is best handled by an international financial institution, such
as the IMF. What we have in place today to respond to crises should be  supported  even  as  we
work to improve those mechanisms and institutions.
Accordingly,  I  fully  back  the  Administration’s  request  to  augment  the  financial
resources of the IMF -- U.S. participation in the New Arrangements to Borrow and an increase
in the U.S. quota in the IMF. Hopefully, neither will turn out not to be needed, and no funds will
be  drawn.  But  it  is  better  to  have  it  available  if  that  turns  out  not  to  be  the  case  and  quick
response to a pending crisis is essential. I also believe it is important to have mechanisms, such
as  the  Treasury  Department’s  Exchange  Stabilization  Fund,  that  permit  the  United  States  in
exceptional circumstances to provide temporary bilateral financial support, often on short notice,
under appropriate conditions and on occasion in cooperation with other countries.
In my testimony before this Committee in mid-November, I endeavored to outline
the roots of the current crisis. This morning I should like to carry the analysis a bit further.
Companies  in  Korea  and  many  other  Asian  countries  have  become  formidable
world-class producers in a number of manufacturing sectors using advanced technologies, but in
a  number  of  cases  they  permitted  leverage  to  rise  to  levels  that  could  only  be  sustained  with
continued very rapid growth. Growth, however, was destined to slow.
Asian  economies  to  varying  degrees  over  the  last  half  century  have  tried  to
combine rapid growth with a much higher mix of government-directed production than has been
evident  in  the  essentially  market-driven  economies  of  the  West.  Through  government
inducements, a number of select, more sophisticated manufacturing technologies borrowed from
the  advanced  market  economies  were  applied  to  these  generally  low-productivity  and,  hence,
low-wage economies. Thus, for selected products, exports became competitive with those of the
market economies, engendering rapid overall economic growth.
There  was,  however,  an  inevitable  limit  to  how  far  this  specialized  Asian
economic regime could develop. As the process broadened beyond a few select applications of
advanced technologies, overall productivity continued to increase and the associated rise in the
average  real  wage  in  these  economies  blunted  somewhat  the  competitive  advantage  enjoyed
initially.  As  a  consequence  of  the  slackening  of  export  expansion  caused  in  part  by  losses  in
competitiveness  because  of  exchange  rates  that  were  pegged  to  the  dollar,  which  was
appreciating  against  the  yen,  aggregate  economic  growth  slowed  somewhat,  even  before  the
current crisis.
For  years,  domestic  savings  and  rapidly  increasing  capital  inflows  had  been
directed by governments into investments that banks were required to finance. As I pointed out
in previous testimony, lacking a true market test, much of that investment was unprofitable. So
long as growth was vigorous, the adverse consequences of this type of non-market allocation of
resources were masked. Moreover, in the context of pegged exchange rates that were presumed
to continue, if not indefinitely, at least beyond the  term  of  the  loan,  banks  and  nonbanks  were
willing  to  take  the  risk  to  borrow  dollars  (unhedged)  to  obtain  the  dollar-denominated  interest
BIS Review   6/1998
- 3 -
rates that were invariably lower than those available  in  domestic  currency.  Western,  especially
American  investors,  diversified  some  of  their  huge  capital  gains  of  the  1990s  into  East  Asian
investments.  In  hindsight,  it  is  evident  that  those  economies  could  not  provide  adequate
profitable opportunities at reasonable risk to absorb such a surge in funds. This surge, together
with distortions caused by government planning, has resulted in huge losses. With the inevitable
slowdown, business losses and nonperforming bank loans surged. Banks’ capital eroded rapidly
and,  as  a  consequence,  funding  sources  have  dried  up,  as  fears  of  defaults  have  risen
dramatically. In an environment of weak financial systems, lax supervisory regimes, and vague
guarantees about depositor or creditor protections, bank runs have occurred in several countries
and  reached  crisis  proportions  in  Indonesia.  Uncertainty  and  retrenchment  have  escalated.  The
state  of  confidence  so  necessary  to  the  functioning  of  any  economy  has  been  torn  asunder.
Vicious  cycles  of  ever  rising  and  reinforcing  fears  have  become  contagious.  Some  exchange
rates have fallen to levels that are understandable only in the context of a veritable collapse  of
confidence in the functioning of an economy.
A  similar  breakdown  was  also  evident  in  Mexico  three  years  ago,  albeit  to  a
somewhat lesser degree. In late 1994, the government was rapidly losing reserves in a vain effort
to support a currency that had come under attack when the authorities failed to act expeditiously
and  convincingly  to  contain  a  burgeoning  current  account  deficit  financed  in  large  part  by
substantial short-term flows denominated in dollars.
These  two  recent  crisis  episodes  have  afforded  us  increasing  insights  into  the
dynamics  of  the  evolving  international  financial  system,  though  there  is  much  we  do  not  yet
understand.
With the new  more  sophisticated  financial  markets  punishing  errant  government
policy  behavior  far  more  profoundly  than  in  the  past,  vicious  cycles  are  evidently  emerging
more often. For once they are triggered, damage control is difficult. Once the web of confidence,
which  supports  the  financial  system,  is  breached,  it  is  difficult  to  restore  quickly.  The  loss  of
confidence  can  trigger  rapid  and  disruptive  changes  in  the  pattern  of  finance,  which,  in  turn,
feeds  back  on  exchange  rates  and  asset  prices.  Moreover,  investor  concerns  that  weaknesses
revealed in one economy may be present in others that are similarly situated means that the loss
of confidence can quickly spread to other countries.
At one point the economic system appears stable, the next it behaves as though a
dam  has  reached  a  breaking  point,  and  water  (read,  confidence)  evacuates  its  reservoir.  The
United States experienced such a sudden change with the decline in stock prices of more than 20
percent on October 19, 1987. There is no credible scenario that can readily explain so abrupt a
change in the fundamentals of long-term valuation on that one day. Such market panic does not
appear to reflect a simple continuum from the immediately previous period. The abrupt onset of
such  implosions  suggests  the  possibility  that  there  is  a  marked  dividing  line  for  confidence.
When  crossed,  prices  slip  into  free  fall  --  perhaps  overshooting  the  long-term  equilibrium  --
before markets will stabilize.
But  why  do  these  events  seem  to  erupt  without  some  readily  evident  precursor?
Certainly, the more extended the risk-taking,  or  more  generally,  the  lower  the  discount  factors
applied to future outcomes, the more vulnerable are markets to a shock that abruptly triggers a
revision in expectations and sets off a vicious cycle of contraction.
Episodes of vicious cycles cannot be easily forecast, as our recent experience with
Asia has demonstrated. The causes of such episodes are complex and often subtle. In the case of
BIS Review   6/1998
- 4 -
Asia, we can now  say  with  some  confidence  that  the  economies  affected  by  this  crisis  faced  a
critical  mass  of  vulnerabilities;  ex  ante,  some  were  more  apparent  than  others,  but  the
combination was not generally recognized as critical.
Once  the  recent  crisis  was  triggered  in  early  July  with  Thailand’s  forced
abandonment  of  its  exchange  rate  peg,  it  was  apparently  the  lethal  combination  of  pegged
exchange  rates,  high  leverage,  weak  banking  and  financial  systems,  and  declining  demand  in
Thailand and elsewhere that transformed a correction into a collapse. Normally the presence of
these factors would have produced a modest retrenchment, not the kind of discontinuous fall in
confidence  that  leads  to  a  vicious  cycle  of  decline.  But  with  a  significant  part  of  short-term
liabilities,  bank  and  nonbank,  denominated  in  foreign  currencies  (predominantly  dollars),
unhedged, the initial pressure on domestic currencies led to a sharp crack in the fixed exchange
rate  structure  of  many  East  Asian  economies.  The  belief  that  local  currencies  could,  virtually
without risk of loss, be converted into dollars at any time was shattered. Investors, both domestic
and foreign, endeavored en masse to convert to dollars, as confidence in the ability of the local
economy  to  earn  dollars  to  meet  their  fixed  obligations  diminished.  Local  exchange  rates  fell
against the dollar, inducing still further declines.
The weakening of growth also led to lowered profit expectations and contracting
net  capital  inflows  of  dollars.  This  was  an  abrupt  change  from  the  pronounced  acceleration
through 1996 and the first half of 1997. The combination of continued strong demand for dollars
to  meet  debt  service  obligations  and  the  slowed  new  supply,  destabilized  the  previously  fixed
exchange rate  regime.  This  created  a  marked  increase  in  uncertainty  and  retrenchment,  further
reducing  capital  inflows,  still  further  weakening  local  currency  exchange  rates.  This  vicious
cycle will  continue  until  either  defaults  or  restructuring  lowers  debt  service  obligations,  or  the
low local exchange rates finally induce a pickup in the supply of dollars.
These virulent episodes appear to be at the root of our most recent breakdowns in
Mexico  and  Asia.  Their  increased  prevalence  may,  in  fact,  be  a  defining  characteristic  of  the
new high-tech international financial system. We shall never be able to alter the human response
to  shocks  of  uncertainty  and  withdrawal;  we  can  only  endeavor  to  reduce  the  imbalances  that
exacerbate them.
While,  as  indicated  earlier,  I  do  not  believe  we  are  as  yet  sufficiently
knowledgeable of the full complex dynamics of our increasingly developing high-tech financial
system,  enough  insights  have  been  gleaned  from  the  crises  in  Mexico  and  Asia  (and  previous
experiences)  to  enable  us  to  list  a  few  of  the  critical  tendencies  toward  disequilibrium  and
vicious cycles that will have to be addressed if our new global economy is to limit the scope for
disruptions in the future. These elements have all, in times past, been factors in international and
domestic economic disruptions, but they appear more stark in today’s market.
1. Leverage
Certainly in Korea, probably in Thailand, and possibly  elsewhere,  a  high  degree
of leverage (the ratio of debt to equity) appears to be a  place  to  start.  While  the
key  role  of  debt  in  bank  balance  sheets  is  obvious,  its  role  in  the  efficient
functioning  of  the  nonbank  sector  is  also  important.  Nevertheless,  exceptionally
high  leverage  often  is  a  symptom  of  excessive  risk  taking  that  leaves  financial
systems and economies vulnerable to loss of confidence. It is not easy to imagine
the  cumulative  cascading  of  debt  instruments  seeking  safety  in  a  crisis  when
assets  are  heavily  funded  with  equity.  The  concern  is  particularly  relevant  to
banks  and  many  other  financial  intermediaries,  whose  assets  typically  are  less
liquid  than  their  liabilities  and  so  depend  on  confidence  in  the  payment  of
BIS Review   6/1998
- 5 -
liabilities for their continued viability. Moreover, both financial and nonfinancial
businesses can employ high leverage to mask inadequate underlying profitability
and  otherwise  have 
their  volatile
environments.
inadequate  capital  cushions 
to  match 
Excess  leverage  in  nonfinancial  business  can  create  problems  for  lenders
including their banks; these problems can, in turn, spread to other borrowers that
rely  on  these  lenders.  Fortunately,  since  lending  by  nonfinancial  firms  to  other
businesses is less prevalent than bank lending to other banks, direct contagion is
less likely. But the leverage of South Korea’s chaebols, because of their size and
the pervasive distress, has clearly been an important cause of bank problems with
their systemic implications.
2. Interest rate and currency risk
Banks,  when  confronted  with  a  generally  rising  yield  curve,  have  a  tendency  to
incur  interest  rate  or  liquidity  risk  by  lending  long  and  funding  short.  This
exposes  them  to  shocks,  especially  those  institutions  that  have  low  capital-asset
ratios.  When  financial  intermediaries,  in  addition,  seek  low-cost,  unhedged,
foreign  currency  funding,  the  dangers  of  depositor  runs,  following  a  fall  in  the
domestic currency, escalate.
3. Weak banking systems
Banks  play  a  crucial  role  in  the  financial  market  infrastructure.  When  they  are
undercapitalized,  have  lax  lending  standards,  and  are  subjected  to  weak
supervision  and  regulation,  they  become  a  source  of  systemic  risk  both
domestically and internationally.
4. Interbank funding, especially in foreign currencies
Despite  its  importance  for  distributing  savings  to  their  most  valued  use,  short-
term interbank funding, especially cross border may  turn  out  to  be  the  Achilles’
heel  of  an  international  financial  system  that  is  subject  to  wide  variations  in
financial confidence. This phenomenon, which is all too common in our domestic
experience, may be particularly dangerous in an international setting.
5. Moral hazard
The  expectation  that  monetary  authorities  or  international  financial  institutions
will come to the rescue of failing financial systems and unsound investments has
clearly  engendered  a  significant  element  of  moral  hazard  and  excessive  risk
taking.  The  dividing  line  between  public  and  private  liabilities,  too  often,
becomes blurred.
6. Weak central banks
To  effectively  support  a  stable  currency,  central  banks  need  to  be  independent,
meaning  that  their  monetary  policy  decisions  are  not  subject  to  the  dictates  of
political authorities.
7. Securities markets
Recent adverse banking experiences have emphasized the problems that can arise
if banks are almost the sole source of intermediation. Their breakdown induces a
sharp  weakening  in  economic  growth.  A  wider  range  of  nonbank  institutions,
BIS Review   6/1998
- 6 -
including  viable  debt  and  equity  markets,  are  important  safeguards  of  economic
activity when banking fails.
8. Inadequate legal structures
Finally,  an  effective  competitive  market  system  requires  a  rule  of  law  that
severely delimits government’s arbitrary intrusion into commercial disputes.
Defaults  and  restructuring  will  not  always  be  avoidable.  Indeed  “creative
destruction”,  as  Joseph  Schumpeter  put  it,  is  often  an  important  element  of
renewal  in  a  dynamic  market  economy,  but  an  efficient  bankruptcy  statute  is
required to aid in this process, including in the case of cross-border defaults.
 Interest  and  currency  risk  taking,  excess  leverage,  weak  financial  systems,  and
interbank funding are all encouraged by the existence of a safety net. In a domestic context, it is
difficult  to  achieve  financial  balance  without  a  regulatory  structure  that  seeks  to  simulate  the
market  incentives  that  would  tend  to  control  these  financial  elements  if  there  were  not  broad
safety nets. It is even more difficult to achieve such a balance internationally among sovereign
governments operating out of different cultures. Thus, governments have developed a patchwork
of arrangements and conventions governing the functioning of the international financial system
that I believe will need to be thoroughly reviewed and altered as necessary to fit the needs of the
new global environment. A review of supervision and regulation of private financial institutions,
especially  those  that  are  supported  by  a  safety  net,  is  particularly  pressing  because  those
institutions have played so prominent a role in the emergence of recent crises.
As  I  have  testified  previously,  I  believe  that,  in  this  rapidly  expanding
international  financial  system,  the  primary  protection  from  adverse  financial  disturbances  is
effective  counterparty  surveillance  and,  hence,  government  regulation  and  supervision  should
seek to produce an environment in which counterparties can most effectively oversee the credit
risks of potential transactions.
Here a major improvement in transparency, including both accounting and public
disclosure,  is  essential.  To  be  sure,  counterparties  often  exchange  otherwise  confidential
information as a condition of a transaction. But broader dissemination of detailed disclosures of
governments,  financial  institutions,  and  firms,  is  required  if  the  risks  inherent  in  our  global
financial structure are to be contained. A market system can approach an appropriate equilibrium
only if the signals to which individual market participants respond are accurate and adequate to
the needs of the adjustment process. Among the important signals are product and asset prices,
interest  rates,  debt  by  maturity,  detailed  accounts  of  central  banks,  and  private  enterprises.
Blinded by faulty signals, a competitive free-market system cannot reach a firm balance except
by  chance.  In  today’s  rapidly  changing  market  place  producers  need  sophisticated  signals  to
hone production schedules and investment programs to respond to consumer demand.
There is sufficient bias in political systems of all varieties to substitute hope (read,
wishful thinking) for possibly difficult pre-emptive policy moves, both with respect to financial
systems and economic policy. There is often denial and delay in instituting proper adjustments.
Recent propensities to obscure the need for change have been evidenced by unreported declines
in official reserves, issuance by governments of the equivalent to  foreign  currency  obligations,
or  unreported  large  forward  short  positions  against  foreign  currencies.  It  is  very  difficult  for
political  leaders  to  incur  what  they  perceive  as  large  immediate  political  costs  to  contain
problems that they see (often dimly) as only prospective.
BIS Review   6/1998
- 7 -
Reality  eventually  replaces  hope,  but  the  cost  of  delay  is  a  more  abrupt  and
disruptive  adjustment  than  would  have  been  required  if  action  had  been  more  pre-emptive.
Increased transparency for businesses, financial institutions, and governments is a key ingredient
in fostering more discipline  on  private  transactors  and  on  government  policymakers.  Increased
transparency can counter political bias in part by exposing for all to see the risks to stability of
current policies as they develop. Under such conditions, failure to act would also be perceived as
having  political  costs.  I  suspect  that  recent  political  foot  dragging  by  governments  in  both
developed and developing countries on the issue of greater transparency is credible evidence of
its power and significance.
Transparency, which is so important to foster safe and sound lending practices, is,
of course, less relevant for local currency lending if banks are guaranteed with sovereign credits.
Moreover, transparency becomes especially difficult to create for organizations and corporations
with large interlocking ownerships. Cross holdings of stock lead too often to lending on the basis
of association, not economic value.
The  list  of  problems  that  must  be  addressed  to  achieve  balance  in  our  future
global  financial  system  could  be  significantly  extended,  but  let  me  end  with  a  notion  that  is
relevant also to today’s crisis. It is becoming increasingly evident that supervision and regulation
should address excess nonperforming loans expeditiously. The expected values of the losses on
these  loans  are,  of  course,  a  subtraction  from  capital.  But  since  these  estimates  are  uncertain,
they embody an additional  risk  premium  that  reduces  the  markets’  best  estimate  of  the  size  of
effective  equity  capital  even  if  capital  is  replenished.  It  is,  hence,  far  better  to  remove  these
dubious assets and their associated risk premium from bank balance sheets, and dispose of them
separately, preferably promptly.
 As a consequence of the unwinding of market restrictions and regulations, and the
rapid increase in technology, the international financial system has expanded at a pace far faster
than either domestic GDP or cross-border trade. To reduce the risk of systemic crises in such an
environment,  an  enhanced  regime  of  market  incentives,  involving  greater  sensitivity  to  market
signals, more information to make those signals more robust, and broader securities markets --
coupled with better supervision -- is essential. Obviously appropriate macro policies, as ever, are
assumed. But attention to micro details is becoming increasingly pressing.
Nonetheless, it is reasonable to expect that despite endeavors at risk containment
and  prevention  the  system  may  fail  in  some  instances,  triggering  vicious  cycles  and  all  the
associated contagion for innocent bystanders. A backup source of international financial support
provided  only  with  agreed  conditions  to  address  underlying  problems,  the  task  assigned  to  the
IMF,  can  play  an  essential  stabilizing  role.  The  availability  of  such  support  must  be  limited
because its size cannot be expected to expand at the pace of the international financial system. I
doubt if there will be worldwide political support for that.
In  closing,  I  should  like  to  stress  that  the  significant  degree  of  volatility  that
continues to exist in Asian markets indicates exceptionally high levels of uncertainty, bordering
on  panic.  It  is  not  reasonable  to  expect  that  the  substantial  investments  needed  to  implement
meaningful  structural  reforms  can  proceed  very  far  until  we  observe  a  simmering  down  of
frenetic changes in asset prices and exchange rates.
BIS Review   6/1998
- 8 -
That  is  likely  to  result  only  when  stability  of  banking  and  financial  systems
generally  is  achieved.  As  I  indicated  in  my  November  testimony,  the  failure  of  the  fragile
banking  systems  of  East  Asia  to  hold  steady  as  financial  pressures  increased  was  a  defining
element  in  the  developing  crisis.  The  stabilization  of  those  banking  systems  is  crucial,  if
confidence, that has been so thoroughly undercut in this most debilitating crisis, is to be restored.
BIS Review   6/1998
