Mr. Duisenberg’s opening statement at the meeting of the Governing Council
of  the  European  Central  Bank      Introductory  statement  by  the  President  of  the  European
Central Bank, Dr. W. F. Duisenberg, at the press conference held in Frankfurt on 11/9/98.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are here today to report not only
on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank, but
also - as you are already aware - on the outcome of the meetings of the Governing Council and
the General Council that took place on 1 September 1998. It was in view of the short time span
between the two sets of meetings that we decided that it would be more efficient to hold only one
press conference to provide you with a summary of our deliberations.
It is my intention to continue this practice for the remaining meetings of this year.
In  this  regard,  the  Governing  Council  will  meet,  not  only  as  scheduled  on  13  October,  3
November and 1 December 1998, but there will also be an additional meeting on Tuesday, 22
December 1998. By this time, the bulk of nearly five years of preparatory work - including the
“EMI years” - will be behind us and I envisage that the Governing Council’s final meeting before
the start of Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) will be devoted to fine-tuning
its  last-minute  preparations.  You  will  recall  that  monetary  policy  decisions  remain  a  national
competence until 31 December 1998. Looking ahead to next year, the Governing Council will
hold fortnightly meetings and I intend to hold a press conference, normally, once a month. For
the  first  quarter  of  1999,  I  envisage  holding  a  press  conference  immediately  after  the  first
meeting  of  each  month.  Further  details  of  the  meetings  schedule  are  provided  in  the  separate
press release that will be issued to you this evening.
Let me, however, return to the present. The Governing Council and the General
Council devoted part of their September meetings to an extended exchange of views on recent
economic,  monetary  and  financial  developments.  In  particular,  much  attention  was  paid  to  the
global economic and financial environment of the future euro area, which has clearly worsened.
Two major factors are currently affecting capital markets. First, the “flight into quality”. Second -
and related - the tendency to switch from equities to bonds. As evidenced once again over the
past  few  days  by  large  swings  in  investor  sentiment,  the  monetary  policy  environment  has
become more uncertain.
One  focal  aspect  of  the  discussion  has  been  a  close  monitoring  of  the  financial
crisis in Russia. As we all know, the Russian crisis has added to concerns regarding the state of
the  world  economy  at  a  time  when  the  crisis  in  Asia  is  still  ongoing  and  growth  in  Japan  is
negative. These concerns have been fuelled by renewed strains in international financial markets
as  well  as  sharp  fluctuations  and  downward  corrections  in  major  stock  markets.  There  is  no
doubt that these developments will have a dampening effect on the world economy. However,
their precise impact is difficult to measure at the current juncture.
On the one hand, economic and model-based analysis still suggests only moderate
effects on prices and output in the euro area. This is due to the fact that, first, most of the crisis
regions  are  quite  small  in  economic  terms,  i.e.  when  compared  with  world  GDP  or  their
contribution  to  world  trade.  Second,  trade  links  between  these  countries  and  the  euro  area  are
also of limited size. Third, the euro area itself is a very large economy,  which  is  only  directly
exposed  to  variations  in  global  trade  to  a  certain  degree.  However,  on  the  other  hand,  this
analysis  should  not  mislead  us.  We  are  perfectly  aware  that  the  risks  associated  with  current
global developments go beyond those effects which we can measure directly. In this respect one
may think  of  indirect  influences  resulting  from  changes  in  confidence,  saving  and  expenditure
BIS Review   72/1998
- 2 -
within the euro area. We have to take these risks seriously and analyse the situation soberly, but
we should also not dramatise.
Let me now turn to the latest available data. These seem to indicate that economic
expansion  within  the  euro  area  has  remained  broadly  on  track,  despite  the  worsening  of  the
external environment. Domestic demand remains strong, while the contribution to growth from
net  exports  has  declined.  Both  private  consumption  and  investment  provided  an  important
stimulus  to  the  growth  rate  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year.  More  up-to-date  indicators  point
towards continued expansion in the second quarter, albeit at a possibly more moderate pace than
in the first quarter.
The  outlook  on  consumption  is  supported  by  higher  real  earnings  growth  and
declining  unemployment,  and  is  reflected  in  consumer  confidence.  The  evidence  for  the
corporate  sector  is  perhaps  more  mixed.  As  compared  to  the  first  quarter  of  1998,  industrial
production figures show a somewhat slower rate of increase in the period from April to May, but
capacity utilisation has continued to increase and this, combined with low interest rates, should
underpin investment. European Commission survey data, such as confidence indicators and the
assessment of order books, bear witness to relatively high levels, both with respect to their long-
term averages and recent peaks. This can also be taken as a favourable indicator for continued
growth in the short term, although some indicators have not improved further since the spring.
Unemployment  has  also  been  declining,  but  at  a  modest  pace,  and  from  a  high  level.  In
discussing the cyclical uncertainties, one should not forget that work on badly needed structural
reforms has not so far made much progress.
Considering  recent  price  developments,  HICP  inflation  for  the  euro  area  as  a
whole remained stable at 1.4% between May and July. Both domestic and external factors still
appear to be favourable, suggesting that euro area inflation may be expected to remain subdued
in the future. An important external factor underlying the favourable prospects for inflation is the
sharp decline in oil and commodity prices, which is partly associated with developments in Asia.
Moreover, domestic sources of inflation, such as those arising from the labour market situation
and  capacity  utilisation,  are  also  relatively  moderate  at  the  present  juncture.  In  my  opinion,
taking  a  euro  area  wide  perspective,  these  views  are  also  broadly  compatible  with  current
monetary and financial developments. In this connection, please take note that we should soon
have  new  information  on  monetary  developments  on  the  basis  of  the  new  statistical  reporting
framework for money and banking.
The  environment  of  significant  volatility  in  international  financial  markets,
particularly stock markets, appears to account for much of the recent decline in long-term interest
rates in the euro area to historically low levels, as investors have sought to protect themselves
against  heightened  global  risk.  Nonetheless,  it  is  notable  that  the  euro  area  yield  curve  shifted
downwards  at  all  maturities,  which  to  some  extent  would  tend  to  indicate  a  further  decline  in
long-term inflation expectations for the euro area as a whole.
As  we  approach  the  start  of  Stage  Three,  we  shall  need  to  continue  to  monitor
closely  economic,  monetary  and  financial  developments  within  the  euro  area  and  in  the  world
economy. This will allow us eventually to set the interest rate for the euro area as a whole. At the
same time, we shall also need to monitor fiscal intentions in the euro area Member States, as they
will become more transparent over the autumn. If governments merely adhere to previous deficit
targets  for  1999,  the  structural  position  of  budgets  in  quite  a  number  of  countries  would
effectively  deteriorate.  This  would  entail  that  they  would  move  farther  away  from,  rather  than
BIS Review   72/1998
- 3 -
approach, the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact, which calls for the achievement of a
budget close to balance or even in surplus.
In addition to the review of economic developments, a number of organisational
issues were settled.
(i) The General Council adopted its Rules of Procedure, which will be published
in the Official Journal of the European Communities. You will recall that I informed you that the
Governing Council’s Rules of Procedure were adopted in July.
(ii) The General Council also decided that the non-euro area national central banks
shall  pay  up  5%  of  their  subscriptions  to  the  capital  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB).
However,  the  four  national  central  banks  concerned  will  not  be  asked  actually  to  pay  in  their
share as the amount due is less than they can expect to receive as their share in the proceeds of
the liquidation of the European Monetary Institute (EMI). Further details on the actual amounts
involved are provided in the separate handout that will be issued to you this evening.
(iii) For its part, the Governing Council completed the list of committees which
will  assist  in  the  work  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB).  In  addition  to  the
eleven ESCB Committees agreed upon at the meeting in July, the Governing Council decided to
establish an International Relations Committee and a Budget Committee. The latter was set up in
order to provide transparency to the shareholders of the ECB - the national central  banks  -  on
matters relating to the budget of the ECB.
(iv)  Finally,  the  Governing  Council  endorsed  the  draft  Headquarters  Agreement
between the German Federal Government and the ECB, which will be signed here in Frankfurt
on 18 September 1998.
A  number  of  decisions  were  also  taken  with  regard  to  various  aspects  of  the
preparatory work for Stage Three.
(a) Exchange rate policy co-operation between the euro area and other EU countries
The General Council endorsed the text of an Agreement between the ECB and the
non-euro area national central banks, laying down the operating procedures for an exchange rate
mechanism in Stage Three (the so-called ERM II). You will recall that the European Council in
Amsterdam  in  June  last  year  agreed  to  set  up  an  exchange  rate  mechanism  in  Stage  Three  to
replace the present European Monetary System (EMS). For this reason, the EMI had, on behalf
of  the  ECB,  prepared  a  draft  Central  Bank  Agreement  to  replace  the  current  exchange  rate
mechanism (ERM I, if you like) by a new one in Stage Three. It is this Agreement which has
now  been  signed  by  the  President  of  the  ECB  and  the  Governors  of  the  four  non-euro  area
national  central  banks.  The  signature  by  the  latter  implies  their  agreement  to  the  operating
procedures. It does not, however, imply their participation in ERM II.
Further details on the conventions and procedures for ERM II are provided in the
separate  press  release  that  is  being  issued  to  you  this  evening.  The  Agreement  itself  will  be
published in the Official Journal of the European Communities.
(b) Monetary policy issues
BIS Review   72/1998
- 4 -
The Governing Council agreed on several issues relating to the monetary policy
framework  in  Stage  Three.  At  the  centre  of  this  framework  is  the  report  entitled  “The  single
monetary policy in Stage Three: General documentation on ESCB monetary policy instruments
and procedures”, which contains a detailed description of the monetary policy instruments and
procedures to be applied by the ESCB in Stage Three. The report expands on and updates the
material included in an earlier version of the report that was published by the EMI in September
1997. I should like to limit my remarks in this regard to the announcement that a copy of this
comprehensive  report  will  be  released  very  shortly,  at  which  time  a  separate  press  release
explaining the nature and purpose of the documentation will be issued.
The Governing Council also agreed upon a guideline for the management of the
foreign  exchange  assets  by  the  national  central  banks  and  for  the  Member  States’  transactions
with their foreign exchange working balances. These are now being formalised in official legal
documentation.
(c) Statistics
The  Governing  Council  endorsed  the  statistical  framework  on  the  basis  of  a
number of reports that had been prepared by the EMI - many of which had been published in the
past - thereby confirming the ECB’s statistical requirements for  Stage  Three.  I  should  perhaps
point  out  that  the  reporting  framework  for  the  money  and  banking  statistics  of  the  ECB  will
appear in the “General Documentation” that will be released next Wednesday.
(d) Euro banknotes
With regard to the euro banknotes, the Governing Council confirmed (in line with
previous recommendations by the EMI) that seven banknote denominations would be issued: 5,
10,  20,  50,  100,  200  and  500.  Furthermore,  it  decided  that  there  would  not  be  any  national
features on the euro banknotes. As you know, the euro banknotes will be put into circulation on
1 January  2002.  Thus  there  are  fewer  than  800  working  days  to  go  before  their  launch.  The
Governing  Council  took  note  that  the  technical  preparations  for  the  euro  banknotes  are
proceeding  according  to  schedule.  The  origination  phase  (i.e.  the  process  of  converting  the
designs into proof-prints) has now been successfully concluded and a zero-production run will be
conducted in the autumn before mass production starts in early 1999.
(e) Payment systems
The  Governing  Council  endorsed  a  list  of  eligible  securities  settlement  systems
following an assessment of such systems against standards that had previously been laid down
for  their  use  in  the  credit  operations  of  the  ESCB.  The  list,  which  indicates  those  securities
settlement systems that will be used by the ESCB and the conditions for their use, will be set out
in  the  “General  Documentation”,  to  which  I  have  already  referred.  In  addition,  the  Governing
Council approved a report on the “Assessment of EU securities settlement systems against the
standards for their use in ESCB credit operations”. It is intended to release this report during the
next couple of weeks.
BIS Review   72/1998
