Mr. Greenspan comments on the  current  direction  of  the  US  economy  and
the  fiscal  situation  in  the  United  States      Testimony  by  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  the
US Federal  Reserve  System,  Mr.  Alan  Greenspan,  before  the  Committee  on  the  Budget  of  the
US Senate on 29/1/98.
Mr. Chairman  and  members  of  the  Committee,  in  just  a  few  weeks,  the  Federal
Reserve  Board  will  submit  its  semiannual  report  on  monetary  policy  to  the  Congress.  That
report, and my accompanying testimony, will give a detailed assessment of the outlook for the
US.  economy  and  the  implications  for  monetary  policy.  This  morning,  I  would  like  to  direct
most  of  my  comments  to  the  fiscal  situation.  But  let  me  begin  by  offering  a  few  observations
about the current direction of the economy.
First, it is clear that the U.S. economy has been exceptionally healthy, with robust
gains  in  output,  employment,  and  income.  At  the  same  time,  inflation  has  remained  low  --
indeed, declining by most measures -- over the past year.
Second,  to  date,  we  have  as  yet  experienced  only  the  peripheral  winds  of  the
Asian  crisis.  But  before  spring  is  over,  the  abrupt  current-account  adjustments  that  financial
difficulties are forcing upon several of our Asian trading partners will be showing through here
in  reductions  in  demand  for  our  exports  and  intensified  competition  from  imports.  All  of  this
suggests that the growth of economic activity in this country will moderate from the recent brisk
pace.
Third, as I’ve noted previously, such a moderation would appear helpful at this
juncture. The growth of output has caused employment to rise much faster than the working-age
population  and  there  are  limits  to  how  far  this  can  go.  Pressures  in  the  labor  market  likely
contributed to the acceleration of wages in recent months. Since price inflation has been minimal
and domestic profit margins firm, productivity appears to have accelerated sufficiently last year
to damp increases in unit labor costs. How long that pattern can continue is still an unresolved
issue. The likelihood that we shall be seeing some lower prices on imported goods as a result of
the difficulties in Asia may afford some breathing room from inflation pressures. But they will
not  permanently  suppress  the  risks  inherent  in  tightened  labor  markets.  Conversely,  a
continuation of the Asian crisis should give us pause in assuming that our economy will remain
robust indefinitely. As a consequence, we must be vigilant to the re-emergence of destabilizing
influences  --  both  higher  inflation,  and  shortfalls  in  demand  and  decreases  in  some  prices  that
would press the disinflation process too far, too fast.
One very favorable aspect of our economic performance over the past few years
has  been  the  remarkable  improvement  in  the  federal  budget  picture.  The  deficit  dropped  to  its
lowest level in more than  two  decades  in  fiscal  1997,  and  yesterday  the  Congressional  Budget
Office released projections that show the budget remaining essentially in balance over the next
few  years,  moving  to  annual  surpluses  equal  to  1  percent  of  GDP  by  the  middle  of  the  next
decade. The reduction in federal borrowing to date and in prospect is already paying off for the
U.S. economy by helping hold down long-term interest rates and, in turn, providing support to
private capital spending and other interest-sensitive outlays.
But  much  hard  work  remains  to  be  done  to  ensure  that  the  projected  surpluses
actually  materialize  and  that  we  remain  on  track  to  address  our  longer-run  fiscal  and
demographic challenges. The CBO projections provide a good starting point: They are based on
sensible economic and technical assumptions and thus offer a reasonable indication of how the
budget is  likely  to  evolve  over  the  next  10  years  if  economic  conditions  remain  favorable  and
BIS Review   6/1998
- 2 -
current  budgetary  policies  remain  in  place.  But,  as  CBO  highlights  in  its  latest  report,  such
forecasts are subject to  considerable  error.  Indeed,  as  recently  as  last  winter,  when  fiscal  1997
was already well under way, both CBO and OMB were still overestimating that year’s deficit by
more than $100 billion.
In the case of CBO, about two-thirds of the error was in receipts, including nearly
$50  billion  more  tax  receipts  than  would  have  been  expected  based  on  the  actual  behavior  of
income as measured in  the  national  income  and  product  accounts.  This  overage  helped  lift  the
receipts share of GDP to an historical high. Such “tax surprises” are nothing new  --  in  fact,  in
the  early  1990s,  growth  of  receipts  fell  well  short  of  expectations  based  on  the  trends  in
aggregate income and the tax laws then in place. And, even after the fact, our knowledge about
the sources of such surprises has been limited. Thus, we cannot rule out the possibility that the
forces behind last year’s tax surge will prove transitory and dissipate more rapidly than CBO has
assumed,  implying  lower  receipts  and  renewed  deficits  for  the  years  ahead.  Indeed,  all  else
equal, had the surprise fallen on the other side -- downward instead of upward -- we would be
looking at non-trivial budget deficits at least through the beginning of the coming decade.
Moreover, the CBO projection assumes that discretionary spending will be held to
the statutory caps, which allow almost no growth in nominal outlays through fiscal 2002. Given
the  declining  support  for  further  reductions  in  defense  spending,  keeping  overall  discretionary
spending  within  the  caps  is  likely  to  require  sizable,  but  as  yet  unspecified,  real  declines  in
nondefense programs from current levels. Not surprisingly, many observers are skeptical that the
caps will hold, and battles over appropriations in coming years may well expose deep divisions
that  could  make  the  realization  of  the  budget  projections  less  likely.  In  addition,  although  last
year’s legislation cut Medicare spending substantially, experience has highlighted the difficulty
of  controlling  this  program,  raising  the  possibility  that  the  savings  will  not  be  so  great  as
anticipated -- especially if resistance develops among beneficiaries or providers.
Uncertainties  such  as  these  argue  for  caution  as  you  begin  work  on  the  1999
budget.  We  have  no  guarantee  that  the  projected  surpluses  will  actually  materialize.  An  even
more important consideration, though, is the need to address the erosion of the budget after the
next  decade,  a  task  that  will  become  increasingly  difficult  the  longer  it  is  postponed.  The
favorable budget picture over the next decade, unless steps are taken, will almost inevitably turn
to  large  and  sustained  deficits  as  the  baby  boom  generation  moves  into  retirement,  putting
massive strains on the social security and Medicare programs.
Indeed, especially in light of these inexorable demographic trends, I have always
emphasized  that  we  should  be  aiming  for  budgetary  surpluses  and  using  the  proceeds  to  retire
outstanding federal debt. This would put further downward pressure on long-term interest rates,
which would enhance private capital investment, labor productivity, and economic growth.
The outpouring of proposals for using the anticipated surplus does not bode well
for the prospect of maintaining fiscal discipline. In recent years the President and the Congress
have been quite successful, contrary to expectations, in placing, and especially holding, caps on
discretionary spending. More recently, they have started to confront the budget implications of
the surge in retirements that is only a decade away. We must not allow the recent good news on
the  budget  to  lull  us  into  letting  down  our  guard.  Although  many  of  the  individual  budget
proposals  may  have  merit,  they  must  be  considered  in  the  context  of  a  responsible  budget
strategy for the longer run.
BIS Review   6/1998
- 3 -
Over  the  decades  our  budgetary  processes  have  been  biased  toward  deficit
spending.  Indeed,  those  processes  are  strewn  with  initiatives  that  had  only  a  small  projected
budgetary cost, but produced a sizable drain on the Treasury’s coffers over time. As you are well
aware,  programs  can  be  easy  to  initiate  or  expand,  but  extraordinarily  difficult  to  trim  or  shut
down once a constituency develops that has a stake in maintaining the status quo.
In closing,  I  want  to  commend  Chairman  Domenici  and  the  committee  for  your
insistence on fiscal responsibility and for years  of  persistent  effort.  Your  work  has  contributed
importantly  to  shrinking  the  budget  deficit  and  bringing  surpluses  within  sight.  These
projections  of  surpluses,  which  are  based  on  an  extrapolation  of  steady  economic  growth  and
subdued  inflation  over  the  coming  years,  implicitly  assume  that  monetary  and  fiscal
policymakers will remain attentive to potential sources of instability. If this is the scenario that,
in  fact,  unfolds  and  the  budget  moves  into  surplus  within  the  next  few  years,  the  increase  in
national  saving  will  pay  off  handsomely  in  preparing  our  economy  and  our  budget  for  the
challenges of the twenty-first century.
BIS Review   6/1998
