Mr.  Brash  asks  how  central  banks  can  best  help  banking  systems  remain
strong in a world of open capital markets   Address by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of
New  Zealand,  Dr.  Donald  Brash,  to  the  Asian  Pacific  Bankers  Club  Annual  Conference  in
Auckland on 13/3/98.
Introduction
I appreciate your invitation to address you this morning and I join with others in
welcoming you all to New Zealand. This country can not be regarded as truly Asian, but we are
increasingly  integrated  into  the  Asian  region,  through  trade,  through  immigration,  through
political  and  diplomatic  linkages,  through  cultural  exchanges,  and  in  my  own  case  through
marriage!
Whereas when I went through school  almost  the  only  foreign  language  learnt  in
New  Zealand  schools  was  French,  now  more  New  Zealand  students  learn  Japanese  than  learn
any other foreign language, with many students also studying Mandarin and Indonesian.
Whereas  when  I  went  through  school  the  United  Kingdom  took  roughly  half  of
New Zealand’s exports, now the British market takes only some 7 per cent of our exports, with
Japan taking 16 per cent, China/Hong Kong taking 6 per cent, and Korea (in 1997) taking 5 per
cent. Seven of our largest 10 export markets are now in this region.
Whereas when I went through school almost all immigrants to New Zealand came
from  the  United  Kingdom,  Australia  or  the  Pacific  Islands,  in  the  last  few  years  a  great  many
immigrants have come from East Asia - especially from China/Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Korea.
And  New  Zealand  has  gained  enormously  from  these  immigrants,  who  have  tended  to  be
hard-working,  thrifty,  enthusiastic  about  education,  and  enterprising.  They  have  enriched  our
culture and helped our economy.
Whereas when I went to school New Zealanders seeking international experience
inevitably  travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  Europe,  typically  by  means  of  a  ship  which
travelled  via  the  Panama  Canal  and  lots  and  lots  of  ocean,  today  many  New  Zealanders  seek
overseas  experience  in  the  countries  of  Asia  and,  even  when  travelling  to  Europe,  travel  via
several Asian countries.
This  year  and  next,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  holds  the  Chair  of
SEANZA,  a  grouping  of  20  central  banks  in  the  Asian  region  originally  formed  in  the
mid-1950s,  and  we  were  a  founding  member  of  EMEAP,  an  11-country  group  of  East  Asian
central banks. (Indeed, we hosted two of the three EMEAP working groups in New Zealand last
month.)  And  of  course  next  year  New  Zealand  will  host  the  APEC  Leaders’  meeting  here  in
Auckland.
So  we  are  increasingly  a  part  of  the  Asian  region,  and  have  a  vital  stake  in  the
prosperity of the region.
And in that regard, everybody in this room, and indeed almost everybody in this
country,  is  very  much  aware  of  the  stresses  and  strains  which  several  of  the  countries  in  the
region  have  been  going  through  in  the  last  few  months.  Even  countries  which  have  not
experienced  severe  turbulence  in  their  currency  markets  in  some  cases  face  very  considerable
BIS Review   21/1998
- 2 -
pressures on their banking systems, so that it is no exaggeration to say that most of the people in
the region live in countries where banking systems are under real strain.
Oceans  of  ink  have  been  spilt  in  analysing  the  causes  of  these  strains,  and  this
analysis will no doubt continue for a long time to come. Most detached observers seem to agree
that  the  underlying  problems  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  real  or  imagined  activities  of  foreign
speculators  but  a  great  deal  to  do  with  more  fundamental  factors,  factors  which  clearly  varied
from country to country, but which included politically-directed lending by banks, the end of a
real estate bubble, sharply increased real exchange rates  in  a  pegged  exchange  rate  situation,  a
lack of transparency in financial markets, and, dare I say it to this audience, some poor quality
credit analysis by some of the banks and other financial institutions.
I do not propose to offer my own analysis of the causes of ‘the Asian crisis’ this
morning.  I  was  originally  invited  to  speak  about  ‘the  role  of  central  banks,  the  New  Zealand
experience’.  But  instead  I  want  to  tailor  my  remarks  more  specifically  to  the  theme  of  your
conference, ‘Open Markets - the implication for Banks in the Asian Pacific Region’. So for this
reason I want to focus this morning on a question, namely ‘In a world of open capital markets,
how can central banks best help banking systems remain strong?’ Not surprisingly, my remarks
will be heavily conditioned by our own experience in New Zealand.
While we are all conscious of the strains currently besetting the banking systems
in  many  Asian  countries,  not  all  of  you  will  be  aware  that  we  in  New  Zealand  had  our  own
banking system problems less than 10 years ago. As a result of these problems, our largest bank
would  almost  certainly  have  failed  had  the  government,  as  majority  shareholder,  not  been
willing  on  two  occasions  to  provide  a  substantial  capital  injection.  One  very  major  financial
institution (not a bank, but certainly a quasi-bank, and an institution which was in the process of
applying  for  a  banking  licence)  did  fail,  one  of  the  largest  failures  in  New  Zealand’s  history.
Another bank would have failed had its private sector shareholder not been in a position to inject
very  large  amounts  of  additional  capital,  and  even  after  that  was  done  the  institution  was
eventually wound up. At no point did it look likely that the whole banking system might fail, but
we certainly had major problems with some of the largest participants in the system.
What  lessons  did  we  learn  from  that  experience?  There  were  of  course  a  whole
host of factors which caused these difficulties. One important factor was the sheer inexperience
of many of our bankers: they had been accustomed to a highly protected environment, and were
ill-prepared to deal with the demands of a deregulated environment. Nevertheless, I think there
were four important lessons. While every country has to make judgements and decisions in the
light of its own particular circumstances - and certainly no two countries are exactly alike - some
of the things we learnt may have relevance to other countries also.
Lessons from New Zealand: encourage banks to behave prudently
First,  it  is  important  that  banks  are  given  every  incentive  to  behave  prudently.
This may seem a self-evident statement, but it is astonishing how frequently the importance of
this  principle  is  ignored.  In  New  Zealand’s  case,  we  diminished  this  incentive  to  behave
prudently by allowing the view to go unchallenged that banks were effectively ‘sovereign risk’,
or  at  least  ‘too  big  to  fail’.  This  meant  that  bank  creditors  felt  little  need  to  assess  the
creditworthiness  of  the  banks  with  which  they  deposited  funds  -  banks  were,  it  was  widely
believed,  effectively  guaranteed  by  government.  Bank  boards  and  managements  may  have  felt
similarly  protected  against  the  possibility  of  failure,  and  made  loans  with  a  disregard  for  risk
which was, in some cases, breath-taking. This so-called ‘moral hazard problem’ may have been
BIS Review   21/1998
- 3 -
particularly severe in the case of two of the three institutions which got into serious difficulties
in the late 1980s, both of them owned wholly or in part by government. There was little or no
direction  of  their  lending  by  government,  but  the  management  of  both  institutions  certainly
embarked  upon  lending  transactions  in  the  newly  liberalised  environment  which  rapidly  got
them into serious difficulties.
In  some  Asian  countries,  it  is  possible  that  the  incentive  for  banks  to  behave
prudently was seriously eroded not only by the impression that most large financial institutions
would not be allowed to fail but also  by  the  extent  to  which  governments  directed  the  lending
activities  of  the  banks  themselves.  After  all,  if  governments  are  going  to  become  extensively
involved in directing where banks should and should not lend, it is not unreasonable if the banks
and  their  creditors  assume  that  governments  will  ‘see  them  right’  if  things  go  wrong.  Bank
management certainly has little incentive to carefully assess credit risk if, at the end of the day,
the decision on whether or not to lend will be made by the bank’s board under the influence or
direction of higher political authority.
At the moment, there is a great deal of international attention focused on how this
problem of poor credit decisions in the banking sector can be dealt with. Most of the attention is
on  how  official  banking  supervision  and  banking  regulation  can  be  improved,  and  made  more
independent  of  political  influence.  Certainly,  freeing  banks  from  political  interference  in  their
credit decisions is very desirable, and better banking supervision is one possible way to reduce
the risks of future problems in the banking system.
But  as  some  of  you  perhaps  know,  we  in  New  Zealand  are  not  persuaded  that
improving the quality of official banking supervision is the only way to proceed, or indeed even
necessarily the best way to proceed in all circumstances. When we reviewed what we were doing
in  banking  supervision  in  the  early  1990s,  we  became  concerned.  At  that  time,  we  were
conducting banking supervision along conventional Basle Committee lines.  We  were  gathering
very large amounts of confidential information from banks on a quarterly (sometimes a monthly)
basis.  We  were  laying  down  a  large  number  of  rules  and  limits  designed  to  ensure  that  banks
behaved prudently.
Several things prompted us to review that approach, and one of them was a worry
about the risks which we were incurring on behalf of taxpayers. What would happen if, despite
our banking supervision, a bank were to  get  into  difficulties?  Might  depositors  argue  that  they
wanted  full  compensation,  since  while  they  had  had  no  knowledge  of  the  bank’s  financial
condition  we  in  the  Reserve  Bank  were  not  only  fully  aware  of  that  condition  but  were  also
responsible for laying down the rules and limits by which the bank had been obliged to operate?
We consoled ourselves with the thought that our banking supervision was so good
that  no  banks  would  fail  under  our  watchful  eye.  But  then  we  looked  abroad  -  at  the  United
States, at Japan, at Scandinavia,  at  the  United  Kingdom,  at  Australia,  and  indeed  even  at  New
Zealand  itself.  We  found  banks  going  down  in  significant  numbers,  despite  some  extremely
professional  and  politically-independent  banking  supervision.    We  could  not  be  confident  that
traditional banking supervision would prevent bank failure, and we could be confident that, by
being the sole recipient of detailed financial information on banks and the main arbiter of what
constituted  prudent  banking  behaviour,  there  was  a  major  risk  that  we  would  be  held  liable,
politically and morally if not legally, for any losses incurred by depositors.
Then  we  became  aware  of  anecdotal  evidence  that  our  banking  supervision  was
reducing  the  incentive  for  bank  directors  to  make  their  own  decisions  about  crucial  aspects  of
BIS Review   21/1998
- 4 -
their bank’s operations. In other words, because the Reserve Bank was  laying  down  maximum
individual  credit  limits,  and  limits  on  open  foreign  exchange  positions,  and  guidelines  for
internal  controls,  some  bank  directors  were  assuming  that  they  were  necessarily  behaving
prudently  provided  they  were  operating  within  those  limits  and  guidelines.  They  stopped
addressing  the  risks  which  their  own  banks  were  facing  and  simply  complied  with  the  general
limits and guidelines. To the extent that that was true - and as I say we found some evidence that
it  was  true  in  some  banks  -  we  concluded  that  our  banking  supervision  might  actually  be
increasing  the  risk  of  bank  failure,  by  reducing  the  incentive  for  bank  directors  and  bank
managers to make their own careful assessment of risk.
So  we  retain  a  system  of  official  banking  supervision,  and  we  take  it  very
seriously.  But  we  retain  only  a  few  absolute  rules  within  that  framework,  principally  that  all
banks must at least meet the Basle capital adequacy rules, and rely mainly on a requirement that
banks disclose to the public a substantial amount of financial information quarterly. In addition,
all bank directors must sign off these quarterly statements, at the same time attesting to the fact
that the internal controls of their banks are appropriate to the nature  of  their  banking  business,
and that those controls are being properly applied. We in the Reserve Bank do not attempt to tell
banks  what  those  controls  should  look  like,  but  directors  signing  those  quarterly  statements
without  making  a  careful  assessment  of  the  adequacy  of  internal  controls  are  exposing
themselves to very considerable legal risk in the event that their bank gets into difficulty.
We have also gone out of our way on a number of occasions to make it clear to
the  public  that  neither  the  Reserve  Bank  nor  the  government  of  New  Zealand  is  guaranteeing
individual  banks,  and  we  published  a  booklet  designed  to  assist  the  general  public  to  interpret
banks’ financial information.
None  of  these  actions  is  a  guarantee  against  imprudent  bank  behaviour,  but  we
believe  that  we  have  gone  a  considerable  distance  towards  ensuring  that  banks  face  strong
incentives  to  behave  prudently.  No  bank  operating  in  New  Zealand  is  now  owned  by
government, none is guaranteed by government, none is obliged to lend to particular sectors or
companies,  and  our  supervision  is  based  heavily  on  mandatory  public  disclosure  and  director
attestations. As Alan Greenspan said last year, ‘Regulation by government unavoidably involves
some  element  of  perverse  incentives.  If  private  market  participants  believe  that  government  is
protecting their interests, their own efforts to do so will diminish.’1  We have tried to minimise
those perverse incentives.
Of  course,  to  some  extent  this  approach  only  works  where  there  is  a  clear
framework  of  company  law  which  makes  it  clear  that  company  directors  and  managers  have
unambiguous responsibilities. Having agreed accounting rules is important.  Having a vigorous
media, with probing financial journalists, is also of great value, so that when a bank is forced to
disclose to the public a deteriorating financial position, or a breach of one of  the  few  rules  we
retain, there is at least a reasonable chance of that being picked up and sensibly analysed by the
media. Not all countries are so lucky.
So  far  at  least,  we  are  well  satisfied  by  the  way  in  which  the  new  system  is
working.  (A  few  months  after  the  new  system  first  came  into  operation,  at  the  beginning  of
1996,  one  bank  was  obliged  to  disclose  the  fact  that  it  had  had  a  credit  exposure  to  its
shareholder  bank  which  considerably  exceeded  the  limit  which  we  had  stipulated  for  such
                                                       
1 Remarks by the Chairman of the Board of the US Federal Reserve System, Dr Alan Greenspan, at the annual
conference of the Association of Private Enterprise Education, in Arlington, Virginia, on 12 April 1997.
BIS Review   21/1998
- 5 -
exposure. The attention focused on this issue by the media, and indeed by other banks, created
strong incentives for the bank never to repeat that mistake -  quite  probably  stronger  incentives
than any threat of central bank sanction could have created.)
Lessons from New Zealand: beware of government ownership of banks
The second lesson from the New Zealand experience in the late 1980s is that the
ownership of banks is an important issue. For us, the issue was in part government ownership of
banks  and  in  part  foreign  ownership  of  banks.  The  government-owned  financial  institutions
almost  without  exception  suffered  various  degrees  of  financial  difficulty  -  sometimes  because
their managers had undertaken imprudent lending, and sometimes because they had been obliged
to  invest  in  large  amounts  of  government  securities  at  sub-market  interest  rates.  The  large
foreign-owned  banks  suffered  to  a  much  more  limited  extent  from  the  bad  debts  and  losses
which the government-owned banks experienced.
There have been various reasons given for this difference, but the most plausible
is that the large foreign-owned banks were under the watchful eye of experienced parent banks,
and were therefore much less able to stray into some of the riskier propositions which tempted
the government-owned institutions, especially in the years immediately after the banking sector
was liberalised in the mid-eighties. (The newly-arrived foreign-owned banks, however, often did
succumb to the temptation of lending on risky propositions, perhaps because, being quite small
both in absolute terms and in relation to their overseas parents, they were subject to much  less
intensive parental scrutiny.)
More recently, New Zealand has been running a very large balance of  payments
deficit,  probably  amounting  to  more  than  7  per  cent  of  GDP  at  the  present  time.  As  in  some
Asian  countries,  this  balance  of  payments  deficit  has  been  experienced  at  a  time  when  the
government itself is running a fiscal surplus. In other words, it has been the private sector which
has  been  borrowing  heavily  from  overseas,  not  the  public  sector.  And  while  some  of  this
borrowing  has  been  done  by  the  corporate  sector  directly,  much  of  it  has  been  done  by  the
banking  sector.  Comparable  levels  of  overseas  borrowing  by  some  Asian  banks  have  been
sufficient to make foreign lenders very nervous, and yet similar nervousness has not been at all
evident  in  New  Zealand.  Why?  I  can  only  conclude  that  the  foreign  lenders  take  considerable
comfort  from  the  fact  that  most  of  the  banks  operating  in  New  Zealand  now  are  in  fact
wholly-owned  by  foreign  banks,  or  are  indeed  branches  of  foreign  banks.    Those  parents  are
seen  as  being  financially  strong,  and  fully  able  to  back  the  operations  of  their  New  Zealand
subsidiaries or branches. (It may also be relevant that, overwhelmingly, the overseas borrowing
being  undertaken  by  New  Zealand  banks  carries  no  foreign  exchange  risk  for  the  banks
themselves.)
In  some  countries,  there  is  political  reluctance  to  allow  foreign  institutions
unrestricted entry into local banking sectors. I would have to say that, as a country where all but
one  of  our  19  banks  are  owned  and  controlled  overseas,  we  have  seen  absolutely  no
disadvantages  from  this  situation,  and  many  advantages.  We  have  a  financially  stable  banking
sector,  with  vigorously  competing  and  highly  innovative  banks,  all  of  them  subject  to  the
monetary policy influence of the central bank. I have no doubt at all that the banking sector  is
considerably  more  stable 
the  banks  been
domestically-owned, whether in the private sector or in the public sector.
than  would  have  been 
the  case  had  all 
BIS Review   21/1998
Lessons from New Zealand: keep prices stable
- 6 -
The third lesson from our experience has been the crucial importance of keeping
prices  stable.  By  the  late  1980s,  New  Zealand  had  experienced  nearly  20  years  during  which
inflation had been above 10 per cent almost without a break. Interest rates after adjustment for
tax and inflation were often strongly negative, and there was as a consequence a strong incentive
to  invest  in  real  estate  and  shares,  using  as  much  borrowed  money  as  could  be  obtained.  This
was  undoubtedly  an  important  contributor  to  the  severe  difficulties  which  both  the  corporate
sector and some parts of the banking sector experienced when monetary policy was tightened in
order to reduce inflation. Interest rates went up and asset prices  went  down,  and  several  banks
incurred very large losses as a consequence.
Asian  countries  have  an  enviable  record  of  combining  very  rapid  rates  of
economic growth with rates of inflation which, by the standards of many other countries, have
been low or moderate. But it is also true that in many Asian countries relatively low consumer
price  inflation  has  been  accompanied  by  a  huge  escalation  in  asset  prices.    There  is  no  single
explanation  for  this  phenomenon  and,  as  New  Zealand  has  itself  discovered  over  recent  years,
with  quite  a  strong  increase  in  the  price  of  both  residential  and  rural  property,  it  is  often
extraordinarily difficult to restrain asset price inflation even when inflation in consumer prices is
low.
But it is at least possible that asset price inflation in Japan in the late 1980s - the
reversal  of  which  has  done  so  much  damage  to  bank  balance  sheets  in  that  country  -  was  a
consequence of monetary policy being kept too easy for too long, whether to appease the United
States after the Plaza Accord or for some other reason I know not. Similarly, it may well be that
if central banks in some other Asian countries had not been so preoccupied with trying to avoid
the appreciation of their currencies against the US dollar as capital flowed into these economies
in  recent  years,  their  interest  rates  would  have  been  higher  and  asset  price  inflation
commensurately  reduced.  And  of  course  if  asset  price  inflation  had  been  less,  the
over-investment in certain kinds of real estate would presumably have been less and, with that,
the subsequent fall in asset prices would have been less also.
Lessons from New Zealand: avoid pegging the exchange rate
And  that  brings  me  on  rather  naturally  to  the  final  lesson  from  New  Zealand
experience, and that is the danger of pegging the exchange rate unless you are prepared to go all
the way to a currency board, as Hong Kong has done, and have the political and banking sector
strength to endure the economic, political, and social pain which is inevitably associated with a
currency board arrangement from time to time.
In New Zealand, we had a pegged exchange rate until March 1985. Prior to that
date, it was not uncommon for companies to borrow overseas, often at interest rates which were
very much lower than those within the high inflation New Zealand economy.  Some companies
made rather spectacular losses when the New Zealand dollar was devalued from time to time, or
when, even when pegged, the New Zealand dollar depreciated against the currency in which the
loan  was  denominated.  (Borrowing  in  Swiss  francs  was  particularly  popular,  and  particularly
painful, for some companies.) But the losses were probably fairly moderate in comparison to the
loss which the government itself incurred on behalf of taxpayers in 1984. In that year, the New
Zealand  dollar  was  devalued  by  20  per  cent  after  a  foreign  exchange  crisis  which  had  certain
similarities to some of those in Asia more recently and the government, which had written very
BIS Review   21/1998
- 7 -
large  volumes  of  forward  exchange  contracts  with  companies  trying  to  protect  their  positions,
incurred losses of many hundreds of millions of dollars.
Since March 1985, the New Zealand dollar has been freely floating, and indeed I
suspect  we  may  be  the  only  central  bank  that  can  claim  not  to  have  intervened  directly  in  the
foreign exchange market for more than 13 years. (I say ‘directly’ because from time to time we
did adjust monetary policy when we felt that movements in the exchange rate seemed likely to
threaten our single goal of low inflation.) One of the benefits of this has been that, though many
companies  and  banks  have  borrowed  overseas,  none  of  this  borrowing  was  undertaken  in  the
belief  that  there  was  no  currency  risk  involved.  Overseas  interest  rates  were  frequently  much
lower than those in New Zealand, but after factoring in the exchange rate risk, the incentive to
borrow offshore in foreign currency was substantially reduced.
As a consequence, when, after a period of strong New Zealand dollar appreciation
between early 1993 and early 1997, the New Zealand dollar fell by some 18 per cent against the
US  dollar,  there  were  very  few  companies  unhappy  about  that  fall  -  and  indeed  plenty  of
exporters who were delighted. Even fewer of our banks were caught out by the depreciation, and
to the best of my knowledge none incurred losses as a consequence of the move. Because they
knew  that  the  New  Zealand  dollar  was  freely  floating,  they  were  careful  to  avoid  taking  on
unhedged positions in foreign currency.
Conclusion
In conclusion, in a world of open capital markets, the challenges facing banks are
very  considerable.  Central  banks  can  not  prevent  all  banks  from  getting  into  trouble,  and  nor
should  they  try  to  do  so.  But  central  banks  do  have  a  responsibility  in  all  our  countries  to
promote the stability of the banking sector. In my own view, they can best do that  by  creating
strong  incentives  for  banks  to  behave  prudently;  by  discouraging  government  ownership  of
banks,  and  removing  barriers  to  the  foreign  ownership  of  banks;  by  keeping  the  focus  of
monetary policy on price stability; and by not creating the impression that borrowing in foreign
currency is a riskless activity. We learnt those lessons the hard way.
BIS Review   21/1998
