Mr. Erçel reports on medium and long-term prospects for the Central Bank
of the Republic of Turkey   Address by the Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of
Turkey, Mr. Gazi Erçel, before the 66th Shareholders’ General Meeting, in Ankara, on 28/4/98.
A  detailed  account  of  economic  developments  during  1997  is  given  in  our  annual
report  for  that  year  which  has  already  been  delivered  to  you.    We  are  keeping  the  public
informed of our expectations for this year through the quarterly announcements of our monetary
programme.  Today, instead of repeating these short-term perspectives, I would like to speak of
the medium and long-term prospects of the Central Bank.  For the last two years, my discourse
has  touched  on  what  kind  of  institution  an  ideal  central  bank  should  be.    Today,  I  want  to
consider this matter in a more detailed way.
In recent years, there has been a worldwide trend towards simplification of the goals
of central banking.  This has led to a reduction of the responsibilities they take on.  Funding their
governments, for example, is no longer the main purpose of central banks.  There is none among
the  western  central  banks  that  aims  at  achieving  full  employment  of  the  highest  level  of
production.  Today’s modern central banks have only one aim: to maintain price stability.
It  is  not  surprising  that  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey,  one  of  the  most  important
institutions  of  the  Turkish  economy,  which  hopes  to  become  integrated  with  the  western
economies, is affected by these trends in modern central banking as it maps out its medium and
long-term strategies.
Accordingly, the main goal of the Central Bank of Turkey, like that of other central
banks, should be to maintain the stability of prices in the economy.
At  this  stage  I  would  like  to  clear  up  two  points  with  respect  to  the  price  stability
target.  First, the Central Bank’s price stability target and its responsibility for price stability are
two different issues.  The price stability target assumes a stability which exists under conditions
of low inflation.  Therefore, the economy has to undergo a “ disinflationary process”  before the
Central Bank assumes responsibility for price stability.
It is well known that in Turkey, which has been experiencing high inflation for years,
reducing inflation to the levels of the western economies will require a comprehensive effort and
is not a process which can be accomplished by the Central Bank alone.  The Central Bank can
track the price stability target as a part of the larger disinflationary programme.  I believe that
once low inflation rates have been achieved by means of such a programme, it will be a rational
decision to make the Central Bank responsible for maintaining price stability.
The  second  point  I  want  to  stress  concerning  the  price  stability  target  concerns
microeconomic  functions  of  central  banks.    Efficient  operation  of  a  payments  system  and
supervision  of  the  banking  sector  are  two  other  basic  functions  of  a  central  bank.    These  two
functions can also be performed in a way that supports price stability targets: indeed, a sound,
effective financial sector and payments system are necessary conditions for price stability.
Duties assumed by the Central Bank of Turkey in the economy, which aims at price
stability,  should  be  consistent  with  the  target.    Functions  that  conflict  with  the  price  stability
target or which cause difficulties for the achievement of this target should not be assigned to the
Central Bank.  And this should be the basic theme of the Bank’s medium and long-term strategic
planning.
BIS Review   37/1998
˝
- 2 -
Whether  or  not  those  functions  assumed  by  the  Central  Bank  as  a  result  of  such
factors  as  the  country’s  geographic  size,  history,  legal  structure  and  degree  of  technological
development operate as impediments to the achievement of stability targets, can be examined by
means of several criteria.  Effective use of monetary policy is an absolute necessity for a central
bank that takes price stability as its first priority.  We must therefore review those functions of
the Central Bank that interfere with the effectiveness of monetary policy.
At  this  point,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  the  importance  of  increasing  the  Central
Bank’s control over its own balance sheet, which is one of the main conditions required for the
effective implementation of policies, mainly monetary policy, that must be adopted in order to
achieve  the  price  stability  target.    Over  the  past  decade,  substantial  improvements  have  been
visible  in  the  Central  Bank’s  balance  sheet,  especially  on  the  asset  side.    Foreign  assets
increased,  while  domestic  assets  dropped  sharply  due  to  the  decrease  in  loans  to  the  public
sector, including valuation accounts.  The final step to be taken in this area will be to reduce, by
law, the advances made by the Central Bank to the Treasury to zero.  Pursuant to the protocol
between  the  Central  Bank  and  the  Treasury,  signed  in  the  second  half  of  last  year,  the
effectiveness of the monetary policies pursued by the Central Bank increased during this period.
An amendment to our laws will ensure the  continuance of this favourable condition.  And the
revision of the financial relationship between the Central Bank and the Treasury and the increase
in the Central Bank’s control over its balance sheet will aid the achievement of the price stability
target.
But the structural improvements seen on the asset side of the Central Bank’s balance
sheet in recent years have not been matched by similar improvements on the liability side.  Our
Turkish  lira  liabilities  represent  a  minor  share  in  our  total  liabilities.    To  improve  this
unfavourable situation, which can be seen as the reflection in our balance sheet of high inflation,
will require a lasting reduction in the inflation rate, which is the basic reason for this problem.
Converting our liabilities into Turkish lira is one of our goals for the medium term.
Independence is of great importance in the medium and long-term perspectives of the
Central Bank.  An independent central bank, with respect both to its goals and its instruments,
will promote the achievement of the price stability target.  A central bank which is independent
with respect to instruments will implement its monetary policy effectively.
It is also recognised that a central bank which is  independent  of  political  authority
will play an important role in minimising fluctuations arising from political uncertainties.
Today,  it  is  apparent  that  economies  with  independent  central  banks  that  have
maintained monetary and financial stability are very strong.
The  basic  features  of  the  Central  Bank’s  medium  and  long-term  strategies  are  to
choose  price  stability  as  its  main  target,  to  establish  consistency  between  its  functions  and  its
main  target,  and  to  revise  any  functions  that  may  impede  the  implementation  of  its  monetary
programme and in this context to achieve its independence.
On the other hand, the organisational efficiency of the Central Bank can be seen as
the complementary element of this strategy.  There is no doubt that a central bank with qualified
personnel, which fulfils its duties with high productivity, will earn full credibility.  Distinguished
guest, here let me quote  one  of  the  economists:    “ Credibility  cannot  be  purchased,  it  must  be
acquired.  And this is achieved step by step, through consistent policy implementations.”
To carry the Central Bank, one of Turkey’s most credible institutions, into the future
with this in view is the fundamental mission of my fellow workers and myself.
BIS Review   37/1998
˝
