Mr.  Gunnarsson  reports  on  some  aspects  of  economic  conditions  and
current  prospects  in  Iceland      Address  by  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,
Mr. Birgir Isl. Gunnarsson, at the Bank’s Annual Meeting on 31/3/98.
On behalf of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank I welcome you to this
37th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bank.  The  Bank’s  Annual  Accounts  for  1997  have  today  been
ratified by the Minister of Commerce, and the Bank’s Annual Report has been published. The
Report gives an overview of the Bank’s operations and a detailed description of economic and
monetary developments in the past year, as well as of the Bank’s monetary policy objectives and
measures.  I  will  discuss  some  aspects  of  economic  conditions  and  current  prospects,  mainly
those that are most closely linked to the Central Bank’s areas of responsibility.
Economic Growth
GDP  grew  sharply  in  1997  for  the  second  year  in  a  row.  It  is  estimated  that
growth was 5 percent, compared with 5.5 percent in 1996. Economic growth in Iceland during
these  two  years  has  been  far  higher  than  in  other  industrial  countries.  In  the  European  Union
growth was 2.6 percent and in the United States 3.8 percent; in Japan, which has faced adversity
in  recent  times,  growth  was  only  1  percent.  The  British  economy  has  strengthened  in  recent
years and growth is estimated to have been 3 percent in 1997. The rapid growth of the domestic
economy  inevitably  raises  the  question  of  whether  this  is  consistent  in  the  long  run  with  the
economic stability that has been achieved in recent years. The growing current account deficit
clearly  preaches  caution  and  underscores  the  need  for  sufficiently  tight  monetary  and  fiscal
conditions.
Growth in 1997 was primarily driven by growing private consumption and fixed
investment. Private consumption rose by 6 percent and fixed investment by 9.9 percent. Over
the last two years fixed investment has increased sharply following many years of contraction.
Investment  in  power-intensive  industry  has  played  an  important  role,  as  has  investment  in
commercial buildings. Housing investment has also begun to recover during the last two years
but not sufficiently to offset the decline in the previous year.
Current Account Deficit
The current account deficit turned out smaller in 1997 than had been expected, or
just in excess of 8 billion kronur. Merchandise imports grew by 5.9 percent in volume terms,
with consumer goods accounting for three-fifths of the increase and investment goods for less
than a third. Here it needs to be borne in mind that it may have been mere coincidence whether
imports for power-intensive industrial projects were recorded in 1997 or 1998. More appear to
have been recorded in 1998 than expected. Merchandise exports grew by less than 2 percent in
volume terms, which is not a particularly good performance. The growth of exports is in fact too
slow in relation  to,  for  example,  the  expansion  of  world  trade.  Thus,  it  can  be  said  that  slow
export growth is as much the cause of the current account deficit as the expansion of domestic
demand.
Business Profitability and the Labour Market
The  external  conditions  of  the  economy  in  1997  were  largely  unchanged  from
1996, and were on the whole favourable. Business profitability seems to have been fairly good,
although not as favourable as in 1996, because of the wage increases at the beginning of the year
BIS Review   42/1998
- 2 -
and  large  depreciation  and  interest  charges  related  to  the  high  levels  of  investment  in  recent
years,  especially  in  the  fisheries.  The  labour  market  situation  improved  further  and
unemployment declined to 3.9 percent on average, having come down from a peak of 5 percent
in 1995. Real wages grew by 5.7 percent in the course of 1997, and were at year-end at their
highest level since 1989.
Prices
Inflation remained subdued in 1997, or 2.2 percent in the course of the year, and
1.8 percent on average between 1996 and 1997. The Central Bank had, in the wake of the wage
settlements, forecast somewhat higher inflation but wage increases did not translate into price
increases to the extent shown by past experience. Productivity growth was higher than expected
and  the  rise  in  import  prices  lower.  In  addition,  the  Central  Bank’s  measures  restrained  price
increases, as I will discuss in greater detail shortly. In January, the Bank forecast that inflation
would average 2.6 percent between 1997 and 1998, and 2.3 percent in the course of the year. It
seems clear that inflation during the first quarter of this year has been lower than expected in
January.
Government Finances
In 1997, the Treasury recorded a welcome surplus of 1.3 billion kronur on a cash
basis  despite  tax  cuts,  a  rise  in  the  wage  bill  and  special  interest  payments  associated  with
government bond redemptions. In order to compare the outcome with the budget it is necessary
to  exclude  the  special  interest  payments  of  3.5  billion  kronur.  Thus  adjusted,  the  Treasury’s
surplus  was  4.7  billion  kronur.  A  Treasury  surplus  had  not  been  recorded  since  1984.  On  an
accrual  basis,  which  includes  accrued  interest  and  pension  liabilities,  the  Treasury’s  finances
appear  to  have  been  close  to  balance  in  1997.  The  Treasury  repaid  debt  during  the  year.
Amortization of foreign debt exceeded new borrowing by 6.5 billion kronur, or the equivalent of
5 percent of the Treasury’s foreign debt; this marked the first time since 1986 that amortization
of foreign debt exceeded new borrowing. Domestically, new borrowing exceeded amortization
by 3.4 billion kronur.
While this turnaround in the Treasury’s finances is certainly to be welcomed, it
is,  nonetheless,  a  somewhat  mixed  blessing.  It  is  a  matter  of  concern  that  the  budgeted
improvement  in  the  Treasury’s  finances  in  1998  is  less  than  warranted  by  the  automatic
stabilizers  alone  and  that,  all  other  things  equal,  the  degree  of  fiscal  restraint  on  domestic
demand in 1998 will be less than last year. In preparations for the 1999 budget it is therefore of
paramount  importance,  in  light  of  economic  conditions,  to  aim  for  a  substantial  Treasury
surplus. The same considerations, of course, apply to the implementation of  the  1998  budget,
and any excess revenue should be used to improve the financial balance rather then end up as
extra spending. I say this because there are limits on what monetary policy can accomplish to
restrain domestic demand in the current circumstances.
Local  government  finances  deteriorated  somewhat  in  1997.  The  combined
revenue deficit of the 14 largest municipalities was 2.9 billion kronur. It is estimated that local
government  debt  increased  from  36  billion  kronur  to  42  billion  kronur  in  1997.  General
government debt in relation to GDP declined from 56 percent in 1996 to 52.7 percent in 1997,
which, in light of the Maastricht limit on government debt of 60 percent of GDP, is a fairly good
debt position.
Monetary Developments
BIS Review   42/1998
- 3 -
The Central Bank’s principal target remains price stability. The Bank’s monetary
instruments primarily influence inflation in the long run, and it is generally accepted that price
stability  is  an  important  precondition  for  economic  growth  and  improved  living  standards.
Domestically there is a good consensus about this goal, as is the case in most countries where
central banks pursue the same or a similar objective.
In an open economy such as the Icelandic one a stable exchange rate is necessary
for favourable price developments. A stable exchange rate has, therefore, been an intermediate
target for monetary policy. The Central Bank implements monetary policy mainly by setting its
own interest rates and by intervening on the money market. In the short run the Bank can also
influence the exchange rate through the purchase and sale of foreign currency.
Given  the  conditions  that  prevailed  in  1997,  there  was  clearly  a  danger  of
overheating which led the Central Bank to pursue a tight monetary policy. After the Bank had
raised money market rates in the fall of 1996 the differential between domestic money market
rates  and  those  in  main  trading  partner  countries  widened  to  3  percentage  points.  This  was  a
necessary  response  to  the  growing  uncertainty  about  the  outcome  of  the  pending  wage
negotiations,  and  it  led  to  an  acceptable  equilibrium  for  some  time.  However,  some  currency
outflow was experienced during the first weeks of 1997 until the outline of the wage settlements
began to emerge. The wage settlements eased fears of rising inflation and increased confidence
in a stable exchange rate. The Central Bank, nevertheless, maintained unchanged interest rates,
and considerable currency inflow took place through July. International reserves grew to a peak
of 36.2 billion kronur at the end of July, up 5.2 billion kronur from the beginning of the year
despite the repayment of some of the Treasury’s foreign debt.
The Central Bank thought it desirable that the exchange rate of the krona should
strengthen  somewhat  to  lessen  pressures  on  the  domestic  market  and  dampen  inflation
pressures. The Bank’s measures undoubtedly contributed to lower inflation than expected.
Monetary  developments  changed  course  at  the  beginning  of  August.  Currency
outflow commenced anew and bond market yields began to rise. This change was the result of
increased purchases of foreign securities by residents, a stop in the relending of foreign loans
and an increase in general bank lending. The differential between domestic and foreign money
market  rates  had  also  narrowed  because  of  interest  rate  rises  in  some  neighbouring  countries.
When it had become clear that this was not a temporary situation, the Central Bank responded
by  raising  interest  rates  by  0.3  percent  in  mid-November.  The  interest  rate  had  an  immediate
impact, the exchange rate of the krona strengthened and the currency outflow stopped. At the
end of the year, the exchange rate index was 0.9 percent below the central rate of the fluctuation
range  after  having  strengthened  on  the  whole  by  1.4  percent  in  the  course  of  the  year.
International reserves stood at 27.8 billion kronur at year-end, down 3 billion kronur from a year
earlier.  Reserves  are  now  about  27  billion  kronur.  The  Central  Bank’s  short-term  foreign
liabilities were close to zero at year-end, where they in fact remain.
The Bond Market
Bond market reforms were continued in 1997. In 1996, the Central Bank decided
to withdraw from the long-term market and reached custodian agreements with three securities
firms  following  a  bidding  process.  The  Bank  handed  over  to  the  firms  a  part  of  its  securities
portfolio and at the same time ceased to be a market maker in government bonds, government
notes  and  housing  bonds.  The  experience  from  these  agreements  is  positive  and  they  were
BIS Review   42/1998
- 4 -
renewed in March 1997. The new agreements were more extensive than the earlier ones, and in
their wake two banks announced that they would engage in market making for certain classes of
government  securities  in  the  same  manner  as  the  custodial  firms.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  such
custodial agreements will become unnecessary and that the Central Bank will no longer need to
be involved in ensuring adequate market making in the long-term market. Both the Treasury and
the State Housing Authority began to reorganize the classes of bonds they issue, with the effect
of improving the price determination of government guaranteed bonds and raising turnover in
the secondary market.
The Central Bank’s Monetary Policy Instruments
In  1997,  the  Central  Bank  began  preparing  changes  to  its  monetary  policy
instruments.  The  purpose  was  twofold:  first,  to  level  the  playing  field  for  domestic  credit
institutions with respect to their access to facilities at the Central Bank, and, second, to adjust
the operating environment of domestic credit institutions to the environment prevailing  in  the
European Economic Area.
These  changes  have  been  modelled  on  the  instruments  designed  for  the
prospective  European  Central  Bank,  which  will  be  established  on  July  1  and  formally
commence  operations  on  January  1,  1999.  Under  the  auspices  of  the  European  Monetary
Institute,  the  precursor  to  the  European  Central  Bank,  work  has  proceeded  on  designing  the
monetary  instruments  of  the  bank.  The  Central  Bank  has  followed  this  work  to  the  extent
possible. Some issues, such as concerning reserve requirements, will not be resolved until after
the European Central Bank has been established. The Central Bank may therefore adjust its rules
when the situation in Europe becomes clearer.
The first step in changing the Central Bank’s instruments was taken on March 1
and covered the following. The liquidity requirement of deposit banks was abolished. Weekly
auctions  of  14-day  repurchase  agreements  replaced  the  tap-sale  of  these  agreements.  All
government  guaranteed  securities  and  the  Central  Bank’s  certificates  of  deposit  qualify  as
collateral for repurchase agreements rather than only Treasury bills and certificates of deposit.
The Central Bank will auction 14-day certificates of deposit when it feels the need to withdraw
liquidity. The direct sale of 45-day certificates of deposit will cease, but 90-day certificates will
continue  to  be  sold.  A  new  overnight  facility  for  credit  institutions  subject  to  reserve
requirements  was  established  at  the  Central  Bank.  Collateral  for  overnight  loans  will  be
provided by government guaranteed securities held by the credit institutions.
The  next  step  in  these  changes  will  take  place  on  April  1  when  new  rules
governing reserve requirements will take effect. The reserve base will be widened to include the
foreign borrowing of credit institutions while the reserve requirement ratio will be lowered as
the change is intended to be broadly neutral with respect to required deposits, thus making the
change  neutral  from  a  monetary  policy  perspective.  The  reserve  requirement  ratio  will  be  4
percent  on  obligations  under  1  year  to  maturity  but  1.5  percent  on  obligations  tied  for  longer
than  1  year.  Also,  the  reserve  requirement  will  cover  more  institutions  than  before,  and  only
institutions subject to reserve requirements will have access to facilities at the Central Bank. It
will  be  possible  to  meet  the  reserve  requirement  more  flexibly  than  has  been  the  case.
Indexation of required deposits will be abolished but the interest rate on them will initially be
set on the basis of prevailing yields.
BIS Review   42/1998
- 5 -
The last step in these changes will be taken on May 21 when the first calculations
based  on  the  new  rules  concerning  reserve  requirements  will  be  done.  At  the  same  time,  the
so-called discount quota, which is a facility that the Central Bank has offered to deposit banks,
will be abolished. The Bank will also close the foreign currency accounts of deposit banks it has
held.
Since 1987 the Central Bank has targeted  interest  rates  to  achieve  its  monetary
policy objective rather than targeting the money supply or base money. The access that deposit
banks have to liquidity at the Central Bank is therefore flexible and at their own discretion, with
the Bank’s interest rates among the factors influencing the extent to which the draw on liquidity
from the Central Bank. At the outset, the long-term market was most important to the Central
Bank  but  as  the  money  market  and  the  foreign  exchange  market  developed  during  1992  and
1993, the Bank began to focus its activities on them. The Central Bank’s instrument rate is now
the  yield  it  requires  on  repurchase  agreements  with  credit  institutions.  This  arrangement  is
similar to the most common practice among industrial countries, and  is  based  on  the  premise
that central bank instrumental rates largely determine money market rates. Money market rates
then influence price developments, with price stability being the ultimate objective, through two
channels. First, they have a strong direct impact on currency flows and the exchange rate when
capital movements have been liberalized. Second, they affect the interest rates of deposit banks
and the entire interest rate spectrum, which in turn influences consumption and investment and
thereby  affect  the  level  of  demand  on  goods  and  labour  markets.  Thus,  the  Central  Bank
achieves its objective whether it targets prices directly or indirectly by having the exchange rate
as an intermediate target.
The  changes  that  the  Central  Bank  implemented  at  the  beginning  of  March
concerning repurchase agreements had two components. On the one hand, the definition of the
collateral  that  qualified  for  repurchase  agreements  was  widened  to  include  again,  after  an
intermission, all market listed government guaranteed securities and central bank certificates of
deposit.  The  purpose  of  this  change  is  to  level  the  positions  of  the  various  government
securities,  as  varying  positions  in  regard  to  liquidity  transactions  with  the  Central  Bank  can
influence  their  relative  market  yields.  It  is  clear  that  such  limitations  do  not  exist  among
Iceland’s  neighbours.  In  addition,  the  stock  of  outstanding  Treasury  bills  has  shrunk  in  the
recent  period,  which  has  caused  a  shortage  of  these  bills  for  deposit  banks  to  use  in  their
repurchase agreements with the Central Bank. The other change is, as mentioned before, that the
practice of offering repurchase agreements on tap has been abolished and replaced by a weekly
auction of the agreements, as is done in many industrial countries. The Central Bank can at its
discretion  choose  to  auction  reverse  repurchase  agreements  instead  of  straightforward
repurchase agreements.
Neither of these changes alters the course of monetary policy. However, they did
have  the  effect  of  reversing  the  rise  in  money  market  rates  that  had  occurred  in  January  and
February, when the interbank rate rose to 8.3 percent because of the shortage of Treasury bills
on the market. This moved money market rates back to the level the Central Bank had aimed for
when it set its interest rates in November, a range of 7.2-7.4 percent. It is always debatable what
is precisely the right level of money market rates in light of the situation on and prospects for
the  foreign  exchange  market  in  the  short  run  and  for  the  goods  and  labour  markets  1-2  years
hence.  The  Central  Bank’s  current  assessment  is  that  the  level  of  the  interest  rate  set  in
November provides sufficient restraint to ensure price stability in the  period  ahead.  However,
this assessment is under constant review in light of the development of a host of indicators.
BIS Review   42/1998
- 6 -
Foreign Exchange Market
The  foreign  exchange  market  was  reorganized  in  1997.  The  exchange  rate
quotation meetings were abolished and replaced by a continuous market. Furthermore, market
participants  other  than  the  Central  Bank,  now  six  institutions,  replaced  the  Bank  as  market
makers  on  this  market.  The  arrangement  is  now  similar  to  that  among  many  neighbouring
countries. The Central Bank’s transactions on the foreign exchange market are now always at its
own initiative, and should be view as intervention aimed at influencing the exchange rate. The
new market arrangement has greatly improved the flow of information about market conditions
and made the market more active. Also, all information about pressure on the exchange rate now
appears instantaneously and the volume of transactions has grown sharply. Total turnover on the
foreign  exchange  market  was  162  billion  kronur  in  1997,  and  had  doubled  since  1996.  In
addition, the participation of the Central Bank in foreign exchange market transactions fell from
82 percent of turnover in 1996 to 37 percent in 1997. So far this year turnover has continued to
increase and the share of the Central Bank has declined to 13.2 percent. Average daily turnover
has been about 2 billion kronur this year. Daily fluctuations in the exchange rate increased as a
result  of  last  year’s  change,  but  not  much  when  compared  to  what  is  common  among  other
countries.  Since  mid-1993,  or  for  almost  5  years,  the  exchange  rate  of  the  krona  has  never
deviated more than 2.1 percent from the central rate.
Yields on Domestic Markets
Money  market  yields  declined  in  the  course  of  the  year  until  the  Central  Bank
raised its rates in November after which they rose. Yields on 3-month Treasury bills rose to 7.22
percent where they stood at year-end. A low Treasury borrowing requirement at times caused a
shortage  of  Treasury  bills.  Demand  for  Treasury  bills  was  also  boosted  because  of  increased
interest in them for liquidity management.
Yields on indexed bonds changed little during the first half of  1997  but  during
the second half the yield on government bonds and housing bonds fell sharply, albeit unevenly.
This  decline  was  partly  the  result  of  the  low  Treasury  borrowing  requirement.  The  yield  on
non-indexed  government  bonds  also  declined  sharply  in  1997,  although  also  unevenly,  to  8.3
percent at year-end. Yields on both indexed and non-indexed bonds have continued to fall this
year, with the yield on government guaranteed indexed bonds now well below 5 percent which
some had regarded as the floor.
Although  money  and  bond  market  yields  declined  in  1997  the  lending  rates  of
commercial and saving banks changed little. These rates have now begun to come down.
Profitability of deposit institutions
The profitability of banks improved during 1997. Current information on profits
of the commercial banks shows a substantial increase compared with the preceding year. Their
combined return on equity was 9.2% in 1997, compared with 8.2% in 1996 and 5% in the year
before that.  Nonetheless,  profitability  varied  widely  among  them,  and  the  different  conditions
that they faced complicate comparisons. Landsbanki (the National Bank) and Búnaðarbanki (the
Agricultural Bank), for example, incurred large irregular expenses related to the final settlement
of their pension obligations, which cannot be expected to recur in future. Provisions to reserves
for loan losses have fallen sharply among all the banks. At the same time, the six largest savings
banks recorded some decline in profitability compared with the previous year, and their return
BIS Review   42/1998
- 7 -
on  equity  was  8.5%.  I  should  underline,  however,  that  profitability  varied  widely  among
individual savings banks.
Reforms to the Banking System
There  now  appears  to  be  widespread  agreement  that  efficiency  needs  to  be
improved  in  the  banking  system  in  order  to  lower  costs  and  make  domestic  banks  more
competitive in relation to foreign competitors, which will seek a market share in Iceland. It is
necessary to take advantage of the opportunity provided by the incorporation of the state banks
into limited liability companies and the prospective sale of shares in them. Certain goals need to
be kept in mind. Effective competition on financial markets needs to be secured, although the
merger of institutions should not be excluded if it can improve efficiency and profitability. The
important question arises whether the state as owner of three strong institutions should take the
lead in the necessary restructuring or whether powerful institutional investors are needed to do
the job. Foreign investors with experience in banking are one option. The latter approach may,
however,  prevent  the  Treasury  from  realizing  the  full  value  of  its  assets  in  the  banking
institutions.  The  wide  distribution  of  share  holdings  will  also  undoubtedly  be  an  issue  in  the
debate. This is by no means a simple matter and desirable goals may not be fully consistent. The
main goal must be to ensure effective competition and efficiency improvements in the operation
of credit institutions.
Pension Funds
It  is  estimated  that  the  assets  of  the  pension  funds  which  are  available  to  pay
pensions,  stood  at  345  billion  kronur  at  the  end  of  1997,  an  increase  of  more  than  39  billion
kronur, or 12.7 percent, in the course of the year. The composition of pension fund assets has
change somewhat. Holdings of market listed securities expanded by 25.6 billion kronur while
holdings of other securities declined by 3.7 billion kronur. At the end of 1997, the pension funds
held  21.7  billion  kronur  worth  of  domestic  shares.  The  pension  funds’  holdings  of  foreign
securities  grew  sharply  in  1997,  or  by  12.6  billion  kronur,  about  one-half  of  which  was  in
shares.  At  the  end  of  1997,  the  pension  funds  held  foreign  securities  valued  at  22.2  billion
kronur.
Payment Intermediation
Over the last two years, the Central Bank has increasingly turned its attention to
payment  systems,  both  to  specific  payment  forms  and  to  settlement  systems.  The  Bank  has
released  two  reports  on  this  subject,  one  on  electronic  payment  forms  and  another  on  a
comparison  of  payment  intermediation  in  Iceland  with  international  practice.  In  recent  years
there has been growing international concern that settlement systems do not adequately take into
account settlement risks. Two responses have been adopted. First, strong conditions have been
imposed  on  net  settlement  systems  which  lower  risk,  and  plans  have  been  laid  for  the
contingency  that  a  settlement  party  is  unable  to  meet  its  obligations.  Second,  net  settlement
systems  have  been  abandoned  in  favour  of  real-time  settlement,  in  which  each  transaction  is
recorded immediately and permanently, rather than transactions being netted, for example, at the
end  of  the  day.  It  now  appears  to  be  generally  accepted  that  settlement  systems,  where  the
central bank provides settlement services, should be real-time systems. In light of this, in 1997
the  Central  Bank  began  in  co-operation  with  financial  institutions  a  review  of  domestic
settlement systems with the view of bringing them into line with best international practice. The
aim is to establish a real-time settlement system in 1999. The operation of a real-time settlement
BIS Review   42/1998
- 8 -
system  will  be  a  precondition  for  participation  in  the  European  Central  Bank’s  TARGET
settlement system should it become available.
Financial System Stability
Securing the sound operation of financial institutions is a task of steadily growing
importance for the Central Bank. By law, the Central Bank is required to protect the monetary
system and support sound money and securities transactions. Central banks pursue this task in a
variety  of  ways.  They  carefully  follow  those  macroeconomic  developments,  which  impact
money flows and thus the profitability of financial institutions. Securing payment and settlement
systems is a central bank task across the world. Central banks are also lenders of last resort to
financial  institutions  and  need  to  be  prepared  to  lend  resources  in  excess  of  what  would
normally  be  required.  The  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  has  partly  performed  this  task  through  its
Bank Inspectorate which has been built from the ground up in the Bank and is closely linked to
some  of  the  Bank’s  other  activities,  for  example  in  regard  to  a  joint  database.  Parliament  is
currently debating draft legislation, which calls for the creation of a new supervisory institution,
which  would  combine  all  supervision  of  financial  institutions.  I  cannot  deny  that  the  Central
Bank is opposed to these ideas for reasons I discussed at this venue last year, and I shall not go
into the issue in any more detail now. However, since the government’s wishes in this matter
became clear the Central Bank has co-operated wholeheartedly with the Ministry of Commerce
in preparing the best possible legislation in this area and in securing the necessary link between
the Central Bank and the new supervisory institution and also to ensure that The Central Bank
will have all necessary opportunities to guard a sound and effective financial system. In some
central banks, which do not have supervision among their responsibilities, such as in Sweden
and the United Kingdom, much work has been put into defining the relevant tasks of the central
bank. The Central Bank is bound to seek models in these countries when it becomes clear that
the Bank Inspectorate will depart.
European Monetary Union
There  are  now  9  months  until  the  member  countries  of  the  European  Union,
which  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  become  members  of  the  European
Monetary Union, adopt a new currency, the euro. There is now little to suggest that this will not
happen on January 1, 1999 and the European Central Bank will be established this coming July
1. The Central Bank has thought it necessary to follow these developments closely, not least in
order to be able to analyze the impact on Iceland and the options available to Iceland in the new
environment.  In  June  1997,  the  Central  Bank  released  a  report  European  Monetary  Union,
Creation  and  Impact.  The  Bank  will  release  interim  reports  on  this  issue  as  the  occasion
warrants.  At  this  stage,  it  is  premature  to  say  what  impact  the  Monetary  Union  will  have  on
Icelandic exchange rate policy or on the options Iceland will face. I will, nevertheless, say a few
words about the subject as it appears from the perspective of the Central Bank. The outlook is
now that 11 countries will form the Monetary Union at the outset. These countries account for
only 33 percent of Iceland’s external goods trade. The initial impact will therefore not be nearly
as  significant  as  has  been  suggested  in  the  domestic  debate.  Only  when  the  United  Kingdom
joins the Monetary Union will more than one half of Iceland’s goods trade be with countries in
the union.
But  which  options  will  we  have  as  regards  exchange  rate  policy  when  the
Monetary Union has come into existence? Theoretically the options are: 1) the current system;
2) a floating exchange rate; 3) a unilateral link with the euro; 4) a bilateral link with the euro;
BIS Review   42/1998
- 9 -
and 5) introducing the euro as legal tender in Iceland. This list does not include membership of
the Monetary Union, as that is only available to members of the European Union.
Three  factors  need  to  be  considered  when  weighing  these  options:  first,  the
success they will produce in terms of low inflation and economic stability; second, how likely
are they to narrow interest rate differentials vis-à-vis abroad; and, third, the flexibility they offer
in case of external shocks, whether positive or negative.
The current arrangement calls for the maintenance of a trade-weighted exchange
rate  index  within  6  percent  on  either  side  of  a  central  rate.  The  arrival  of  the  euro  will  not
prevent  the  continuation  of  this  arrangement.  The  euro  would  be  assigned  a  weight  in  the
currency basket consistent with the Monetary Union members’ share of Iceland’s external trade.
This approach will, however, not yield any progress towards narrowing interest rate differentials
vis-à-vis those abroad beyond the growing credibility that economic stability will achieve on its
own in due course. In addition, the experience of recent years, most recently from Asia shows
that it has become more difficult to maintain a stable  exchange  rate  with  the  liberalization  of
capital movements and ever larger and more active international financial markets. A response
to this would be to allow the exchange rate to float, but in order to maintain low inflation and
achieve narrower interest differential vis-à-vis abroad this would call for the adoption of a direct
inflation target with the Central Bank entrusted to pursue it.
A unilateral link to the euro is hardly an option, as it would yield little in terms of
greater  credibility  of  stability  and  narrower  interest  differential  vis-à-vis  those  abroad.  In
addition it has the drawback of not reflecting the composition of Iceland’s external trade, at least
for as long as the United Kingdom remains outside the monetary union. A bilateral link would
be better, as it would enhance credibility by virtue of the commitment of the European Central
Bank to defend the link, and would result in narrower interest rate differentials. The exchange
rate risk premium would not vanish entirely because the commitment of the European Central
Bank would never be without limits and conditions. It should be pointed out that it is unclear if
and  when  the  European  Central  Bank  will  be  willing  to  discuss  the  possibility  of  bilateral
co-operation with countries outside the union. Exchange rate changes could still take place in
the case of a bilateral link with the euro. Only if the krona were abolished and replaced as legal
tender by the euro, in a similar  manner  as  Panama  and  Liberia  have  done  with  respect  to  the
dollar,  would  exchange  rate  risk  and  the  associated  interest  rate  risk  premium  disappear.
However, it is good for thought that no country with its economy in good order has chosen this
path. Seignorage then accrues to  another  country  or  group  of  countries  and  all  influence  over
monetary  policy  is  surrendered.  Nor  is  it  clear  that  such  a  path  would  be  acceptable  to  the
European  Central  Bank.  Participation  in  the  Monetary  Union  would  be  a  preferable  option  to
adopting the unions currency unilaterally as this would allow for a share in seignorage and give
the  possibility  for  influencing  monetary  policy  decisions.  This  would,  however,  require
membership  of  the  European  Union  as  I  mentioned  earlier  and  any  decision  in  that  regard  of
course concerns wider issues than only monetary and exchange rate arrangements.
This is of course a very general analysis of the options we face, but nevertheless
shows  that  the  issue  is  more  complicated  than  we  are  sometimes  led  to  believe.  All  the
alternative  options  have  strengths  and  weaknesses.  Also,  future  developments  and  what  will
actually be on offer are still in doubt. One reason is that the European Monetary Institute, the
precursor of the European Central Bank, has not been empowered to discuss linkages with any
non-member of the European Union. The task of preparing Monetary Union has been more than
sufficient.  Until  these  matters  are  clarified,  the  best  thing  for  Icelanders  to  do  is  to  contain
BIS Review   42/1998
- 10 -
inflation  and  preserve  economic  stability  in  order  to  be  able  to  choose  among  future  options
from  a  position  of  strength.  The  experience  of  others  has  shown  that  there  are  no  instant
solutions when it comes to the exchange rate and that what matters are strong fundamentals and
steady economic management.
Concluding Remarks
Ladies and gentlemen,
At  present,  the  Icelandic  economy  is  reasonably  well  balanced.  The  outlook  is
nevertheless  for  a  current  account  deficit  in  1998  for  the  third  year  in  a  row.  Price  increases
remain very moderate and there are still no signs of general wage drift although it can be spotted
in  certain  sectors.  Economic  growth  will  continue  to  be  high.  It  is  likely  that  the  slack  that
existed  in  the  economy  when  the  recovery  began  has  now  disappeared.  Strong  growth  will
stimulate demand for goods and services and fuel the danger of cost increases being translated
into  price  increases.  The  implications  is  that  there  is  a  danger  of  overheating.  Therefore,  the
Central Bank will continue to pursue a tight monetary policy.
Finally,  I  would  like  to  express  my  thanks  for  the  pleasant  co-operation  the
Central Bank has had with the government and financial institutions in Iceland.
BIS Review   42/1998
