Mr. White discusses promoting international financial stability: the role of the BIS
Paper  by  Mr. William  R.  White,  Economic  Adviser  and  Head  of  the  Monetary  and  Economic
Department, Bank for International Settlements, to be published in the forthcoming conference volume
“Regulatory  and  supervisory  challenges  in  a  new  era  of  global  finance”  from  the  Forum  on  Debt  and
Development (FONDAD) to be held in August 1998.
A. Why financial stability is important
It is not surprising that central bankers worry about financial stability, even those central
bankers who do not have statutory responsibilities for banking supervision. Weak financial systems can
have  long-lasting  and  insidious  macroeconomic  implications  (the  problem  of  “financial  fragility”)  that
are naturally of concern to central bankers. Moreover, sudden failures in financial institutions, financial
markets or payment systems (the problem of “systemic crisis”) threaten contagion effects warranting the
close  attention  of  central  bankers  given  their  traditional  role  as  lender  of  last  resort.  The  seemingly
ceaseless string of financial crises through the 1980s and 1990s, in both industrial (e.g. Scandinavia and
Japan) and emerging market economies (e.g. Mexico and South Asia), indicates that these are practical
and not theoretical concerns.
One  problem  arising  from  financial  fragility  is  that  central  banks  will  be  tempted  to
forbearance in the conduct of monetary policy, with associated risks to price stability and an increased
likelihood  of  asset  price  bubbles.  Even  if  the  monetary  authorities  do  not  choose  to  behave  in  this
fashion, market perceptions that they may be forced to do so may actually encourage speculative attacks
on currencies and eventually a process of self-fulfilling expectations.1 Conversely, attempting to pursue
stabilising macroeconomic policies when the financial system is already fragile can lead to institutional
failures, giving rise to both heavy costs for national Treasuries and important negative feedback effects
on the real economy.2 These processes were seen in Sweden, Finland and Mexico and still more recently
in  a  number  of  Asian  countries.  A  stronger  financial  system  would  alleviate  both  macroeconomic
problems.  In  the  same  spirit,  it  should  also  be  noted  that  unstable  macroeconomic  policies  can  also
contribute  to  financial  instability  through  asset  price  bubbles  and  other  channels.  In  short,  monetary
stability and financial stability are two sides of the same coin and central bankers should be concerned
about both. This is perhaps the principal lesson to be learned from the financial crises we have witnessed
around the world in the past two decades.
Sudden  failures  in  financial  markets  or  payment  systems  can  also  have  far-reaching
effects. Major changes in the prices of financial assets, perhaps but not necessarily related to movements
in underlying fundamentals, could threaten the solvency of individual institutions. A recent example of
such phenomena was the impact of the sudden decline in the value of the Mexican peso and some Asian
currencies  on  the  creditworthiness  of  private  borrowers  and  in  turn  their  bankers.  Such  unexpected
developments  could  also  lead  to  exaggerated  concerns  about  counterparty  risk,  with  associated
                                                     
1
Following the seminal article by Obstfeld (1986), the possibility of multiple equilibria has been noted increasingly
in the academic literature.
For a summary of the explicit fiscal costs of some recent crises, see Caprio and Klingebiel (1996).
2
BIS Review   62/1998
- 2 -
reductions in liquidity in other financial markets. The recent drying-up of trade credit in Indonesia and
some other Asian countries is an example of what might happen. Finally, technical failures in payment
systems,  which  currently  process  many  trillions  of  dollars  daily  in  the  Group  of  Ten  countries  alone,
would  threaten  a  massive  payments  gridlock  whose  effects  could  easily  extend  beyond  the  financial
sphere  into  the  real  economy.  The  disruptive  effects  of  such  a  development  would  obviously  increase
(and perhaps non-linearly) the longer the problem persisted.
It  is  also  the  case  in  the  modern  world  that  financial  instability  is  unlikely  to  remain
contained within national borders. All financial disruptions are likely to have an international dimension
because the three pillars of any financial system - financial institutions, financial markets, and payment
and settlement systems - are increasingly international. In the early 1980s, virtually every OECD country
limited  or  even  refused  the  right  of  establishment  to  foreign  financial  institutions.  By  1995  this
discrimination had virtually disappeared in industrial countries and is being reviewed in many emerging
markets.3 Cross-border transactions in bonds and equities in 1980 amounted to 10% of the GDP of the
Group of Seven countries (excluding the United Kingdom); by 1995 this had risen to 140%. Derivative
instruments  were  essentially  unknown  in  1980;  daily  turnover  (notional  amounts)  had  risen  to  almost
US$ 1½ trillion by 1st April 1995 and one-half of these trades involved a non-domestic counterparty.4
Finally, the fact that new information is now available instantaneously and almost costlessly around the
globe further increases the likelihood that shocks in individual countries will be propagated elsewhere,
even when such contagion might not be warranted by underlying economic fundamentals.
B.
A strategy for promoting financial stability
Any strategy for promoting global financial stability must begin by recognising two facts.
First, the pace of change in modern financial markets is extraordinary, ongoing and irreversible. Second,
financial  transactions  are  becoming  increasingly  complicated  and  opaque  and  are  involving  an  ever
widening and changing cast of characters. The implication is that the “system” which policy-makers aim
to stabilise is both difficult to define at any moment in time and rapidly changing.
An important underlying force driving both developments is continuing improvements in
computing  and  telecommunications  which  have  brought  a  sharp  reduction  in  the  costs  of  carrying  out
even extremely complicated financial transactions. Deregulation, which implies a significant expansion
in the importance of market forces, has also contributed materially to the process of change to date. Yet,
in part at least, deregulation is a by-product of technological change which has made it far easier to avoid
existing regulations. For example, when Microsoft can be traded at a transactions cost of 2 cents a share
on the Internet, Japanese domestic regulations that enforce a cost of US$ 5 are simply unsustainable.
                                                     
3
For a fuller treatment of international agreements designed to facilitate international financial transactions and
contribute to the health of the international financial system, see White (1997).
See Bank for International Settlements (1996a).
4
BIS Review   62/1998
- 3 -
Better and cheaper communications have also contributed materially to the breakdown of
sectoral  and  national  distinctions  in  international  financial  markets,  as  well  as  to  the  growing
participation  of  a  whole  host  of  new  players.  The  importance  of  this  last  development  should  not  be
underestimated  since  such  new  participants  as  pension  funds,  mutual  funds  and  hedge  funds  are  not
likely  to  behave  like  traditional  banks,  a  possibility  which  creates  new  uncertainties  about  how  the
international financial system might react during periods of stress.  The  fact  that  emerging  markets  are
also far more important on  the  global  stage  than  they  were  ten  years  ago,  and  that  emerging  financial
markets have many idiosyncratic properties (often including a lack of transparency and of good corporate
governance),  further  complicates  the  task  of  formulating  policies  to  ensure  financial  stability.5  This
combination  of  complexity  and  rapid  change,  allied  with  the  increased  integration  of  the  international
financial system, points, however, to four strategic implications.
First,  measures  to  strengthen  the  system  must  be  comprehensive.  There  are  no  simple
answers. This means that wide-ranging measures must be directed to promoting the good health of each
of  the  major  components  of  the  international  financial  system:  financial  institutions,  financial  markets
and payment and settlement systems. In each instance, the overriding objective must be the stability of
the system as a whole; that is, policy-makers must seek to ensure that disturbances in one component of
the system are not easily transmitted throughout the system because they can interact with some other
weakness elsewhere.
The  second  strategic  implication  is  that  policy-makers  and  regulators  must  rely
increasingly on market-led processes to provide the discipline required to lead to prudent and stabilising
behaviour. It seems to be a fact that regulators everywhere are having trouble keeping up with modern
investment practices. Nor do they wish to respond with still stricter regulation of the traditional sort. This
would be very costly in terms of efficiency, would only invite more evasion, and would probably lead to
moral  hazard  problems  and  still  greater  dangers  in  the  future.  Rather,  regulators  are  increasingly
choosing  to  rely  on  the  judgements  of  market  participants,  who  are  likely  to  be  more  up  to  date  with
evolving  practices.  In  turn,  the  market  will  allocate  rewards  and  punishments  as  necessary,  both  to
owners of firms and to their directors and managements. This will help improve internal governance and
encourage appropriate behaviour.
For  market  discipline  to  work  effectively,  regulators  should  put  growing  emphasis  on
disclosure and increased transparency. Better information aids “good judgement” as well as minimising
the risk of “bad judgement”; say the likelihood that creditors might mistakenly shun good counterparties.
However, since firms are often hesitant to increase voluntary disclosure, an important role for the public
sector  is  to  convince  a  small  number  of  important  and  well-managed  firms  to  start  the  process  going.
Other firms will then have little choice but to follow for fear of being accused of having something to
                                                     
5 
See Goldstein and Turner (1996) and White (1996).
BIS Review   62/1998
- 4 -
hide. This strategy was recommended in a recent BIS document6 (the Fisher Report) on the disclosure of
derivatives transactions, and also underlies the strategy of the IMF in asking for better macroeconomic
data from emerging countries (SDDS) in the wake of the Mexican crisis.
This  approach  might  also  be  used  to  support  efforts,  recently  undertaken  by  the  G-10
Deputies7 and the Basle Supervisors,8 to reduce the risk of financial instability in emerging markets. Here
the basic idea would be to build on the recently agreed set of international “Core Principles” governing
the behaviour of (say) banks and their supervisors. Subsequently, a set of quantitative indicators of the
health of the financial system might be drawn up9 and applied in the first instance to countries whose
financial systems were known to be in good condition. With time, the market (including rating agencies)
might  come  to  insist  on  similar  information  from  other  countries,  which  in  turn  would  encourage
pressures for desirable financial sector reforms. Recognising that the Core Principles were conceived of
as minimum standards, the “hurdle rates” sufficient for banking systems to be judged healthy might be
significantly  higher  in  emerging  than  in  industrial  economies.  Financial  systems  of  many  emerging
markets are subject to relatively large macroeconomic shocks and to potential transitional problems in
the  context  of  financial  deregulation,  and  may  be  prone  to  greater  swings  of  sentiment  than  in  more
developed  markets.10  All  such  considerations  should  be  taken  into  account  when  setting  minimum
requirements.
The third strategic implication is that market discipline must be a  complement to, rather
than  a  substitute  for,  the  traditional  activities  of  regulators  and  policy-makers.  Publicly  available
information  may  arrive  too  late  or  be  of  too  poor  quality  to  support  adequate  market  discipline.
Moreover, safety-net provisions may also alter the incentives of market agents to respond appropriately
to  the  receipt  of  new  information.11  Finally,  it  would  be  simply  naive  to  assume  that  the  markets  will
always  exercise  discipline  appropriately.  Throughout  history,  there  have  been  instances  recorded  of
excessive  price  volatility  in  financial  markets,  “bubbles”  and  other  misalignment  of  financial  asset
prices.12 Moreover, banks and other financial institutions, buoyed by waves of “excessive optimism” or
even “irrational exuberance”,13 have frequently lent large sums of  money  to  borrowers  who  ultimately
proved  unable  to  pay.  Recent  events  in  a  number  of  Asian  countries  would  seem  to  provide  further
evidence  of  this  particular  kind  of  market  failure,  albeit  along  with  a  number  of  other  important
shortcomings.
                                                     
6 
7 
See Euro-currency Standing Committee (1994b).
See Group of Ten (1997).
See Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (1997a).
This follows along lines originally suggested by Goldstein (1997).
See Goldstein and Turner (1996).
In  the  recent  Asian  experience,  a  number  of  central  banks  failed  to  provide  timely  data  about  their  own
exposure  in  forward  markets  and/or  their  commitments  to  support  the  foreign  exchange  requirements  of
private sector entities. Safety-net considerations may have affected the willingness of local depositors to keep
their assets with local banks and the willingness of foreign banks to lend to local banks.
For an overview of such considerations, see Bank for International Settlements (1996b) and (1998a).
The former phrase was introduced by McKinnon and Huw (1996), the latter more famously by Alan Greenspan.
8
9
10 
11 
12 
13
BIS Review   62/1998
- 5 -
It  is  particularly  worth  noting  at  the  present  moment  that  imprudent  behaviour  and
excessive  risk-taking  by  financial  institutions  often  follow  periods  of  declining  profits  due  either  to
deregulation,  and  the  associated  loss  of  monopoly  rents,  or  bad  investment  decisions  in  the  past.
Examples of such phenomena can be found in the domestic behaviour of US banks in the 1980s14 and the
expansion  of  Asian  loans  by  certain  Japanese  and  European  banks  more  recently.15  Given  the  strong
current  trend  towards  financial  deregulation  in  emerging  markets,  and  the  likely  effects  of  similar
developments in industrial countries (the “Big Bang” in Japan, the effective demise of Glass-Steagall in
the  United  States  and  the  effects  on  European  banks  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro16),  regulatory
oversight will continue to have an important role to play for the foreseeable future. Indeed, it is plausible
to  argue  that  the  combination  of  these  changing  circumstances,  allied  with  the  spread  of  Internet  and
other technologies17(as well as important demographic changes18), could be ushering in an unprecedented
period of transformation in modern financial markets. If so, policy-makers will need all the instruments
available to them if this process of change is not to prove disruptive.
The  role  of  policy  overseers  will,  however,  have  to  change  to  reflect  this  required
complementarity  between  market  discipline  and  regulatory  oversight.  Just  as  monetary  policy  in  a
deregulated financial system must be conducted “with the grain of the market”, regulatory oversight must
be  increasingly  directed  to  improving  market  processes.  In  response,  regulators  have  already  begun  to
strengthen  the  focus  they  put  on  the  adequacy  of  internal  control  procedures.  This  applies  both  to
financial  firms  and  to  firms  providing  infrastructure  services  in  the  international  financial  system.19
There must too be a greater willingness to use market-developed (firm-specific) models for  evaluating
risk exposures of various sorts (market risk, credit risk and liquidity risk); this process too is also well
begun.  Regulators  will  also  wish  increasingly  to  set  or  suggest  standards  for  external  disclosure.  This
will foster the use of market discipline in general and will facilitate the participation and contribution of
                                                     
14
15 
16
17 
18
19 
The  losses  associated  with  the  debt  crisis  of  the  early  1980s  were  followed  (if  not  necessarily  caused)  by
vigorous expansion into LBOs, property loans and proprietary trading.
At  a  CEPR  conference  in  London  on  4th-5th  February  1998,  David  Folkerts-Landau  of  Deutsche  Morgan
Grenfell stated that many European banks had responded to declining rates of return in European banking in
the early 1990s by “targeting middle-market Asia”. French banks have been repeatedly warned by the Bank of
France to cease making international loans at margins that are too low to cover all-in costs. Crédit Lyonnais is
known to be the French bank most significantly exposed to Asia.
See McCauley and White (1997).
Technology  allows  both  the  unbundling  and  the  rebundling  (pooling)  of  risks.  This  contributes  to  the
development of securities markets as opposed to the use of intermediated credit. Moreover, new technological
developments have supported the advancement of non-bank financial intermediaries at the expense of banks,
and the advancement of specialist “non-banks” to the detriment of both. Finally, by making information cheaper
to  obtain  publicly,  technology  directly  attacks  the  insider  information  which  is  at  the  heart  of  relationship
banking.
The  broad  implications  of  projected  demographic  trends  in  the  OECD  area  has  been  the  focus  of  recent
OECD studies. See Roseveare et al. (1996). The G-10 Deputies currently have a Working Group looking into
the macroeconomic and international financial implications.
In the realm of the governance of banks, see Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (1998b). With respect to
governance  issues  in  the  area  of  financial  infrastructure,  see  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems
(1997c).
BIS Review   62/1998
- 6 -
rating  agencies  in  particular.  Finally,  it  is  worth  noting  that  as  markets  evolve,  as  they  will  certainly
continue to do, the complementary nature of the relationship between the regulator and the markets will
have to continue to evolve as well.
The fourth strategic implication is that regulation or guidance from policy-makers must
be the by-product of international agreements among policy-makers from different countries. Given the
reality  of  international  competition,  efforts  must  be  made  to  establish  a  “level  playing-field”  for
regulatory  purposes.  Participation  in  such  agreements  must  also  be  widespread  enough  to  avoid  the
danger of regulatory competition (regulatory arbitrage) for non-participating countries. Finally, given the
required  complementarity  between  regulatory  and  market  discipline,  the  dialogue  leading  up  to
international agreements must somehow involve both public sector and private sector participants. The
BIS plays an important role in facilitating such an international dialogue.
C.
1.
The role of the BIS in promoting financial stability
The process of achieving agreement
Before turning to what the BIS does, it is perhaps useful to be clear about what it does
not do. In particular, it does not normally use its own financial resources to promote or finance particular
courses of action by its members. In these respects, its mandate is completely different from that of other
international financial institutions such as the IMF, the World Bank and the regional development banks.
Rather,  since  being  founded  in  1930,  its  unchanged  mandate  has  been  to  promote  international
cooperation  on  monetary  and  financial  issues,  principally  but  not  exclusively  among  central  banks.
Leaving  aside  the  banking  services  provided  by  the  BIS  to  central  banks  and  international  institutions
(which  have  resulted  in  a  balance  sheet  of  about  $130  billion),  the  BIS  could  be  described  as  being
essentially  a  talking  shop.  However,  this  talk  had  led  to  many  important  decisions  being  taken  with
significant international implications. While the small BIS staff organises and facilitates meetings, and
its  research  papers  (both  published  and  unpublished)  help  raise  the  analytic  quality  of  the  debate,  the
greater  value  added  is  provided  by  the  national  representatives  who  attend  meetings  at  the  BIS  and
contribute to international cooperation in other ways.
International cooperation at the BIS is based firmly on  the  principle  of  national  (state)
control.20 This recognises the reality that sovereignty in the modern world still resides at the level of the
nation state and that national legislatures (particularly those of larger countries) are often not willing to
cede their power to international bodies. Moreover, this approach also helps alleviate concerns about the
existence  of  a  “democratic  deficit”;  that  is,  the  fear  that  important  decisions  might  be  made  by
technocrats rather than public servants directly accountable to nationally elected politicians. The depth of
such concerns is evident to anyone following the current debate about the introduction of the euro, the
                                                     
20 
A fuller description and analysis of alternative processes for achieving international agreements can be found in
Kapstein (1992) and Kapstein (1994).
BIS Review   62/1998
- 7 -
desirability of the European Central Bank being politically accountable, and the future political structure
of Europe. Yet such concerns are by no means confined to Europeans alone.
Members  of  the  various  committees  which  meet  at  the  BIS  negotiate  positions  among
themselves. Each clearly pursues national objectives and, in general, each has been in close contact with
private sector agents in his or her own country to ascertain their views. The objective of the exercise is to
find a negotiated agreement which is mutually acceptable, across countries and to both public and private
sector agents, and which can then be ratified by Ministers and Governors and subsequently implemented
using national legislation or regulation. The fact that the size of committees is relatively small facilitates
the  decision-making  process,  as  does  the  tradition  of  making  decisions  by  consensus.  The  recognition
that a  failure  to  reach  an  international  agreement  would  open  the  door  to  both  unfair  competition  and
regulatory arbitrage also drives the process forward.
The fact that national legislators have been willing to accede to such a process, and that
private  sector  participants  likely  to  be  affected  have  also  generally  signed  on,  testifies  to  the  moral
authority exercised by these international agreements and the perceived legitimacy of the process itself.
Moreover, although the committees which meet at the BIS have generally drawn their members from the
G-10 group of countries, many of the agreements reached (most notably, capital adequacy standards for
internationally  active  banks)  have  simply  been  accepted  by  non-G-10  countries  as  effective  global
standards.  In  this  regard,  the  influence  of  private  rating  agencies  has  often  played  a  useful  supporting
role,  as  have  the  efforts  made  by  the  various  committees  to  disseminate  publicly  their  findings  and
agreements.21  Other  international  financial  institutions,  such  as  the  IMF  and  World  Bank,  have  also
played a major role in communicating to a wide range of non-G-10 countries what might be thought of as
“best practice” in the industrial world. It is also notable that this model, which leaves decision-making
firmly in the hands of experts from nation states and relies on international organisations to spread the
word,  is  the  model  recently  recommended  by  the  G-10  Deputies  (in  association  with  many
representatives  of  emerging  markets)  in  their  recent  report  on  financial  stability  in  emerging  market
economies.22
These  positive  comments  about  the  “Basle  process”  should  not  blind  us  either  to
shortcomings  evident  in  the  past  or  to  some  important  challenges  for  the  future.  The  most  important
problem  in  the  past  has  been  that,  although  difficulties  were  often  identified  at  an  early  stage,  it
sometimes took a crisis of some sort to galvanise into action the process of finding a solution. By way of
example,  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  was  set  up  only  after  the  failure  of  Bankhaus
Herstatt in 1974, even though it had been recognised well in advance that banks with large international
operations posed special problems. It is also instructive that the question of “Herstatt risk” (i.e. the credit
risk arising from lack of simultaneity in the settlement of the two legs of foreign exchange transactions)
                                                     
21
A full list of all recent publications by the BIS and the various committees which meet there can be found at
http://www.bis.org.
See Group of Ten (1997).
22
BIS Review   62/1998
- 8 -
was highlighted at the same time (1974) but the first significant attempt to address the problem was not
made until over twenty years later.23 Having registered this shortcoming, it is also true that, the various
committees meeting at the BIS also have become significantly more proactive in recent years. This will
become evident below.
As  for  future  challenges  to  the  current  process,  the  first  complication  is  the  need  to
involve participants from emerging markets. Hong Kong and Singapore are already the fourth and fifth
largest  foreign  exchange  markets  in  the  world  and  other  financial  markets  are  expanding  rapidly
elsewhere. The growing industrial might of countries like Korea, China, Brazil and others must also be
recognised,  even  if  recent  events  in  Asia  suggest  that  there  can  be  setbacks  along  the  way.  If  the
credibility of the decision-making process rests on the involvement of national experts from jurisdictions
most affected by the decisions taken, then input from emerging markets will be increasingly important.
The  issue  is  how  to  reconcile  such  an  expansion  with  the  maintenance  of  the  intimate  club-like
atmosphere  (also  involving  shared  values  and  shared  conceptual  frameworks)  that  facilitate  agreement
and decision-making on the basis of consensus.
A second important complication is the breaking-down of the barriers between different
markets  and  different  kinds  of  financial  institution.  Not  only  are  national  regulatory  frameworks
generally  based  on  such  distinctions  but  so  also  are  international  committees.  At  the  very  least,  there
needs  to  be  a  channel  for  communication  among  such  bodies  as  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking
Supervision, IOSCO and the International Association of Insurance Supervisors. The recent decision in
the United Kingdom to consolidate all forms of financial supervision in the hands of a super-regulator
may presage a more radical solution to this problem, but one which raises still other complications. In
particular,  the  decision  to  site  this  regulator  outside  the  Bank  of  England,  but  to  give  the  Bank
responsibility  for  overall  systemic  stability,  raises  the  question  of  overlapping  mandates  for  those  two
bodies. Again, there may be international implications if non-central banks come to play an increasingly
important role in the BIS  process.  Similarly,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  and  the  establishment  of  the
European Central Bank raises the question of future representation on the various BIS committees. The
answer to this will presumably depend on the nature of the relationship which evolves between national
supervisors and the supranational European System of Central Banks.24
A final challenge has to do with managing the balance of influence between public sector
and private sector representatives in the process. While in the past public sector participants generally
made  proposals  and  the  private  sector  responded,  increasingly  the  opposite  is  true.25  This  trend  is,
however, to be welcomed in that it is consistent with the concept that it is the private sector that should
be held primarily responsible for avoiding possible failures in private financial markets. The role of the
public sector will increasingly be to ensure that such private initiatives are commensurate with the total
                                                     
23
See Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (1996b).
For a discussion of such issues see McCauley and White (1997) and Centre for European Policy Studies (1998).
Consider the recent reports by the Group of Thirty (1997) and the Institute of International Finance (1997).
24 
25
BIS Review   62/1998
- 9 -
costs (including externalities) of such failures. As noted above, however, it may well take many years for
this new balance to be struck.
2.
Specific measures to promote financial stability
The  objective  of  this  part  of  the  paper  is  to  record  more  specifically  how  various
committees meeting at the BIS contribute to implementing the strategy for financial stability described
above. Before doing so, it seems worth reiterating that the likelihood of financial stability, both at the
national  and  the  international  level,  will  be  significantly  enhanced  if  governments  follow  stabilising
macroeconomic  policies.  This  objective  is  also  firmly  endorsed  by  the  BIS,  which  indeed  regularly
organises a wide range of meetings directed to improving the conduct of monetary policy in participating
countries.  While  these  meetings  have  traditionally  focused  on  events  in  the  G-10  countries  (regular
meetings  in  Basle  of  the  G-10  Governors,  the  Gold  and  Foreign  Exchange  Committee,  Economists,
Model  Builders  and  many  others),  an  increasing  number  of  meetings  now  focus  on  macroeconomic
developments in emerging markets as well.26 However, since macroeconomic stability is a necessary but
certainly not a sufficient condition for ensuring financial stability, the implication is that more specific
measures to foster financial stability are still warranted and are indeed urgently required.
In this regard, it was suggested above that the international financial system is based on
three pillars: financial institutions, financial markets, and payment and settlement systems. The analytical
model  underlying  this  suggestion  is  that  of  a  flow-of-funds  matrix  underpinned  by  the  infrastructure
(payment systems and other “plumbing”) required for it to function.27 Perhaps more by luck than design,
there is a BIS committee dealing with each of these individual pillars: the Basle Committee on Banking
Supervision  (institutions),  the  Euro-currency  Standing  Committee  (markets)  and  the  Committee  on
Payment and Settlement Systems (infrastructure).28 Pursuing the analytical framework one step further, it
is evident that disturbances at the level of institutions, markets or infrastructure will have implications
for  market  clearing  conditions  (interest  rates,  exchange  rates,  etc.)  in  the  flow-of-funds  matrix  which
could  well  have  macroeconomic  implications.  While  all  three  of  the  BIS  committees  recognise  these
interactions,  and  increasingly  share  information  in  consequence,  it  is  the  Euro-currency  Standing
                                                     
26 
27 
28
The  proceedings  of  some  of  these  meetings  and  the  papers  prepared  for  them  are  now  available  in  a  new
series of BIS Policy Papers. See, for example, Bank  for International Settlements (1998b).
See White (1994).
For the sake of completeness, it should also be noted that various other committees of national experts also
meet  regularly  at  the  BIS  and  contribute  in  rather  more  technical  ways  to  issues  having  implications  for
international  financial  stability.  The  Committee  of  Legal  Experts  has  at  various  times  considered  the  possible
undesirable implications of having different legal codes (in particular, bankruptcy procedures) governing financial
transactions  in  different  countries,  and  the  Committee  has  recently  considered  as  well  legal  questions
surrounding  the  introduction  of  electronic  money.  Committees  of  security  and  computer  experts  meet
regularly at the BIS and commonly exchange views on technical issues having systemic implications. One such
issue currently receiving attention is how the official community should itself respond to the  “millennium bug”
problem.  This  work  complements  the  recent  document  (September  1997)  issued  by  the  Basle  Supervisors
directed to encouraging the private sector to address this problem in a serious way (see Basle Committee on
Banking Supervision (1997b)). A global conference, jointly organised by the Basle Supervisors, IOSCO and the
Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, took place at the BIS on 8th April 1998.
BIS Review   62/1998
- 10 -
Committee  that  has  traditionally  been  most  interested  in  the  overall  dynamics  of  these  systemic
processes.
a.
The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision
The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, whose traditional preoccupation has been
the stability of banking institutions, is the best known of the committees which meet at the BIS. Set up in
1974,  the  Committee  first  directed  its  attentions  to  ensuring  that  all  internationally  active  banks  were
adequately  supervised  on  a  consolidated  basis.  The  first  agreement  of  this  sort  was  the  Basle
Concordat,29  which  established  the  principle  that  no  foreign  banking  establishment  should  escape
supervision, and that such supervision should be adequate. The Concordat has been revised a number of
times in the light of changing circumstances and perceived shortcomings, but a key principle has been
maintained throughout: the home or parent supervisor is responsible for the global operations of banks
headquartered in its territory and should supervise them on a consolidated basis.
The Minimum Standards paper of 199230 was a further effort to put such principles into
practice. Four standards were laid out to ensure that home supervisors do practise effective supervision
(if  not,  the  host  country  can  refuse  a  banking  licence)  and  to  ensure  that  the  home  supervisor  has
adequate access to information about cross-border activities of its banks (if not, the home supervisor can
refuse  to  allow  the  business  to  continue).  Nevertheless,  members  of  the  Basle  Committee  and  other
supervisors  continue  to  feel  that  the  flow  of  information  among  themselves  remains  subject  to  legal
impediments.  Accordingly,  at  the  International  Conference  of  Banking  Supervisors  in  Stockholm  in
1996,31 delegates from over 150 countries endorsed a further report prepared by a joint working group of
the Basle Committee and the Offshore Group of Banking Supervisors. In this report 29 recommendations
were  presented.  These  included  suggested  procedures  for  the  conduct  of  cross-border  inspections  by
home authorities monitoring their own banks, and approaches for dealing with corporate structures which
create potential supervisory gaps. Ongoing problems include those posed by countries which still do not
allow on-site inspection by home-country supervisors (Singapore and France, for example) and fears that
information sent to other supervisory agencies will find its way into the public domain under the laws of
the  recipient  country  (a  particular  concern  in  the  United  States).  In  both  cases,  changes  to  domestic
legislation are required which may prove difficult to achieve.
A second preoccupation of the Committee has been to ensure that internationally active
banks  maintain  a  level  of  capital  commensurate  with  the  risks  they  run.  The  Committee’s  first
achievement in this area  was  the  promulgation  of  the  Basle  Capital  Accord,32  which  was  published  in
1988  and  laid  down  minimum  capital  adequacy  requirements  based  on  relative  levels  of  exposure  to
                                                     
29 
30 
31 
32 
See Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (1975).
See Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (1992).
See Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (1996).
See Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (1988).
BIS Review   62/1998
- 11 -
various  forms  of  credit  risk,  both  on  and  off  balance  sheet.  While  a  number  of  issues  remain  to  be
resolved by the Committee, such as the treatment of short-term capital flows into emerging markets via
domestic banks, this hard-won agreement did succeed in both levelling the international playing-field and
increasing  levels  of  bank  capital  after  a  long  period  of  deterioration  in  most  G-10  countries.  By
September  1993,  all  G-10  banks  with  significant  international  operations  were  meeting  or  exceeding
these minimum requirements.
This  success  clearly  owed  something  to  the  legitimacy  of  the  Basle  process,  but  also
reflected the fact that the Accord suggested a clear quantitative standard on which market participants
could  focus  and  impose  discipline.  More  recently,  the  complications  posed  by  having  different
accounting conventions in different G-10 countries have received more attention and this problem is also
beginning to look more capable of resolution. Ongoing discussions between the Accounting sub-group of
the Basle Supervisors and the International Accounting Standards Committee  are  directed  to  resolving
some of these problems. Success in this area would also provide international benchmarks to help guide
and improve accounting standards in many emerging markets. Without such improvements in the basic
numbers, it is difficult to draw much comfort from banks in emerging markets claiming to have met the
minimum capital adequacy requirements.
The Basle Committee has recently made a further significant extension to its work in the
area  of  capital  adequacy.  Whereas  credit  risk  initially  figured  centrally  in  the  calculation  of  minimum
capital  requirements,  increased  attention  is  being  paid  to  market  risk.  Moreover,  in  its  calculation  of
exposure  to  market  risk,  the  Committee  is  now  prepared  to  use  the  results  generated  by  firms’  own
internal models, subject to certain restrictions.33 This has been a significant step, among many others, in
the direction of regulators working more closely with the grain of the market. Yet new challenges in the
area  of  capital  adequacy  are  also  emerging.  Credit  derivatives  are  rather  new  instruments  but  are
spreading  rapidly,  and  they  may  have  the  potential  to  change  dramatically  the  nature  of  financial
intermediation. Consequently, the required form of regulatory oversight might eventually also have to be
reviewed.
A landmark extension of the work of the Basle Committee was mentioned briefly above.
In October 1997, at the time of the IMF meetings in Hong Kong, the Committee released a new set of
Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking  Supervision,  based  in  large  part  on  their  deliberations  and
decisions  taken  over  previous  decades.  These  principles  reflect  the  strategic  considerations  described
above and constitute a significant development in at least four respects. First, they are  comprehensive
and  cover  all  aspects  of  banking.  Second,  they  provide  a  checklist  of  good  practice  for  use  by
supervisors,  international  financial  institutions,  rating  agencies  and  other    market  participants.  Third,
they were drawn up with the active participation of official representatives from emerging markets. And
                                                     
33 
See Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (1995).
BIS Review   62/1998
- 12 -
finally,  they  apply  to  all  banks  and  not  just  those  that  are  internationally  active.  This  is  a  major
development, the significance of which may not yet have been adequately appreciated.
The  obvious  remaining  challenge  is  to  ensure  that  these  Core  Principles  are  actually
implemented.  The  Committee  intends  to  begin  by  asking  supervisors  around  the  world  to  endorse  the
Core  Principles  and  this  will  be  followed  by  a  questionnaire  to  determine  whether  actual  supervisory
practices are consistent with them. In cases of inconsistency, the intention would be to agree on a clear
and  definite  timetable  for  change  with  a  report  on  progress  made  being  prepared  for  the  next
International  Conference  of  Banking  Supervisors  in  October  1998.  This  implementation  strategy  will
complement the broader efforts being made to implement the results of the recent G-10 Deputies’ study
on financial stability in emerging market economies.34 Broadly put, such implementation will demand an
important degree of political will in all countries concerned. Mustering such will, particularly in the face
of monopoly rents and the entrenched interests they support, will not be an easy task. Ways must also be
found to evoke market discipline in ensuring that required changes are carried out.
Reflecting  the  breakdown  of  sectoral  barriers  and  the  growth  of  international  financial
conglomerates,  the  Basle  Committee  has  had  increasing  contacts  with  its  international  counterparts
representing  both  the  securities  (IOSCO)  and  the  insurance  (IAIS)  industries.  Indeed,  all  three  groups
now meet regularly in the Joint Forum on Financial Conglomerates and joint documents are beginning to
emerge.35  To  facilitate  such  work,  the  IAIS  Secretariat  moved  physically  to  Basle  at  the  beginning  of
1998. However, it is a fact that progress in establishing a consolidated supervisory framework has been
slow, sometimes because of the difficulties of ensuring cooperation among different regulatory agencies
at the national level. Such concerns may have provided some of the motivation for the recent proposal by
the  Group  of  Thirty  (1997)  that  the  relatively  few,  large  international  conglomerates  should  establish,
promulgate and oversee their own industry standards, subject to review by a single international auditor
with the active cooperation of supervisory bodies. What remains to be determined is whether this would
provide  an  adequate  degree  of  complementarity  between  market  and  regulatory  discipline.  An  active
debate on this issue seems both needed and likely.
b.
The Euro-currency Standing Committee
Financial  markets  are  the  second  major  pillar  of  the  international  financial  system.
Analysing  new  developments  in  this  area  and  the  possible  policy  requirements  arising  from  them  has
traditionally been of interest to the Euro-currency Standing Committee. This Committee was originally
established  to  look  into  the  expansion  of  international  bank  lending,  and  the  LDC  debt  crisis  was  its
principal preoccupation for much of the early 1980s. To provide increased possibilities for the official
                                                     
34 
The Secretariat of the G-10 Deputies has  recently  sent  out  a  questionnaire  to  a  wide  range  of  national  and
international bodies to ascertain what each has done to support the strategy laid out in the original G-10 report.
A report on progress to date and potential further steps will presumably be put forward to the G-10 Ministers
and Governors.
See Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (1998a).
35 
BIS Review   62/1998
- 13 -
and private sectors to monitor risk in this area, the Committee gave the BIS a mandate to coordinate the
collection  and  dissemination  of  relevant  international  banking  data  from  national  (creditor)  sources.
Indeed, in recent years the international banking statistics have expanded in both content and geographic
scope and further improvements are under way.36
The  BIS  statistics  on  international  bank  lending  have  received  particular  attention
recently in the light of the Asian crisis. This crisis is similar to the debt crisis of the early 1980s in that
banks  have  been  the  principal  international  creditors.37  Moreover,  the  BIS  is  now  also  maintaining  an
extensive  database  on  international  securities  markets  and  has  dramatically  expanded  its  coverage  of
derivatives  markets.  In  addition  to  the  triennial  survey  conducted  by  central  banks,  about  75  major
financial  institutions  began,  in  June  1998,  semi-annual  reporting  on  their  consolidated  derivatives
activity.  Analysis  of  recent  data  and  associated  regulatory  developments  in  all  these  areas  (banking,
securities and derivatives markets) is presented in various BIS publications.38 While seeking to be neither
alarmist nor prescriptive, this analysis does also attempt to highlight points of strain in the international
financial system. Examples going back to 1996 included comments on the heavy exposure of Thai and
Korean banks to short-term foreign currency financing, and the sharp reduction in both credit and market
risk  premia  associated  with  relatively  risky  investments  worldwide.  The  fact  that  these  concerns  were
generally  ignored,  as  were  the  similarly  muted  warnings  by  other  international  financial  institutions,
seems worthy of further reflection.
Over  the  last  decade,  the  Committee  has  focused  on  the  implications  of  financial
innovations  -  and  in  particular  of  the  rapid  growth  of  derivatives  markets  designed  to  facilitate  the
transfer  of  market  risk  -  for  the  functioning  and  stability  of  markets.  While  the  general  conclusion
reached has been that derivatives enhance market efficiency,39 financial innovation has also brought with
it a diminution of transparency in markets and made it more difficult for market participants to assess the
creditworthiness  of  individual  counterparties.  To  help  deal  with  these  problems,  the  Committee  (in
association with the Basle Supervisors) has taken steps to encourage key market participants to improve
their  public  disclosure  practices,  notably  in  the  area  of  market  and  credit  exposures,  by  drawing  on
information generated by  their  internal  risk  management  systems.  The  semi-annual  global  statistics  on
derivatives markets, referred to above, should also help participants assess the significance of their own
positions in these markets.40
                                                     
36 
Data on loans made by banks will increasingly be available on an “ultimate risk” basis. That is, loans made to
(say) a Brazilian bank in the United Kingdom will be classified as Brazilian and not UK exposure. The number of
reporting countries is also likely to expand to record loans by (say) Korean banks to (say) Russian borrowers.
The timeliness of the statistics is also being addressed.
In contrast, it differs in that sovereign borrowers were of primary importance in the early 1980s and today it is
primarily private borrowers in Asia.
In particular, see the quarterly “International banking and financial market developments” and the semi-annual
“The maturity, sectoral and nationality distribution of international bank lending”.
See Euro-currency Standing Committee (1986) and (1994a).
See Euro-currency Standing Committee (1996).
37 
38
39 
40 
BIS Review   62/1998
- 14 -
Since the financial world is always changing, new questions pertinent to the mandate of
the  Euro-currency  Standing  Committee  are  always  arising.  One  set  of  issues  has  to  do  with  the
implications for financial stability of structural changes in financial intermediation, notably a world in
which non-bank financial entities and markets are coming to play increasingly prominent roles. A further
source of concern is the resilience of liquidity in linked markets under stressful circumstances.41 Many
markets are dominated at the wholesale level by a relatively small number of key players (albeit often
different  ones  in  different  markets),  and  their  interactions  as  they  strive  simultaneously  to  adjust  to
common  shocks  can  be  an  important  determinant  of  market  outcomes.  Although  short-term  financial
market volatility seems to have decreased over the last decade or so, we have observed occasional bouts
of  price  “gapping”  as  well  as  sudden  reversals  of  longer-term  price  movements  without  any  obvious
economic  rationale.  The  reasons  for  this,  and  the  possible  implications  for  the  solvency  of  market
participants, need further assessment.
c.
The Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems
The  third  pillar  of  the  international  financial  system  is  the  payment  and  settlement
system.  As  the  gross  volume  of  financial  transactions  has  expanded  in  recent  years,  the  exposure  of
individual firms to possible non-payment by a counterparty has increased commensurately. Failing timely
settlement,  they  too  might  be  unable  to  meet  their  obligations,  raising  the  prospect  of  gridlocks  of
potentially significant proportions. In recent years, the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems
has made many concrete proposals as to how these systems might be strengthened. While the focus has
been  on  the  timely  settlement  of  large-value  transfers,  issues  relating  to  retail  payment  systems
(especially the implications of electronic money)42 have also begun to receive attention. Typically, the
action  needed  requires  cooperation  between  the  public  and  private  sectors,  but  as  far  as  possible  the
private sector has been encouraged to help itself.
The work of the Committee has consistently emphasised the  importance  of  large-value
interbank  funds  transfer  systems,  for  the  obvious  reason  that  banks  continue  to  be  at  the  core  of  the
international financial system. One of the Committee’s first  projects  was  a  detailed  analytic  review  of
payment system developments in the G-10 countries, the results of which were published in 1985 in the
form of a “Red Book” on payment systems. Since then, similar books have treated payment systems in a
number of other countries, both industrial and emerging, and Red Books are regularly revised in the light
of  changing  practice.  As  well,  considerable  efforts  have  been  put  into  evaluating  different  kinds  of
cross-border and multicurrency interbank netting schemes and various reports have laid down agreed (by
the G-10 central banks) minimum standards for such private sector systems.43
                                                     
41 
For a recent discussion of market dynamics, market liquidity and the role of information in price determination
in stressful situations, see Euro-currency Standing Committee (1997).
See Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (1996a).
Among others, see Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (1990a), (1990b), (1993) and (1995).
42 
43 
BIS Review   62/1998
- 15 -
The  Committee’s  most  recent  work  focusing  on  banks  is  a  report  on  real-time  gross
settlement (RTGS) systems.44 These systems, which are now in place in most G-10 countries along with
many  others,  protect  against  gridlock  by  ensuring  final  settlement  of  all  transactions,  transaction  by
transaction in real time. The report not only provides an overview of key concepts and principal design
features but also describes the risks associated with such systems and some broader policy implications.
It addresses the particular differences between systems already in place, the management of liquidity in
such systems, and the various procedures used to queue payment instructions. The report is the first of its
kind  and  is  likely  to  prove  particularly  useful  to  both  emerging  and  industrial  countries  still  in  the
process of modernising their settlement systems.
In  recent  years,  the  Committee  has  extended  its  interest  beyond  banks  to  settlement
systems for securities and foreign exchange, and clearing arrangements for exchange-traded derivatives.
In all cases, the nominal values of the daily transactions are very large. Various reports on arrangements
to  support  securities  transactions  have  been  published  since  1992,  with  the  latest  effort  focusing  on  a
disclosure  framework  for  system  operators  that  will  allow  participants  in  such  arrangements  to  better
evaluate the risks they are running.45 As for exposure to settlement risk in foreign exchange markets, the
Committee has established that settlement exposures are much larger than had previously been thought.
In a report published last year,46 they also indicated ways in which participants could reduce such risks
and strongly suggested they do so to avoid a punitive response from public sector authorities. Regarding
clearing arrangements for exchange-traded derivative instruments, the Committee published a report in
March  199747  which  systematically  reviewed  such  arrangements,  identified  weaknesses  and  made
recommendations for remedying them. As with many other Committee reports, it contains a great deal of
factual and comparative information not available elsewhere.
Finally, the Committee recognises that issues having to do with the use of collateral to
manage risk, and with the operational reliability of the infrastructure (e.g. business continuity planning,
especially with regard to IT services), are also germane to a well-functioning payment system. So too are
many legal issues, such as the enforceability of netting agreements and the complications likely to arise
from  the  absence  of  an  international  agreement  on  bankruptcy  procedures  for  internationally  active
financial institutions. The bottom line is that the task of ensuring timely settlement in all circumstances
remains incomplete and the Committee’s agenda is still full.
d.
Global participation in the work of the committees
Finally,  the  increasing  efforts  made  by  the  various  committees  to  involve  non-G-10
countries in their work deserves to be emphasised.  The  Core  Principles  were  drawn  up  with  the  close
cooperation  of  non-G-10  supervisors,  and  the  “Report  on  cross-border  banking”  was  prepared  jointly
                                                     
44 
45 
46 
47 
See Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (1997a).
See Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (1997c).
See Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (1996b).
See Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (1997b).
BIS Review   62/1998
- 16 -
with  the  Offshore  Group  of  Banking  Supervisors.  Regional  supervisory  groups  meet  regularly  with
representatives  of  the  Basle  Committee  in  attendance,  and  there  has  been  a  significant  increase  in
supervisory  training  by  G-10  supervisors  in  association  with  the  Secretariat  of  the  Basle  Committee.
Finally, the Committee has recently initiated joint meetings with regional supervisors on the occasion of
its  quarterly  meetings  in  Basle.  All  of  these  efforts  are  directed  to  building  a  truly  global  network  of
supervisors  and  the  wide  dissemination  of  documents,  standards  and  guidelines  developed  by  the
Committee  in  association  with  others.  Similar  initiatives  have  recently  been  undertaken  by  the
Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  with  similar  objectives  in  mind.  The  Euro-currency
Standing  Committee  had,  for  many  years,  “extended”  meetings  involving  representatives  of  important
non-G-10 financial centres. However, it is now actively engaged in discussing how broader participation
might be made more effective.
D.
The role of the BIS in crisis management
It  has  been  analytically  convenient  above  to  deal  separately  with  the  three  major
components  of  the  international  financial  system  and  the  BIS  committees  which  support  each.  This
approach also emphasises the comprehensive reach of the Committees’ concerns. However, a deficiency
of  this  approach  is  that  it  fails  to  emphasise  the  relationships  between  the  various  components  of  the
system, as well as the further links to macroeconomic variables of interest to central bankers. In fact, it is
the  complex  reality  of  these  interrelationships  that  makes  the  pursuit  of  financial  stability  such  a
challenging task and also accounts for the fact that there have been so many financial crises along the
way.
Before turning to the role of the BIS in crisis management, it is important to note that,
even at the domestic level, a certain “constructive ambiguity” often applies about the potential role of the
public sector. This is to avoid bad behaviour and moral hazard on the part of the private sector. Given
that  no  two  crises  are  the  same,  the  amount  of  pre-planning  that  can  be  done  is  in  any  event  limited.
Perhaps the most that can be hoped is that the prospective players in the unfolding drama - the central
bank, the Treasury, supervisory bodies and deposit insurance agencies - know each other well and have
well-established lines of communications, so that decisions affecting all can be speedily agreed upon. At
a moment of crisis, the time allowed for decision-making is not likely to be great. Moreover, as we have
seen  in  South  Asia,  the  failure  of  domestic  policy-makers  to  take  credible  policy  actions  quickly
(particularly if these policies have been prescribed in the context of an IMF programme) can result in the
market imposing heavy penalties.
The provision of international support to help resolve financial crises with international
ramifications  should  be  equally  ambiguous  if  moral  hazard  is  to  be  avoided.48  In  any  event,  liquidity
                                                     
48 
A  new  but  unwelcome  form  of  ambiguity  has  emerged  in  the  context  of  the  Asian  crisis.  The  short-term
liquidity requirements of a number of countries have been so great as to call into question whether the Fund
had adequate resources to restore confidence on the part of private creditors. For example, as of July 1996 the
BIS Review   62/1998
- 17 -
support from the International Monetary Fund to sovereign borrowers must continue to be firmly linked
to conditionality and the adjustment of domestic policies. Moreover, support should be provided in such
a  way  as  to  insure  that  all  the  parties  whose  behaviour  contributed  to  the  crisis  (both  debtors  and
imprudent creditors) pay some part of the costs. As for liquidity support to internationally active banks,
the G-10 Governors have agreed that such support should be provided in the first instance by the home-
country  authorities.  However,  this  decision  still  leaves  unclear  whether  the  home  authorities  will  be
prepared to do so. The willingness of the Bank of England to allow Baring Brothers to fail is a welcome
indicator of this ambiguity. What is also unclear is the extent to which other national authorities might
act to support the home authorities in different circumstances. The 1996 agreement between the Federal
Reserve and the Bank of Japan, under which the Bank of Japan could obtain dollar funds through repo
arrangements, gives some indication of the possibilities in this regard.
Given  the  scope,  increasingly  wide  participation  and  regularity  of  the  meetings  which
take  place  in  Basle,  the  BIS  makes  an  important  contribution  to  international  financial  stability  by
ensuring that policy-makers (at least central banks and other regulators) know each other well and have
open lines of communication. This is the institution’s most important contribution to crisis management,
although  not  its  only  one.  The  international  community  (in  particular  the  central  banks  of  the  G-10
countries)  have  often  found  it  appropriate  to  provide  bridge  loans  through  the  BIS  to  countries  in
financial difficulties which are awaiting the receipt of funds from the IMF, the World Bank or other such
bodies. Such bridge loans often provide needed liquidity, are an indication of international support for
the  policy  changes  normally  associated  with  Fund  programmes,  and  ensure  a  continuing  central  bank
involvement in the process of crisis management. While this role might be thought less important in the
future,  given  that  the  Fund  can  now  disburse  much  more  rapidly  than  before  thanks  to  the  new
Emergency  Financing  Mechanism,  some  possibilities  still  remain  open.  For  example,  in  view  of  its
expertise  with  arranging  bridge  loans,  the  BIS  might  be  asked  to  help  draw  up  multilateral  legal
agreements to ensure equal and fair treatment of sovereign creditors should loans go bad. Attempts to use
bilateral agreements to secure a “second line of defence” in support of the IMF programme for Korea in
recent months have become extremely complicated and are not yet complete.
For completeness, it should be noted that the BIS, in addition to providing support for
bridge loan facilities, is also prepared to act as a principal and to lend funds on both a collateralised and
an uncollateralised basis. Needless to say, the sums available in this fashion must be strictly limited by
concerns  about  prudent  behaviour  and  the  continuing  good  financial  health  of  the  BIS  itself.
Nevertheless, there have been occasions when even the relatively small loans made by the BIS may have
been useful in stopping small problems from potentially turning into much bigger ones.
E.
Conclusions
                                                                                                                                                                          
short-term debt (less than one year to maturity) owed by Korean debtors to international banks amounted to
almost $70 billion. See Bank for International Settlements (1998c). Private bankers did finally agree to establish a
process  for  rolling  over  this  debt.  However,  to  the  extent  that  this  was  not  purely  voluntary,  the  difference
between this procedure and a debt rescheduling is moot.
BIS Review   62/1998
- 18 -
As the process of liberalisation and globalisation proceeds, markets increasingly replace
the  dictates  of  governments  and  regulators.  This  is  perhaps  even  more  true  with  respect  to  financial
markets  than  in  other  areas  of  economic  activity.  As  a  corollary,  the  influence  of  those  government
bodies which work closely with markets tends to be enhanced. In part, this may explain the perception
that  both  the  domestic  and  the  international  profile  of  central  bankers  has  risen  in  recent  decades.
Without delving too far into bureaucratic theories of institutional behaviour, the desire to expand their
influence  may  be  a  further  reason  explaining  why  both  central  bankers  and  other  regulators  are
increasingly relying on market processes to achieve their objectives. The role and reputation of the BIS
has been similarly enhanced in that international cooperation among central banks and other regulators in
large part takes place in that forum.49
Another  change  affecting  the  work  of  the  BIS  in  recent  years  has  been  the  growing
emphasis being put by governments on issues having to do with financial stability as opposed to price
stability and traditional macroeconomic preoccupations. It is of some note that the last four G-7 Summit
Communiqués (Halifax, Lyon, Denver and Birmingham) put strong emphasis on such issues while hardly
mentioning international macroeconomic policy coordination. It is also notable that, at the semi-annual
meetings  of  the  G-10  Governors  and  Ministers,  the  General  Manager  of  the  BIS  has  in  recent  years
reported regularly on work being undertaken at the BIS in this area. This is  not  to  say  that  traditional
macroeconomic  concerns  have  somehow  become  less  important.  Rather,  these  recent  developments
indicate  that  the  BIS,  and  those  who  regularly  meet  there,  now  seem  to  have  a  wider  scope  for
contributing to global economic welfare than perhaps ever before.
References
Bank  for  International  Settlements  (1998a):  “The  role  of  asset  prices  in  the  formulation  of  monetary
policy”. Conference papers Vol. 5, March.
Bank for International Settlements (1998b): “The transmission of monetary  policy  in  emerging  market
economies”. Policy papers No. 3, January.
Bank  for  International  Settlements  (1998c):  The  maturity,  sectoral  and  nationality  distribution  of
international bank lending, January.
Bank  for  International  Settlements  (1996a):  Central  bank  survey  of  foreign  exchange  and  derivatives
market activity 1995, May.
Bank  for  International  Settlements  (1996b):  “Financial  market  volatility:  measurement,  causes  and
consequences”. Conference papers Vol. 1, March.
Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (1998a):  Supervision  of  financial  conglomerates.  Papers
prepared  by  the  Joint  Forum  on  Financial  Conglomerates.  Bank  for  International  Settlements,
February.
                                                     
49 
An  important  early  paper  describing  this  cascading  process  (from  markets  to  central  banks  to  the  BIS)  was
written by Padoa-Schioppa and Saccomanni (1994).
BIS Review   62/1998
- 19 -
Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (1998b):  Framework  for  the  evaluation  of  internal  control
systems. Bank for International Settlements, January.
Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (1997a):  Core  principles  for  effective  banking  supervision.
Bank for International Settlements, September.
Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (1997b): The year 2000: a challenge for financial institutions
and Bank Supervisors. Bank for International Settlements, September.
Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (1996): The supervision of cross-border banking. Report by a
working  group  comprised  of  members  of  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  the
Offshore Group of Banking Supervisors. Bank for International Settlements, March.
Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (1995):  An  internal  model-based  approach  to  market  risk
capital requirements. Bank for International Settlements, April.
Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (1992):  Minimum  standards  for  the  supervision  of
international  banking  groups  and  their  cross-border  establishments.  Bank  for  International
Settlements, July.
Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (1988): International convergence of capital measurement and
capital standards. Bank for International Settlements, July.
Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (1975):  Report  on  the  supervision  of  banks’  foreign
establishments. Bank for International Settlements.
Caprio, Gerard and Daniela Klingebiel (1996): “Bank insolvency: bad luck, bad policy, or bad banking?”
Paper  presented  to  the  Annual  World  Bank  conference  on  development  economics,  Washington,
D.C., 25th-26th April.
Centre for European Policy Studies (1998): Capital markets and EMU. Report of a CEPS Working Party.
Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (1997a): Real-time gross settlement systems. Bank for
International Settlements, March.
Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (1997b): Clearing  arrangements  for  exchange-traded
derivatives. Bank for International Settlements, March.
Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (1997c): Disclosure framework for securities settlement
systems. Bank for International Settlements, February.
Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (1996a):  Security  of  electronic  money.  Bank  for
International Settlements, August.
Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (1996b):  Settlement  risk  in  foreign  exchange
transactions. Bank for International Settlements, March.
Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (1995): Cross-border  securities  settlements.  Bank  for
International Settlements, March.
Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (1993): Central bank payment and settlement services
with respect to cross-border and multi-currency transactions (Noël Report). Bank for International
Settlements, September.
BIS Review   62/1998
- 20 -
Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (1990a): Report of the committee on interbank netting
schemes  of  the  central  banks  of  the  Group  of  Ten  countries  (Lamfalussy  Report).  Bank  for
International Settlements, November.
Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (1990b): Large-value transfer systems in the Group of
Ten countries. Bank for International Settlements, May.
Euro-currency  Standing  Committee  (1997):  The  measurement  of  aggregate  market  risk.  Bank  for
International Settlements, November.
Euro-currency Standing Committee (1996): Proposals for improving global derivatives market statistics
(Yoshikuni Report). Bank for International Settlements, July.
Euro-currency Standing Committee (1994a): Macroeconomic and monetary policy issues raised by the
growth of derivatives markets (Hannoun Report). Bank for International Settlements, November.
Euro-currency  Standing  Committee  (1994b):  A  discussion  paper  on  public  disclosure  of  market  and
credit  risks  by  financial  intermediaries  (Fisher  Report).  Bank  for  International  Settlements,
September.
Euro-currency Standing Committee (1986): Recent innovations in international banking (Cross Report).
Bank for International Settlements, April.
Goldstein,  Morris  (1997):  “The  case  for  an  international  banking  standard”.  Policy  analyses  in
international economics, 47, Institute for International Economics, April.
Goldstein, Morris and Philip Turner (1996): “Banking crises in emerging economies: origins and policy
options”. Economic Papers No. 46. Bank for International Settlements, October.
Group of Ten (1997): Financial stability in emerging market economies: a strategy for the formulation,
adoption  and  implementation  of  sound  principles  and  practices  to  strengthen  financial  systems.
Bank for International Settlements, April.
Group  of  Thirty  (1997):  Global  institutions,  national  supervision  and  systemic  risk:  a  Study  Group
report. Washington.
Institute of International Finance, Inc. (1997): Financial supervision in a global market: a preliminary
private sector perspective. Report of the Task Force on Conglomerate Supervision, February.
Kapstein, Ethan B. (1994): Governing the global economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kapstein, Ethan B. (1992): “Between power and purpose: central bankers and the politics of regulatory
convergence”. International Organization, 46(1), pp. 265-287.
McCauley,  Robert  N.  and  William  R.  White  (1997):  “The  euro  and  European  financial  markets”.
Working Papers No. 41. Bank for International Settlements, May.
McKinnon, Ronald I. and Huw Pill (1996): “Credible liberalizations and international capital flows: the
“overborrowing  syndrome”.  Financial  deregulation  and  integration  in  East  Asia,  edited  by
Takatoshi Ito and Anne O. Krueger. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
Obstfeld, Maurice (1986): “Rational and self-fulfilling balance of payments crises”. American Economic
Review, March, pp. 72-81.
BIS Review   62/1998
- 21 -
Padoa-Schioppa,  Tommaso  and  Fabrizio  Saccomanni  (1994):  “Managing  a  market-led  global  financial
system”. Managing the world economy: fifty years after Bretton Woods, edited by Peter B. Kenen.
Institute for International Economics, Washington, September, pp. 235-268.
Roseveare,  Deborah,  Willi  Leibfritz,  Douglas  Fore  and  Eckhard  Wurzel  (1996):  “Ageing  populations,
pension  systems  and  government  budgets:  simulations  for  20  OECD  countries”.  Working  Paper
No. 168. OECD Economics Department.
White,  William  R.  (1997):  “International  agreements 
the  area  of  banking  and  finance:
accomplishments and outstanding issues”. Regulation and supervision of financial institutions in
the NAFTA countries and beyond, edited by George M. von Furstenberg. Boston, Dordrecht and
London: Kluwer Academic, pp. 48-81.
in 
White, William R. (1996): “Keynote address” and “Summing up”. Proceedings of the 12th Pacific Basin
Central  Bank  Conference  on  The  impact  of  financial  market  development  on  the  real  economy,
organised by the Monetary Authority of Singapore, Singapore, 18th-20th November, pp. 3-8 and
pp. 306-316.
White,  William  R.  (1994):  “Systemic  risk  and  derivatives:  can  disclosure  help?”  Special  Paper  Series
No. 66. London School of Economics, Financial Markets Group, December.
 NB   This BIS Review is available on the BIS World Wide Web site (http://www.bis.org).
 BIS Review   62/1998
