Mr. Matsushita discusses recent monetary and economic conditions in Japan
and  comments  on  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  monetary  policy  management      Speech  by  the
Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  Mr.  Yasuo  Matsushita,  to  the  Research  Institute  of  Japan  in
Tokyo on 5/11/97.
I. Introduction
It is a great honor to be invited by the Research Institute of Japan to address this
distinguished audience.
It  has  been  one  year  since  I  last  attended  this  gathering  in  November  1996.
Looking  back  at  the  economic  developments  in  Japan  over  the  past  year,  economic  growth
temporarily accelerated from the latter half of 1996 through the spring of 1997, helped to some
extent by increased demand ahead of the rise in the consumption tax rate in fiscal  1997.  Since
April this year, however, economic growth has been decelerating partly reflecting the lingering
effects of the rise in the consumption tax rate. During this period, business sentiment seems  to
have  become  more  cautious.  Today,  I  would  like  to  give  views  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  on  the
present condition of and on the outlook for the Japanese economy. I will also discuss the Bank’s
thinking behind its monetary policy management.
I would then like to use the remaining time to discuss the Bank’s views on some
of the comments and questions the Bank has been receiving recently concerning the prolonged
easy  money  policy,  by  which  the  official  discount  rate  has  been  maintained  at  0.5  percent  for
more than two years. Through my explanation, I hope to gain your better understanding on the
Bank’s aims in its monetary policy management.
II. Recent Monetary and Economic Conditions and the Bank’s Monetary Policy Management
A. The Present Condition of and the Outlook for the Domestic Economy
Let me first discuss the domestic economic  condition.  Japan’s  economic  growth
has been decelerating since April 1997 partly reflecting the impact of the rise in the consumption
tax rate that took place that month. In addition to the continuing decrease in public investment
since autumn 1996, household spending such as personal consumption  and  housing  investment
has  also  dropped  significantly  since  April  1997.  As  regards  personal  consumption,  outlays  on
services  such  as  those  provided  by  the  travel  industry  have  been  increasing  moderately.
However, outlays on goods have remained sluggish, as indicated by the sales of automobiles and
household  electric  appliances  as  well  as  department  store  and  chain  store  sales,  although  there
are  signs  of  a  slight  recovery.  In  addition,  housing  investment  in  terms  of  housing  starts  has
declined  more  recently  to  1.3  million  from  the  1.6  million  per  annum  level  that  existed  until
spring 1997.
Several factors are responsible for such declines in household spending. The first
is the strong and persistent reaction to the significantly increased demand ahead of the rise in the
consumption  tax  rate.  The  increase  in  sales  in  the  consumer  goods-  and  housing-related
industries  from  the  latter  half  of  1996  had  been  taken  as  a  strong  indication  of  a  sustainable
recovery. In hindsight, those sales in fact included a significant amount of demand for household
spending that would most likely have taken place later this year had the hike in the tax rate not
been scheduled. The second factor, which to some extent had been anticipated, is the slowdown
BIS Review   117/1997
- 2 -
in the growth of real disposable income of households -- nominal income less tax payments and
income  erosion  due  to  inflation  --  following  the  rise  in  the  consumption  tax  rate  and  the
discontinuation  of  the  special  tax  reduction.  In  addition,  it  seems  undeniable  that  consumer
confidence has weakened somewhat.
This decline in household expenditure since spring 1997, which was greater than
had  initially  been  anticipated,  created  excess  inventories  in  certain  sectors  of  consumer
goods- and  housing-related  industries.  These  sectors  have  been  required  to  reduce  excess
inventories  since  summer  1997  and,  as  a  result,  industrial  production  has  leveled  off.  These
developments  in  household  expenditure  and  industrial  production  have  resulted  in  a  more
cautious business sentiment.
The  question  is  whether  these  developments  in  household  expenditure  and
industrial  production  will  undermine  the  momentum  of  economic  recovery,  or  in  other  words,
whether  the  declining  personal  consumption  and  housing  investment  will  affect  other  demand
items  such  as  business  fixed  investment,  thereby  placing  further  downside  pressure  on  the
economy.  The  answer  lies  in  the  current  strength  of  the  self-sustained  recovery  in  the  private
sector, and this is precisely what the Bank has carefully attended to over the past two years. As
this is the most important factor when judging the outlook for the economy, I would like to give
the Bank’s views in some detail.
I will start off by discussing what is meant by the momentum of a self-sustained
economic  recovery,  and  then  move  on  to  the  Bank’s  assessment  of  the  present  force  of  the
self-sustained recovery as compared to that in 1995, when the Bank lowered the official discount
rate to 0.5 percent. Lastly, I will use these points to examine the actual developments in demand
and production, and assess the outlook for the economy.
The strength of self-sustained recovery of the private sector can be considered as
the  strength  of  the  cyclical  force  inherent  in  the  private  sector.  With  this  force,  a  build  up  of
economic  activity  should  lead  to  improved  business  sentiment,  which,  in  turn,  should  lead  to
increased  earnings  and  income.  The  rises  in  earnings  and  income  should  eventually  encourage
sustained growth in business fixed investment and personal consumption, respectively. When the
strength  of  the  self-sustained  recovery,  or  the  momentum  of  this  cyclical  force,  is  very  weak,
there is a risk that private-sector activity might begin to decline, particularly if unable to absorb
the negative impact of such exogenous factors as external  demand  and  fiscal  policy.  However,
when there is a reasonable measure of strength in the self-sustained recovery, the inherent force
can  be  expected  to  withstand  the  negative  impact  and  put  the  economy  back  on  the  recovery
path, despite being temporarily decelerated. In this case, the negative impact is contained and the
private sector’s economic outlook and investment attitude remain firm. As the pressures created
by those exogenous factors subsequently  subside,  economic  recovery  should  gradually  become
apparent.
I will now turn to my second point, that is, assessment of the strength of Japan’s
self-sustained recovery. The Japanese economy began to recover in late  1993  from  a  recession
that  followed  the  collapse  of  the  “bubble”  economy.  In  early  1995,  however,  the  recovery
paused, and there were even concerns about the occurrence of a deflationary spiral. In view of
these circumstances, drastic monetary  and  fiscal  policy  measures  were  adopted.  While  the  halt
was directly attributable to the negative effects of the rapid appreciation of the yen, it was also
due to the fact that the strength of the self-sustained recovery in the private sector  was  yet  too
weak  to  overcome  the  downward  pressures  from  outside  the  private  sector.  It  is  true  that  the
economy  had  been  on  a  recovery  trend  since  late  1993.  However,  we  at  the  Bank  judge  that
BIS Review   117/1997
- 3 -
because firms’ profitability as well as capacity utilization had remained at a low level, the shock
of a sudden appreciation of the yen applied the brakes to the economic recovery.
The  important  issue  now  is  how  much  strength  there  is  in  the  recent  economic
recovery  in  Japan.  Balance-sheet  adjustment  and  adjustment  of  industrial  structure  are  still  in
process.  This  being  the  case,  we  at  the  Bank  do  not  believe  that  the  self-sustained  economic
recovery  has  gained  sufficient  strength.  This  is  precisely  why  we  have  maintained  the  official
discount  rate  at  a  low  level  since  September  1995.  In  the  course  of  the  gradual  economic
recovery over the past two years, however, the level of economic activity has doubtlessly been
rising steadily, gradually adding to the strength of the self-sustained economic recovery.
Specifically,  there  has  been  some  progress  in  balance-sheet  adjustment  and
industrial  restructuring  as  corporate  profits  continued  to  increase.  The  manufacturing  sector,
especially  large  manufacturers,  have  achieved  a  higher  than  average  level  of  profitability,
although the profitability of the nonmanufacturing sector remains low. According to the results
of the “Tankan --  Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan”,  firms  feel  that  there
have  been  declines  in  the  excessiveness  of  production  capacity  and  employment.  This  implies
that while business fixed investment increased over the past two years, excessive accumulation
of  capital  stock  has  been  avoided.  Judging  from  these  points,  the  force  of  the  self-sustained
economic  recovery  has  clearly  strengthened  compared  to  1995,  at  which  time  there  were
concerns about a deflationary spiral.
Thirdly, I would like to discuss the outlook for demand, production, and income
based on the aforementioned assessment of the self-sustained economic recovery.
As  for  final  demand,  personal  consumption  and  housing  investment  continue  to
be  sluggish  in  general  and  public  investment  is  expected  to  follow  a  declining  trend.
Employment,  however,  continues  to  be  on  a  trend  of  gradual  recovery.  Firms  plan  to  increase
the number of newly hired  graduates  in  fiscal  1998  for  the  second  consecutive  year.  Although
the growth of the household sector’s real disposable income is expected to slow, any substantial
income  erosion  should  be  avoided  owing  to  the  increase  in  employment.  Therefore,  provided
that  there  is  no  serious  deterioration  of  consumer  confidence,  personal  consumption  should
gradually  move  toward  recovery  as  the  initial  impact  of  the  rise  in  the  consumption  tax  rate
diminishes.
Meanwhile,  net  exports  and  business  fixed  investment  continue  to  increase.
Exports have increased significantly since the latter half of 1996, reflecting the depreciation of
the yen until spring 1997. Imports, after having increased rapidly until mid-1996 due partly to a
growth  in  imports  from  the  overseas  subsidiaries  of  Japanese  manufacturers,  have  leveled  off
recently reflecting the depreciation of the yen.
Under  these  circumstances,  the  key  issue  for  the  time  being  is  how  the  recent
currency and financial instability in Southeast Asia will affect Japan’s exports and imports and
its economy as a whole. In view of the progress in the horizontal division of labor and expansion
of  trade  and  capital  transactions  between  Japan  and  other  Asian  countries,  this  matter  requires
due attention.
If  we  take  a  look  at  Japan’s  trade  with  Asian  countries,  Japan’s  exports  to
Thailand  have  decreased  significantly.  However,  there  have  not  been  any  notable  declines  in
exports  to  other  neighboring  countries.  In  addition,  Japan’s  other  export  markets  such  as  the
United  States  maintain  solid  economic  growth.  On  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  yen  has
BIS Review   117/1997
- 4 -
appreciated against Southeast Asian currencies following their shift to a floating  exchange  rate
system.  However,  the  yen  has,  overall,  remained  in  a  stable  range  reflecting  a  gradual
depreciation against the U.S. dollar. Thus, Japan’s export environment as a whole continues to
be favorable, and the currency and financial instability in Southeast Asia has, so far, not affected
the fundamental trend of Japan’s exports in any significant way.
In  addition,  Southeast  Asian  countries  have  been  adopting  various  measures,
some  of  which  are  internationally  coordinated.  On  November  1,  it  was  announced  that  the
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and  other  international  organizations  have  agreed  on  a
financial  package  for  Indonesia.  In  the  foreign  exchange  markets,  the  monetary  authorities  of
Japan,  Singapore,  and  Indonesia  have  confirmed  that  they  will  cooperate  to  stabilize  the
Indonesian currency. The Bank of Japan strongly hopes that these and similar measures taken by
other  countries  will  soon  restore  monetary  and  financial  stability  in  these  countries  and
encourage  a  smooth  economic  adjustment.  The  Bank  will  continue  to  observe  developments
carefully.
With regard to business fixed investment, this is likely to continue to expand as a
whole  against  the  backdrop  of  sustained  growth  in  corporate  profits.  Firms’  projections  of
earnings  in  fiscal  1997  indicate  that  smaller  nonmanufacturing  firms  anticipate  a  decline  in
profits for the first time in four years, strongly affected by a decline in public investment and in
personal  consumption.  In  the  manufacturing  sector,  however,  both  large  and  smaller  firms
expect a continued rise in earnings and profits partly supported by solid export performance. In
addition,  large  nonmanufacturing  firms  project  sustained  growth  in  profits  following  the
favorable  results  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  Some  of  these  profitable  firms  recently  revised
their  earnings  outlook  downward  because  of  the  recent  deceleration  in  domestic  demand.
However, on the whole, earnings and profits remain on an upward trend.
Against the backdrop of such developments in profits, overall investment plans in
fiscal  1997  seem  to  be  firm,  especially  in  the  manufacturing  sector,  although  business  fixed
investment of smaller firms in the nonmanufacturing sector is expected to remain at a low level.
In view of the aforementioned profit trend, the positive outlook for returns on  investment,  and
the  strong  demand  for  information-related  investment,  it  is  fair  to  expect  that  business  fixed
investment will continue to increase.
As  I  have  discussed,  the  Bank  believes  that  the  trend  of  economic  recovery  has
not been undermined on account of gradual improvements in corporate profits, employment, and
income.  The  Bank,  therefore,  expects  that  as  personal  consumption  recovers,  inventory
adjustment will progress and the economy will resume a gradual recovery.
However,  it  is  apparent  that  the  virtuous  circle  in  which  increased  production
leads  to  larger  income,  which  in  turn  stimulates  spending,  has  weakened  due  in  part  to  the
effects  of  fiscal  tightening.  Should  recovery  in  household  expenditure  be  delayed,  thus
prolonging economic deceleration, the strength of the self-sustained economic recovery might be
impaired.  Bearing  this  possibility  in  mind,  the  Bank  will  watch  cautiously  economic
developments  in  the  coming  days,  including  such  points  as  the  pace  of  recovery  in  personal
consumption,  progress  in  inventory  adjustment,  and  developments  in  business  and  household
confidence.
BIS Review   117/1997
B. Recent Monetary Condition
- 5 -
Looking at the recent monetary condition in Japan, stock prices dropped sharply
at the end of October amid a worldwide decline  in  stock  markets  triggered  by  the  Hong  Kong
market.  The  impact  on  the  prices  seems  to  have  subsided  in  the  markets,  however,  owing  to
rebounds in the Southeast Asian markets.
The  Bank  has  been  informed  that  Sanyo  Securities  has  decided  to  take  legal
measures  to  liquidate  its  affiliated  entities,  and  that  due  to  losses  on  credits  extended  to  these
affiliates, it has become difficult for Sanyo Securities to continue ordinary business.
On  November  3,  Sanyo  Securities  filed  with  the  Tokyo  District  Court  an
application for the commencement of reorganization proceedings. In response to the application,
the  District  Court  has  issued  an  asset  preservation  order  halting  the  company’s  repayment
activities,  but  has  allowed  for  exceptions  with  regard  to  such  activities  as  return  of  customer
property.  The  Bank  has  been  informed  that  customer  property,  including  cash  deposited  by
customers, will be protected and that the property will be returned swiftly with the support and
cooperation  of  relevant  parties,  including  the  Securities  Deposit  Compensation  Fund  (a  fund
established for compensating customers’ losses in the event of a failure of a member securities
company) and the main banks of Sanyo Securities.
While the Bank regrets the failure of Sanyo Securities, the Bank acknowledges it
crucial that investors be protected and the stability  of  the  securities  market  be  secured  through
the efforts of relevant parties in order to maintain confidence in the Japanese financial system at
home and abroad.
If I may now turn to developments in lending by financial institutions, there have
recently been views that financial institutions may have become too cautious with their lending,
and this as a result may be constraining the economic activity of private businesses. I would like
to briefly discuss the Bank’s present views on this point.
It is true that an increasing number of financial institutions are strengthening risk
management and  attaching  more  importance  to  profitability  in  order  to  improve  the  soundness
and  efficiency  of  their  management  and  operations.  More  specifically,  they  are  revising  their
screening  systems  to  assess  more  rigorously  the  creditworthiness  of  borrowers.  They  are  also
establishing  lending  rate  structures  that  adequately  reflect  creditworthiness.  These  efforts  are
essential to financial institutions if they are to accommodate themselves to the ongoing financial
globalization and deregulation over the long run. However, it may appear to firms that financial
institutions  have  significantly  shifted  their  lending  attitude,  or  have  suddenly  adopted  a  very
strict lending policy.
Having said that, financial institutions maintain a positive lending stance toward
firms  showing  sound  business  performance.  In  fact,  the  Tankan  survey  indicates  that  while  an
increasing number of firms in certain sectors feel that the lending attitude has become “severe”,
more  firms  feel  that  the  attitude  remains  “accommodative”.  The  average  lending  rates  of
financial institutions have been linked to market rates at historically low levels.
In view of these circumstances, it is fair to assume that the recent slow growth in
lending by financial institutions is due to weak demand for funds arising against the background
of  decelerating  domestic  demand.  Therefore,  the  Bank  considers  that  the  lending  attitude  of
BIS Review   117/1997
- 6 -
financial institutions is, at the moment, not constraining business activity, nor militating against
the economy.
The  Bank  will  continue  to  monitor  carefully  the  lending  activity  of  financial
institutions focusing on (1) whether the stance of financial institutions is reaching a point where
even firms maintaining sound management find it difficult to borrow; and (2) whether squeezed
lending is leading to a general rise in interest rates.
C. Monetary Policy Management
After the effects of the rise in the consumption tax rate are excluded, prices can
be seen to have remained generally stable and are expected to remains so for some time.
In managing monetary policy under such a monetary and economic situation, the
Bank  believes  it  appropriate  to  continue  to  watch  developments  carefully  with  an  emphasis
being placed on further strengthening the foundation of the economic recovery.
III. Bank’s Thinking Behind Its Continued Easy Stance of Monetary Policy
A. The Effects of Monetary Easing
I would like to use the remaining time to discuss the Bank’s views on some of the
comments and questions the Bank has been receiving in  relation  to  the  prolonged  low  level  of
interest rates.
First,  there  have  been  questions  about  the  effects  of  monetary  easing  --  that  is,
although low interest rates are conducive to improving corporate profits, it seems that businesses
are  simply  using  those  earnings  to  repay  their  debts,  and  therefore,  the  desired  effects  of
stimulating  economic  activity,  such  as  increasing  investment,  have  not  been  achieved.  Some
even say that the low  interest  rates  are  only  delaying  the  structural  adjustment  of  the  Japanese
economy.
If  we  take  a  look  at  the  actual  figures  of  corporate  profits  and  business  fixed
investment,  cash  flow  of  firms  --  hat  is,  retained  earnings  plus  depreciation  --  increased  by
approximately ¥7 trillion in the two years since fiscal 1995, when the official discount rate was
lowered  to  0.5  percent.  Business  fixed  investment  also  increased  by  approximately  ¥7  trillion,
commensurate with the growth in corporate profits. During this two-year period, the low interest
rates  have  helped  to  improve  the  profitability  of  investment  and  to  support  corporate  profits.
Therefore,  the  Bank  believes  that  low  interest  rates  have  had  the  effect  of  generating  an
appropriate increase in business fixed investment.
It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  in  past  phases  of  economic  recovery,  firms
borrowed  from  financial  institutions  to  expand  their  business  fixed  investment  in  addition  to
using  their  cash  flow.  This  time,  however,  few  firms  have  increased  bank  lending  or  issued
bonds for this  purpose.  Rather,  in  quite  a  few  cases,  firms  have  used  the  increase  in  profits  to
repay their debt.
Thus,  there  has  been  no  significant  acceleration  of  business  fixed  investment
when  compared  to  past  recovery  phases.  One  factor  behind  this  seems  to  be  the  various
BIS Review   117/1997
- 7 -
structural  adjustment  pressures  that  the  Japanese  economy  faces  today,  notably  persistent
balance-sheet adjustment pressures.
As  you  are  aware,  many  firms  borrowed  actively  from  financial  institutions
during the economic “bubble” period to engage in large-scale real-estate investment or securities
investment.  Following  the  bursting  of  the  economic  “bubble”,  prices  of  real  estate  and  stocks
plunged.  The  borrowings,  however,  remained.  Thus,  on  corporate  balance  sheets,  there  was  a
significant  depreciation  of  assets  at  market  value  while  liabilities  remained  unchanged.  This
resulted in a decrease in the net worth of firms -- that is, assets less liabilities -- and this in turn
has  limited  the  business  risks  that  these  firms  can  take  on.  Firms  in  this  situation  can  rarely
conduct active investment in  plant  and  equipment  that  leads  to  the  expansion  of  their  business
activity. This situation is often referred to as the “balance-sheet problem”.
When  we  look  at  the  relationship  between  balance  sheets  and  business  fixed
investment  by  sector  and  by  the  size  of  firm,  large  manufacturers  are  faced  with  only  limited
balance-sheet  adjustment  pressures  since  they  did  not  take  on  large  debts  during  the  “bubble”
period. These large manufacturing firms saw an early recovery in profits following the collapse
of  the  economic  “bubble”,  and  in  fact,  have  been  investing  significant  amounts  in  plant  and
equipment since fiscal 1995.
Smaller  firms,  however,  especially  those  in  the  nonmanufacturing  sector,
continue  to  suffer  heavy  balance-sheet  adjustment  pressures,  having  borrowed  heavily  from
financial  institutions  during  the  “bubble”  period  to  invest  in  real  estate.  The  ratio  of  financial
liabilities to assets at market  value  of  smaller  nonmanufacturing  firms  remains  at  a  high  level.
As  these  firms  have  been  most  strongly  affected  by  industrial  restructuring,  their  profits  as  a
whole  have  been  slow  to  recover.  As  a  result,  their  business  fixed  investment  has  shown  little
signs of improvement.
Yet, it cannot be said that  low  interest  rates  have  proved  ineffective  to  alleviate
firms’  balance-sheet  problems.  The  only  ways  to  alleviate  the  balance-sheet  adjustment
pressures  is  for  firms  to  increase  profits,  and  low  interest  rates  have  contributed  broadly  to
improving  firms’  profits.  With  increased  profits,  firms  can  repay  borrowings  and  thereby
recover their net worth. Also, a forecasted rise in a firm’s profits would facilitate the raising of
capital by that firm. Thus, increasing profits is most effective in improving the financial strength
of a firm, and the repayment of debt  is  an  important  process  in  allowing  a  firm  to  prepare  for
future business activity.
Although in the current phase of economic recovery, low interest rates  have  not
yet triggered any significant rise in business fixed investment  in  the  smaller  nonmanufacturing
firms,  these  rates  have  steadily  contributed  to  establishing  the  foundation  of  the  recovery  by
helping to improve firms’ financial strength. Including such  indirect  effects,  the  Bank  believes
that the low interest rates have in fact been firmly supporting the recovery of economic activity
in the corporate sector.
I  would  now  like  to  go  on  to  another  often  raised  question  about  whether  low
interest  rates  are  delaying  the  structural  adjustment.  It  is  true  that  there  may  be  firms  that  are
managing to survive despite a deteriorating business performance, owing to lower interest rates
alleviating the burden of paying interest. My view, however, is that structural adjustment of the
economy  is  achieved  not  just  through  natural  selection  of  firms,  where  those  with  extremely
poor business performance are weeded out. Rather, I believe that it is achieved when the  large
BIS Review   117/1997
- 8 -
number  of  firms  with  high  growth  potentials  enhance  their  activities.  Therefore,  in  order  to
promote structural adjustment, it is most important to pursue effective deregulation.
Monetary policy, by nature, is not aimed at promoting structural adjustment. It is
to be managed in accordance with economic and price developments with the aim of achieving
noninflationary,  sustainable  growth.  However,  monetary  policy  can  realize  a  stable
macroeconomic environment, that in turn would facilitate structural adjustment. This is because
firms  can  confidently  undergo  forward-looking  business  transformation  only  when  there  is  a
stable  macroeconomic  environment.  Also,  as  I  have  already  stated,  monetary  easing  has  been
contributing to the balance-sheet adjustment of firms.
The Bank believes that if interest rates were to be raised before economic activity
has  sufficiently  firmed,  it  may  affect  not  only  troubled  firms  but  also  growing  businesses.  In
view of the fundamentally weak earnings structure of venture businesses, which are expected to
be the driving force of the structural reform, it can easily be imagined that an untimely raising of
interest rates would make the progress of industrial restructuring even more difficult.
In  other  words,  although  monetary  easing  is  not  directly  aimed  at  promoting
structural  adjustment,  by  providing  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment,  it  does  support  the
management efforts of many firms with high growth potentials and thereby contributes to laying
the  foundation  for  structural  adjustment.  I  very  much  hope  to  gain  your  understanding  on  the
importance of this point.
B. Monetary Easing and Income Distribution
Another set of comments and questions that the Bank often receives in relation to
the  low  level  of  interest  rates  concerns  the  issue  of  income  distribution.  There  have  been
comments  that  low  interest  rates  are  sacrificing  the  household  sector,  or  that  they  are  aimed
solely  at  supporting  the  profits  of  financial  institutions.  As  I  have  spoken  on  this  subject  on
various occasions already, I will give only a brief explanation of the Bank’s views.
Monetary easing would have the impact of reducing interest earning  on  deposits
and  bonds  while  lowering  interest  payments  on  mortgage  loans  and  other  liabilities.  As  the
household sector holds a larger amount of financial assets than financial liabilities, lower interest
rates would in fact to reduce the  net  interest  income.  It  would  not  be  appropriate,  however,  to
judge the effects of monetary easing based  simply  on  the  interest  income.  Lower  interest  rates
stimulate  economic  activity  by  improving  returns  on  investment,  increasing  corporate  profits,
and supporting asset prices. This in turn leads to an increase in employment and in employees’
income to thereby bring about a favorable impact on the household sector as a whole.
In  fact,  in  the  two  years  since  fiscal  1995,  when  the  series  of  monetary  easing
measures  was  implemented,  employees’  income  has  increased  steadily,  and  this  increase  has
significantly exceeded the net decrease in interest income. This implies that the monetary easing,
by stimulating economic activity, has had favorable effects on the entire household sector.
In reality, there are various types of households, and the Bank is fully aware that
the  situation  has  been  extremely  difficult  for  those  households  that  are  heavily  dependent  on
interest income. However, I would  like  to  emphasize  that  monetary  policy  should  be  managed
from  a  macroeconomic  perspective  for  the  purpose  of  achieving  a  self-sustained  economic
BIS Review   117/1997
- 9 -
recovery. When a self-sustained recovery is realized, benefits will accrue broadly to all sectors,
including the household sector.
In  relation  to  the  profits  of  financial  institutions,  monetary  easing  was  not
implemented  for  the  purpose  of  increasing  financial  institutions’  earnings  and  the  Bank  has
absolutely no intention of managing monetary policy to aid financial institutions.
The  misunderstanding  over  the  Bank’s  intentions  seems  to  derive  from  the  fact
that  operating  profits  of  financial  institutions  tend  to  increase  when  interest  rates  decline.  For
example,  in  fiscal  1995,  when  there  was  a  sharp  decline  in  interest  rates,  operating  profits  of
financial  institutions  rose  significantly.  This  is  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  when  interest  rates
decline,  the  prices  of  their  bond-holdings  rise,  and  therefore,  their  profits  on  sales  tend  to
increase.  It  is  also  due  to  the  fact  that  lower  interest  rates  are  reflected  immediately  on  the
liability side, whereas their effects appear more slowly on the asset side, since the average length
of  maturity  of  assets,  such  as  loans,  tends  to  be  longer  than  the  average  length  of  maturity  of
liabilities such as deposits.
However, these effects are only temporary. For example, once the effects of lower
interest rates have worked their way through, sale of bonds will no longer generate new profits.
Moreover, if interest rates begin to rise, the sale of bonds will start creating losses. In addition,
maturity  gap  between  assets  and  liabilities  will  cause  profits  to  decline  from  the  following
accounting term reflecting declines in the returns on interest-earning assets, which follow the fall
in  the  cost  of  financing  liabilities.  In  fact,  the  operating  profits  of  financial  institutions,  after
rising  significantly  in  fiscal  1995,  leveled  off  in  fiscal  1996.  In  fiscal  1997,  they  are  likely  to
register a substantial decline as the effects of reduced interest rates will have diminished.
In  the  meantime,  the  net  interest  margin  of  financial  institutions  --  that  is,  the
differential  between  financing  costs  and  investment  returns  --  remains  at  a  level  equal  to  the
average since the latter half of the 1980s. In other words, the decline in deposit interest rates has
not  permanently  widened  the  interest  margin  for  financial  institutions,  which  is  only  the
intermediate  stage  in  the  permeation  of  monetary-easing  effects.  Rather,  the  decline  has
subsequently lead to lower lending rates. Through these channels, the effects of monetary easing
have been permeating steadily through the entire Japanese economy.
As  I  have  explained,  monetary  policy  is  not  aimed  at  supporting  financial
institutions,  and  it  is  not  possible  to  control  the  earnings  of  financial  institutions  by  means  of
monetary policy over an extended period. I would  once  again  like  to  emphasize  that  monetary
policy is  to  be  managed  in  accordance  with  the  overall  economic  condition  for  the  purpose  of
ensuring price stability.
C. Monetary Policy Management from a Medium to Long-Term Perspective
I would like to turn to a third set of comments and questions received by the Bank
related to its monetary policy management. It is a question of whether the official discount rate
should  have  been  raised  sometime  between  1996  and  early  1997,  when  the  economy  was
recovering.
Monetary  policy  should,  by  its  very  nature,  be  monitored  over  a  long  period  of
time.  In  addition,  I  believe  it  is  not  appropriate  for  the  Bank,  which  is  in  charge  of  monetary
policy  management,  to  give  its  own  assessment  casually.  Today,  therefore,  I  would  like  to
BIS Review   117/1997
- 10 -
explain the basic thinking underlying the Bank’s monetary policy management, including that on
the recent interest-rate policy.
The  drastic  monetary  easing  measures  the  Bank  implemented  in  September
1995 --  including  the  lowering  of  the  official  discount  rate  to  0.5  percent  --  was  aimed  at
preventing  the  occurrence  of  a  deflationary  spiral  and  was  intended  to  place  the  Japanese
economy  on  a  path  of  self-sustained  recovery  by  strengthening  corporate  and  household
confidence in the economy. Since the beginning of 1996, the Japanese economy  has  recovered
moderately. In the course of the recovery, the concern for a possible deflationary spiral has been
gradually  dispelled,  and  the  confidence  of  the  corporate  and  household  sectors  has  been
gradually  regained.  Looking  back,  it  appears  that  the  recovery  in  early  1996  was  supported
significantly  by  the  series  of  monetary  easing  measures  and  government  economic  packages
adopted in autumn 1995. It also cannot be denied that the growth rate  from  the  second  half  of
1996 through spring 1997 was boosted by a significant step-up in  demand  ahead  of  the  rise  in
the consumption tax rate. Under these circumstances, it was too soon to conclude that the private
sector  had  gained  sufficient  strength  to  achieve  a  self-sustained  recovery  on  its  own  while
dealing  with  the  impact  of  fiscal  tightening.  If  the  monetary  support  were  to  have  been
discontinued  before  the  economy  had  gained  adequate  strength,  it  would  have  become  more
difficult  to  attain  a  self-sustained  recovery.  This  is  precisely  why  the  Bank  has  maintained  its
easy stance of monetary policy since September 1995.
In connection with the Bank’s  current  stance  of  monetary  policy  management,  I
would  like  to  mention  another  important  point.  The  Bank  aims  to  achieve  price  stability  and
thereby noninflationary, sustainable economic growth over a medium to long term. Accordingly,
it  is  necessary  to  predict  economic  developments  and  to  take  fully  into  consideration  the  time
required  for  monetary  policy  effects  to  spread  throughout  the  economy  when  managing
monetary  policy.  Were  we  to  implement  monetary  policy  merely  to  respond  to  the  immediate
economic condition, it may only amplify economic fluctuations.
For  example,  when  the  Bank  takes  monetary  policy  measures  in  response  to
immediate  improvements  in  economic  activity,  this  action  could  carry  two  conceivable  risks.
The first is the risk that at the time the economic upturn is confirmed, prices may already have
started  to  rise.  Considering  the  time  necessary  for  monetary  policy  effects  to  permeate
throughout the economy, the central bank must act more pre-emptively, as it is too late to take
action after price rises have been confirmed. The other is the risk that the strength of recovery is
insufficient although economic activity may have started to improve. Monetary tightening under
such  circumstances  may  impair  the  force  of  recovery  that  had  at  last  started  to  grow.  In  other
words, monetary tightening at this time will be premature.
Thus, it is extremely important that monetary policy be managed from a medium
to  long-term  perspective.  With  this  in  mind,  the  Bank,  in  its  management  of  monetary  policy,
has  emphasized  accurate  prediction  of  economic  and  price  developments  rather  than  the
economic condition at the time. Further, in accurately predicting these developments, the Bank
has focused on the strength of the self-sustained recovery in the private sector.
This  does  not  mean,  however,  that  the  Bank  is  not  carefully  monitoring  the
potential risks arising from the prolonged easing of monetary policy. It is particularly important
for the Bank to constantly verify that the low interest rates are not expanding the potential risk of
inflation.  In  the  past,  there  were  times  when  the  effects  of  monetary  easing  amplified  rapidly,
increasing abruptly the risk of inflation. In view of the time needed for monetary policy effects
to permeate, the task of assessing potential risk cannot be neglected.
BIS Review   117/1997
- 11 -
As I stated  earlier,  the  Bank  judges  that  there  is  no  large  risk  of  inflation  at  the
moment.  We  at  the  Bank  continue  to  seek  appropriate  policy  decisions  from  a  medium  to
long-term perspective by accurately identifying the risk of price movements.
IV. Conclusion
I  very  much  hope  that  my  discussion  today  has  helped  you  understand  the  key
points in the Bank’s monetary policy management. The Bank will continue to make the utmost
effort to manage monetary policy properly to achieve price stability.
If  I  may  add  to  what  I  have  said  with  regard  to  the  monetary  and  economic
conditions  in  Japan,  the  Bank  believes  it  is  important  to  strengthen  corporate  and  household
confidence in the economy in order to gain a clearer outlook for economic recovery. The recent
cautious  business  sentiment  seems  to  reflect  the  concerns  held  by  firms  over  the  ongoing
structural  adjustment,  the  completion  of  which  is  taking  longer  than  expected.  This  being  the
case,  I  believe  the  important  challenge  for  the  Japanese  economy  continues  to  be  the
implementation of structural measures including deregulation and liquidation of real estate.
BIS Review   117/1997
