Mr.  Desario  reports  on  growth  prospects  and  implications  for  supervision  of
asset management   Address by the Director General of the Bank of Italy, Dott. Vincenzo Desario,
at the conference “Asset management: insurance companies versus banks” held in Rome on 9/4/98.
1. Introduction
The growth of asset management has been a common feature of the financial systems
of all the leading industrial countries. In Italy, the growth has been especially rapid in the last two
years, under the influence of both cyclical and structural factors.
The professional management of  savings  has  always  been  a  characteristic  aspect  of
financial intermediation. Its scope was originally limited to the management 
of individual estates and
The  mandate  to  engage  in  financial  investment  conferred  by  savers  (asset
management)  does  not  place  intermediaries  under  an  obligation  to  repay  the  nominal  value  of  the
principal invested, nor does it guarantee the achievement of a given yield. The scope of the activity
has  become  much  broader;  it  now  involves  a  wide  range  of  different  financial  intermediaries  andinstruments and a much larger pool of investors.
The sharp increase in financial flows has led intermediaries to operate in a variety of
markets and expand the number of innovative products they offer. The ranks of those involved have
grown: banks and insurance companies have been joined by investment houses and investment fund
management companies,  the  savings  of  high-income  customers  by  those  of  lower-income  workers
and pensioners, and individual investors by institutional investors.
The  operational  overlap  between  different  categories  of  intermediary  and  the
substitutability  of  different  types  of  instrument  have  increased.  Competition  has  become  fiercer  at
both the domestic and the international level. The need to achieve a critical mass in order to operate
in a market where the geographical boundaries and the supply of products are changing rapidly has
prompted reorganizations, concentrations and the formation of conglomerates.The  expansion  of  asset  management  has  been  a  major  driving  force  in  financial
innovation  and  has  contributed  everywhere  to  the  erosion  of  institutional  segmentation  and  to  the
I shall look first at the evolution of asset management at the international level, before
analyzing  its  development  in  Italy  and  the  role  of  banks  and  other  intermediaries.  In  view  of  the
opportunities and risks that this development entails, I shall also address supervisory issues, the new
legal framework established recently with the consolidated law on financial markets and the need for
closer and more effective cooperation between authorities, both in Italy and in international fora.
The rapidity of the growth of the international asset management industry is reflected
in  the  share  of  the  financial  instruments  it  offers  in  households’  portfolios  and  the  importance  of
institutional investors.
Between 1982 and 1994 - a period for which comparable figures are available - there
was  a  significant  shift  in  the  composition  of  households’  portfolios  in  all  the  leading  OECD
countries: while the share of financial assets held as bank deposits declined, that of products offered
by insurance companies, investment funds and pension funds grew steadily.
BIS Review  40/1998
˝
- 2 -
˝
Significant  differences  between  countries  nonetheless  persist  within  this  common
trend.  At  the  end  of  the  period  considered,  the  proportion  of  households’  financial  portfolio
consisting of managed assets was one-sixth in Italy and France, one-fourth in Germany and Japan,
two-fifths in the United Kingdom and three-fifths in the United States.
During  the  same  period,  the  assets  of  institutional  investors  (insurance  companies,
investment  funds  and  pension  funds)  increased  in  relation  to  the  total  volume  of  financial
intermediation  and  gross  domestic  product.  Differences  in  the  role  of  institutional  investors  in  the
various countries are captured by the latter indicator: the assets under their management were equal
to 30 per cent of GDP in Italy and Germany but amounted to more than 200 per cent of GDP in the
United Kingdom and Japan (Table 1).
The disparity in the size of the sector in the different countries does not prevent us
from identifying a number of shared structural determinants of the growth in asset management.
The  first  and  most  important  is  the  gradual  aging  of  the  population,  which  fuels
demand for pension-related financial instruments. The difficulties faced by public pension systems
reinforce this trend: asset management has grown the most in countries whose pension systems are
primarily based on private pension schemes; where public systems play a major role, the sector has
developed later and grown more slowly.
The tight limits on budget deficits imposed by the stability pact among the countries
participating  in  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  will  accelerate  recourse  to  private  pension
arrangements, giving additional impetus to the growth of institutional investors in Italy, France and
Germany.
The  liberalization  of  capital  movements  at  the  end  of  the  1980s  was  an  equally
important propulsive factor. New opportunities to diversify financial investments were opened up to
savers in countries that had previously imposed foreign exchange restrictions. It became possible to
construct portfolios with the desired combination of risk and return; at the same time, it became more
difficult  to  manage  portfolios,  increasing  the  importance  of  the  services  offered  by  specialized
intermediaries.
The  decline  in  the  rate  of  inflation  in  recent  years,  together  with  the  restoration  of
macroeconomic stability, has been another factor contributing to  the  growth  and  has  encouraged  a
shift in financial resources towards longer-term assets and, above all, the stock market.
The  spread  of  asset  management  has  not  had  the  same  features  everywhere.  In  the
United States, the process has been accompanied by a considerable reduction in the role of banks; in
the countries of continental Europe the latter have retained a significant position and in many cases
have been the main actors in promoting the growth of the sector.
In  reality,  the  growth  of  asset  management  does  not  necessarily  lead  to  banking
disintermediation: the competition triggered by the changed preferences of savers,  new  technology
and more refined financial instruments, and the evolution of the legal framework does not favour any
one  type  of  intermediary  but  rather  modifies  the  characteristics  of  financial  intermediation  and
financial products as we know them today.
Asset management, defined as the all-inclusive professional management of savings,
is destined to produce lasting changes in the structure of the financial system we have inherited, in
three  main  directions:  greater  concentration  in  the  production  of  asset  management  services,  an
expansion  of  financial  assets  in  relation  to  real  wealth,  and  an  increase  in  the  importance  of  the
securities market.
BIS Review  40/1998
˝
- 3 -
The  search  for  optimal  size 
international
diversification strategies and the need to create efficient integrated structures for the production and
distribution  of  financial  products  have  given  rise  to  mergers  between  some  of  the  world’s  leading
intermediaries.
in  asset  management  activities, 
The growth in asset management has contributed to financial deepening in the leading
industrial  countries.  Between  1982  and  1994  the  ratio  of  gross  financial  assets  to  real  wealth  rose
from 0.8 to 1.6 in the United States and from 1.5 to 2.5 in the United Kingdom.
Institutional investors are channelling an increasingly large volume of funds towards
the  financial  markets.  The  arbitrage  activities  they  engage  in  and  their  ability  to  trade  in  highly
volatile  financial  assets  give  breadth  and  depth  to  the  securities  market,  reinforcing  its  role  in  the
allocation of savings and the redistribution of risk. It is worth noting the introduction of derivative
credit instruments and the growing recourse to techniques for securitizing of bank loans.
The connection between the development of asset management and the growth of the
stock  market  is  shown  by  the  fact  that at the  end  of  1995  the  shareholdings  of  UK  pension  funds
were greater than the total capitalization of the Italian and German stock markets.
In  certain  circumstances  the  behaviour  of  institutional  investors  could  accentuate
tensions  in  securities  markets.  In  markets  of  insufficient  depth,  price  fluctuations  are  likely  to  be
amplified by the use of dynamic hedging techniques or the imitative behaviour of managers seeking
to reduce the risk of performing less well than their competitors.
3. The growth of asset management in Italy
In Italy, the spread of asset management products has increased appreciably in recent
years, approaching the levels achieved in the other leading countries.
Between  1990  and  1997  the  aggregate  comprising  investment  funds,  portfolio
management services, pension funds and life insurance companies’ technical reserves increased from
150 trillion lire to just under 1,000 trillion, rising from 8.5 to 33 per cent of total domestic financial
assets (Table 2).
The  increase  was  especially  large  in  1997.  Net  fund-raising  by  investment  funds
tripled by comparison with 1996 and amounted to 143 trillion lire. In the first nine months of 1997,
the net inflow of resources to portfolio management services nearly doubled to 64 trillion lire, while
premiums paid in respect of life insurance policies grew more moderately, increasing by 44 per cent.
The  differences  between  the  products  offered  by  the  various  categories  of
intermediary have narrowed. About one-quarter of the funds raised by portfolio management services
were  reinvested  in  investment  funds.  In  the  insurance  industry  there  has  been  strong  growth  in
products  with  a  more  pronounced  financial  component,  such  as  single  premium  policies,  sales  of
which increased by 125 per cent in the first nine months of 1997.
The impressive increase in asset management in 1997 was boosted by the decline in
interest rates that accompanied the fall in inflation. Small investors entrusted professional managers
with savings that had previously been invested in government securities as they sought to increase
their returns, inter alia through capital gains.
The  shift  from  personal  investment  to  asset  management  has  led  to  a  greater
diversification  of  households’  and  firms’  investment  portfolios.  Nonetheless,  considering  the  total
BIS Review  40/1998
˝
- 4 -
˝
assets  held  directly  or  indirectly  by  savers  shows  that  the  redistribution  of  final  investment
instruments is taking place gradually. In the past two years the substantial reduction in households’
demand  for  government  securities  has  been  largely  offset  by  the  increase  in  the  subscriptions  of
investment funds. Only in part has it translated into purchases of listed shares and especially foreign
securities.
The preference for asset management is likely to be reinforced by the recent changes
in  the  tax  treatment  of  financial  assets.  The  new  procedures  for  the  taxation  of  financial  income,
based on an all-inclusive approach, relieves investors in managed asset instruments from having to
send  in  returns  and  requires  the  intermediaries  providing  the  service  to  settle  the  related  tax
liabilities. The new rules also standardize the procedures for individual and collective instruments; a
simplification that should enhance operational efficiency.
The flow of funds to institutional investors  and  to the  securities  market requires  an
adequate response in terms of the supply of financial instruments. Greater recourse by firms to the
market, through debt and equity issues, will enable the productive economy to benefit from Italy’s
substantial  saving  capacity  and  give  intermediaries  an  opportunity  to  expand  their  investment
banking services.
The  supply  policies  of  banks,  especially  the  leading  Italian  banking  groups,  have
played a key role. Capitalizing on professional asset management is now a central strategic objective;
it is in line with customer preferences, helps offset the downward trend in interest income, increases
productivity  through  a  better  utilization  of  labour,  and  consolidates  the  fiduciary  relationship  with
savers.
In  1996  managed  asset  services  contributed  substantially  to  banking  groups’
profitability,  producing  gross  revenue  of  more  than  4  trillion  lire  or  around  one-third  of  pre-tax
profit.
In the same year banks and their subsidiaries handled 70.4 per cent of  all  managed
assets in Italy, up from 63 per cent in 1992. Considering investment funds and portfolio management
services  only,  at  the  end  of  1997  the  volume  of  assets  managed  directly  or  indirectly  by  banks
amounted  to  four-fifths  of  the  total.  Banking  groups  have  strengthened  their  central  role  in  asset
management; overall, there has been no significant impact on the volume of funds intermediated by
the credit system.
Over  the  past  five  years  the  fund-raising  policies  of  the  bank-controlled  asset
management companies have transformed the rankings in this sector; the number of bank-controlled
companies in the top five has risen from two to four.
Marketing  capabilities  and  the  fiduciary  relationship  with  customers  have  given
banks  a  competitive  edge  over  other  financial  intermediaries.  The  expansion  of  the  distribution
network  in  years  past  through  the  progressive  diversification  of  channels  (branches,  financial
salesmen, marketing agreements) has produced very extensive coverage of the territory.
A survey of the banking system conducted by the Bank of Italy found that at the end
of  1995  portfolio  management  services  were  offered  by  more  than  60  per  cent  of  all  banks,  life
insurance products by over 70 per cent, and investment fund units by 80 per cent.
Insurance  products  are  increasingly  simple  and  standardized,  which  has  facilitated
their marketing via bank networks and financial salesmen. In the first nine months of 1997 the share
of life insurance products sold through bank networks was 33 per cent, compared with 25 per cent in
the same period of 1996; the share marketed through agents dropped from 42 to 36 per cent.
BIS Review  40/1998
˝
- 5 -
4. Banks and other intermediaries: competition and integration
The 
Italian 
than
market-oriented.  It  did  not  offer  valid  opportunities  for  portfolio  diversification:  the  scope  for
investment was restricted to one instrument - bank deposits - offering modest yields and a nominal
value that was stable over time.
system  was  historically  bank-oriented 
financial 
rather 
In  the  last  fifteen  years  Italians’  high  propensity  to  save,  the  increasing  supply  of
government  securities,  the launch  of  investment  funds  and  the  liberalization  of  capital  movements
have enormously enlarged the role of the financial markets and the opportunities for diversification.
There nonetheless remain risks for the economy as a whole that the markets do not
help to control and which financial theory defines as “non-diversifiable”. Such risks are connected
with the economic cycle or the alternation of periods of financial euphoria and panic, which tend to
generate broad swings in asset prices and thus affect households’ wealth. In such circumstances, an
important  role  is  played  by  intermediaries  that  perform  the  function  of  converting  risk  via  their
balance  sheets  through  the  supply  of  such  non-negotiable  instruments  as  bank  deposits  and
defined-benefit life insurance products.
Financial  innovation  continuously  redefines  the  interaction  between  markets  and
intermediaries.  It  is  this  process  that  determines  the  ability  of  the  financial  system  to  sustain  the
growth of the economy and offer instruments with adequate safeguards for households’ and firms’
savings.
The  growing  competition  between 
intermediary,  and
intermediaries  and  markets  thus  does  not  eliminate  some  of  the  features  that  distinguish  the
operations of banks, insurance companies and securities intermediaries.
instruments, 
types  of 
Banks  necessarily  have  a  large  portion  of  their  assets  tied  up  in  non-negotiable
assets -  loans.  They  retain  a  central  role  in  the  provision  of  payment  services.  They  are  the  main
channel for the transmission of monetary policy impulses, owing to the convertibility of deposits into
legal tender.
Insurance  companies  are  characterized  by  the  production  of  non-negotiable
instruments that offer customers a guaranteed return even for the long term.
Securities  intermediaries  are  geared  to  efficient  trading  in  securities.  The  liabilities
they issue do not carry the obligation of redemption at face value and are not means of payment.
The  intensification  of  competition  is  a  force  for  the  increasing  integration  of
specialized intermediaries within group structures.
The  reasons  for  integration  are  often  to  be  found  precisely  in  the  field  of  asset
management,  where  the  overlapping  between  banking,  insurance  and  securities  business  is  most
pronounced.
Competition spurs the drive for ever greater size, permitting adequate diversification
and  the  exploitation  of  economies  of  scale  in  the  supply  of  individual  and  collective  asset
management services. The recent wave of mergers among the leading global intermediaries confirms
the link between the enlargement of the market, the increase in competition and the effort to achieve
critical  mass.  For  instance,  the  merger  between  Union  Bank  of  Switzerland  and  Swiss  Bank
Corporation, already the third and fifth-largest European banking groups at the end of 1996, created
BIS Review  40/1998
˝
- 6 -
˝
an intermediary with some $680 billion of managed assets, nearly three times the total net assets of
Italian investment funds.
Competition  and concentration  are  bound  to  intensify  with  economic  and  monetary
union,  which  will  eliminate  the  residual  segmentations  based  on  the  currency  of  denomination  of
financial products.
In  the  drive  for  efficiency,  Italian  intermediaries  have  also  begun  to  centralize
functions  that  were  once  performed  by  different  operational  units  and  not  always  integrated  in
operational  or  administrative  terms.  They  are  rationalizing  the  production  and  distribution  of  their
different asset management services within group structures, but they have not yet attained the size
needed in order to compete at the European level.
Italian  intermediaries  can  defend  their  position  in  the  domestic  market  effectively,
capitalizing on their customer relations and distribution capabilities. With respect to certain groups of
investors, however, such as firms, foundations and wealthy individuals, the distribution network is of
minor  importance,  and  foreign  intermediaries  are  likely  to  be  increasingly  effective  competitors.
Over  the  longer  run,  the  spread  of  electronic  sales  networks  and  other  marketing  innovations  will
intensify competition in standardized products for the retail market as well.
The acceleration of mergers and takeovers within the Italian banking industry and the
growing  recourse  to  forms  of  integration  between  credit  and  insurance  institutions  reflect  the
commitment  to  enhance  the  competitiveness  of  the  financial  system  and  to  reposition  the  sector
within the European market.
Alongside  the  major  intermediaries  there  is  still  room  for  local  operators,  but  their
success  requires  highly  specialized  production  strategies,  aimed  at  particular  instruments  and
markets. Alternatively, these banks could concentrate on strengthening their distribution capabilities,
perhaps  through  agreements  with  large-scale  asset  management  institutions  that  do  business  in  a
number of different financial market centres, in order to obtain more sophisticated products and offer
their customers a broader range of services.
5. The new regulation of asset management
The erosion of the geographical and product barriers between markets, the creation of
complex and internationally ramified groups, the increasing competition between different types of
intermediaries  and  the  growth  of  securities  markets  have  enhanced  the  investment  opportunities
available to  vast  numbers  of  small  investors;  they  have  also  called  for  a  major  effort  to  adapt  the
regulatory framework and the organization of supervision in order to protect the savings invested and
the stability of intermediaries.
The  revision  of  the  regulations  governing  the  various  financial  sectors,  partly  in
response  to  the  process  of  harmonization  within  the  European  Community,  has  eliminated  the
competitive  inequalities  between  different  intermediaries  operating  in  the  same  markets,  created
instruments  for  exercising  control  in  order  to  counter  the  risks  arising  from  the  new  forms  of
organization of financial activity.
In Italy, the Consolidated Law on Financial Markets has responded to the problems
posed by the new and diversified structure of supply by thoroughly overhauling the rules governing
financial intermediaries and markets.
BIS Review  40/1998
˝
- 7 -
The  statutory  innovations  will allow  Italian  intermediaries  to  diversify  and  broaden
the range of services they provide, adopt more flexible organizational structures and compete on an
equal footing with foreign firms.
The earlier legal framework restricted the scope for innovation, especially in the field
of collective investment, where new types of investment funds could only be introduced by primary
legislation.
The extensive recourse made to secondary instead of primary legislation has removed
the constraints on the diversification of products and services. In particular, the Ministry of Treasury
is charged with the task of defining the principal characteristics of the various types of investment
funds, with special reference to eligible assets (listed securities, unlisted securities, real estate, etc.),
whether  the  fund  is  open  or  closed-end,  and  the  nature  of  potential  customers  (small  savers  or
institutional investors).
The Bank  of  Italy  is  charged  with  regulating  the management  of  investment  funds’
portfolios. In addition to the earlier tasks associated with the prudential supervision of undertakings
for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS), it is now responsible for establishing the
procedures and prohibitions for investment activity and for the limitation and diversification of risk.
The  most  important  innovation  is  the  elimination  of  the  separation  between
management  on  an  individual  basis  and  that  on  a  collective  basis  with  the  creation  of  a  single
manager, the “asset management company”.
Investment  firms,  banks  and  trust  companies  continue  to  be  allowed  to  provide
individual management services directly, while asset management companies are allowed to provide
both  individual  and  collective  management  services  on  an  exclusive  basis.  The  possibility  of
operating across the board will enable them to achieve higher levels of productive efficiency.
The right to provide the two services jointly, which is consistent with the proposed
Community directive currently under discussion on the collective management of assets, meets the
needs  of  intermediaries  and  puts  them  in  a  better  position  to  satisfy  the  preferences  of  their
customers. At the same time, the prohibition on the supply of other services is an important defence
against conflicts of interest.
Major changes in the direction of greater flexibility have also been introduced at the
organizational  level.  In  particular:  the  management  and  promotion  of  funds  may  be  separated  and
entrusted to different companies; managers may delegate investment activity within a set of criteria
for  the  allocation  of  resources;  and  in  the  field  of  individual  management  services  banks  and
investment firms may entrust the execution of management contracts to third parties, for part of the
portfolio or even the entire portfolio, subject to written authorization by the customer. The granting
of  considerable  autonomy  in  the  organization  of  production  reflects  the  belief  that  the  supply  of
management services is a complex business with high fixed costs and large economies of scale.
The importance of group structures in the financial industry and the related need to
strengthen prudential controls suggested extending the scope of the rules on consolidated supervision
to  financial  groups  having  at  least  one  investment  firm  or  asset  management  company.
Responsibility for issuing the regulations lies primarily with the Bank of Italy, which is required to
define  such  groups  for  supervisory  purposes  and  draw  up  the  prudential  rules  to  be  applied  on  a
consolidated basis.
The division of supervisory responsibilities according to purpose has been confirmed
and  further  clarified  for  all  intermediaries.  Consob  is  entrusted  with  ensuring  the  transparency,
BIS Review  40/1998
˝
- 8 -
˝
correctness and regularity of trading, while the Bank of Italy is responsible for the controls aimed at
protecting investors and ensuring the capital adequacy and stability of intermediaries.
Faced with the continuous and at times tumultuous development of financial markets,
the debate on the optimal organization of supervisory controls sometimes appears to be conducted at
an  excessively  abstract  level.  The  experience  of  recent  years  shows  that  supervisory  arrangements
must be constantly adapted to the situations created by financial and technological innovation.
The  transfer  of  vast  sums  to  the  care  of  professional  managers  by  small  savers
belonging  to  a  wide  range  of  social  groups  raises  special  issues  with  regard  to  financial  stability.
Naturally, there is no derogation from the principle that the result of delegated investment depends
on the performance of the management scheme, which may involve both lower-than-expected rates
of  return  and  capital  losses.  Managers  nonetheless  have  a  special  responsibility  to  safeguard  the
value  of  such  savings.  It  is  indispensable  that  management  choices  should  correspond  to  the  risk
profiles  accepted  by  investors  and,  more  generally,  that  the  rules  on  risk  diversification  should  be
observed. The prudential limits on operations established and monitored by the authorities become of
great importance.
The structural changes under way in the Italian financial system require the different
supervisory regulators to intensify their coordination efforts. Effective cooperation among authorities
enhances the effectiveness of controls, and the ability to forestall instability is the key to achieving
the efficiency gains that the growth of financial markets makes possible.
The  consolidated  law  imposes  an  obligation  on  the  authorities  to  collaborate,
inter alia by exchanging information; they cannot invoke official secrecy in their dealings with each
other. The importance of coordination is thus confirmed, in recognition of the dangers that inefficient
cooperation  is  likely  to  entail  for  the integrity  and  efficiency  of  the  financial  system.  At  the  same
time collaboration must be informed by the principle of minimizing the costs borne by those subject
to supervision.
The  globalization  and  increasing  competition  between  financial  centres  that  have
accompanied the growth in asset management have also spurred a far-reaching reorganization of the
securities markets. The consolidated law completes the innovations introduced by Legislative Decree
415/1996, which provided for the privatization of the stock exchange and the securities markets. The
management of the markets is entrusted to limited companies that have private sector shareholders
and  self-regulatory  powers  in  matters  such  as  the  admission  of  financial  instruments  and
intermediaries to the market, as well as their exclusion and suspension.
Consob  is  charged  with  the  supervision  of  the  regulated markets; the  Bank  of  Italy
has been given a primary role for the markets that are important for monetary policy purposes: the
screen-based government securities market (MTS) and the interbank deposit market (MID).
6. International coordination
The response to the growing integration of markets has been to complete the reform
of financial regulations, with the creation of a system of controls that is basically neutral with respect
to the nature of intermediaries and based on cooperation among supervisory authorities.
The  internationalization  of  finance  results  in  cooperation  among  the  authorities  of
different  countries  becoming  of  fundamental  importance.  The  increasing  openness  of  financial
markets  makes  the  exchange  of  information  indispensable,  requires  a  flexible  interpretation  of
cooperation  agreements  and  calls  for  the  coordination  of  corrective  measures.  The  links  between
BIS Review  40/1998
˝
- 9 -
supervisory bodies must be permanent, not restricted to crisis situations, and must involve both the
authorities responsible for controlling intermediaries and those with powers over markets.
The growth of asset management, where the activities typical of institutions engaged
in banking, insurance and securities investment services intersect, has fostered the rise of financial
conglomerates.
The presence of these complex organizations creates new channels for the spread of
possible crises; their international ramification and the existence of different types of intermediaries
increase the difficulty of coordinating the supervisory bodies involved.
Generally  speaking,  the  emergence  of  a  small  group  of  very  large  global  operators
with  substantial  capital  and  highly  diversified  portfolios  strengthens  the  financial  system;  the
emergence  of  such  a  group  nonetheless  faces  the  international  community  with  the  problem  of
forestalling  the  possibility  of  an  insolvency  and  defining  instruments  on  an  adequate  scale  for
handling such an event.
The  supervision  of  financial  conglomerates  is  hindered  by  the  existence  of
unregulated  entities,  but  problems  also  arise  where  all  the  components  are  subject  to  prudential
controls. In the case of capital adequacy, it is necessary to avoid double and multiple gearing, which
can result in the group as a whole failing to have adequate capital even though the individual units all
satisfy their respective capital requirements.
The ramification and strategies of groups can reduce the effectiveness of individual
supervisory authorities’ prudential controls and make it less easy to overcome company crises.
Risk  control  in  the  more  complex  financial  conglomerates  is  often  centralized  in  a
single operating unit; the correspondence between company structures and lines of business ceases to
exist; group activities are no longer covered by supervisory controls, which are divided by country,
type of institution and product. Regulators are likely to encounter greater obstacles to the effective
performance of their tasks because functions that are crucial to the sound and prudent management of
the undertaking subject to supervision are carried on in a different jurisdiction.
Awareness of these difficulties has led to an intensification of cooperative efforts in
international  fora.  At  the  beginning  of  1996  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  the
International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) and the International Association of
Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) set up the Joint Forum on financial conglomerates and charged it with
the task of addressing the supervisory issues raised by these complex financial organizations.
In  particular,  the  Joint  Forum  has  studied  the  practical  means  of  facilitating  the
exchange  of  information  among  supervisory  authorities,  at  both  the  national  and  the  international
levels, and has examined arrangements for facilitating the coordination of control activities both in
ordinary  circumstances  and  in  crises.  It  has  also  drawn  up  a  list  of  principles  aimed  at  permitting
more effective supervision of regulated institutions within financial conglomerates.
The  proposals  put  forward  by  the  Joint  Forum  primarily  concern  the  methods  for
evaluating  the  capital  adequacy  of  conglomerates  and  verifying  the  integrity  and  experience
requirements  for  corporate  officers  and  significant  shareholders.  Common  reporting  formats  have
been  prepared  for  use  by  authorities  in  order  to  improve  their  understanding  and  analysis  of  the
structure and operations of conglomerates.
The possibility has been examined of identifying one authority to act as coordinator
with the aim of facilitating the exchange of information, permitting an overall assessment to be made
BIS Review  40/1998
˝
- 10 -
 of the riskiness and capital adequacy of groups, and improving the consistency of prudential controls
and the timeliness of corrective measures. This hypothesis nonetheless requires that consideration be
given not only to the benefits just mentioned but also to the danger that supervisory action will be
made  more  complex  and  the  safety  net  seen  as  having  been  extended  to  all  the  components  of
conglomerates, including those that are unregulated.
As things stand today, coordination among supervisors has to rely on their practice of
exchanging information, the knowledge each has of the others’ operating procedures and objectives,
and trust in the opinions they express.
Last  February  the  documents  prepared  by  the  Joint  Forum  were  distributed  to
supervisory  authorities  and  market  participants  for  them  to  put  forward  their  observations  and
suggestions.  It  is  important  that  financial  industries,  including  Italy’s,  analyze  the  proposals  very
carefully, in order to contribute to enhancing their effectiveness and utility, to the benefit ultimately
of all market participants.
7. Conclusions
The growth in asset management represents a major structural change and is common
to all the leading industrial countries. In Italy, the growth of the industry has accelerated sharply in
conjunction  with  the  fall  in  interest  rates  over  the  last  two  years.  The  shifts  in  intermediaries’
strategies,  the  recomposition  of  their  assets  and  the  links  created  between  the  different  types  of
intermediary suggest that the growth will not peter out once Italian interest rates come into line with
those prevailing in the other countries that will be part of the European Monetary Union.
The management of savings by institutional investors benefits from the development
of the securities markets and, at the same time, contributes to their efficiency. It does not necessarily
imply the disintermediation of banks. In Italy, the supply policies of the major banking groups have
sustained the expansion of management services. The increasing competition, at the international as
well as the domestic level, is stimulating the search for larger size through mergers and equity stakes
that often give rise to financial conglomerates.
The  changes  under  way  modify  the  exposure  to  systemic  risk,  the  channels  for  the
propagation  of  crises  and  the  latter’s  potential  impact.  The  greater  ramification  of  the  financial
market is likely to reduce the probability of a single intermediary’s difficulties spreading to the rest
of the system. Nonetheless, the number and size of today’s financial markets and institutions mean
that it may prove more difficult to limit the effects of a crisis where one does occur.
Despite the progress made in adjusting the regulatory framework to the new reality of
financial  markets,  supervisory  authorities  are  faced  with  new  challenges;  the  most  important
concerns the coordination of their action, both domestically and internationally.
The  crises  that  have  occurred  in  the  last  few  years  show  how  fast  tensions  can  be
transmitted  across  countries,  markets  and  intermediaries.  Macroeconomic  instability  is  likely  to
interact  with  elements  of  financial  instability,  spreading  to  the  jurisdictions  of  several  supervisory
authorities,  central  banks  and  governments  and 
international  organizations.  As
globalization  proceeds,  the  asymmetry  between  the  integration  of  markets  and  the  multiplicity  of
regulatory  authorities  increases  the  difficulty  of  carrying  out  supervision,  calls  for  a  parallel
integration of supervisory action.
involving 
Coordination  and  the  timely  exchange  of  information  can  increase  the  ability  to
forestall crises and help overcome them when they do occur.
BIS Review  40/1998
˝
- 11 -
The  reform  of  the  securities  market  and  the  opening  of  finance  to  international
competition have broadened and strengthened the structure of Italy’s financial system and improved
its allocative efficiency. Firms and households can turn to new intermediaries and new instruments.
Firms can tap a wider range of sources of external finance, raise long-term debt and,
above  all,  make  greater  use  of  equity  capital.  In  this  way  they  can  achieve  a  more  solid  financial
structure that is better able to sustain investment. Households have  greater  scope  to  diversify  their
financial portfolios with products that in the long run permit higher real rates of return.
In today’s new conditions of monetary stability, the possibility of earning high returns
at low risk that was a feature of the last twenty-odd years will no longer exist. In order to take full
advantage of the opportunities offered by the development of the securities markets, intermediaries
will have to make their investment choices keeping a close eye on economic fundamentals and firms’
capital solidity and earnings prospects.
It is not only intermediaries who must be fully aware of the growing complexity of
financial intermediation and of the related risks, but also the investors who entrust them with their
savings.
BIS Review  40/1998
˝
- 12 -
 Table 1
Assets of institutional investors
as a percentage of total financial intermediation
as a percentage of GDP
1982
1986
1990
1994
1982
1986
1990
1994
Italy ..................
France  ..............
Germany  ..........
Japan  ................
United States ....
United Kingdom
4.0
5.5
12.2
61.4
50.4
24.0
12.4
13.6
14.3
63.1
56.2
32.6
14.9
18.0
14.6
59.4
61.8
34.2
17.1
23.6
15.3
63.2
69.2
42.6
6.0
12.2
22.6
150.9
89.8
71.7
19.5
33.8
28.8
205.9
127.5
131.8
22.3
50.5
33.9
222.2
148.9
119.1
29.8
71.3
36.4
246.9
188.1
202.8
Source: OECD, financial accounts.
Table 2
Assets under management in Italy
(billions of lire - percentage)
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
47,379
56,191
60,663
110,093
130,169
126,802
197,544
368,432
65,022
92,824
105,329
142,929
180,959
192,438
260,584
372,456
39,604
n.a.
152,005
49,718
76,209
274,942
62,402
80,941
309,335
70,893
85,545
409,460
69,276
94,977
475,381
84,693
101,025
504,958
94,867
104,812
657,807
107,951
108,741
957,580
1,818,643
2,037,146
2,203,325
2,379,134
2,536,384
2,631,070
2,688,595
2,916,609
8.4
13.5
14.0
17.2
18.7
19.2
24.5
32.8
Investment funds
Portfolio
management
services1
Life insurance
companies1,2
Pension funds1
Total (a)
Domestic
financial
assets (b)
Memorandum
item: a/b*100
Sources: Banca d’Italia, Abridged Annual Report and Economic Bulletin.
1 The figures for 1997 are estimates. 2 Technical reserves excluding assets entrusted to portfolio management services.
BIS Review  40/1998
˝
