Mr. Reddy reports on the recent performance of the Indian economy  Speech by
Dr.  Y.V.  Reddy,  a  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  entitled,  “ Managing  Capital
Account”  in Hyderabad on 01/10/98.
On behalf of the Reserve Bank of India, I would like to convey my warm greetings to
all the delegates from various South Asian countries. I have special pleasure in welcoming our chief
guest, Governor A. S. Jayawardhene.
The  forex  markets  in  many  parts  of  the  world  are  going  through  a  turmoil  due  to
currency crises, which are intensively affecting more and more countries. Many of these crises are
characterized  by  volatile  capital  flows  –  though  the  underlying  causes  for  such  crises  may  vary.
Currently,  there  is  a  raging  debate  on  the  issues  relating  to  managing  capital  flows,  incidentally
reopening many issues such as the merits of capital controls, and the adequacy of the international
financial  architecture.  There  are  references  to  India  also  in  this  debate  and  interest  has  been
expressed  on  how  we  are  managing  our  capital  flows.  I  will,  therefore,  share  with  you  our
perceptions on the following issues.
First, why is it that India has remained relatively unaffected by the Asian crisis?
Second, what role did policy relating to capital flows play in imparting stability? To
put it differently, what was the policy and operational framework in managing capital flows? How
was the current account handled to ensure effective management of the capital account? What were
the strategies for crisis avoidance? What were the means adopted to meet extraordinary situations?
Third, in view of emerging global developments, can India continue to be what has
been described as an island of tranquility amidst a sea of turbulence in the emerging economies? To
put it differently, what are the immediate prospects for India in the external sector?
India and Asian Crisis
The  performance  of  the  Indian  economy,  by  all  accounts,  has  been  by  and  large
impressive both in terms of growth and stability. During the period 1992-97, the annual average real
GDP  growth  rate  was  6.8  per  cent.  Our  annual  average  growth  rate  during  this  period  was  higher
than the developing countries’ average at 6.4 per cent. Our inflation during the period 1992-97 was
8.7  per  cent,  which  compares  favourably  with  the  developing  countries’  average.  Our  current
account deficit as a percentage of GDP was only 1.3 per cent during this period. Foreign exchange
reserves went up from US$ 9.2 billion in 1991-92 to US$ 26.4 at end-March 1997.
The  data  that  I  have  just  presented  will  show  that  our  fundamentals  are  strong,
making  us  less  vulnerable  to  contagion,  and  this  is  clear  from  our  performance  in  1997-98  also,
when the crisis struck East Asia. During 1997-98, real GDP growth  has  been  estimated  at  5.1  per
cent, a decline from the previous year’s growth of 7.5 per cent, mainly attributable to a significant
decline  in  agricultural  output.  The  rate  of  inflation  as  measured  by  the  wholesale  price  index
declined in 1997-98 to 5.3 per cent on a point-to-point basis. In 1997-98, the current account deficit
continued to be low at 1.7 per cent of GDP and there was accretion to foreign exchange reserves to
the tune of US$ 3 billion.
The  reason  as  to  why  we  escaped  the  contagion  can  be  analysed  in  terms  of  the
policies that we have been pursuing in areas where serious concern has been expressed in the context
of the Asian crisis. Investment as a percentage of GDP has been reasonably steady in the recent past
BIS Review   89/1998
- 2 -
at around 27 per cent on average, and about 95 per cent of this was financed by domestic savings. In
managing  our  external  account,  we  ensure  a  sustainable  current  account  deficit,  strictly  control
reliance on short-term external debt, limit access to external debt, and emphasise productive use of
such  debt.  We  do  encourage  Foreign  Direct  Investment  and  portfolio  investments  through  foreign
institutional investors as the main sources of non-debt-creating capital inflows. Also, the exchange
rate is market determined. The RBI closely monitors it, and when warranted makes purchases and
sales of foreign currency to ensure orderly conditions in forex markets. We undertook, early in the
reform  period,  financial  sector  reforms  -  especially  banking  reform,  which  included  strengthening
the  regulatory  framework,  imposing  prudential  norms  and  reducing  non-performing  assets.  We
discourage  banks’  investments  in  real  estate  and  stock  markets.  Corporates’  exposure  to  debt,
especially external debt, is within reasonable limits. As compared with other central banks, there is
widely  recognised  transparency  in  operations  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  There  is,  therefore,
reason to believe that it is not just chance but sound macroeconomic management which saved us
from the South-East Asian contagion. It is nonetheless necessary for us to learn from the experience
of the Asian crisis.
Policy Frame
The broad approach to reform in the external sector after the Gulf crisis was laid out
in the Report of the High Level Committee on Balance of Payments chaired by Dr. C. Rangarajan,
currently  the  Governor  of  Andhra  Pradesh.  It  recommended,  inter  alia:  liberalisation  of  current
account transactions, leading to current account convertibility; compositional shift in capital  flows
away  from  debt  to  non-debt-creating  flows;  strict  regulation  of  external  commercial  borrowings,
especially  short-term  debt;  discouraging  volatile  elements  of  flows  from  non-resident  Indians;
gradual liberalisation of outflows; and disintermediation of the Government in the flow of external
assistance.  The  Committee  also  recommended  the  introduction  of  a  market-determined  exchange
rate regime while emphasing the need to contain the current account deficit within limits. The policy
framework  for  the  external  sector  based  on  the  Rangarajan  Committee  Report  was  implemented
along with policy changes in the trade, industrial and financial sectors.
Under  trade  policy,  there  has  been  a  virtual  elimination  of  licensing,  a  progressive
shift of restricted items of imports to Open General Licence (OGL) and a lowering of tariff barriers.
Industrial policy has been characterised by delicensing, removal of monopoly clauses defining large
industrial houses and removal of most reservations for public sector enterprises. The reforms in the
area  of  the  financial  sector  were  guided  by  the  recommendations  of  the  Narasimham  Committee.
Alongside the deregulation of the banking industry, including entry for new private sector banks, the
general  thrust  of  monetary  policy  has  been  towards  reduction  in  pre-emptions,  greater  recourse  to
open  market  operations,  deregulation  of  interest  rates  and  widening  and  deepening  of  financial
markets. Simultaneously, measures have been undertaken to strengthen the institutional framework
in  banking,  non-banking  financial  companies,  financial  institutions  and  stock  markets  through
prudential  norms,  capital  adequacy  stipulations,  improvements  in  payments  and  settlement
mechanisms  and  strengthening  of  the  supervisory  framework.  Institutional  measures  have  also
included  recapitalisation  of  banks,  improvements  in  debt  recovery  and,  most  important,  the
setting-up of the Board for Financial Supervision and strengthening Bank’s supervisory mechanisms.
A second Narasimham Committee has given a road map for further reform of the banking sector.
We have taken various measures to ensure that the banking system does not get into a
maturity  mismatch  bind.  With  a  view  to  encouraging  banks  to  mobilise  longer-term  deposits,  we
increased  the  interest  rate  ceiling  on  FCNR-B  deposits  above  one  year  while  simultaneously
reducing the ceiling on such deposits below one year. Banks have been asked to monitor unhedged
BIS Review   89/1998
foreign  currency  exposures  of  their  clients.  Draft  guidelines  for  asset-liability  management  have
been prepared and after discussion with banks will be put in place. We are monitoring the liquidity
position in the economy very closely.
Fiscal  adjustment  has  been  undertaken  and  a  very  significant  measure  is  that  the
system of automatic monetisation of the fiscal deficit was replaced by a system of ways and means
advances.
In brief, reform in the external sector was meshed with reform in other related sectors
and,  within  the  external  sector  reform,  capital  flows  were  managed,  keeping  in  view  the  needs  of
efficiency and stability. There was a fairly smooth movement from  an  administered  exchange  rate
system to a market-determined exchange rate, and the Reserve Bank always ensures that volatility
and speculative elements are curbed through both direct and indirect measures.
Operational Framework
Based  on  the  policy  frame  and  the  projected  financing  requirement  for  each  year,
management  of  the  capital  account  is  operationalised  through  procedures  for  foreign  direct
investment, portfolio investment, external commercial borrowings, NRI deposits and outflows.
The broad approach to targeting of foreign direct investment has been through a dual
route,  i.e.  automatic  and  non-automatic.  Where  the  approval  is  automatic,  activities  and  extent  of
ownership are listed, while in regard to the rest, a case-by-case approval by a high-powered board is
adopted.
Portfolio investments are restricted to select players, viz. FIIs. They could, subject to
some restrictions, operate in equity and debt markets. FIIs are permitted to invest in equity subject to
a ceiling of 10 per cent for individual FIIs in a single company and 30 per cent collective investment
ceiling in a single company. Indian corporates are permitted, again through a process of approval of
individual cases satisfying general guidelines, to access funds through global depository receipts and
euroconvertibles.
The  approach  to  external  commercial  borrowings  has  been  one  of  prudence,  with
self-imposed ceilings on commitments and a careful monitoring of the cost of raising funds as well
as  their  end  use.  External  commercial  borrowings  are  subject  to  a  ‘dual  route’,  viz.  a  small
component  of  automatic  and  a  major  part  through  case  by  case  approval,  based  on  the  size  and
sector.  Short-term  debt,  including  trade-related  payments  beyond  180  days,  is  subject  to  strict
case-by-case approval of purpose, amount and terms. An overall annual ceiling is kept for all debt
flows - both for short-term and medium to long-term.
In respect of NRI deposits, control over inflows is exercised through specification of
interest rates or interest rate ceilings for different maturities in respect of deposits in select schemes,
while, more generally, variable reserve requirements are stipulated to encourage or discourage such
flows.
As regards external assistance, both bilateral and multilateral flows are administered
by the Government of India.
In  respect  of  capital  outflows,  the  approach  has  been  to  facilitate  direct  overseas
investment through joint ventures and wholly owned subsidiaries and provision of financial support
BIS Review   89/1998
- 4 -
to promote exports, especially project exports from India. There are dual routes, namely automatic
and  case-by-case  and  there  is  an  aggregate  annual  ceiling  for  such  approvals.  Exporters  and
exchange earners have also been given permission, on a selective basis, to maintain foreign currency
accounts and use them for permitted purposes which facilitate their overseas business promotion and
growth.
Current Account Management
When  India  adopted  current  account  convertibility  in  1994,  it  was  recognised,  as
emphasised by the Rangarajan Committee, that there could be capital outflows in the guise of current
account  transactions.  Hence,  certain  safeguards  were  built  into  the  regulations  relating  to  current
account transactioins.
First, the requirement of repatriation and surrender of export proceeds was continued.
Exporters were, however, allowed to retain a portion of their earnings in foreign currency accounts
in  India  which  could  be  used  for  approved  purposes,  thereby  avoiding  costs  of  conversion  and
reconversion.
Second, all authorised dealers were allowed to sell foreign exchange for underlying
current account transactions which could be readily identified and supported by some documentary
evidence.
Third, indicative value limits were given for different kinds of transactions so that the
amounts  sold  were  reasonable  in  relation  to  the  purpose.  For  higher  amounts,  the  banks  had  to
approach  the  RBI.  This  operational  framework  for  the  current  account  enabled  effective
management of the capital account.
Fourth,  the  RBI  has  been  taking  an  active  interest  in  the  development  of  money,
government securities and forex markets. A proactive interest in the development of these markets
has also enabled effective management of the current and capital accounts.
Fifth, while ensuring orderly and cautious deregulation, every effort has been made to
improve the information base on major transactions in the forex markets with respect to its nature
and  magnitude.  Constant  improvements  are  made  to  ensure  the  appropriateness,  timeliness  and
quality  of  the  information  base.  The  insistence  on  adequate  and  timely  details  from  authorised
dealers  in  forex  markets  also  helped  in  fine  tuning  the  management  of  the  current  and  capital
accounts.
It must be noted that we insist as a general rule that foreign currency transactions take
place for financing defined underlying transactions. No doubt, genuine hedging of exposures under
specified  conditions  is  allowed.  Transactions  merely  involving  currency  exchange  or  with  purely
speculative motives are viewed with serious disfavour. This consistent approach has lent credibility
to the management of both current and capital transactions.
As explained by Governor Jalan, the objective of the current policy in regard to the
foreign  exchange  market  is  to  maintain  orderly  conditions  in  the  financial  markets.  The  policy  is
aimed at preventing any destabilizing speculation in the market while at the same time facilitating
foreign exchange transactions at market rates for all permissible purposes.
BIS Review   89/1998
Crisis avoidance
It  would  not  be  appropriate  to  conclude  that  managing  capital  flows  on  the  above
lines, however efficient, will ensure that there would be total tranquility in the capital flows. In fact,
even  with  a  managed  capital  account,  we  had  to  contend  with  occasional  surges  in  capital  flows
between 1993 and 1997. In general, the short-term response has taken a number of forms, viz. raising
of reserve requirements, reviewing the pace of removal of restrictions on capital inflows, relaxation
of end-use specifications, liberalization of capital outflows, partial sterilization through open market
operations,  and  deepening  the  foreign  exchange  market  by  routing  an  increased  volume  of
transactions through the market.
The  prolonged  stability  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rupee  from  March  1993  came
under stress in the second half of 1995-96. In response to the upheavals, the RBI intervened in the
market  to  signal  that  the  fundamentals  were  in  place  and  to  ensure  that  market  correction  of  the
exchange rate was orderly and calibrated. Exchange market intervention was supported by monetary
policy action to withdraw liquidity. The pressures intensified towards the end of January 1996 and
the first week of February 1996. The Reserve Bank undertook a number of measures to encourage
the  faster  realization  of  export  proceeds  and  to  prevent  an  acceleration  of  import  payments.  The
interest  rate  surcharge  on  import  finance  was  raised,  the  scheme  of  post-shipment  export  credit
denominated  in  foreign  currency  was  scrapped  and  the  RBI  continued  to  intervene  actively  in  the
spot, forward and swap markets.
The  year  1997-98  and  the  first  quarter  of  1998-99  posed  severe  challenges  in
exchange  rate  management  in  the  face  of  the  threat  of  external  contagion  and  other  uncertainties.
Distinct phases of exchange rate movements and response by the RBI can be identified. During April
to  September  1997,  excess  supply  conditions  prevailed  in  the  market  and  the  Reserve  Bank
undertook large net purchases of foreign currency. From September 1997 to mid-January 1998, acute
exchange  market  pressure  was  staved  off  through  sales  of  foreign  currency,  coupled  with
administrative measures such as restricting certain forward contracts and monetary policy measures.
Mid-January  to  April  1998  marked  the  return  of  stability  and  enabled  the  rolling-back  of  tight
monetary measures introduced in January 1998.
When the foreign exchange market was characterised by considerable uncertainties in
May  to  June  1998,  several  measures  were  announced  by  the  RBI  in  June  1998  to  reverse  the
demand/supply mismatches in the market. The market responded positively to these measures, but in
August 1998 there were fluctuations in the exchange rate in view of international developments. The
RBI again undertook strong administrative  and  monetary  measures,  which  included  an  increase  in
the repo rate and the cash reserve requirement of banks.
A vigilant and proactive policy by the RBI was, therefore, essential to avoid crisis in
a highly unsettled atmosphere in international currency markets.
Managing Extraordinary Events
An  extraordinary  situation  arose  consequent  upon  the  imposition  of  sanctions,  and
the issue of Resurgent India Bonds (RIBs) is an interesting example of management of the capital
account in such a situation. The RIBs were designed to compensate for the extraordinary events in
1998-99,  which  may  result  in  some  shortfall  in  the  normally  expected  level  of  capital  inflows  -
though the current account deficit would continue to be well within 2 per cent of GDP. Due to the
sudden developments in 1998-99, a temporary disruption in capital flows, especially debt flows, was
BIS Review   89/1998
- 6 -
anticipated.  Instead  of  dipping  into  currency  reserves,  which  might  affect  sentiment  adversely,  or
cutting  the  current  account  deficit  through  drastic  import  cuts,  which  would  affect  real  economic
activity,  the  alternative  was  to  enhance  debt  flows  at  the  least  possible  cost.  There  was  a  need  to
offset the adverse negative market sentiment created in the international capital markets due to the
downgrading  of  India’s  sovereign  rating  to  non-investment  grade.  This  could  be  done  by
demonstrably raising debt resources at a cost lower than  that  any  organised  financial  intermediary
was prepared to provide in the context of the rating downgrade. Raising resources through sovereign
borrowing was considered to be time-consuming and in any case inadvisable as a maiden offering
under adverse circumstances. At the same time, it was necessary to ensure that amounts so obtained
were  restricted  quantitatively  to  meet  essential  needs  as  a  replacement  for  normal  debt  flows  by
keeping an option for premature closure. Furthermore, we had to ensure that the borrowing had an
appropriate  medium-term  maturity,  say  five  years.  RIBs,  which  are  essentially  in  the  nature  of
foreign currency deposits on a par with FCNR-B, were devised in the light of these considerations. It
was  also  necessary  for  the  RBI  to  ensure  that  these  funds  did  not  disrupt  the  money,  forex  or
government securities market.
There  have  been  three  main  points  of  criticism  regarding  RIBs,  i.e.  cost  of  raising
RIBs, substitution of FCNR-B deposits and exchange rate guarantee.
A total amount of $ 4.23 billion has been mobilised at a moderate cost in the face of a
difficult  international  environment  and  the  recent  downgrading  of  our  credit  rating.  Some  have
called it the deal of the year. To quote an international investor, “… the cost at which funds have
been raised imply a perceived sovereign rating three to four notches higher than current levels. For
comparison sake China’s 2003 Yankee Bond Issue, rated A3 by Moody’s trades at a spread of 280
basis points (on August 21) over the ten year US Treasury implying a dollar yield of 7.90 per cent
and the RIB issue is not even sovereign risk.”
On the second point, as most of the banks that have actively mobilised RIBs may be
aware  by  now,  there  has  been  limited  substitution  from  FCNR-B  deposits  and  moreover,  to  the
extent there has been substitution, it  would  result  in  elongation  of  the  maturity  of  deposits  to  five
years, while at the same time bringing into the country actual foreign exchange that is presently kept
unswapped.
In  regard  to  the  exchange  guarantee  extended,  it  is  recognised  that  under  normal
circumstances, issuance of such a guarantee is inadvisable. However, it can be legitimately held that
the  recent  times  have  been  far  from  normal.  In  return  for  a  specific  guarantee  on  RIBs,  the
Government  can  claim  benefits  in  four  ways,  viz.  addition  to  forex  reserves,  support  to
macroeconomic environment and sentiment, indirect support for its own borrowing programme and
resources for infrastructure development, including for public sector entities. It can also be argued
that the Government bears exchange risk in regard to bilateral and multilateral flows for its use or for
onlending.  Moreover,  given  the  Indian  track  record  on  prudent  macroeconomic  management,  the
burden of the exchange guarantee could be said to be manageable.
Prospects
The trend growth rate of real  GDP  in  India  during  the  nineties  so  far  has  averaged
6.1 per cent per annum as against 5.4 per cent in the 1980s. Taking the entire 17-year period from
1980-81  to  1997-98,  India’s  trend  growth  has  averaged  5.8  per  cent  per  annum,  which  is
significantly higher than the trend, annual average rate of 4.7 per cent for the developing countries
and  2.4  per  cent  for  the  advanced  countries.  The  performance  during  1997-98  also  revealed
BIS Review   89/1998
considerable  resilience  and  inner  strength  to  meet  the  macroeconomic  challenges  posed  by  both
domestic  and  external  developments.  The  performance  of  various  sectors  clearly  suggests  that  the
growth of real GDP during the current year (1998-99) would be about 6.5 per cent - an impressive
figure, especially in the current international environment.
As regards prices, we have an impressive record of maintaining a modest single-digit
annual  inflation  rate  during  the  1980s  and  most  of  1990s.  However,  during  the  current  year,  the
annual inflation rate has been a little over 8 per cent on a point-to-point basis as at September 12,
1998. The principal sources of current inflation lie in the primary articles group, within which major
contributions were from fruits and vegetables, oilseeds and cereals. The price situation seems largely
to  reflect  a  shortage  of  supplies  of  certain  primary  articles  and  is  perhaps  attributable  to  seasonal
factors.
There were some concerns earlier in the current year that interest rates could harden
significantly  due  to  the  large  borrowing  programme  of  the  Government.  However,  most  of  the
market  borrowing  requirement  of  the  Government  for  this  year  has  already  been  met  with  only  a
very marginal increase in yields on government paper. Moreover, the genuine credit requirement of
the productive sectors would be comfortably met by the significant accretion in bank deposits.
During the 1980s the average current account deficit was of the order of 2.0 per cent
of GDP. Even when we faced the Gulf crisis we had a current account deficit of a mere 3.2 per cent.
Since then, it has remained well below 2 per cent. In 1997-98, despite large uncertainties, the current
account deficit remained modest at about 1.7 per cent of GDP. In 1998-99, the relatively low level of
oil prices in international markets and trends in invisible receipts should help maintain the current
account  deficit  at  a  sustainable  level  of  about  2  per  cent  of  GDP.  This  order  of  current  account
deficit is clearly sustainable and we expect it to be financed by capital flows. In addition, we do have
the comfort of a reasonable level of foreign currency reserves, which we would not hesitate to use to
curb speculative activities and ensure orderly conditions in the market.
During 1997-98, we added $ 3 billion to our foreign currency assets despite payments
of  over  $  2  billion  effected  directly  from  reserves  under  the  FCNR-A  deposits  scheme  and
repayments  to  the  IMF.  During  1998-99  also,  despite  all  the  turbulence,  we  have  increased  our
foreign currency assets marginally from $ 25,975 million as at end-March 1998 to $ 26,135 million
as on September 18, 1998.
We fully recognise that the uncertain international financial and economic situation
poses considerable policy challenges. Of late, there have been some unfavourable developments in
the  Russian  economy  and  in  a  few  Latin  American  countries.  The  developments  in  the  industrial
countries,  in  particular  Japan,  are  also  being  closely  watched  as  they  impact  not  only  the  current
account,  but  also  capital  flows.  On  the  whole,  the  international  scene  has  been  unfavourable  for
developing countries. However, in so far as markets in India are concerned, the response has been
fairly reasonable and has been less volatile than other countries in the region.
From the presentation I have made on prospects, it should be evident that India is in a
position to meet the challenges of possible adverse international developments. The recent success of
the  Resurgent  India  Bonds  is  a  clear  testimony  to  the  confidence  which  investors  have  in  our
country.  We  fully  recognise  that  there  is  no  room  for  complacency,  but  we  do  believe  that  the
economic fundamentals, prudent management as well as the operational framework of capital flows
will ensure the reasonable stability in the external sector that has been the hallmark of India’s reform
process.
BIS Review   89/1998
- 8 -
In conclusion, the relative tranquility of the Indian economy in the face of the Asian
crisis  was  neither  an  accident  nor  a  stroke  of  luck.  The  management  of  the  capital  account  has
displayed  pragmatism  and  a  contextual  response  to  a  changing  environment.  The  prospects  for
1998-99  indicate  continued  stability  in  our  external  sector,  consistent  with  our  record  of  recent
performance. In fact, I expect that the second half of the current fiscal year will be better than the
first half, in terms of sentiment and economic performance.
BIS Review   89/1998
