Mr.  Yam  speaks  on  defending  Hong  Kong’s  monetary  stability      Speech  by
the Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  Mr.  Joseph  Yam,  JP,  at  the  TDC
Networking Luncheon in Singapore on 14/10/98.
…
As I am sure you have noticed, Hong Kong, and specifically the involvement of
the Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  (HKMA)  in  the  stock  and  futures  markets  in  August,  has
been the subject of some controversy recently. This is understandable, for Hong Kong has always
been in favour of leaving markets alone, as much as possible. Indeed, Hong Kong has for many
years been named as one of the freest, if not the freest, markets in the world. For the authorities
in Hong Kong to go into the stock and futures markets to buy shares and stock futures contracts
in such a big way naturally came as a surprise to every one, apart from the few of us who had the
unenviable task of taking the very difficult decisions.
Clearly the responsibility of public office includes taking difficult decisions in the
overall public interest, and one must take them with courage and execute them with commitment.
Furthermore,  one  must  also  try  one’s  best  to  explain  the  rationale  behind  them,  and  be
transparent in, and accountable for, the actions taken. Difficult and controversial decisions can be
easily  misunderstood,  even  by  the  most  learned  man  on  earth.  So  we  need  to  present  the
arguments patiently and clearly.
This has not been easy. Domestically, although there has been tremendous support
from  the  Hong  Kong  public,  a  lot  of  dirt  has  also  been  thrown  around.  A  number  of  public
officers, including myself, have been the targets of much of this dirt. But, thankfully, amid the
inevitable,  and  I  am  sure  well  intentioned,  political  noise,  there  have  also  been  constructive
comments.
Internationally, the initial response has been hostile, to put it mildly. The foreign
press has been critical, almost as critical as it was about the imposition of exchange controls in
Malaysia.  Sadly,  my  most  respected  Nobel  Laureate  Milton  Friedman,  who  has  been  most
supportive of the free market philosophy so diligently practiced in Hong Kong, thought that we
had  simply  gone  crazy.  Even  Fed  Chairman  Alan  Greenspan,  in  his  testimony  to  the  House
Banking Committee, spoke up on the subject. He said in answer to a question, in his carefully
chosen words, that: “I think it would be mystery to find that I think that the efforts on the part of
the Hong Kong authorities to try and jack up their stock market was a wise effort.”
But  I  am  glad  to  see  that  opinions  have  changed  more  recently.  Perhaps  it  was
Russia,  or  Latin  America,  or  Long  Term  Capital  Management,  or  perhaps  it  was  our  untiring
efforts to explain our case that did it. Let me quote a somewhat unexpected source - Barton Biggs
of  Morgan  Stanley.  On  14  September  1998,  he  wrote:  “the  more  I  think  about  it,  the  more
sympathetic  I  become  toward  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  and  its  stock  market
intervention”. David Hale of the Zurich Group also said that: “it is difficult not to sympathize
with the frustrations and anxieties which compelled... the government of Hong Kong to intervene
in  the  stock  market”.  And  last  week  George  Soros  said  in  Washington,  when  asked  what  he
thought of Hong Kong’s actions in the stock market: “I can’t really disapprove”.
My  correspondence  with  Alan  Greenspan  is  still  ongoing:  while  I  continue  to
point  out  to  him  that  we  were  only  trying  to  deter  market  manipulation,  which  in  any  case  is
against  anti-trust  laws  in  the  US,  he  still  has  doubts.  This  is  because  of  the  difficulty  in
distinguishing between what he calls “conventional, albeit sharp-eyed, arbitrage and speculative
BIS Review   85/1998
- 2 -
activities”  in  financial  markets  and  what  I  call  market  manipulation.  I  shall  persevere.  In  my
view, whilst distinguishing between the two is difficult, it is not impossible, particularly when
you  are  close  to  it.  Perhaps  I  should  deploy  Chairman  Greenspan’s  argument  for  the  Fed’s
involvement  in  Long  Term  Capital  Management  in  justifying  our  case.  Instead  of  deterring
market  manipulation,  I  could  say,  in  Alan  Greenspan’s  words,  that  we  were  trying  to  “avoid
possible  serious  market  dislocations  that  could  have  potentially  impaired  the  economy”.  But
whatever  argument  we  use,  it  is  my  firm  belief  that  our  actions,  whilst  controversial,  are  well
justified.  In  this  connection,  let  me  put  to  you  a  few  facts  and  allow  you  to  draw  your  own
conclusions.
Fact number one: Hong Kong maintains a fixed exchange rate through a currency
board  system.  Such  a  system  requires  any  change  in  the  monetary  base  to  be  matched  by  a
corresponding  change  in  the  amount  of  foreign  reserves  held  by  the  currency  board,  with  the
currency  board  acting  passively  in  response  to  capital  flows.  With  a  very  efficient  financial
infrastructure,  characterized  by  a  real-time  interbank  payment  system,  and  in  the  absence  of
reserve  requirements,  banks  in  Hong  Kong  do  not  need  to  maintain  large  balances  in  their
clearing accounts held with the HKMA. This means that the crucial part of the monetary base, in
the form of the aggregate balance in the clearing accounts that all the licensed banks maintain
with  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  is  very  small.  This  in  turn  makes  interbank  interest
rates in Hong Kong very sensitive to capital flows into and out of the currency board. The sale of
a small amount of Hong Kong dollars by a bank to the HKMA, which has to take it and provide
US  dollars  at  the  fixed  exchange  rate  in  accordance  with  the  discipline  of  currency  board
arrangements, could send interbank interest rates sharply higher.
Fact  number  two:  the  hedge  funds  had  been  borrowing  and  sitting  on  large
amounts of Hong Kong dollars. From the beginning of this year to the middle of August, over
HK$30 billion of one and two-year money were raised through the issue of debt paper in Hong
Kong.  The  issuers  were  the  multilateral  institutions  such  as  the  World  Bank,  the  Asian
Development Bank, the Nordic Investment Bank, the European Investment Bank, the European
Bank  for  Reconstruction  and  Development,  the  Council  of  Europe,  etc.  We  welcomed  these
multilateral  issuers  making  use  of,  and  therefore  helping  to  develop,  the  debt  market  in  Hong
Kong. But the real borrowers behind these Hong Kong dollar debt issues were predominantly the
hedge funds, providing, through swaps arranged by intermediaries, attractive US dollar funding
at below LIBOR to the multilateral institutions. To use less jargon, as I said the hedge funds have
been borrowing and sitting on large amounts of Hong Kong dollars. They of course do so for a
purpose. But since I am talking about facts I do not wish to venture a guess here. All I would like
to point out is that the cost of running a HK$30 billion position, with an interest rate premium
over the US dollar that had been driven up to about 5 percentage points, is over HK$4 million a
day. And I would only add that the hedge funds are not exactly in the habit of throwing money
away for nothing and that they do not seem to have been using the money to buy up Hong Kong
stocks.
Fact  number  three:  on  the  securities  side,  the  potential  for  serious  market
dislocation had been building up. While the turnover in our stock market fell quite substantially
as  financial  turmoil  in  the  region  intensified,  activity  in  our  stock  index  futures  market  grew
sharply and disproportionately. A thin cash market, coupled with an ultra-active futures market,
is  a  recipe  for  market  dislocation,  if  not  disaster,  beyond  the  realms  explainable  by  economic
fundamentals. Furthermore, at least before the recent changes to the rules on shorting stocks, in
terms of the financing cost there has always been a structural bias in favour of shorting stocks.
The  cost  of  borrowing  stocks  was  low  and  there  were  rather  lax  settlement  requirements  that
BIS Review   85/1998
- 3 -
specified T+2 but said at the same time that you could have a few days’ grace if you did not have
the  stocks  on  settlement  day,  even  though  going  “naked”  short  in  stocks  was  against  the  law.
Indeed,  along  with  increasingly  heavy  bets  being  placed  in  the  futures  market  there  had  been
continuous shorting in the cash market.
Fact  number  four:  there  had  been  an  abundance  of  bad  news,  bad  numbers  and
rumors.  In  July  and  the  first  half  of  August,  an  unusually  large  number  of  investment  houses
published research papers on the Hong Kong dollar’s link with the US dollar, predicting that the
link would soon be broken. There were also many articles predicting the Renminbi’s devaluation.
Rumors abounded and the shorting of the Hong Kong dollar ahead of the weekend had become a
weekly  affair.  In  the  first  half  of  August,  Hong  Kong’s  GDP  growth  for  the  first  quarter  was
revised down to - 2.8%. Wall Street was down sharply. The yen fell to over 147 against the US
dollar. On the approach of the long weekend in the middle of August, rumors of a devaluation of
the RMB and/or the abandoning of the Hong Kong dollar’s link with the US dollar intensified,
risking the creation of panic and a breakdown of confidence in the currency.
Fact number five: there had been much selling pressure on the Hong Kong dollar
in the first half of August. In accordance with the discipline of the currency board arrangements,
the HKMA would have had to sell foreign reserves and buy Hong Kong dollars passively. This
would  have  created  a  serious  shortage  in  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  monetary  base,  thus  sending
interbank interest rates sharply higher and the stock market sharply lower. Given, however, the
need to fund the budget deficit for this financial year, the opportunity was taken to switch some
of  our  accumulated  fiscal  reserves  held  in  foreign  currencies  back  into  Hong  Kong  dollars,
leaving the monetary base and therefore interbank interest rates largely unchanged. The amount
of  Hong  Kong  dollars  absorbed  in  this  manner  was  large,  exceeding  the  HK$30  billion
accumulated by the hedge funds.
Piece together these facts and you will have quite a clear picture of what happened
and whether there had been manipulation or a danger of serious market dislocation. Your views
are  as  good  as  mine;  but  for  what  it  is  worth,  let  me  give  you  my  assessment.  In  contrast  to
October last year, when they had to pay very penal interest rates to fund their short Hong Kong
dollar positions, during the currency attack in August this year the hedge funds had pre-funded
themselves.  This  they  did  by  swapping  US  dollars  for  Hong  Kong  dollars,  through
intermediaries, with multilateral institutions which had issued Hong Kong debt paper, incurring
an interest cost of HK$4 million a day for the HK$30 billion position. But this was not a lot of
money to them. We had reason to believe that they had been building up and maintaining quite
large  short  positions  in  stock  index  futures.  With  an  estimated  80,000  short  contracts  held
amongst these hedge funds, for every thousand-point fall in the stock market index, they stood to
profit HK$4 billion. The cost and benefit calculation is clear. And this is the case regardless of
economic or market fundamentals. So they waited for a good opportunity to sell the Hong Kong
dollars they had borrowed, in the hope of creating a severe shortage  in  the  money  market  and
sharply higher interbank interest rates, thereby sending the stock market into a nosedive. And as
if this was not blatant enough, all this occurred in a climate of malicious rumors about the RMB
and  the  Hong  Kong  dollar,  glorified  by  publications  from  the  so-called  in-house  currency
strategies and analysts, and by the usual “reliable information from authoritative sources”.
Well, it did not quite work out the way they intended. They miscalculated on two
counts.  First,  they  did  not  factor  in  the  need  for  the  HKSAR  Government  funding  this  year’s
budget deficit, unexpected at the time when the budget was drawn up, through a drawdown of
foreign  reserves.  And  so  the  currency  board  adjustment  mechanism  involving  sharply  higher
BIS Review   85/1998
- 4 -
interest rates was not triggered. Second, they did not realize that the HKSAR Government was
far from the sitting duck they thought we were. Committed to the free market as we may be, we
took the view that free markets do not mean that markets can be freely manipulated. They need
to  be  fair  markets  as  well.  We  have  a  responsibility  to  tackle  market  manipulation  and  avoid
serious market dislocations developing.
So after much agonizing we acted on two fronts. First, we intervened in the stock
and futures markets to deter market manipulation, by making sure that the manipulation did not
pay  off.  Second,  we  followed  this  action  through  with  various  measures  to  strengthen  our
monetary  and  financial  systems.  On  the  monetary  side,  we  introduced  technical  measures  to
modify  our  currency  board  arrangements  of  our  linked  exchange  rate  system  to  make  it  less
susceptible to manipulation. On the securities side, we are in the process of introducing a series
of reform measures to lessen the potential for market dislocation.
I  am  happy  to  say  that  our  actions  have  been  successful.  There  has  been  no
indication  of  further  market  manipulation  since  the  end  of  August.  We  have  seen  substantial
unwinding of the short positions in our currency by the hedge funds, with considerable losses.
And with the stock market having recovered substantially from the level at which we entered the
market  in  the  middle  of  August,  more  considerable  losses  were  incurred  also  in  their  short
positions in the stock index futures. Much of the interest rate premium of the Hong Kong dollar
over the US dollar has disappeared, clearly reflecting with hindsight the extent of the excessive
pain that had been so mercilessly inflicted on the community by the manipulative plays. I hope
you are now more sympathetic towards the controversial actions that we have taken. But in case
you still have doubts, let me specifically address four accusations that have been hurled at us.
The first accusation is that we were trying to jack up the market against trends
dictated by fundamentals. Alan Greenspan used those words. But this is simply not true. We do
not mind where the level of the market is, if that is what the adjustment process demands. No
official view on the “right” market level has been taken and there never will be such a view. So if
somebody shorted the market thinking that the adjustment should be deeper, and if the market
did  fall  and  he  benefited  from  the  short  position,  we  would  even  congratulate  him  for  having
excellent foresight. But we are against market manipulation, specifically the manipulation of our
currency  market,  taking  advantage  of  our  passiveness  under  the  discipline  of  the  rule-based
currency board arrangements, to produce very high interest rates with a view to sending the stock
market  into  a  nosedive  and  benefiting  from  a  short  position  in  stock  index  futures.  Such
manipulation  was  conducted  with  no  regard  to  economic  fundamentals.  This  presents  serious
risks of market dislocation or overshooting, with asset markets ratcheting down every time this
double play is staged. This can be highly damaging to the stability of the whole financial system
of  Hong  Kong.  It  also  presents  the  serious  risk  of  undermining  general  confidence  in  our
currency. Our aim has been to deter market manipulation, not to jack up the market.
The second accusation is that we panicked because the pain of adjustment with a
fixed  exchange  rate,  including  the  interest  rate  pain  arising  from  capital  outflow  under  the
currency  board  arrangements,  had  become  unbearable.  We  did  not  panic.  We  were  trying  to
prevent the market panic and overshooting that those manipulating  our  markets  were  trying  to
engineer. And Hong Kong is prepared and well equipped to bear the inevitable pain of economic
adjustment  necessitated  by  the  financial  turmoil  that  originated  in  this  region  and  is  now
spreading  to  the  developed  markets.  As  head  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  I  have
repeatedly been asking our community to stick it out. We have seen downward adjustments in
asset markets of about 50% in less than twelve months. While not taking a view as to whether
BIS Review   85/1998
- 5 -
such  adjustments  are  adequate  in  the  circumstances,  we  can  do  without  the  excessive  and
destabilizing interest rate volatility brought  about  by  market  manipulation.  We  can  do  without
what  is  now  clearly  proven  to  be  the  excessive  interest  rate  premium  brought  about  by  the
continuous presence of the market  predators.  We  can  do  without  the  market  overshooting  that
many of our neighbouring economies have been made to suffer. We can do without confidence
being undermined by the greed of those that are intent only on making profits at the expense of
our people. We have the wherewithal to tackle the situation and we did so decisively.
The third accusation is that we have dangerously departed from the currency board
discipline  and  ventured  into  discretionary  monetary  management.  We  have  not.  And  without
bothering you with too much technical detail, the measures introduced recently have the effect of
strengthening the currency board arrangements of Hong Kong rather than eroding them.  There
has been much confusion about this matter, stemming from the somewhat academic debate as to
whether a currency board should also be responsible for the provision of liquidity to the banking
system that involves an increase in the monetary base. The purists would say no to this, but they
should  really  come  down  to  earth  and  recognize  that  in  modern  day  finance  the  majority  of
transactions are conducted electronically without the use of cash. For the effective operation of
currency board arrangements, the organisation responsible for running the system has to manage
the  electronic  interbank  clearing  system  as  well.  This  requires  that  the  banks  operate  clearing
accounts with the currency board and that the aggregate of the balances in their clearing accounts
forms the crucial part of the monetary base which is subject to the monetary rule of the currency
board. This puts the responsibility for the provision of liquidity to the banking system squarely
on the currency board. But this arrangement need not involve any significant departure from the
discipline of currency board arrangements. The important issue is how liquidity for the purpose
of facilitating the clearing of interbank transactions is provided. In Hong Kong this is provided
through the repurchase of debt issued by the currency board and fully backed by foreign reserves.
There is therefore no departure from the discipline of currency board arrangements.
The  fourth  accusation  is  that  we  were  too  late  in  introducing  our  technical
measures  to  strengthen  our  currency  board  arrangements  and  that  had  we  done  so  earlier  we
could have avoided having to intervene in the stock market. Frankly, I do not think that we could
have turned around the market sentiment with just part of the package of actions. The measures
to strengthen our currency board arrangements have been effective. But basically what we have
done, amongst other things, was to dampen interest rate volatility by accepting some fluctuation
in  our  foreign  reserves.  In  isolation  this  would  probably  not  have  been  effective  in  deterring
market manipulation. The timing for doing anything is of course an easy question to pose, but the
reality  is  much  more  complex  than  that.  One  should  realize  that  the  system,  before  the
introduction of the technical modifications, has served Hong Kong very well for almost fifteen
years. Furthermore, there is no free lunch. Costs are involved. The larger fluctuations in foreign
reserves  may  affect  confidence.  It  may  be  seen  as  a  sign  of  weakness,  although  with  foreign
reserves in multiples of the monetary base this should not be a cause for concern. Tightening the
provision  of  liquidity  to  the  banking  system  by  denying  access  to  the  discount  window  paper
other than that issued by the currency board may affect the development of the debt market. And
making explicit the passive convertibility of the monetary base into foreign reserves may dampen
activity in the foreign exchange market. The pros and cons must be considered carefully before
making these significant changes.
I  think  I  have  spoken  long  enough.  I  hope  I  have  made  my  case  convincingly.
Thank you Victor for giving me this opportunity. In closing, may I quote Barton Biggs again. He
said: “I have come around to agreeing with the HKMA that it could not simply stand by idly and
BIS Review   85/1998
- 6 -
watch  the  speculators  and  hedge  funds  create  a  vicious  circle  involving  the  stock  market,  the
currency and interest rates. ... When the hedge funds become a pack and attack a country the way
they  attacked  Hong  Kong,  they  are  engaged  in  destabilizing  and  essentially  immoral  activity.
They  are  intent  only  on  making  profits  for  themselves  at  the  expense  of  The  People.  The
speculators  cannot  be  allowed  to  rule  the  world,  and  the  State  must  use  the  weapons  it  has
against them when they attack.” May I also leave you with this question: if the authorities of the
freest market in the world are pushed into controversial market intervention action, could it be
that  there  is  something  seriously  wrong  with  the  international  financial  architecture?  Paul
Krugman in one of his articles in a recent issue of the Fortune magazine provides some insight
into  this  question.  He  said  that  “speculative  conspiracies  against  companies  are  effectively
regulated; those against countries are not... Capital markets are global, but the institutions that
support and regulate them - that allow them to work - remain national. It’s hard to imagine how
truly  global  institutions  could  come  into  existence  -  how  we  could,  for  example,  prosecute
American traders working in London for manipulating some market in China. But until we figure
it out, it’s going to be a very rough ride.”
The  task  at  hand  for  everybody  is  to  figure  this  out,  urgently,  even  though  you
might not yet have a fire in your backyard.
BIS Review   85/1998
