Mr. Carse looks at the importance of the euro for Hong Kong   Speech by the
Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Mr. David Carse, at a Seminar
on the euro, held in Hong Kong on 9/11/98.
Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
I  am  very  pleased  to  be  here  this  morning  to  speak  at  this  seminar  on  the  euro
organized by the Vocational Training Council in conjunction with the British Consulate-General
and the Hong Kong Institute of Bankers. With the introduction of the euro less than two months
away, this is obviously a good time to hold such a seminar. It is also fitting to hold it in Hong
Kong where our fixed exchange rate system gives us a natural sympathy for its logical extension,
the single currency. We are fortunate to have a number of experts on the euro here today to give
us  the  benefit  of  their  views,  including  my  former  colleague  from  the  Bank  of  England,  John
Townend.
My role in the seminar is to say a few words on the importance  of  the  euro  for
Hong Kong. I will also take the opportunity to brief you on some of the regulatory steps which
we have been taking to prepare for the euro.
The introduction of the euro is a truly momentous change in the global economic
and  financial  landscape.  It  is  not  simply  a  change  of  currency  for  the  participating  countries,
though that in itself is a major event. Rather, it is a crucial step in the economic and monetary
integration of the European Union (“EU”) countries and the creation of the single market. This
change will involve 300 million consumers, 16% of world GDP and 29% of world trade. This
demonstrates why the euro is an important event for Hong Kong. As the UK Chancellor of the
Exchequer recently made clear, we are now living in a global economy, in which each economy
can directly affect the prospects of every other. Where the economy concerned is the size of the
EU, its potential to affect other economies - for good or bad - is without question.
This  is  reinforced  by  the  existing  trade  and  financial  links  between  Hong  Kong
and the EU countries:
•  the EU ranks 3rd among Hong Kong’s trading partners in the world;
•  in the first eight months of this year, the EU accounted for HK$245 billion or
13.2%  of  Hong  Kong’s  total  trade  -  much  of  this  represents  entrepot  trade
between the EU and mainland China;
•  the  EU  is  the  largest  external  investor  in  Hong  Kong,  accounting  for  over
HK$200 billion or 34% of the total;
•  more  than  700  EU  companies  use  Hong  Kong  as  regional  headquarters  or
regional offices;
•  the  EU  is  the  2nd  largest  source  of  visitors  and  4th  largest  source  of  tourist
earnings for Hong Kong;
•  there  are  over  50  licensed  banks  and  other  authorized  institutions  in  Hong
Kong from the EU countries, the largest concentration in Asia.
BIS Review   95/1998
- 2 -
Clearly, what happens in the EU matters to Hong Kong. What therefore will  be
the  impact  of  the  euro  on  the  participating  countries?  There  should  certainly  be  a  number  of
economic benefits, including in particular:
•  a  huge  increase  in  transparency  from  the  single  currency  which  will  make  it
easier to compare prices across national frontiers. This will boost competition,
bring down costs and prices, and improve efficiency;
•  a  reduction  in  transaction  costs,  in  particular  from  the  elimination  of  foreign
exchange commissions. This will encourage trade and cross-border investment
flows;
•  lower  interest  rates  in  individual  countries  from  the  elimination  from  the
foreign exchange risk premium. This will reduce financing costs and stimulate
investment and output;
•  the development of larger and more liquid debt  and  stock  markets  across  the
euro  zone.  This  will  create  a  vast  new  pool  of  capital  for  companies,  thus
giving a further stimulus to investment;
•  tighter  fiscal  discipline  on  the  member  countries  under  the  Stability  and
Growth Pact and monetary discipline exercised by  the  new  European  Central
Bank.  Both  these  should  ease  inflationary  expectations  and  produce  a  more
stable financial environment for the euro zone.
In summary, the single currency should be able to deliver higher economic growth
and  therefore  increased  demand  for  imports  by  the  euro  countries.  As  one  of  the  EU’s  major
trading partners, this should benefit Hong Kong. Hong Kong may also be able to take advantage
of the increased flow of funds for global investment which may be forthcoming from a greatly
enlarged  European  capital  market.  Furthermore,  to  the  extent  that  an  offshore  euro  market
develops, Hong Kong would be an obvious location for this in Asia. This reflects the existing
large presence of European banks in Hong Kong and our role as a bridge between Europe and
mainland China. Finally, Hong Kong is one of the world’s largest holders of foreign exchange
reserves and the euro will provide interesting opportunities for diversification of our portfolio.
Of course, the advent of the single currency also brings with it certain risks. The
discipline imposed by the single currency will not always be comfortable, particularly when the
business cycles diverge in different member countries. This could set up tensions which could at
worst lead to a break-up of  monetary  union  or  at  least  undermine  confidence  in  the  euro.  The
current  dispute  between  politicians  and  the  European  Central  Bank  over  interest  rate  policy
might be a foretaste of what is to come. A break-up of monetary union seems highly unlikely, but
the potential for internal wrangling is clearly there and that could be disruptive to world financial
markets.
There  must  also  be  at  least  a  possibility  that  closer  integration  of  the  EU  could
make it more self-contained and inward-looking. Intra-EU trade could increase, while that with
the  rest  of  the  world  and  Hong  Kong  could  diminish.  Moreover,  will  the  enlarged  EU  capital
market suck in capital from Asia to Europe? In the first four months of this year, for example,
BIS Review   95/1998
- 3 -
Japanese net purchases of European securities totalled US$9.9 billion, while net sales of bonds
and  stocks  in  Asia  totalled  US$2.1  billion.  Extended  diversion  of  capital  to  Europe  would
undermine Asia’s growth prospects as well as Hong Kong’s position as an international financial
centre. This could also happen if the European banks are tempted to consolidate their business in
Asia to focus their efforts on their enlarged home market.
This is not the occasion to be pessimistic. Overall, I believe that the euro will be a
good thing for Europe and for the world economy. But as with any major change in the world
financial  architecture,  Hong  Kong  will  need  to  monitor  developments  closely  and  respond
quickly to emerging threats as well as opportunities.
Let me now turn to the HKMA’s regulatory response to the euro in Hong Kong.
First, banks in Hong Kong need to be prepared to handle and account for the euro, particularly
during the awkward transitional period before the legacy currencies disappear entirely. If they are
not ready, many of the potential benefits of the euro for Hong Kong will simply not materialize.
We have therefore issued advice to the banks on the steps that they need to take, such as: review
of business strategies and business processes that might be affected by the Euro; review of nostro
accounts in the legacy currencies; adaptation of information systems; and review of contracts that
might be affected by introduction of the euro.
Secondly, we have thought it sensible to introduce legislation that will provide for
continuity of contracts in relation to the introduction of the euro. In doing so, we are following
the example of the EU itself as well as some other jurisdictions. In theory, such legislation may
be  unnecessary  since  the  well-established  “lex  monetae”  or  “law  of  the  currency”  principle
means that the currency of a payment obligation should be determined by the law of the country
of  that  currency.  This  means  for  example  that  a  payment  obligation  payable  in  French  francs
would become payable in euros after the introduction of the euro because that is the situation that
applies under the law of France.
However, despite this general principle, concerns have been expressed that parties
to contracts might argue that the introduction of the euro represented a fundamental change of
circumstances, bringing the contract to an end or requiring its terms to be adjusted. In addition,
another feature of the introduction of the euro is that it will replace the ECU at a rate of one for
one on 1 January 1999. The ECU is a currency basket but not a currency in its own right. The
“lex monetae” principle does not apply in this case and therefore the euro will not automatically
substitute for the ECU in contracts.
It is to remove uncertainty on these points that we have decided to legislate. We
believe  that  this  is  appropriate  for  an  international  financial  centre  such  as  Hong  Kong.  The
financial and legal community in Hong Kong strongly supports this view.
This  is  just  one  specific  example  of  how  Hong  Kong  is  affected  by  the
introduction of the euro. There will undoubtedly be more far-reaching effects on our  economy
and our financial system as the single currency takes root. This is why this seminar is timely and
important. I hope that you will find it enjoyable and useful.
BIS Review   95/1998
