Mr. Schieber considers the impact of EMU on the banking structure in Europe
Speech  delivered  by  Mr.  Helmut  Schieber,  a  member  of  the  Directorate  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank,  at  the  symposium  organised  jointly  by  the  Greco-German  Chamber  of  Industry  and
Commerce and the Bank of Greece, as part of the “Money Show” in Athens on 14-15/11/98.
I
Money and wealth, as the Stoics knew long ago, are not bad in  themselves.  They  can  be  used  for
good or ill. When applied to stage three of European economic and monetary union, which begins in
only seven weeks, this means that the quality of the euro will depend on decision-makers within the
ESCB consistently gearing their monetary policy to achieving and maintaining stability. If the euro is
to be a success, its future price stability will be of paramount importance. The new currency will be a
success story in the international financial markets only if we can build up confidence in it.
The changeover to stage three of European economic and monetary union will have implications for
everyone in business, in politics and, naturally in a very special way, in banking. EMU is creating a
new set of conditions under which the credit institutions are to conduct their business and to which
they must adjust. For example, the transition to a single monetary policy in Europe will bring about a
direct change in the refinancing structures of credit institutions.
The  single  currency  and  the  integration  of  the  European  capital  markets  represent  an  enormous
challenge for the European banking sector. Firstly, the credit institutions not only have to absorb the
additional cost burden of the conversion to the euro but must also sustain losses of revenue resulting
from  the  disappearance  of  profitable  lines  of  business  and  the  simultaneous  intensification  of
competition  within  the  entire  financial  services  industry.  Secondly,  monetary  union  provides
competitive  institutions  with  new  opportunities  for  earning  money  by  repositioning  themselves
operationally and regionally, in their products and in the sales channels.
I shall therefore start by examining how the new set of monetary policy instruments will change the
refinancing  structures  and  money  market  conditions  in  Europe  before  turning  to  the  future
international  role  of  the  euro  and  its  impact  on  Europe’s  banking  landscape.  I  shall  conclude  by
setting out the criteria for the euro to succeed.
II
The  General  Documentation  on  ESCB  monetary  policy  instruments  and  procedures,  whose  final
version  the  ECB  published  only  last  month,  form  the  basic  foundations  for  the  integration  of  the
European money market.
When choosing its monetary policy instruments, the ESCB was guided by the principle that access to
refinancing  funds  should  be  widely  available  and  that  institutions  within  the  euro  area  should  be
treated  equally.  When  devising  the  instruments,  account  was  taken  of  the  market  principles  laid
down in the Maastricht Treaty.
Two standing facilities are available to business partners within the ESCB. The interest rates for the
marginal lending facility and for the deposit facility mark the ceiling and the floor, respectively, for
the day-to-day money market rate.
Open  market  operations,  which  are  the  crux  of  the  regular  interest  rate  and  liquidity  policy
management of the money market, are carried out within this interest rate corridor. This means that
the present monetary policy practice in most of the participating countries is being continued. The
BIS Review   97/1998
- 2 -
main  weekly  auction  with  a  14-day  maturity  forms  the  key  element  of  regular  money  market
management.  It  is  used  to  provide  liquidity  to  the  banking  system  from  week  to  week  and  to
illustrate  or  revise  the  basic  monetary  policy  stance  of  the  ESCB.  The  longer-term  refinancing
operations represent what for Germany, too, is an innovation. Carried out at monthly intervals and
with a maturity period of three months, it serves as the basic means of supplying the banking system
with central bank money in order to help stabilise refinancing and the security of operations of the
banks, especially the smaller ones.
However, the set of monetary policy instruments does not come into play only in the provision of
central bank money. It is only the minimum reserve instrument - which is also deployed in Greece -
 that creates a sufficiently stable demand for central bank money on a permanent basis. At the same
time,  the  minimum  reserve  has  a  stabilising  effect  on  interest  rate  trends  in  the  money  market  by
providing the institutions with the possibility of cushioning the effects of temporary fluctuations in
liquidity. The result is that the central bank has to intervene only to a comparatively small extent; the
decentralised  structure  of  the  ESCB  is  underpinned.  A  major  innovation - at  all  events,  from
Germany’s point of view - is the market-related remuneration of minimum reserve balances. In this
way the banks’ refinancing costs incurred as a result of holding minimum reserves are fully offset.
That  is  an  important  factor  with  respect  to  the  acceptability  and  competitive  neutrality  of  the
minimum reserve system.
Not only the single monetary policy but also a uniform technical infrastructure is essential  for  the
creation  of  a  single  money  market  in  Europe.  The  effective  implementation  of  monetary  policy
measures  and  the  distribution  of  central  bank  money  through  the  future  European  money  market
presupposes that there is a correspondingly competitive and efficient large-value payment system for
the  euro.  TARGET  has  been  conceived  as  a  decentralised  system  which  is  based  on  the  national
real-time  gross  systems  which  are  connected  to  each  other  through  an  Interlinking  system.  This
enables  the  national  systems  to  settle  payments  both  nationally  and  internationally.  This  creates  a
satisfactory market depth for the European money market and strengthens the position of Euribor in
relation  to  the  British  Euro-Libor  in  competing  for  recognition  as  the  reference  interest  rate  for
European financial trading.
III
How  the  euro  fares  internationally  as  a  transaction,  investment  and  reserve  currency  will  be  of
enormous importance for the future business opportunities of the credit institutions in the euro area. I
think credit institutions in the member countries will have an excellent opportunity to expand their
business operations if we are successful in making the euro one of the internationally used currencies
which might assume a more important role in the global currency system than the currencies of the
11 countries initially participating in EMU taken together.
In  the  short  term,  however,  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency  will  mean  a  loss  of  profitable
areas  of  business  for  the  credit  institutions.  This  applies  first  and  foremost  to  foreign  exchange
trading.  It  is  estimated  that,  as  a  result  of  EMU,  there  will  be  a  10 %  to  15 %  reduction  in
intra-European  foreign  exchange  trading.  This  decline  will  be  spread  unevenly  over  the  financial
centres.  On  the  European  foreign  exchanges  outside  London  and  Frankfurt  the  foreign  exchange
trading of the respective local currencies against the D-Mark accounts for up to 50 % of total trading
in foreign currency. In the EU, foreign exchange dealing in non-European currencies amounts to no
more  than  just  under  30 %  of  the  total.  The  banks  will  therefore  lose  a  major  area  of  business,
especially as it is likely that future euro-dollar and euro-yen trading will be concentrated on a small
number  of  dealers.  They  will  have  to  focus  their  trading  operations  on  other  segments,  such  as
trading in central and east European currencies.
BIS Review   97/1998
- 3 -
Over the longer term, however, the single currency in Europe is likely to provide a positive stimulus
to the credit institutions’ business operations. With the disappearance of currency barriers the capital
markets will gain in breadth and depth; prices will become more transparent and will tend to fall.
Financial markets with a large range of products, a broad range of maturities, a high level of liquidity
and low transaction costs will attract an enormous amount of international custom and will attract
both international investors and borrowers.
Whether or not the euro will succeed in competing with the US dollar as a vehicle currency will be
of paramount importance for the international use of the euro and therefore for the credit institutions’
business opportunities in the euro area. Vehicle currencies always emerge when currencies can be
exchanged  indirectly  via  this  vehicle  currency  more  cheaply  than  would  be  the  case  if  they  were
exchanged  directly.  The  inertia  that  favours  the  US  dollar  as  a  vehicle  and  reserve  currency,
however,  may  represent  a  certain  barrier  to  the  development  of  the  euro  in  this  field.  The
concentration of transactions on a currency will be fostered by economies of scale. The greater the
share  of  a  currency  in  the  world’s  monetary  reserves,  in  private  assets  and  in  global  turnover,  the
lower  are  the  transaction  costs  associated  with  trading  in  it.  Besides,  a  certain  degree  of  inertia
impedes  a  change  of  the  existing  vehicle  and  reserve  currency.  Although  that  doesn’t  mean  that  a
change in a currency’s functions is impossible, the elasticity of substitution between the US dollar
and the euro is likely to be relatively small, at least initially, for the reasons mentioned.
Nevertheless,  the  euro’s  functions  as  a  transaction  and  investment  currency  will  give  the  credit
institutions in Europe an excellent opportunity here to gain a foothold in the new business areas and
thus to open up new sources of revenue for themselves.
IV
The strong and  rapid  structural  change  in  the  financial  sectors  of  the  past  few  years  will  continue
with the introduction of the single currency in European monetary union. For the financial services
suppliers, this will result in a significant intensification of competition; EMU will act as a catalyst
and encourage other trends such as disintermediation, internationalisation, technological change and
a  transformation  of  customer  behaviour.  For  the  banking  sector  this  development  will  generate
unprecedented pressure for radical restructuring and consolidation.
EMU is hitting the European banks at a time when they are already suffering from a deterioration in
their  profitability.  Considerable  investment  in  information  and  communications  technology  in
connection with EMU are now leading to additional costs while profitable business areas are being
lost at the same time. This means initially that there will be further pressure on the already narrow
margins  of  banks  in  continental  Europe.  This  will  inevitably  force  them  to  re-examine  their
commercial strategy, with the primary objective of lowering costs.
The effect of monetary union on the profitability of the banks will depend on each bank’s specific
business  structure.  Institutions  which  are  already  geared  to  operating  internationally  and  tend  to
operate to a greater extent in wholesale banking will find that the introduction of the single currency
in Europe exposes them to even stiffer competition than it does smaller banks, which operate mainly
in retail banking. The latter will retain their local or regional significance or will define themselves
as “niche suppliers” of specialised products.
The necessary reduction in overcapacity as a result of greater competition will be seen as the main
challenge  for  the  entire  financial  sector.  However,  the  special  role  of  the  banking  industry  in  the
economy calls for a more varied assessment of this more intense competition. The main reason for
this  is  the  key  position  that  the  banking  industry  has  in  payments  and  in  lending.  It  must  also  be
BIS Review   97/1998
- 4 -
remembered that credit institutions operate with a lower capital ratio than other types of enterprise
and are therefore more prone to risk. This means that it is essential that the process of consolidation
in  banking  occurs  in  an  orderly  fashion;  in  other  words,  without  endangering  the  stability  of  the
entire system.
Only  a  stable  financial  system  provides  a  reliable  base  for  the  real  economic  development  of  an
economy. Consequently, efforts to achieve a degree of concentration in the banking sector must not
reach  a  stage  where  they  encourage  the  development  of  a  too-big-to-fail  mentality,  which  might
excessively  heighten  the  banking  industry’s  willingness  to  take  risks.  Another  point  is  that  the
concentration of credit risks on a few large institutions tends to increase the danger of banking crises
with undesirable implications for the economy as a whole.
The structure of the banking system is also very important for monetary policy. Credit institutions
have an extremely important part to play in the monetary transmission process. The comprehensive
range  of  business  activities  provided  by  the  universal  banks  and  the  large  number  of  credit
institutions  in  Europe  guarantee  a  broad  “interface”  for  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy
objectives.  Competition  among  the  banks  also  plays  an  important  role  for  the  effectiveness  of
monetary  policy  because  changes  in  interest  rates  can  be  passed  on  as  quickly  as  possible  to  the
economic agents only if there is a sufficient level of competition. The transmission channel will be
kept  relatively  short  as  a  result,  and  monetary  policy  stimuli  will  have  an  early  impact  on  the
spending  of  the  economic  players.  At  the  same  time  the  banking  system  must  be  stable  and
sufficiently profitable to make it possible, where applicable, to sustain  the  consequences  of  strong
monetary policy stimuli as well.
V
The market’s confidence in the stability of the new currency is absolutely essential if the euro is to be
used intensively internationally. The success of the euro will be measured in terms of future price
stability,  and  the  expectations  of  market  participants  regarding  that  success  will  be  of  paramount
importance.
The starting conditions are favourable for ensuring a stable euro. The average inflation rate in the 11
countries participating in EMU has never been as low as it is now. The increase in prices was 1.0 %
in  September  1998  compared  with  the  same  period  a  year  earlier;  this  compares  with  an  annual
average of 1.6 % in 1997 and 2.2 % in 1996. In this respect European monetary union can claim to
have achieved a respectable and notable degree of success in convergence.
A  crucial  factor  for  the  stability  of  the  euro  stems  from  the  fact  that  the  single  currency  and
supranational monetary policy will continue to be accompanied by national fiscal, structural, wage
and social policies.
The abolition of exchange rates and of national interest rate policies will reduce the scope for action
of  all  of  the  participating  states.  In  future,  the  only  possibility  of  coping  with  differences  in  the
economic cycle and different response patterns to asymmetrical developments in the EMU countries
will  be  by  means  of  the  economic  policy  instruments  which  remain  within  the  sphere  of  national
responsibility.
Satisfactorily functioning markets for goods, services and labour, with flexible costs and prices will
play a key role in overcoming future asymmetrical shocks in Europe. Responsive fiscal, social and
structural policies will likewise grow in importance as instruments of economic policy adjustment.
Recognition of this fact was also a motive for introducing the Stability and Growth Pact. Only those
countries which are in a healthy condition economically and have a budget which is balanced or in
BIS Review   97/1998
- 5 -
surplus will be able to enjoy a certain leeway in a recession and pursue an expansionary fiscal policy
without risking structural deficits.
How do things look in reality? Most countries are quite some way from achieving a balanced budget.
Many  countries  reached  the  convergence  mark  of  3 %  for  the  current  deficit  only  after  making
considerable efforts. In some cases they did so only by resorting to one-off measures,  the  costs  of
which were simply shifted  to  future  budgets.  Particularly  countries  with  a  high  level  of  debt  were
able to meet the deficit criterion only through all-time low market interest rates. What is more, these
countries’ large debt, which is frequently incurred at the short end of the market or at variable rates
of interest, harbours a considerable measure of potential conflict for monetary policy makers. Any
restrictive  monetary  policy  measures  by  the  ECB  would  have  a  direct  impact  on  these  countries’
interest payments and place a burden on their current budgets.
Among the serious problem areas in Europe is unemployment, which persists at an intolerably high
level. It is true that a few countries such as the Netherlands, or Denmark and the United Kingdom
(which  are  not  yet  participating  in  monetary  union),  point  to  a  possible  way  out  of  the  crisis  in
Europe.  However,  the  situation  in  the  large  countries  of  Germany  and  France  indicates
simultaneously  the  inability  of  the  labour  markets  to  react  flexibly  to  the  problem  of  permanently
rising unemployment.
VI
During  the  past  few  weeks  there  has  been  a  tendency  in  some  quarters  to  try  to  exert  a  political
influence on the consistent stability-oriented monetary policy in Europe. However, the priority given
to  the  objective  of  stability  and  the  independence  of  the  ESCB  as  the  essential  elements  of  the
Maastrict Treaty must not be called into question. Monetary stability is a precondition for - and not
an  alternative  let  alone  an  impediment  to - achieving  an  appropriate  measure  of  economic  growth
and  for  solving  Europe’s  employment  problem.  No  monetary  policy  can  solve  structural  problems
which have their origins in national trends in fiscal, economic, wage and social policies.
BIS Review   97/1998
