Mr.  George  discusses  the  prospects  for  the  euro  and  the  attitude  towards  the
single  currency  in  the  United  Kingdom      Speech  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,
Mr. E.A.J. George, given to the Financial Forum of West Flanders in Bruges on 21/10/98.
Britain in Europe
It’s a great pleasure to be here in the beautiful city of Bruges, and I am honored to
have this opportunity to address the Financial Forum here in West Flanders.
Mr.  Chairman,  in  just  50  business  days’  time  -  on  1st  January  next  year  -  eleven
European  countries  will  take  the  long-awaited,  truly  historic,  step  of  merging  their  national
currencies into a single “euro”. The United Kingdom will not be among them, but we have a vital
interest  in  the  euro’s  success.  I  should  like  to  explain  to  you  this  evening  Britain’s  attitude  to  the
euro,  and  then  say  something  about  the  prospects  for  the  new  single  currency  as  an  element  of
stability in today’s turbulent global financial and economic environment.
Let  me  make  clear  at  the  outset  that,  of  course,  I  recognise  that  monetary  union  is
fundamentally  a  political  issue.  It  necessarily  involves  some  deliberate  further  pooling  of  national
sovereignty over important issues of public policy - monetary policy and overall fiscal policy - just
as the single market involved the pooling of sovereignty over aspects of trade and competition policy
and so on.
As a central banker I have nothing to say about the politics of monetary union. But it
is also, of course, about economics, and the economics of monetary union could go either way. I can
see  that  if  it  goes  well  it  will  contribute  to  a  broader  cohesion  within  Europe;  but  equally  if  the
economics were to go wrong, then that could blow back on the politics of Europe and give rise to
tensions. I shall concentrate my remarks this evening on the economics of monetary union.
The  economic  pros  and  cons  have  in  fact  been  exhaustively  debated  in  the  United
Kingdom  and  the  arguments  are  now  reasonably  well  defined,  even  though  different  opinions
inevitably attach different weights to them.
On the positive side, the crucial and unique economic advantage of monetary union is
nominal exchange rate certainty within the euro area - not just the reasonable de facto stability that
might result from each EU member state individually pursuing disciplined macro-economic policies
in  parallel  -  but  nominal  exchange  rate  certainty  for  the  indefinite  future.  And  that  is  a  very  real
economic advantage as any UK exporter who has suffered from the exaggerated strength of sterling
over the past two years or so will readily tell you! One can argue that such exchange rate certainty is
not an essential complement to the European single market - any more than exchange rate fixity is
essential to achieving benefits from free trade more generally. But it brings very material benefits -
through  increased  competition  as  a  result  of  greater  transparency  of  prices  and  lower  transactions
costs, through broader and more liquid financial markets, and through the associated improvement in
economic resource allocation. And there is no doubt that intra-European exchange rate certainty in
particular will enhance the benefits to be derived from the European single market. Whether or not it
is  essential,  therefore,  most  people  would,  I  think,  agree  that,  other  things  equal,  the  nominal
exchange rate certainty that comes with the move to the single European currency is very desirable
in this context.
What  then  are  the  economic  arguments  against  it?  Essentially  they  can  be
summarised  as  the  risk  that  the  single  monetary  policy  -  the  single,  one-size-fits-all,  short-term
BIS Review   88/1998
- 2 -
interest rate within the euro area, which is a necessary corollary of the single currency - will not in
the event prove to be appropriate to the domestic needs of each of the euro-member countries. There
is no doubt that such risk exists. It may result from cyclical divergence within the euro area, with
some  participating  countries  needing  to  stimulate  domestic  demand  while  others  are  already
operating close to capacity. It may arise from differences in fiscal positions even though these are to
be  constrained  through  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Or  it  may  result  from  economic  shocks  of
some sort that have a bigger impact on some countries than on others. The rise in oil prices in the
early 1970s or German reunification are classic examples.
So  the  risk  of  divergent  monetary  policy  needs  within  the  euro  area  is  real.  And  if
there  were  a  material  divergence  of  monetary  policy  needs,  that  could  lead  to  serious  tensions,
because  alternative  adjustment  mechanisms,  such  as  labour  migration  or  fiscal  redistribution,  that
exist within individual countries, and which help to alleviate familiar regional disparities when they
arise at the national level, are simply not well-developed at the pan-European level.
The  Maastricht  Treaty,  of  course,  recognised  this  risk.  The  famous  convergence
criteria  were  specifically  designed  as  a  means  of  reducing  the  risk  to  manageable  proportions  by
requiring  that,  before  joining  the  euro  club,  countries  should  have  achieved  at  least  a  minimum
degree  of  macro-economic  convergence 
to
macro-economic  discipline  both  through  fiscal  consolidation,  and  through  monetary  policy
consistently directed at effective price, and exchange rate, stability. And all member countries of the
European Union have certainly made great progress towards macro-economic stability over the past
few years.
thereby  demonstrating 
their  commitment 
 This has, of course, been a matter of national economic self-interest. But there is no
doubt that the goal of monetary union, and the Maastricht criteria, provided a very powerful external
incentive for many countries - indeed it is barely conceivable that anything like  so  much  progress
would  have  been  achieved  across  the  Continent  without  this  incentive.  It  is  a  remarkable
demonstration of political commitment that the eleven participating countries - against all the odds
as  seen  only  a  couple  of  years  ago  -  could  reasonably  have  been  judged  to  have  met  the  criteria,
enabling the Heads of Government to agree to the launch of a broadly based monetary union at their
meeting in Brussels in May.
But  the  risk  of  divergent  domestic  policy  needs  -  or  of  potential  regional  tensions
within  the  single  currency  area  -  did  not  simply  disappear  during  that  momentous  weekend  in
Brussels.
Remaining  cyclical  differences  are  reflected  in  the  persistence  of  interest  rate
differentials among the first eleven, which will, of course, have to be eliminated by the end of the
year.  It  may  then  prove  necessary  in  some  countries  for  fiscal  policy  to  be  tighter  than  would
otherwise be necessary in order to offset the easing of monetary policy as a result of the move to a
single interest rate.
Even without that, a number of Euroland countries enter monetary union with  very
high ratios of public debt to GDP. And virtually all - to varying degrees - face the prospective burden
on their public finances of ageing populations. All of this means that there will be a continuing need
for rigorous fiscal discipline throughout the area well into the future - as was very clearly recognised
in the EMI’s Convergence Report. That indeed is very much the purpose of the Stability and Growth
Pact.
BIS Review   88/1998
- 3 -
And  the  potential  for  external  shocks,  with  asymmetrical  effects  on  different
Euroland countries, of course remains.
A particular worry is that macro-economic stability - vitally necessary though it is -
will  not,  on  its  own,  be  sufficient  to  prevent  the  persistence  of  unacceptably  high  levels  of
unemployment in a number of the major Continental European economies. Unemployment has been
for  some  considerable  time,  and  remains,  much  the  most  urgent  and  important  economic  issue
confronting us in Europe. I do not suggest for a moment that the right answer would be to abandon
macro-economic  discipline  and  revert  to  old-fashioned  demand  management  policies.  In  anything
other  than  the  very  short  term  that  would  be  likely  to  make  matters  worse.  I  share  the  broad
consensus  view  that  Europe’s  unemployment  problems  originate  essentially  in  rigidities  on  the
supply-side of the economy. The point is that unless we are all more successful in bringing down this
structural unemployment, through micro-economic policies designed to improve structural, supply-
side flexibility, then some countries could find it difficult to continue to live with a common macro-
economic  discipline  without  significant  tensions.  The  nagging  doubt  is  whether  the  necessary
commitment  to  fiscal  discipline,  alongside  monetary  stability,  will  prove  -  in  the  terms  of  the
Maastricht Treaty - to be sustainable.
Some people who basically recognise this concern are inclined to argue that if a euro-
participating country were to find itself  in  this  situation  -  and  given  that  it  would  have  no  macro-
economic way out, for example, through exchange rate adjustment, or monetary relaxation, or fiscal
stimulus beyond the limits of the Stability and Growth Pact - then it would have an overwhelming
incentive  to  take  the  sort  of  supply-side  measures  which  have  proved  so  difficult  to  implement
hitherto.  As  one  of  my  colleagues  once  put  it  to  me  “when  we  have  exhausted  all  other  possible
policy  options,  we  will  finally  be  forced  to  do  what  we  know  to  be  the  right  thing!”  And  the
populations in those countries would it is true have a similar incentive to accept structural change. I
am  not  sure  how  far  one  can  rely  upon  that.  But  it  does  in  any  event  serve  to  emphasise  that
supply-side flexibility will be more crucially important than ever in the context of monetary union.
I  should  emphasise  at  this  point,  Mr.  Chairman,  that  I  am  not  predicting  that  there
will necessarily be serious tensions within the single currency area. There will no doubt be policy
challenges - there always are, with or without monetary union. But it is difficult for anyone to predict
how serious the problems will in fact turn out to be.  I  am  simply  describing  the  sort  of  economic
risks which might occur, and which have been identified in the debate about monetary union in the
United  Kingdom  as  the  potential  downside  to  be  set  against  the  potential  benefits  of  nominal
exchange rate certainty which I touched upon earlier. You here in Belgium may think that these risks
are  sometimes  exaggerated  -  you  have  after  all  been  effectively  in  de  facto  monetary  union  with
Germany for some considerable time. But I don’t think  one  can  reasonably  argue,  certainly  in  the
case of a larger country, that the risks can be ignored.
It was against the background of this kind of economic debate that the Chancellor of
the  Exchequer  announced  a  year  ago  that  the  United  Kingdom  would  exercise  its  opt-out  and  not
participate  in  the  first  wave  of  euro  membership.  That  was  a  disappointment  to  some  of  our
European  partners.  But  it  was  a  considerable  relief  to  others,  because  UK  participation  from  the
outset would undoubtedly have complicated the project - not least because of the substantial cyclical
divergence between ourselves and the major countries on the Continent.
But  the  Chancellor  also  made  it  clear  that  the  present  British  Government  is  not
opposed  to  euro  membership  as  a  matter  of  principle;  it  will  make  its  decision  on  pragmatic
grounds -  the  test  being  whether  membership  would  be  in  our  economic  interests;  and  it  would
BIS Review   88/1998
- 4 -
submit  that  decision  to  Parliament  and  to  the  British  people  in  a  referendum.  The  Chancellor
recognised that - barring some fundamental and unforeseen change in economic circumstances - it
was unrealistic to think that a decision could be made during the lifetime of the present Parliament -
and that could extend to May 2002. But he stressed that in the meantime the United Kingdom should
prepare  -  both  for  the  euro’s  introduction  on  the  Continent  on  1  January  1999  and  for  our  own
eventual participation.
This  statement  was  the  first  by  a  British  Government  to  accept  the  principle  of
monetary union. It implied that the United Kingdom is to be regarded effectively as  a  “Pre-In”.  It
recognised that the single currency will affect us whether we are in or out of it, and that it is clearly
in our national interest to do all that we can to help ensure that the euro is successful.
This,  in  my  view,  provides  a  solid  foundation  for  a  continuing,  positive  and
constructive relationship between the United Kingdom and other EU member states, including those
participating in the first wave of the euro. And that must be in the interest of both sides: just as we
benefit from a stable and prosperous Europe, so too the Continental European interest lies in a stable
and prosperous Britain - and that mutual interest above all is the thing we must all hold on to. To
allow  the  euro  to  become  a  divisive  factor  in  the  broader  relationship  between  European  Union
member states would be to cut off our collective nose to spite our collective face!
What  then  can  the  United  Kingdom  bring,  initially  as  an  ‘out’,  or  ‘pre-in’,  to  the
European party, in terms of contributing to the euro’s success?
There are, I think, two things in particular.
First,  we  can  continue  to  pursue  macro-economic  -  both  monetary  and  fiscal  -
discipline alongside the euro-area countries. The Government is committed to that course as a matter
of  national  economic  self-interest,  but  it  reflects  the  same  philosophy  as  that  which  underlies  the
Maastricht Treaty.
One  of  its  very  first  acts  in  Government,  for  example,  was  to  give  operational
independence for the conduct of monetary policy to the Bank of England, and we have been set the
objective of delivering, consistently, underlying retail price inflation of 2½%. That objective appears
to be compatible with the ECB’s target for the European Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices of
less than 2% - in fact while we are, on the most recent data, precisely on track in terms of our own
target  measure,  our  inflation  rate  in  terms  of  the  harmonised  index  is  down  to  1.3%.  And  on  the
fiscal side the Government has committed itself both to maintaining the debt to GDP ratio at a stable
and  prudent  level  over  the  economic  cycle  and  to  the  “golden  rule”  (under  which  public  sector
borrowing is limited to the financing of investment). These fiscal rules, too, are broadly consistent
with  those  established  for  euro-member  countries  under  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  and  will
ensure that we continue to comply with the Maastricht Treaty fiscal criteria.
These  macro-economic  policies  -  together  with  continuing  structural  reforms  to
improve  supply-side  flexibility  -  are  calculated  to  make  the  United  Kingdom  a  more  prosperous
trading  partner  and  to  ensure  that  we  do  not  disrupt  the  policies  and  the  economy  of  the  rest  of
Europe. More than that they are calculated to encourage sustainable economic convergence with the
rest of Europe as a necessary precursor to our eventual adherence of the euro club.
Secondly,  Mr.  Chairman,  the  United  Kingdom  can  contribute  directly  to  the
development of the euro through the City of London’s financial markets. To take its place alongside
BIS Review   88/1998
- 5 -
the dollar,  the  euro  needs  well  developed,  pan-European,  financial  markets.  And  providing  liquid,
transparent,  competitive  and  innovative,  but  well-regulated,  financial  markets  is  one  of  the  things
that the City of London does particularly well.
The  City’s  strength  derives  from  being  a  uniquely  international  financial  centre,  in
which the strongest financial businesses from all parts of the world - including from all parts of the
European  Union  -  are  represented.  There  are  more  banks  in  the  City  incorporated  abroad,  for
example, than domestic banks. And more than half the total deposit base (over £1 trillion equivalent)
of  the  UK  banking  system  is  denominated  in  foreign  currencies.  And  while  the  current  global
financial turbulence is taking its toll on employment in some financial services activities in London
as elsewhere, the longer-term trend is for the foreign presence - including that from European partner
countries - to continue to increase.
The  Bank  of  England  has  been  working  intensively  with  the  City  for  the  past  few
years to ensure that it is as thoroughly prepared for the start of the euro next year as the financial
centres  in  any  of  the  participating  countries.  We  will  be  ready  to  provide  financial  services
denominated  in  euro  to  all  those  that  want  them  from  day  one.  And  we  are  already  taking  the
initiative with our European partners in creating regional market structures, as you see, for example,
in the talks between the London Stock Exchange and the Deutsche Börse, which are designed to lay
the  foundations  for  an  inclusive,  pan-European,  equity  market.  You  will  be  able  to  account,  trade
and settle in euro-denominated assets in London just as you can now in Deutsche Mark or French
francs  or  dollars  or  yen.  The  financial  markets  of  the  City  are  our  wedding  present  to  the  euro
marriage partners. They are not just a national - but a European - asset.
There are, of course, some here on the Continent who regard this role of the City as
something of a mixed blessing - perhaps even a threat rather than a promise. There is a view that the
euro  should  somehow  ‘belong’  exclusively  to  the  participating  countries  and  that  its  introduction
should  be  used  as  an  opportunity  to  confer  competitive  advantage  on  national  financial  centres
within the euro area. If that view were to prevail the main effect would be to inhibit the development
of the euro as an international trading and portfolio currency, reducing one of the single currency’s
major benefits to both investors and borrowers within the euro area itself.
In  practice  in  today’s  world  of  globally  integrated  markets  and  liberalised  capital
flows there is very little prospect of being able to impose artificial constraints on the international
use  of  the  euro.  There  will  inevitably  be  active  euro  markets  in  all  the  major  financial  centres,
including London. And it is in the interest of financial activity right across Europe that there should
be. Like trade in goods, trade in financial services is a positive sum game, so that London’s success
is not a threat to other European financial centres. As a major interface between Europe and the rest
of  the  world  I  have  little  doubt  that  euro-activity  in  London  will  mean  more  rather  than  less  euro
activity in other European financial centres like Frankfurt, Paris, Milan, Amsterdam or Brussels. And
conversely I have little doubt either that what is good for those centres will be good too for the City.
I hope, Mr. Chairman, that I have said enough to persuade at least some of you that
British hesitations about participating in the euro from the outset are not just plain obstinacy! Out of
the first wave we may be - indeed we are - but we remain very much an active and, I would hope, a
constructive partner in the process of European monetary integration in a wider sense, and we clearly
want the euro to succeed. That is why I prefer to think of Britain in Europe which I took as the title
for my talk.
BIS Review   88/1998
- 6 -
Let  me  conclude,  Mr.  Chairman,  with  just  a  few  remarks  on  the  prospects  for  the
euro in the current climate of global financial turmoil.
For  much  of  the  past  two  years  or  so  financial  markets  have  shown  a  degree  of
scepticism  about  the  future  character  of  the  euro.  The  sense,  from  about  the  autumn  of  1996,
appeared to be that the process was being driven by the politics of Europe with less emphasis on the
importance of economic convergence; expectations therefore increasingly focused upon the prospect
of a broadly-based rather than a narrower euro; and the inference was drawn that this would mean a
weaker  rather  than  a  strong  euro.  Together  with  comparatively  subdued  economic  activity  on  the
Continent, this perception - or misperception - meant that the core European currencies were for a
time relatively weak against the dollar, and against sterling.
That situation has more recently begun to change. Market scepticism has diminished
with the growing realization that the European Central Bank will in fact be rigorous in pursuit of its
mandate of maintaining effective price stability throughout the euro area as a whole - that the euro
will  in  fact  be  soundly  managed.  And  at  the  same  time  domestic  demand  growth  and  economic
activity  have  started  to  pick  up  in  the  core  European  countries,  causing  the  euro-currencies
collectively to strengthen in the foreign exchange market and helpfully easing some of the cyclical
tensions that might otherwise have complicated the move to a single monetary policy.
All  this  is  now  overlaid  by  the  successive  financial  shocks  to  the  global  economy
from Asia, from Russia, and most recently from the need to rescue Long-Term Capital Management
Fund (LTCM).
In practice the euro currencies have been remarkably stable in relation to each other
in the face of these shocks - demonstrating the market’s total conviction, in the words of one market
participant recently that “the euro is a done deal”. The euro area has in fact been a zone of stability
in turbulent currency markets - and that performance puts in proper perspective earlier excited talk
about spectators waiting to rip the euro apart. That never was in my view a serious issue, given the
political  commitment  to  the  process  -  the  economic  issue  has,  as  I  say,  been  about  the  sort  of
regional tensions that might subsequently emerge.
The big questions now - for all of us, not just for the euro countries - are, first, and
most  immediately  whether  we  can  avoid  new  financial  shocks;  and,  secondly,  how  we  should
manage the economic fall out from the financial shocks that have already occurred.
Developments since the IMF/IBRD meetings  in  Washington  have  in  my  view  been
quite encouraging. The Japanese financial package is reassuring, and the strengthening of the Yen
has brought welcome relief to much of the rest of Asia. United States Congressional approval of the
IMF quota increase and of the New Arrangements to Borrow (NAB) has paved the way to a vitally
necessary  increase  in  IMF  resources.  Brazil  -  which  has  been  widely  seen  as  the  next  potential
emerging market domino - is clearly committed to taking strong corrective domestic policy action,
which  would  command  broad  international  support.  And  while  there  evidently  has  been  a  sharp
contraction  of  wholesale  market  lending,  within  the  financial  sector  in  particular,  in  the  United
States, and suggestions there of a possible wider credit crunch, no new problems on anything like the
scale  of  LTCM  have  in  fact  been  uncovered.  We  are  certainly  not  yet  out  of  the  wood,  but  the
financial situation looks rather better than might have been expected two or three weeks ago.
If we can avoid a new financial shock - and I am hopeful that we will - we still have
to manage the global economic slowdown already underway. In that context there has been a good
BIS Review   88/1998
- 7 -
deal of talk about concerted interest rate cuts in Europe and the United States to stimulate domestic
demand and offset the effects of recession elsewhere. And it is true that those effects - both lower
world commodity prices and falling external demand - do mean that interest rates in the industrial
countries  generally  can  be  lower  than  they  would  otherwise  be,  which  in  turn  will  help  to  sustain
global demand. But we do not all start from the same point. Rates have in fact been cut in the United
States  and  the  United  Kingdom,  where  underlying  domestic  demand  growth  also  shows  signs  of
slowing.  In  Continental  Europe,  on  the  other  hand,  domestic  demand  growth  has,  as  I  say,  been
picking up. But even here interest rates have already come down in some of the smaller countries
and  are  likely  to  be  generally  lower  than  they  would  have  been  in  the  absence  of  the  global
slowdown. Markets are, in fact, now expecting rates to converge by the end of the year on German
rates, where only a couple of months ago, they expected convergence at significantly higher rates.
None of this, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me need affect the prospect for the euro - if
anything it may reinforce the more recent firmer tone of the euro currencies. It would only add to
potential  tensions  within  the  euro  area  if  the  global  economic  weakness  had  a  disproportionate
impact on some member countries as against others. Although,  therefore,  the  present  international
climate is less than ideal for the euro’s introduction, that does not alter my conclusion that the new
currency will indeed prove to be a stable element in an uncertain world, and that continuing growth
of the European economy will help to ensure that the present slowdown does not develop into global
recession. And that is clearly in everyone’s interest.
BIS Review   88/1998
