Mr.  Stals  discusses  the  current  economic  situation  and  factors  influencing
monetary  policy  in  South  Africa  in  1999      Address  by  the  Governor  of  the  South  African
Reserve Bank, Dr. C. Stals, at an International Conference arranged by ABN AMRO Bank and
Kagiso Financial Services, held in Johannesburg, on 3/11/98.
1. Domestic economy dominated by international developments
During the past six months the South African economic scene was dominated by
developments  in  the  international  financial  markets.  The  East  Asian  financial  market  crisis,
which already started with pressures in Thailand’s foreign exchange market in June 1997, took
some time before it spread to other emerging markets outside of the East Asian region, and also
to  the  smaller  industrial  countries  of  the  world.  More  recently,  financial  markets  in  major
industrial countries also became contaminated.
In  the  case  of  South  Africa,  the  contamination  took  place  through  the
disinvestment  of  foreign  funds  from  the  South  African  Bond  Exchange.  During  the  first  four
months of 1998, non-residents increased their holdings of South African bonds by R16.3 billion.
During the next five months, from May to September 1998, they reduced their holdings of South
African bonds by R22.4 billion. This major switch was directly linked to a reassessment made by
foreign investors during April/May 1998 of their investment positions, and the decision to reduce
their exposure in fixed-interest bonds of the emerging market economies.
It is interesting to note that non-residents continued to increase their investment in
South  African  equities.  After  increasing  their  investment  in  South  African  shares  acquired
through the Johannesburg Stock Exchange by R19.4 billion in the first four months of 1998, they
added a further R17.3 billion during the following five months. The reversal in the investment
trend on the Bond Exchange was, however, sufficient to change drastically the outlook for the
South African economy, and some promising economic developments in the first quarter of this
year were promptly aborted.
2. Adverse financial developments lead the downward trend in the economy
The sudden switch of foreign investors’ sentiments had far-reaching effects in the
South African financial markets:
•  The  immediate  effect  of  the  withdrawal  of  investment  funds  from  the  Bond
Exchange was a sudden and sharp  increase  in  the  yield  on  long-term  bonds.
The average monthly yield on long-term government bonds rose from 12.9 per
cent in April 1998 to 18.3 per cent in September.
•  The  withdrawal  of  foreign  investments  created  pressure  in  the  foreign
exchange market and the average effective exchange rate of the rand against a
basket  of  currencies  depreciated  by  21.4  per  cent  from  22  May  1998  to  31
August 1998, to bring the cumulative decline in the external value of the rand
from the end of last year to 24.6 per cent.
•  The depreciation of the exchange rate encouraged further capital outflows in
the  form  of  negative  “leads  and  lags”,  and  also  led  to  speculative  positions
taken against a further depreciation of the rand. In the  end,  a  net  outflow  of
more than R13 billion in the form of private sector short-term capital exerted
additional pressure in the foreign exchange market.
BIS Review   93/1998
- 2 -
•  The outflow of capital reduced liquidity in the banking sector and forced the
banks  to  borrow  more  from  the  Reserve  Bank  on  a  day-to-day  basis.  The
estimated daily liquidity needs of the banks increased from about R2 billion at
the beginning of May to more than R13 billion in early June 1998.
•  Other interest rates followed the yield on long-term government bonds on its
strong  upward  surge.  The  rate  for  repurchase  transactions  from  the  Reserve
Bank increased from 14.78 per cent on 12 May 1998 to 24 per cent on 22 June
1998, before it settled early in July at a level just above 21 per cent. Banking
institutions raised their prime overdraft rate from 18.25 per cent at the end of
April 1998 to 25.5 per cent on 28 August 1998.
In  order  to  provide  liquidity  to  the  drained  foreign  exchange  market,  the
Reserve Bank drew about R8 billion on foreign loan facilities and increased its
outstanding  hedge  facilities  in  respect  of  future  international  balance  of
payments  commitments  from  US$  17.5  billion  at  the  end  of  April  1998  to
US$ 25.3 billion at the end of June 1998.
•  Having risen by 32.3 per cent from December 1997 to an all-time high in May
1998,  the  average  monthly  level  of  share  prices  listed  on  the  Johannesburg
Stock Exchange declined by 38.7 per cent between May to September 1998.
 Although the financial conditions started to stabilise again in early July 1998, the
situation remained extremely sensitive throughout the next three months, up to September 1998.
Exchange  rates,  yields  and  interest  rates  and  share  prices  reacted  to  rumours,  speculative
transactions  and  adverse  international  developments,  and  most  of  the  financial  aggregates
showed great volatility.
3. Adverse financial conditions brought negative developments in real economic activity
The  adverse  developments  in  the  financial  markets  had  a  negative  effect  on  an
already  fragile  real  domestic  economy.  The  GDP  growth  rate  remained  subdued  at  a  level  of
½ per cent in the first two quarters of this year. All indications are that it became more subdued
in the third quarter, and there may even have been some decline in the level of total production.
A  much  smaller  decline  in  inventories  during  the  second  quarter  of  this  year
caused some improvement in the level of gross domestic expenditure from the first quarter. Total
domestic final demand, however, declined marginally to a rate of expansion of 3 per cent in the
second quarter. Indications are that the expansion in demand may have been maintained at this
level throughout the third quarter.
The current account of the balance of payments recently also showed the strains of
the adverse international conditions. The main reason for a substantial weakening in the current
account  balance  from  the  first  two  quarters  of  1998  into  the  third  quarter  lay  with  an
unexpectedly sharp rise in total imports whereas total exports, at least in volume terms, declined
from the second to the third quarter.
As could have been expected after the depreciation of the rand, inflation moved
upwards. The rate of increase in consumer prices measured over a twelve-month period increased
from  5.0  per  cent  in  April  1998  to  9.1  per  cent  in  September,  and  the  rate  of  increase  in  the
overall producer price index rose from 2.3 per cent in March 1998 to 4.3 per cent in September.
BIS Review   93/1998
- 3 -
In  this  environment,  the  rates  of  increase  in  bank  credit  extension  and  in  the
money supply remained on a high level. Together with the external strains, the situation forced a
very  restrictive  monetary  policy  approach  on  the  Reserve  Bank  in  order  to  restore  overall
financial stability to the South African financial markets.
The overall South African economy is now going through a cycle that is led very
strongly by developments in the financial markets. The recent decline in real economic activity
was directly caused by the adverse developments in global financial conditions. The East Asian
crisis had started already in the middle of 1997, but had a delayed effect on the South African
financial markets, which deteriorated badly, particularly during the second quarter of this year.
Trends  in  the  real  economy  followed  the  downward  trend  in  the  financial  markets  with  but  a
short time lag.
4. More stable conditions return to financial markets
Although  the  underlying  conditions  in  the  South  African  financial  markets  had
already become more stable in early July, conditions started to improve noticeably only in late
September  and  early  October.  Just  as  the  initial  negative  impact  on  South  Africa  was  closely
linked to adverse  developments  in  the  international  financial  markets,  the  recent  recovery  also
followed an improvement in international financial conditions that gained momentum during and
after the 1998 Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
The improvement in the South African financial market conditions was reflected
in:
•  A  decline  in  the  net  sales  of  South  African  bonds  by  non-residents.  The  net
outflow in October declined to less than R1 billion and was the smallest for
the past six months.
•  An  easing  in  the  overall  liquidity  position  of  banking  institutions.  The  total
liquidity  requirement  at  month-ends  declined  from  R12.2  billion  in  June  to
R7.2 billion in September and R5.9 billion in October.
•  A  decline  in  long  and  short-term  interest  rates.  The  yield  on  long-term
government bonds declined from 20.09 per cent on 28 August 1998 to below
16 per cent at this stage. The rate on repurchase transactions from the Reserve
Bank  declined  from  21.85  per  cent  on  13  October  to  20.45  per  cent  today.
Banking institutions reduced their prime overdraft and mortgage lending rates
by 1 full percentage point during the past few weeks.
•  An appreciation of the rand from the very low level reached in July. During
the  month  of  October  the  average  effective  exchange  rate  of  the  rand
appreciated  by  3.9  per  cent  to  reduce  the  cumulative  depreciation  since  the
beginning of the year to about 17½ per cent.
•  A significant slowdown during September 1998 in the rates of growth of both
the M3 money supply and bank credit extended to the private sector.
Conditions in the financial market will hopefully continue to improve further and
to lead real economic activity into recovery in the course of the current business cycle. The recent
improvements in the South African financial market conditions should therefore hopefully lead
to  an  improvement  in  real  economic  activity,  and  particularly  in  gross  domestic  production,
during the course of next year.
5. What monetary policy must take into account for 1999
BIS Review   93/1998
- 4 -
The tight monetary conditions, high interest rates and restrictive monetary policy
in  1998  were  forced  on  South  Africa  by  adverse  developments  in  the  international  financial
markets.  In  the  situation,  monetary  policy  had  to  carry  a  heavy  burden  in  restoring  financial
stability to the South African financial markets. Unpopular measures, such as a reduction in bank
liquidity and  high  interest  rates,  had  to  be  embraced  in  order  to  avoid  more  serious  problems,
such as a foreign reserves crisis, or a breakdown in the banking system.
Provided 
the  encouraging  recent 
the
international  financial  markets  continues,  monetary  conditions  in  South  Africa  should  also
gradually become easier. From the point of view of real economic activity this is, of course, a
most desirable development at this stage.
towards  greater  stability 
trends 
in 
There are a number of reasons why any deliberate actions taken by the monetary
authorities to relax monetary policy should be implemented with caution.
Firstly,  not  all  problems  in  the  international  markets  have  been  resolved.  The
world is still holding its breath on the vulnerable situation of the Japanese banking and financial
systems; Brazil is still lingering on the edge of a dangerous cliff with its international financial
relations; weaknesses recently surfaced in the financial markets of a few industrial centres; and
the  secondary  effects  of  the  financial  market  crisis  are  only  gradually  filtering  through  in  the
form of a decline in global real economic growth.
Secondly,  the  recent  financial  turmoil  left  the  South  African  scene  with  a  few
additional scars that need time to heal. The depreciation of the rand forced inflation to a higher
level and even more out of line with the rest of the world; the weakening of the current account
of the balance of payments in the third quarter provides a further warning for caution; a monetary
stimulation may easily increase demand without increasing production; and the continuing low
level  of  the  country’s  official  foreign  reserves  do  not  provide  much  scope  for  manoeuvring
unless large foreign capital inflows will again supplement the supply of foreign exchange.
Structural  deficiencies  in  the  South  African  economy  that  restrict  the  country’s
economic  growth  potential  to  a  relatively  low  level  place  an  almost  permanent  obligation  on
monetary policy to remain relatively restrictive. A relaxation of monetary policy would normally
stimulate  demand  and,  unless  production  responds  flexibly  and  quickly  to  increases  in
expenditure, monetary stimulation is inclined to lead either to an unsustainable overall balance of
payments deficit and/or an unacceptably high rate of inflation. The monetary policy targets in the
Government’s Strategy for Growth, Employment and Redistribution (GEAR) cannot be achieved
unless all the other goals for structural adjustment are also achieved at the same time.
In view of the depressed real economic situation in the country at this stage, there
is,  however,  some  room  for  a  responsible  relaxation  of  monetary  policy,  provided  the
international and domestic financial conditions continue to improve further. The Reserve Bank
will  move  cautiously  with  and  not  against  any  improvement  in  the  underlying  conditions,  and
will allow market forces to exert normal pressures on important prices such as the exchange rate
and domestic interest rates.
BIS Review   93/1998
