Mr.  Thiessen  discusses  global  uncertainties  and  the  Canadian  economy
Remarks by the Governor of the Bank of Canada, Mr. Gordon Thiessen, to the St. John’s Board
of Trade in St. John’s, Newfoundland on 23/9/98.
I  am  delighted  to  have  been  invited  to  speak  to  the  Board  of  Trade  on  this
occasion when the Bank of Canada’s Board of Directors is meeting here in St. John’s.
This past year, we have had to deal with the implications for our economy and our
currency of increased global uncertainty and pressures arising from the problems that originated
in  Southeast  Asia.  I  am  sure  that  the  effects  of  these  developments,  especially  on  primary
commodities, such as oil and nickel, are already very familiar to Newfoundlanders.
To understand what is going on, we need to look at the nature of the forces that
are currently affecting our economy. We also need to correctly identify cause and effect when it
comes  to  the  decline  in  the  external  value  of  our  currency  over  the  past  12  months.  The
commentary on this subject has not always been helpful.
I  would  like  to  start  my  presentation  with  a  quick  review  of  international
developments, focusing on the extent to which the problems in Southeast Asia have persisted and
spread. Next, I will discuss the  implications  of  these  developments  for  the  Canadian  economy
and give you the Bank’s latest assessment of the outlook. I can tell you now that I believe that the
key trends in our economy remain positive. Lastly, I will talk about the decline in the external
value of the Canadian dollar and about the response of monetary policy to that decline.
The world around us
For  over  a  year  now,  volatility  and  uncertainty  have  been  the  main  traits  of  the
international environment in which Canada operates.
The financial crisis started in Southeast Asia in the summer of 1997, then spread
to  South  Korea,  and  in  turn  exacerbated  the  domestic  economic  difficulties  that  Japan  was
already facing. Recently, Russia has been added to the list of afflicted countries, and now some
countries in Latin America are under pressure.
As  with  the  crisis  in  Asia,  the  financial  problems  in  Russia  have  reverberated
around the world through foreign exchange, stock, and bond markets, touching off concerns of
still further contagion.
It is certainly easier now, with the benefit of hindsight, to see the extent to which
many investors from industrial countries were attracted to higher-yield investments in emerging-
market  countries,  without  fully  appreciating  the  risks  involved.  When  investors  suffered
substantial losses in certain markets, they sought to reduce their exposure to emerging markets
more generally. But this rapid withdrawal of funds brought to the surface areas of weakness in
some of these economies, making investors still more nervous. The recent events in Russia are a
prime example of this process.
The  apparently  contagious  nature  of  these  developments  has  led  to  some
pessimistic predictions of recession in the world economy. How concerned should we be about
this?
BIS Review   80/1998
- 2 -
While the international environment has turned out to be more difficult than most
people had thought earlier, let me reassure you that it is certainly not all negative.
To be sure, the situation in Japan is worrisome - not only because of that country’s
economic importance but also because of its strong trade and financial links with other troubled
Asian  economies.  But,  and  this  is  an  important  but,  Japan  has  the  capacity  and  the  financial
wherewithal to turn its situation around. With resolute action to speed up the implementation of
measures to deal with its ailing banking sector and to kickstart its domestic economy, the present
concerns would dissipate.
More importantly, economic activity in the United States has been very robust and
is  expected  to  remain  healthy.  In  Canada,  too,  and  in  Europe  the  situation  is  positive.  This  is
certainly not insignificant, for North America and Europe together account for more than half of
world output. And recent declines in medium- and long-term interest rates to record low levels
are helping to sustain domestic spending in all industrial countries.
With  this  as  background,  I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  the  impact  of  these
international  developments,  and  of  the  associated  uncertainties  and  pressures  in  financial
markets, on Canada.
How is our economy faring?
The international developments of the past year have affected our economy more
than previously anticipated. And there is no doubt that those Canadian industries and regions that
depend on the production of primary commodities are facing considerable difficulties.
To appreciate this particular link between recent international developments and
the Canadian economy, let me point out that Asia, including Japan, absorbs between 30 and 35
per cent of the world output of certain key primary materials. So it is not surprising that world
commodity prices have been hit hard by the Asian crisis. The recent events in Russia, which is a
major commodity producer, have added to the uncertainty about the outlook for the world supply
and prices of primary commodities.
Because  of  all  this,  the  US  dollar  prices  of  commodities  that  are  important  to
Canada have fallen by about 15 per cent over the past 12 months. While commodities are less
important  to  us  than  they  used  to  be,  they  still  make  up  about  30  to  35  per  cent  of  our
merchandise exports.
Although Canadians have to deal with these difficulties coming from abroad, it is
important  to  remember  that,  overall,  our  economy  is  still  in  good  shape.  This  is,  first  and
foremost, because some basic aspects of our economic situation have improved markedly in the
last few years. We now have a low rate of inflation, a fiscal surplus, and a declining (though still
high)  public  debt-to-GDP  ratio.  As  well,  Canadian  businesses  have  undertaken  major
restructuring  and  investment  initiatives  to  increase  their  productivity.  Because  of  these
fundamental strengths, we are now better positioned to weather sudden shocks.
As for the near-term outlook, there are also a number of positive elements in the
picture. Economic activity in the United States, our main customer, remains high. And here in
Canada,  the  latest  indicators  suggest  continued  expansion  in  consumer  spending  and  business
investment, supported by higher employment and low medium- and long-term interest rates.
BIS Review   80/1998
- 3 -
This  year,  the  Canadian  economy  will  not  repeat  the  4  per  cent  growth
experienced through 1997. But it may still expand by 2½ to 3 per cent (fourth quarter over fourth
quarter).  Clearly,  a  good  deal  of  uncertainty  surrounds  any  estimate  at  this  juncture,  given  the
international situation. For one thing, it is difficult to judge how quickly and effectively Japan
will deal with its problems, and what this will mean for the rest of Asia. The extent of the impact
from the recent spreading of the crisis to Russia and the pressures in parts of Latin America is
also  uncertain.  But,  at  the  same  time,  most  forecasters  have  consistently  underestimated  the
resilience of the US economy, and may still be doing so.
Implications for the Canadian dollar
One of the most talked-about economic events in Canada over the past year has
been the decline in the external value of our currency. At its lowest point, in late August 1998,
the Canadian dollar had depreciated by about 13 per cent against the US dollar and by more than
7 per cent against the German mark from its average value in the first half of 1997, before the
Asian  crisis  erupted.  Since  that  low  point  in  late  August,  the  Canadian  dollar  has  recovered
somewhat against the US dollar.
What has caused these movements?
Exchange rates will typically reflect developments in Canada and abroad. Thus, it
is  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  recent  movements  in  the  Canadian  dollar  are  the
consequence of developments that have occurred over the past year. They are not the cause of the
difficulties we are now facing, as some of the recent commentary seems to suggest.
It  is  also  important  to  note  that  our  exchange  rate  is  the  price  of  the  Canadian
dollar  expressed  in  terms  of  the  currency  of  another  country,  usually  the  US  dollar.  So,  the
exchange  rate  will  be  influenced  by  events  affecting  both  countries.  If  we  are  to  correctly
interpret  movements  in  the  Canada/US  exchange  rate,  we  must  also  look  at  what  has  been
happening  to  the  United  States,  not  just  to  Canada.  And  that  makes  any  interpretation  more
complex.
Until  very  recently,  the  US  dollar  has  been  exceptionally  strong  against  all
currencies.  In  part,  this  reflected  the  buoyancy  of  the  US  economy.  But  in  the  difficult  and
uncertain global environment of the past year, the strength of the US dollar also came from its
role as the major international currency. After the Asian crisis, and with renewed vigour in the
days  following  the  events  in  Russia,  international  investors  sought  shelter  in  US  dollar  assets.
Indeed, the turmoil in financial markets in late August seemed to be the result of a worldwide
reassessment of risks by investors following the announcement of the Russian debt moratorium.
Thus, to the extent that the depreciation of our currency reflected the appreciation
of the US dollar against all currencies, the cause was the global flight of funds into US assets.
But that is not the whole story. The downward pressure on our currency over the
past year was also related to events that were seen as affecting Canada more specifically. As I
explained earlier, one important event was the marked decline in the prices of the key primary
commodities we export.
BIS Review   80/1998
- 4 -
The drop in these prices has meant lower incomes and wealth for Canadians. The
profit  outlook  for  many  of  our  resource  industries  has  deteriorated  and  production  and
employment in those industries are likely to be affected. And the market value of companies in
those  sectors  has  reflected  these  developments.  Moreover,  lower  net  export  earnings  from  our
primary commodities imply, all else being equal, a larger deficit in our balance of international
payments and a greater need for foreign borrowing than would otherwise be required.
All these commodity-related developments have led to downward pressure on our
exchange rate. And the lower dollar spreads the wealth and income effects of falling commodity
prices across the economy.
In  effect,  a  lower  Canadian  dollar  means  higher  domestic  prices  for  all  those
goods  that  are  imported  and  for  many  of  the  import  substitutes  we  produce  here.  For  a  given
level of income, these higher prices imply a decline in living standards for Canadian consumers.
Retailers who feel unable to pass on these price increases to consumers will have to absorb them
in lower profits which, in turn, will mean lower returns for their shareholders.
The bottom line is that the decline in commodity prices has made us less well off
than we were before. And we have to adjust to this reality.
These effects are unavoidable, even if we were able to prevent the Canadian dollar
from falling. In fact, if the currency were not allowed to move at all, the adjustment would be
slower and more costly, taking place through reductions in wages which usually involve sharper
fluctuations in output and employment. Under a floating exchange rate, the process is facilitated
by some downward movement in the dollar which spreads the burden of adjustment. Over the
years,  this  has  been  an  important  justification  for  a  flexible  exchange  rate  in  Canada  --  that
adjusting  through  exchange  rate  movements  to  the  shocks  that  periodically  hit  our  economy
makes for a generally smoother and fairer process than adjusting through reductions in output,
employment, and wages.
But I do not want to leave you with the impression that foreign exchange markets
always know the appropriate value for a currency. They sometimes push too far once a trend is
established in one direction or another. Indeed, I believe that during this latest episode of global
financial turbulence, markets exaggerated the commodity connection of the Canadian dollar. For
example,  our  exports  of  highly  manufactured  goods,  apart  from  the  important  motor  vehicle
sector, have grown by nearly 20 per cent over the past 12 months, and now represent about 30
per cent of our merchandise trade. This development seems to have been largely overlooked.
Monetary policy response
So, what can and should the Bank of Canada do about the exchange rate in times
of international financial turbulence and major external shocks?
First of all, let me remind you that the objective of Canadian monetary policy is to
hold the rate of inflation within a range of 1 to 3 per cent. This target, jointly agreed upon by the
government and the Bank of Canada, reflects the conclusion that low inflation will contribute to
a stronger, more stable economic performance over time.
If  we  are  to  fulfill  our  commitment  to  keep  inflation  low  and  stable,  monetary
policy  must  remain  focused  on  that  objective.  The  exchange  rate  and  interest  rates  are  the
BIS Review   80/1998
- 5 -
channels  through  which  monetary  policy  operates  and  they  must  be  allowed  to  adjust  to  help
achieve the inflation targets.
But  what  if  the  momentum  of  currency  movements  pushes  the  Canadian  dollar
beyond  any  level  that  is  justified  on  economic  grounds?  Judgments  as  to  what  is,  or  is  not,
justified are very difficult to make, but there are times when the good economic news gets lost in
the face of a persistent currency decline.
On those occasions, Canadian authorities need to remind investors of the positive
trends in our economy. And to reinforce the message, the Bank may intervene, on behalf of the
Minister of Finance, to support the currency by buying Canadian dollars in the foreign exchange
market. But we do know that this kind of intervention will be effective only if a good number of
investors share our belief that the currency movement has been overdone.
The Bank can also respond to currency declines with Bank Rate changes. There
are  two  sets  of  circumstances  in  which  this  would  be  appropriate.  The  first  is  when  the
magnitude  of  the  currency  decline  threatens  to  push  the  economy  off  a  sustainable,  non-
inflationary  growth  path.  Remember  that  a  declining  currency  is  a  source  of  stimulus  to  the
economy,  because  it  encourages  exporters  and  producers  of  import  substitutes  to  expand  their
activities. That is why the Bank always puts the exchange rate and interest rates together in order
to  measure  the  amount  of  monetary  stimulus  in  the  economy.  If  a  declining  currency  leads  to
monetary conditions that are persistently too easy and inconsistent with the inflation targets, the
Bank will offset that with higher short-term interest rates.
The second situation that would prompt a Bank Rate increase is when there is a
potential loss of confidence in the Canadian dollar. If confidence is undermined, both Canadian
and foreign investors will move out of investments denominated in Canadian dollars unless they
are compensated with substantial premiums in interest rates. Higher premiums, which translate
into higher medium- and long-term interest rates, are very costly for the economy. It was because
of  such  concerns  that  the  Bank  responded  strongly  to  the  decline  in  our  currency  during  the
Mexican crisis in early 1995.
The recent Bank Rate increase at the end of August was also designed to counter a
potential  loss  of  market  confidence.  In  this  case,  investor  nervousness  was  exacerbated  by  the
financial crisis in Russia and was reflected in a sharp decline in our currency and rising medium-
and long-term interest rates. Since the Bank Rate increase, the Canadian dollar has recovered and
medium- and longer-term interest rates have come down.
Concluding comments
I have placed a great deal of emphasis on recent international developments in my
remarks today because the implications of these developments for the Canadian economy and the
exchange rate are important and complex.
Let me summarize my main points.
For the past year, our economy has had to cope with the fallout from the  Asian
crisis, which has turned out to be more widespread and prolonged than most of us had predicted.
Although we are having to deal with these difficulties and with the ongoing global uncertainty
and  pressures,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  there  is  still  a  significant  positive  element  in
BIS Review   80/1998
- 6 -
Canada’s external environment coming mainly from a resilient US economy. And there is still
considerable underlying buoyancy in our domestic economy. What’s more, the improvement in
our basic economic foundations puts us in a better position than before to withstand the present
adversity.
In addition to pressure from the worldwide strength of the US dollar, some of the
downward movement in the Canadian dollar over the past year was a reflection of the impact of
lower commodity prices on our economic well-being. However, by early August, it appeared that
investors  were  exaggerating  the  importance  of  these  effects  and  losing  sight  of  the  overall
positive  fundamentals  in  our  economy.  The  Bank  intervened,  buying  Canadian  dollars,  to
encourage market participants to pause and reassess their views of the Canadian economy. When
that pause was overwhelmed by a new wave of nervousness precipitated by the events in Russia
in mid-August, the Bank raised the Bank Rate to forestall a loss of confidence in the currency
and thus reverse a costly increase that was taking place in medium and long-term interest rates.
Since then, these interest rates have come down.
Let  me  conclude  by  pointing  out  that,  despite  all  the  recent  attention  on  the
Canadian  dollar  because  of  exceptional  external  developments,  the  fundamental  focus  of
monetary policy remains on keeping the trend of inflation in Canada inside a target range of 1 to
3 per cent. Low inflation is the best contribution the Bank of Canada can make towards improved
overall  economic  performance  over  time.  It  also  provides  the  best  underpinning  for  a  sound
Canadian dollar in the long run.
BIS Review   80/1998
