Mr.  Stals  reviews  the  position  of  South  Africa  against  the  background  of  the
global financial crisis  Address by the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, Dr. C. Stals, at
the  Fifth  Annual  General  Meeting  of  the  South  Africa  -  Canada  Chamber  of  Business  in
Johannesburg on 22/10/98.
1. Background
As  could  have  been  expected,  this  year’s  Annual  Meetings  of  the  International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank held in Washington D.C. during the first week of October, were
dominated by a discussion of the global financial crisis.
What started off more than a year ago as an East Asian crisis gradually extended to
other emerging  market  countries  and  eventually  also  affected  a  number  of  smaller  well-developed
economies.  The  most  recent  extension  was  an  infliction  on  the  financial  systems  of  some  of  the
industrial  countries,  such  as  the  United  States  of  America.  What  started  off  as  a  more  regional
problem  of  the  countries  surrounding  the  depressed  economy  of  Japan,  indeed  became  a  global
problem that is now demanding the serious attention of the entire international community. This may
be a depressing thought, but it is nevertheless one of the more encouraging outcomes of this year’s
annual  meetings  of  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank.  Now  that  so  many  countries,  and  also  major
industrial countries, are more directly involved in the financial crisis, there is a greater urgency for
finding a solution.
2. The causes of the problem
Many  reasons  have  been  advanced  for  the  world  financial  debacle.  Apart  from  the
adverse effects of a protracted recession in the Japanese economy, East Asian countries were blamed
for lax macroeconomic financial policies, for insufficient disclosure of information on foreign capital
movements and debt positions, for bad governance at government and private sector levels and for
crony capitalism.
Private  international  investors  were  blamed  for  irresponsible  speculative  attacks  on
the  foreign  exchange  rates  of  countries,  destabilizing  activity  in  the  financial  markets  and  a
reluctance to share in the burden of eventual collapse and adjustment.
The  International  Monetary  Fund  has  been  criticized  and  is  still  under  attack  from
many quarters for not diagnosing the problem at an earlier stage, and for the way the Fund eventually
handled the crisis situation in individual countries. The medicine prescribed by the Fund (the Fund’s
“conditionalities”) is blamed for killing the patient, rather than curing the illness.
Recent  developments  added  a  further  dimension  and  exposed  a  possibly  more
important basic cause for the global financial dilemma, and that is the excessive leverage positions
that  certain  financial  institutions  were  allowed  to  create  in  funding  international  capital  flows,
including  speculative  investments  in  emerging  markets.  The  near-collapse  of  the  hedge  fund
Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) in the United States of America in September exposed an
astonishing  balance  sheet  position  for  an  important  operator  in  the  world  financial  markets  -  a
balance  sheet  for  a  non-bank  financial  intermediary  that  used  more  than  $50  of  borrowed  funds
(mostly bank funds) for every one dollar of own capital!
Finally,  the  nature  and  functioning  of  the  present  international  financial  system  of
floating exchange rates, unrestricted capital movements and liberalised financial markets is also now
BIS Review   89/1998
- 2 -
being questioned. This system, which gradually developed through an evolutionary process over the
past two decades after the final demise of the system of fixed par values in the 1970s, has some built-
in elements that encourage periodic occurrences of international financial instability. Particularly the
smaller economies of the world find it increasingly difficult to maintain orderly domestic financial
conditions in an environment of  financial  globalisation,  financial  market  integration  and  exchange
control liberalisation.
The truth is perhaps that no solitary cause can be singled out as the only reason for
the development of the present international financial crisis. The erosion in the quality of the system
took  place  over  a  long  period  of  time  and  the  possible  causes  identified  above  most  probably  all
contributed  to  the  weakening  and  eventual  foundering  of  the  system.  The  restoration  of  greater
stability in the international financial markets is therefore a cumbersome and complex process that
will  take  some  time  to  achieve.  The  seriousness  of  the  problem,  however,  demands  a  worldwide
concerted  effort  that  can  best  be  accomplished  by  working  through  the  available  existing
infrastructure of the IMF and the World Bank.
3. Implications of more recent developments in the crisis
Three important events over the past few months contributed to a deepening of the
crisis, but at the same time also to a better understanding of the situation.
Firstly, the decision of Malaysia to reintroduce rather restrictive and comprehensive
exchange controls on international capital movements focused attention on the real danger of a new
movement towards national protectionist and economic isolation policies. It is true that Malaysia is
traditionally a country with a high domestic savings rate and is therefore less dependant on foreign
investment  for  the  financing  of  its  own  internal  economic  development.  It  is  also  true  that  the
presence of serious internal political division in Malaysia to some extent discredited Mr Mahathir’s
recent economic policy measures. International investors, however, could not ignore the signals of
the danger of a wider and more general recourse to direct governmental controls over international
capital  movements,  particularly  over  the  more  volatile  short-term  capital  flows  that  recently
disrupted the economies of so many of the emerging and developing countries of the world.
Secondly,  the  default  by  Russia  in  respect  of  the  redemption  of  its  short-term
domestic and foreign sovereign debt caught many investors by surprise. A huge overnight decline in
the discounted value of Russian government bonds that was previously regarded as secure collateral
for large banking loans extended to Russian borrowers forced massive losses on investors, and led to
large  provisions  for  bad  debts  from  international  banking  institutions.  The  Russian  debacle  more
than anything else exposed the vulnerability of the world’s banking system in the current situation of
global financial turmoil. It also partly exposed the role of hedge funds and short-term speculators in
this evolving global drama. More than one short-term non-banking financial intermediary and quite a
few banks were caught with their pants down in the Russian debacle, and were forced to absorb huge
losses.  The  clear  warning  was  for  greater  caution  in  the  games  they  play  in  this  high-risk
environment of the global financial markets.
Thirdly, the near collapse of Long-Term Capital Management and the decision of the
American Federal Reserve Bank System to get involved in the subsequent rescue operation of this
non-bank  financial  institution,  exposed  a  new  dimension  of  the  emerging  world  financial  crisis.  It
remains a highly debatable issue of why the Federal Reserve was prepared to attach its name, albeit
not its funds, to the rescue of LTCM. The only reason can be that the Fed was gravely concerned
about possible adverse implications for the American banking system of a liquidation of LTCM. As
BIS Review   89/1998
- 3 -
it turned out to be, LTCM managed about $5 billion of selected clients funds, but had invested in the
financial  markets  more  than  $250  billion  of  borrowed  funds,  mostly  raised  on  a  short-term  basis
from American banking institutions.
Both  the  American  authorities  and  representatives  of  the  hedge  fund  movement
recently went out of their way to explain that LTCM was not representative of the industry and that
most other hedge funds maintained much more reasonable leverage positions on their balance sheets.
The  vulnerability  of  the  world’s  financial  system,  and  of  many  reputable  multinational  banking
institutions, was nevertheless rudely exposed by the LTCM affair. The real explanation that should at
this stage be demanded from the American financial supervisory authorities is therefore not why the
Fed  got  involved  in  the  rescue  operation  of  LTCM,  but  rather  why  such  excessive  gearing  was
permitted by a financial institution that in the end turned out to hold a major systemic threat for the
American banking system, and indeed for the emerging global financial system as a whole.
The  moment  that  the  Fed  decided  to  support  the  rescue  operation  for  LTCM,  the
whole ball game changed as far as the future role of hedge funds is concerned. The fact that it has
become necessary for the monetary authorities of the most important financial structure in the world
to lend their support to the rescue of an institution such as LTCM, surely recognises the importance
of this type of institution for monetary policy in general, and for the protection of overall financial
stability in particular. But then it also demands financial disciplines and the adherence to minimum
requirements  of  financial  prudency,  capital  adequacy  and  risk-aversion  policies  from  such
institutions.
The  epicentre  of  risk  exposure  in  the  present  global  financial  crisis  has  therefore
partly  shifted  from  the  East  Asian  or  emerging  and  smaller  developed  economies  of  the  world  to
some  of  the  world’s  major  financial  centres.  Important  international  banking  institutions  have
become so involved in the problem of excessive leverage and speculative investments in the global
financial  markets  that  they  now  also  have  to  implement  major  and  painful  internal  restructuring
programmes. A few examples of such forced financial reform programmes already surfaced in recent
weeks and more will most probably follow. Maybe we are now much closer to finding a solution for
the  international  financial  crisis  of  the  past  year,  which  can  surely  no  longer  be  blamed  only  on
macroeconomic mismanagement in the smaller economies of the world. LTCM exposed one of the
major sources of global financial instability.
4. In search of a solution
The  causes  of  the  current  world  financial  crisis  are  complex  and  widespread.  The
solution therefore is not a simple one. In particular no quick solution is available.
It must firstly, be taken into account that the adverse developments in the financial
markets will continue to have secondary effects that will, for some time to come, exert a negative
influence  on  global  real  economic  activity.  Forecasts  for  world  economic  growth  in  1998  have
systematically  been  scaled  down  from  a  rather  ambitious  4  per  cent  made  towards  the  end  of  last
year to only about 2 per cent at this stage. In a number of East Asian economies, growth will indeed
be negative this year.
Secondly,  the  restructuring  of  the  banking  systems  in  a  number  of  the  affected
countries  will  take  some  time  before  normality  will  be  restored.  As  is  known,  the  Japanese
Government has just  recently  provided  an  amount  of  more  than  Yen  60  trillion  to  recapitalise  the
BIS Review   89/1998
- 4 -
Japanese banking system. In the meantime only modest amounts of new bank loans will be available
for the financing of consumption and investment.
Thirdly,  the  deleveraging  process  to  reduce  the  absurd  excessive  gearing  ratios  of
some mega-sized financial institutions can only be accomplished by a reduction in world liquidity.
Taking  account  of  the  magnitude  of  the  problem  of  over-leveraging  as  evidenced  by  the  balance
sheet information recently released for LTCM, this can become a major constraint on the availability
of new funds in the global financial market over the next year.
Against  this  background,  the  world  can  only  extricate  itself  from  this  complex
problem by a coordinated effort applied from three different levels:
Firstly,  many  macroeconomic  deficiencies  were  exposed  in  a  number  of  countries
that  in  the  end  suffered  most  from  the  global  financial  crisis.  It  is  dangerous  to  generalise  the
shortcomings  as  they  would  obviously  differ  from  country  to  country  and  would  therefore  also
require  specialised  treatment  suitable  to  the  underlying  situation  in  each  one  of  the  affected
economies.  A  number  of  countries  such  as  Thailand,  Korea  and  the  Philippines  have  already
addressed  their  problems  with  appropriate  adjustment  programmes,  and  are  beginning  to  reap
benefits from often painful corrective measures. These adjustments provide for more disclosure and
transparency,  enhanced  financial  regulation  and  supervision,  recapitalising  of  banking  institutions,
more restrictive monetary and fiscal policies, exchange rate adjustments and improved governance
in macroeconomic management in general.
Secondly  ,  all  the  criticism  against  the  multinational  institutions,  and  particularly
against the IMF, is not without foundation. These institutions did not keep up with the accelerating
process of financial globalisation in recent years, and with the rapid integration of world financial
markets. Economic policy models that may have been appropriate in the old system where central
banks  and  governments  could  still  exert  strong  influences  on  the  direction  of  major  financial
aggregates such as interest and exchange rates and could effectively control changes in the money
supply and in bank credit extension cannot be applied without adjustment in the new world where
market forces now dominate the scene. Some changes in the global financial system have become
necessary  and  urgent.  These  institutions  are  now  concentrating  on  increasing  their  resources,  e.g.
IMF  quotas,  on  improving  their  surveillance  functions  and  on  revising  the  “architecture”  of  their
existing infrastructural frameworks.
Thirdly , after the LTCM affair, there is an urgent need for multinational banking and
other  financial  institutions  to  revise  their  own  internal  risk  control  models.  The  action  taken  by
Malaysia recently to reintroduce exchange controls  on  international  capital  movements  and  the  de
facto default by Russia in its inability to redeem its public debt eroded almost overnight the value of
what  was  regarded  as  secure  collateral  in  terms  of  normal  banking  practices.  The  development  of
more suitable risk management models cannot be left entirely to the official financial supervisors of
the world - private sector financial institutions should on their own initiative improve their internal
financial disciplines and controls.
5. South Africa’s position in the international financial crisis
The South African economy was also badly affected over the past six months by the
deteriorating  international  financial  situation.  As  non-resident  investors  reduced  their  holdings  of
South African bonds, we had to ride with the storms. Although the authorities “leaned against the
wind”, South Africa ended up with:
BIS Review   89/1998
- 5 -
•  a decline in the value of the rand. Changes in the exchange rate of the rand after
some turbulent fluctuations resulted in a currency that is now about 18 per cent
weaker than at the beginning of this year;
•  higher interest rates. The level of interest rates also moved up and down but now
 stands at about 7 full percentage points above the level of six months ago;
some  decline  in  overall  liquidity  in  the  banking  sector  which,  however,  eased
again in recent weeks;
•  a  depressed  real  domestic  economy.  Growth  in  real  gross  domestic  product
slowed down already last year and was further restrained by the recent adverse
developments in the financial markets.
During this testing period, some structural weaknesses in the South African economy
were once again exposed, but also some inherent strengths for which we should be grateful. These
include a sound and well-managed domestic banking sector and financial markets that provided the
liquidity,  the  mechanisms  and  the  resilience  to  adapt  to  the  rapidly  changing  international
environment.
South Africa’s approach to this worldwide financial market problem is to remain part
of the system and to lend our support for a global initiative to solve the problem.
Action  at  the  level  of  national  governments,  the  multinational  financial  institutions
and private sector financial market operators is necessary to restore stability in the global financial
system:
in 
•  Governments  must  recognise,  analyze  and  define  deficiencies 
their
macroeconomic  policies  and  identify  weaknesses  in  their  financial  structures,
and  must  take  the  necessary  steps  on  a  case  by  case  basis  to  strengthen  the
system at the national level. Problems are different from country to country and
no  standard  macroeconomic  module  can  be  prescribed  on  a  global  basis  for
universal application.
•  The multinational institutions should concentrate on the obvious shortcomings of
the present infrastructure for international payments, international capital flows
and the determination of exchange rates. The process of financial globalisation,
worldwide financial market integration and liberalisation of financial institutions
moved  faster  than  the  global  authorities  themselves  did  with  their  control  and
surveillance  systems.  The  approach  now  should  not  be  for  the  markets  to  be
stopped in their progress, but rather for the authorities to catch up.
•  Private  sector  financial  market  operators,  including  multinational  banking
institutions,  hedge  funds  and  institutional  fund  managers,  must  in  their  own
interest reconsider and review their modus operandi in the markets. In particular,
risk  management  models  must  provide  for  the  volatile  global  financial
environment in which they now operate.
Many encouraging signs emerged from the discussion in Washington D.C. to indicate
that progress is now being made at all three levels, and that greater stability is gradually returning to
the world financial system. South Africa, like many other countries in a similar situation, is watching
these signs of hope with great interest.
BIS Review   89/1998
