Mr. Heikensten discusses independence and transparency in monetary policy
Speech  by  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Sweden,  Mr.  Lars  Heikensten,  at  the  City
Executive Club in Gothenburg on 25/9/98.
This morning, rather than discuss current monetary policy, I shall be considering
some questions that have to do with monetary policy’s long-term conditions.
Next year, a  proposal  that  has  received  the  preliminary  approval  of  the  Riksdag
(Sweden’s parliament) will make the Riksbank more independent. Here, Sweden is participating
in a development that has been in progress in the industrialised countries for a couple of decades
-  monetary  policy  decisions  are  being  delegated  to  the  central  banks.  This  has  been  criticised,
both because monetary policy is considered to focus too one-sidedly on a single objective  and
because the increased independence is said to limit democratic influence unduly. It may therefore
be appropriate to review the arguments behind the changes and comment on what they require of
the Riksbank.
A  discussion  of  the  process  towards  more  independent  central  banks  -  and  the
considerations  that  underlie  this  process  -  must  take  monetary  policy’s  objective  as  a  starting
point. I shall therefore begin by discussing why low inflation is important. Then I shall consider
the arguments for central bank independence and outline the changes that are in train in Sweden.
Finally I shall put the case for the importance of monetary policy transparency.
Why low inflation?
From  time  to  time  in  the  debate,  the  importance  of  having  low  inflation  as
monetary  policy’s  objective  is  called  into  question.  The  critics  consider  that  the  fight  against
inflation  is  overdone  and  results  in  an  unnecessary  restriction  on  growth  and  employment.  So
allow me to motivate the wisdom of focusing monetary policy just on low inflation.
The  Riksbank’s  basic  function  is  to  provide  Sweden  with  a  stable  and  efficient
payment system. In practice, this amounts to being accountable for maintaining a fixed value of
money and ensuring that the banks provide money in satisfactory way. If the payment system is
to function properly, however, it must have a solid reputation. If people believe, for example, that
the  value  of  money  will  be  appreciably  eroded,  or  will  fluctuate  markedly,  they  will  be  more
uncertain  and  confidence  in  the  payment  system  will  be  weakened.  That  can  result  in  wrong
decisions.
In  other  words,  low  inflation  renders  the  economy  more  efficient  and  makes  it
easier  for  households  and  firms  to  arrive  at  long-term  decisions.  A  look  at  the  situation  in
Sweden  in  the  1980s  will  illustrate  this.  High  inflation,  recurrent  cost  crises  and  devaluation
cycles made economic development erratic, with weak investment and productivity as a result.
More  and  more  misplaced  investments  were  made  as  a  “bubble”  grew  and  when  the  property
market subsequently collapsed, Swedish society was burdened by heavy adjustment costs.
Inflation  also  leaves  its  mark  on  the  distribution  of  income  and  wealth.  High
inflation tends to widen existing differences in wealth because it varies in its impact on different
types  of  earnings  and  saving.  A  person  who  has  savings  in  a  bank  and  earns  a  fixed  nominal
wage is a loser from inflation, whereas someone who can save in real assets, for instance as a
home-owner, stands to gain from rising inflation. Once again, Sweden in the 1970s and ’80s is a
BIS Review   79/1998
- 2 -
good  example:  prices  rose  sharply  for  houses  and  tenant-owned  dwellings,  while  bank  assets
were eroded. Inflation widened the gaps.
So  far,  so  good,  most  people  would  say.  Few  desire  a  return  to  the  earlier
inflationary and speculative economy. A knottier question is just what rate of inflation to aim for.
In Sweden we have chosen to focus policy on an annual CPI inflation rate of 2 per
cent.  As  monetary  policy  is  not  capable  of  directing  inflation  exactly,  when  the  target  was
established in 1993 it was surrounded by a tolerance interval of ±1 percentage point.
This  target  is  well  in  line  with  the  rate  of  inflation  that  other  industrialised
countries, not least in Europe, are aiming for, though there are some minor differences. It is also
well in line with a statement some years ago  by  Mr.  Alan  Greenspan,  head  of  the  US  Federal
Reserve, to the effect that inflation should be so low that economic agents need not worry about
it when making economic decisions. Perhaps that is as close to the truth as one can come.
Policy for low inflation
Low inflation has been the normal state of affairs in the Swedish economy. Over
the past one hundred years the rate has fluctuated around two per cent. It is only in the post-war
period, more exactly from the late 1960s onwards, that inflation has taken off. The same thing
happened  in  other  countries.  Part  of  the  reason  seems  to  have  been  that  economists  and
politicians changed their view of what monetary policy could achieve. At that time many people
considered that monetary policy could induce permanently higher employment; more jobs could
be brought about simply by letting inflation rise. What they overlooked was the central banks’
primary function of safeguarding the payment system’s stability.
History  has  also  clearly  demonstrated  that  this  strategy  does  not  work;  in  many
countries, unemployment rose parallel with inflation. In Sweden the rate of inflation rose to two-
digit figures, accompanied by the erratic economic development which meant that we dropped
down the “growth league”. Then, when the inflation bubble burst, unemployment rose.
What the economists and politicians had not allowed for was how rising inflation
would leave its mark on expectations of future inflation. The original idea - that higher inflation,
via lower real wages, would result in higher demand and employment - did not hold in the longer
run when firms and households realised that their elected representatives and central banks were
fuelling  inflation.  In  the  original  scenario,  the  higher  inflation  was  supposed  to  come
unexpectedly  and  therefore  would  not  result  in  wage  compensation.  In  practice,  the  increased
inflation affected expectations of future inflation, for which employees demanded compensation.
With the higher nominal wages, real wages rose again and labour demand fell back. A situation
rose where prices and wages chased each other in an upward spiral. Unemployment remained in
the best case at its initial level.
When  it  was  realised  that  monetary  policy  could  not  generate  permanently
increased  employment,  politicians  and  people  in  general  had  to  think  again.  The  attempt  to
stimulate  increased  economic  activity  and  employment  by  means  of  fiscal  and  monetary
measures had failed. This line therefore had to give way to a policy that focused on permanently
stable fundamentals for economic development. One of these fundamentals is low inflation; the
central banks were in the best position to shoulder the task of safeguarding the value of money.
BIS Review   79/1998
- 3 -
Sweden switched to the same track as other countries in the early 1990s. Policy
was directed at price stability with the explicit ambition of thereby laying a good foundation for
future growth and employment. The next few years were onerous for Sweden’s economy.  The
bill for the excesses of the 1980s had to be paid at a time when global activity was weakening
and Europe was hit by currency crises. Since the summer of 1993, however, events have taken a
different turn. Growth above the rate in the boom years in the late 1980s has been combined with
lastingly low inflation. Employment is now picking up but in order to push unemployment down
towards the earlier, very low levels, changes are presumably needed in the workings of the labour
market and wage formation.
Increased independence for the Riksbank
Today,  therefore,  most,  though  not  all,  economists  and  politicians  are  broadly
agreed  that  monetary  policy  has  a  very  limited  potential  for  permanently  altering  the  state  of
employment. But monetary policy is capable of influencing growth temporarily. So for those who
decide economic policy, there is always the temptation to try to strengthen economic activity in
the  short  run  and  push  unemployment  down.  In  order  to  restrict  the  scope  for  such  a  policy,
governments  and  parliaments  in  most  industrialised  countries  have  taken  the  initiative  and
decided  to  make  their  central  banks  more  independent.  This  is  often  combined  with  a  clearer
price  stability  objective.  Some  countries  have  also  established  procedures  for  assessing  and
exacting accountability.
Experience  shows  that  the  countries  with  a  far-reaching  delegation  of  monetary
policy  have  had  a  favourable  development  of  inflation.  It  is  probably  not  just  the  formal
framework  that  has  resulted  in  low  inflation.  Central  banks  have  been  most  successful  in
countries where the aversion to inflation is strongest and most widespread.
Central bank independence is thus, you might say, a straightjacket that parliaments
and governments have put on themselves. Paradoxically, it is just by tying their hands in this way
that the legislators have actually given monetary policy more scope to pay some heed to cyclical
considerations.  This  is  so  as  a  result  of  greater  independence  and  because  everyone  can  rest
assured  that  inflation  will  continue  to  be  low  in  the  future.  In  actual  fact,  a  credible  inflation
target  strategy  normally  caters  to  cyclical  factors.  An  economic  slowdown  tends  to  be
accompanied by a weakening of inflationary pressure, making it possible to ease the monetary
stance. The stance is then tightened again when inflationary pressure rises. In this way monetary
policy can contribute to economic growth, without unnecessary upsets, at a rate that is consistent
with the development of productivity, employment and so on.
A government bill proposing increased formal independence for the Riksbank as
of 1999 was presented to the Riksdag in November 1997. Five political parties in the Riksdag lay
behind the proposals and they have also given the constitutional amendments their preliminary
approval.
The new legislation accordingly gives the Riksbank the constitutional function of
conducting monetary policy. The constitutional provisions also state that the Riksbank is not to
take  instructions  from  authorities  concerning  the  construction  of  monetary  policy.  The
Riksbank’s  current  obligation  to  hold  consultations  with  the  government  prior  to  important
decisions  of  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  is  converted  into  an  obligation  to  inform  the
government. The price stability objective is incorporated in the Riksbank Act, which stipulates
BIS Review   79/1998
- 4 -
that the objective of monetary policy is to safeguard the value of money and promote a safe and
efficient payment system.
The greater independence also involves changes in the Riksbank’s management.
Instead of being directed, as at present, by a Governing Board appointed by the Riksdag, there
will be an Executive Board with six full-time members, chaired by the Riksbank Governor. It is
the Executive Board that will manage the Riksbank and be accountable for all monetary policy
decisions. Unlike the system in the United Kingdom, besides acting as a committee for monetary
policy  decisions,  the  Executive  Board  will  be  responsible  for  managing  the  whole  of  the
Riksbank.
Even  under  the  new  law,  however,  the  Riksbank  will  still  have  a  Governing
Board.  It  will  consist  of  eleven  members,  instead  of  eight  at  present,  and  will  have  a  more
supervisory  role.  Its  principal  functions  will  be  to  monitor  and  control  the  activities  of  the
Riksbank, appoint the Executive Board and, if necessary, dismiss any member of the Executive
Board who no longer fulfils the conditions required for the performance of duties or is guilty of
serious misconduct.
In this context I also want to say something about the timetable this autumn that
the new legislation requires. As usual, our newly elected Riksdag will appoint a new Governing
Board in accordance with the existing procedure. As previously, these eight Delegates will direct
the  Riksbank  and  decide  monetary  policy,  up  to  the  turn  of  the  year.  When  the  constitutional
amendments  have  been  approved  a  second  time,  the  Riksdag  will  appoint  a  Governing  Board
under the new order; this will probably be done in late November or early December. Before the
end of 1998 the new Governing Board - which for a month or so will accordingly exist side by
side with the current arrangement - must then appoint the members of the new Executive Board.
The  new  Governing  Board  and  the  new  Executive  Board  will  then  take  over  from  1  January
1999.
As  there  will  be  little  time  for  the  two  new  Boards  to  prepare  their  necessary
initial  decisions,  preliminary  work  will  have  to  be  done  this  autumn.  Matters  that  the  new
Governing  Board  will  have  to  decide  at  its  first  meeting  include  the  Riksbank’s  rules  of
procedure,  while  at  more  or  less  the  same  time  the  Executive  Board  will  have  to  finalise  the
details of work at the Bank: which matters can be delegated further down the organisation, how
matters should be drafted in the Bank and similar questions. At its first meeting, moreover, the
Executive  Board  will  have  to  decide  the  frequency  of  its  meetings,  which  tasks  its  various
members are to be responsible for and how the Board is to communicate with the general public.
Importance of transparency
This brings me to the degree of transparency in monetary policy. In recent years
the Riksbank has worked to make monetary policy more transparent, with good communication
with market players and the general public.
A basic reason behind our drive for transparency is the need for clarity. The idea is
that clarity in monetary policy will make the policy more effective. If market agents and others
understand how we are reasoning, there will be less risk of unnecessary fluctuations in interest
rates  and  the  exchange  rate.  That  in  turn  should  help  to  make  general  economic  development
more stable. In drastic terms one could say that we aim to make the markets so familiar with our
BIS Review   79/1998
- 5 -
analytical framework and our deliberations that the available information would enable them to
set the interest rate on their own.
Another  reason  for  transparency  has  to  do  with  the  Riksbank’s  social  function.
This  responsibility  is  augmented  in  that  the  increased  independence  has  the  force  of  law.  It  is
then all the more important to develop and communicate the arguments behind the Riksbank’s
actions. This is a prerequisite for a sound discussion and evaluation of our policy and for holding
the Riksbank accountable if the policy is not conducted in a reasonable way.
More  generally,  moreover,  the  Riksbank  should  continue  to  work  for  increased
transparency in order to promote a widespread understanding of what we are doing. In the current
discussion, for instance, there is some criticism of the low-inflation target. The Riksbank is said
to  be  unduly  focused  on  combating  inflation  at  the  expense  of  growth  and  employment.  We
therefore need to persist with an open dialogue to explain that we, too, desire and strive for high
economic growth but  that  the  best  thing  monetary  policy  can  do  to  this  end  is  just  establish  a
stable framework for other components of economic policy.
The  internal  work  at  the  Riksbank  also  calls  for  external  transparency.  Doing
away with a hush-hush attitude to outsiders makes a frank internal discussion easier. Clear policy
goals are also a help in focusing internal work and analysis on the relevant issues.
The  open  presentation  of  a  clear  line  of  thought  simplifies  the  educational  task.
The Riksbank’s line consists of an explicit inflation target and an account of the factors that we
consider affect inflation; it also includes how monetary policy measures are constructed in  the
light of the inflation assessment. Current forecasts and assessments are presented in the quarterly
Inflation Reports. In between we try to comment, in speeches and other ways, on any changes in
our appraisal of inflation.
Unfortunately,  a  soundly  constructed  line  of  thought  does  not  always  suffice.
From  time  to  time  we  are  highly  uncertain  about  how  the  available  information  should  be
interpreted.  That  is  something  which  we  and  all  economic  agents  must  learn  to  live  with  -  an
exact statement may not be possible in such situations.
One matter connected with the independence and transparency of the Riksbank is
whether  or  not  the  Riksbank  should  publish  minutes  of  its  discussions  and/or  show  how
decision-makers have voted. One reason why this issue has attracted so much attention recently
is no doubt that the new Bank of England legislation stresses the monitoring of how individual
members have voted.
The Riksbank’s new Executive Board will clearly have to adopt a position on this
matter. So permit me to raise a couple of relevant aspects. It seems to me that a distinction can be
made between requiring accountability on the one hand and clarity or distinctness of policy on
the other.
•  As  regards  accountability,  it  is  clearly  important  how  individual  members
vote. The Governing Board’s long-term influence over Riksbank policy will,
after all, be exerted primarily through the composition of the Executive Board.
It follows that the Governing Board - presumably the general public as well -
needs  to  be  in  a  position  to  assess  how  different  members  of  the  Executive
Board  have  acted.  The  knowledge  that  voting  is  made  public  no  doubt  also
BIS Review   79/1998
- 6 -
makes every member of the Executive Board all the more keen to arrive at a
personal conclusion about the difficult issues that have to be resolved.
•  As regards transparency, on the other hand, what matters most in my opinion
is to have a clear line of thought, as I outlined earlier, and on this basis find
ways of communicating how assessments change over time. The latter can be
done  in  Inflation  Reports  and  speeches,  as  at  present,  as  well  as  in
communiqués  after  board  meetings,  etc.  In  this  context,  information  about
how  the  individual  board  members  have  voted  is  not  so  self-evidently
important.
There will doubtless be reason to return to this issue. The conclusion from such a
discussion  is  not  automatic.  A  good  combination  of  the  two  perspectives  above  is  probably
feasible. A further consideration is the need to create an Executive Board that functions properly
not  only  when  it  comes  to  making  wise  monetary  policy  decisions  but  also  in  the  Riksbank’s
effective management.
Concluding remarks
Since the early 1990s the Riksbank has clearly had the task of establishing price
stability  in  Sweden.  Strong  confidence  in  the  Riksbank  means  that  monetary  policy  is  able  to
achieve the desired results without resorting to emphatic interest-rate signals. In an environment
with low inflation and high credibility, monetary policy may be in  a  better  position  to  smooth
fluctuations in growth and employment.
Confidence  in  the  low-inflation  policy  does  seem  to  have  been  established.
Inflation  has  been  low  and  inflation  expectations  are  in  line  with  the  inflation  target.  A  tight
fiscal  policy  is  contributing  to  this  but  so,  of  course,  is  a  monetary  policy  that  focuses
consistently on low inflation. The credibility of policy is, however, a continuous question. The
process will be facilitated by the Riksbank’s statutory independence but the Riksbank must also,
for example, work continuously to communicate its policy deliberations clearly and distinctly.
The conditions for policy are affected by many factors. A labour market and wage
formation that function better make it possible to combine low inflation with higher employment.
Fiscal policy is another central matter; it needs to be sustainable in the long run and preferably
also help to counter any signs of incipient overheating.
If  some  component  of  economic  policy  fails  to  promote  the  inflation  target,  the
burden on monetary policy will be heavier. Stronger measures by the Riksbank will be needed as
a clear demonstration of the determination to achieve low inflation. Insufficient support for the
inflation target and policies that are not permanently sustainable would then be a burden not just
for the Riksbank but for the economy in general.
BIS Review   79/1998
