Mr.  Duisenberg’s  opening  statement  at  the  press  conference  covering  the
latest  meeting  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank      Introductory
statement  by  the  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Dr.  W.F.  Duisenberg,  at  the  press
conference held in Frankfurt on 13/10/98.
Ladies and gentlemen, in line with our stated intention, the Vice-President and I
are  here  today  to  report  on  the  outcome  of  today’s  meeting  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the
European Central Bank. The length of my introductory statement reflects the importance of the
matters dealt with today.
As  usual,  the  Governing  Council  devoted  part  of  its  meeting  to  an  exchange  of
views  on  recent  economic,  monetary  and  financial  developments.  This  discussion  took  place
against  the  background  of  conflicting  messages.  Clearly,  on  the  one  hand,  the  data  on  the
economic situation in the United States and Europe, especially in the euro area, mainly indicate a
continuation of real GDP growth, though possibly at a somewhat slower pace. On the other hand,
however, the global macroeconomic environment has deteriorated. In particular, the number of
signs suggesting that the world economy will slow down in 1999 is increasing. At the same time,
uncertainty in the financial markets has been heightened by news of the near-collapse of a large
hedge fund, losses by individual financial institutions, and the large movements in world equity,
bond and foreign exchange markets.
In  the  view  of  the  Governing  Council,  in  responding  to  recent  economic
developments  and  current  market  conditions  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  proposals
inspired by policy activism that do not take due account of the complexity of the issues at stake
are  avoided.  This  would  only  contribute  to  compounding  the  uncertainties  which  underlie  the
prevailing global financial market volatility. Against this background, the Governing Council is
of the view that proposals for a reassessment of capital controls as an acceptable policy option, or
recent  calls  for  world-wide,  uniform  interest  rate  reductions,  are  inappropriate  as  they  do  not
address  the  very  nature  of  the  problems.  At  the  same  time,  the  Governing  Council  considers
structural  improvements  at  the  global  level  to  be  warranted.  These  should  focus,  in  particular,
first  on  enhancing  the  transparency  of  both  the  public  and  private  sectors;  second,  on
strengthening  domestic  banking  systems,  primarily  in  emerging  markets  and  economies  in
transition;  and,  third,  on  improving  financial  crisis  prevention  and  management,  in  particular
through  the  increased  involvement  of  the  private  sector.  A  number  of  proposals  have  already
been developed on  these  issues,  which  should  now  be  finalised  with  a  view  to  their  early  and
forceful implementation.
In addition, the Governing Council stressed that such structural improvements at
the global level would have to be accompanied by sound policies at home. In this respect, given
the size of the euro area and its global role, it is of crucial importance that price stability - and
hence a climate conducive to growth and employment - should be maintained in the euro area.
Achieving this will also be of vital importance for the world economy as a whole.
With this in  mind,  the  Governing  Council  reviewed  the  monetary,  financial  and
macroeconomic situation in the euro area.
First, the Council discussed the monetary situation with reference to preliminary
data on the basis of the new harmonised reporting system for money and banking statistics. Once
internal work has been completed, these monetary statistics will be made available to the public.
When looking at various definitions of broad money, our preliminary data show broadly similar
BIS Review   82/1998
- 2 -
and stable annual growth rates of between 3 and 5% in 1997 and the first half of 1998. According
to  our  initial  analysis,  these  data  do  not  appear  to  signal  inflationary  pressures  arising  from
money at this juncture. However, given the preliminary nature of the new data, caution should be
exercised with regard to their interpretation.
Second,  as  regards  other  financial  indicators,  although  long-term  interest  rates
have  risen  recently,  they  are  still  at  low  levels  by  historical  standards  and  the  yield  curve  has
levelled  off  relative  to  the  situation  some  months  ago.  A  substantial  part  of  developments  in
bond markets during recent months reflects a “flight into quality”.
Third, the Governing Council discussed the broad outlook for prices in the context
of  the  overall  macroeconomic  environment.  With  respect  to  price  developments,  international
factors continued to exert downward pressure. HICP rates in the euro area fell to 1.2% in August
after having remained unchanged at 1.4% from April to July. This mainly reflected a decline in
energy  prices,  which  were  almost  4%  lower  in  August  than  a  year  earlier,  and  in  other
commodity prices. For the euro area as a whole, price pressure as indicated by industrial output
prices  and  labour  costs  also  remained  modest.  In  1999  average  inflation  in  the  euro  area  is
expected to remain subdued, according to the projections available.
Fourth,  considerable  difficulties  are  encountered  in  precisely  assessing  and
quantifying the impact of recent international developments on prices and, equally, on activity.
Recent data seem to suggest that real GDP growth in the euro area, which reached 0.6% in the
first quarter of 1998, has slowed down somewhat in the second quarter. We need to await the
release of more complete and thereby more reliable data for the euro area as a whole before a
final  view  can  be  taken.  Other  recently  released  data  on  industrial  production,  the  volume  of
retail sales and passenger car registrations appear to point to continued growth. This view is also
supported by EC survey  data,  although  some  indicators  have  remained  constant  or  have  fallen
back  slightly  in  recent  months;  nonetheless,  all  these  indicators  remain  well  above  their  long-
term averages.
The Governing Council welcomed recent interest rate reductions by a number of
euro area national central banks. As a result, euro area-wide three-month interest rates have now
reached  a  level  of  3.8%,  which  implies  a  decrease  of  around  15  basis  points  since  the  end  of
August. These changes underline the fact that the process of convergence of central bank interest
rates in the euro area, which is to be concluded by the end of this year, is clearly under way. The
Governing  Council  considered  further  interest  rate  convergence  towards  the  lower  end  of  the
current range prevailing in the euro area as being appropriate, given  our  current  knowledge  of
monetary trends and the prospects for price developments and taking account of an environment
characterised by risks of downward pressures. The Governing Council will continue to monitor
closely  monetary,  financial  and  economic  developments  within  the  euro  area  with  a  view  to
determining the appropriate level of money market interest rates for the euro area.
Meanwhile,  the  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  monitor  closely  fiscal
intentions in the euro area Member States. The structural budgetary positions in several Member
States  are  still  far  from  being  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus  as  required  by  the  Stability  and
Growth  Pact.  Therefore,  these  Member  States  are  not  yet  sufficiently  prepared  to  enable
automatic  stabilisers  to  function  in  the  event  of  a  slowdown  in  real  GDP  growth,  while  still
respecting the 3% reference value set out in the Treaty and ensuring a decline of debt ratios at an
appropriate  pace.  Moreover,  in  a  number  of  Member  States,  against  the  background  of  a  still
BIS Review   82/1998
- 3 -
favourable  and  partly  better  than  expected  growth  performance,  short-term  budgetary  targets
appear not to represent structural improvements.
In addition to the review of economic developments, a number of decisions were
taken with regard to various aspects of the preparatory work for Stage Three.
(a) Monetary policy issues
First and foremost, let me turn to the issue of the monetary policy strategy. I can
inform  you  that  at  today’s  meeting  the  Governing  Council  reached  agreement  on  the  main
features  of  the  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy  that  the  ESCB  will  pursue  in  Stage
Three of Monetary Union.
Before explaining our decision on the strategy, let me emphasise certain important
characteristics  of  the  environment  in  which  the  single  monetary  policy  will  operate  as  of  next
January. Of most concern to the ESCB are some uncertainties which will inevitably  arise  as  a
result of the move to Stage Three. These relate, in particular, to the way in which the transition to
Stage Three of Monetary Union will  affect  economic  behaviour  and  institutional  and  financial
structures in the euro area. They also relate to statistical issues.
Against this background, the Governing  Council  has  chosen  a  distinct  monetary
policy strategy, one that reflects the special circumstances it faces at present. This strategy will
ensure continuity with the successful strategies pursued by participating national central banks in
recent years, while taking into account - to the extent needed - the unique situation created by the
transition to Monetary Union.
With  this  context  in  mind,  the  Governing  Council  today  agreed  on  the  main
elements of the stability-oriented monetary policy strategy of the ESCB. These elements concern:
 the  quantitative  definition  of  the  primary  objective  of  the  single  monetary
policy, price stability;
•  a  prominent  role  for  money  with  a  reference  value  for  the  growth  of  a
monetary aggregate; and
•  a broadly-based assessment of the outlook for future price developments.
First,  let  me  stress  that,  as  mandated  by  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European
Community,  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  will  be  the  primary  objective  of  the  ESCB.
Therefore, the ESCB’s monetary policy strategy will focus strictly on this objective.
In the interest of transparency and in order to give clear guidance with regard to
expectations regarding future price developments, the Governing Council of the ECB has agreed
to announce a quantitative definition of price stability. In this context, the Governing Council of
the ECB has adopted the following definition: “Price stability shall be defined as a year-on-year
increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%”.
Let  me  emphasise  the  fact  that  price  stability  is  an  objective  which  is  to  be
maintained over the medium term. The current rate of HICP inflation in the euro area is in line
with this objective.
Three features of this definition should be highlighted:
BIS Review   82/1998
- 4 -
•  First, the HICP is the most appropriate price measure for the ESCB’s definition of
price stability. It is the only price index that will be sufficiently harmonised across
the euro area at the start of Stage Three.
•  Second,  by  defining  price  stability  using  the  HICP  “for  the  euro  area”,  the
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  makes  it  clear  that  it  will  base  its  decisions  on
monetary,  economic  and  financial  developments  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  I
should like to emphasise the fact that the single monetary policy will adopt a euro
area-wide  perspective;  it  will  not  react  to  specific  regional  or  national
developments.
•  Third, this definition is very much in line with most current definitions adopted by
national central banks in the euro area.
Furthermore,  the  statement  that  “price  stability  is  to  be  maintained  over  the
medium  term”  reflects  the  need  for  monetary  policy  to  have  a  forward-looking,  medium-term
orientation. It also acknowledges the existence of short-term volatility in prices which cannot be
controlled by monetary policy.
In order to maintain price stability, the Governing Council of the ECB agreed to
adopt a monetary policy strategy which will consist of two key elements.
•  First, money will be assigned a prominent role. This role will be signalled by the
announcement  of  a  quantitative  reference  value  for  the  growth  of  a  broad
monetary  aggregate.  The  reference  value  will  be  derived  in  a  manner  which  is
consistent with - and will serve to achieve - price stability.
Deviations  of  current  monetary  growth  from  the  reference  value  would,  under
normal circumstances, signal  risks  to  price  stability.  The  ESCB  will  assess  how
best  to  counter  these  risks.  However,  the  concept  of  a  reference  value  does  not
imply a commitment on the part of the ESCB to mechanistically correct deviations
of monetary growth from the reference value over the short term.
The  relationship  between  actual  monetary  growth  and  the  pre-announced
reference  value  will  be  regularly  and  thoroughly  analysed  by  the  Governing
Council of the ECB; the result of this analysis and its impact on monetary policy
decisions will be explained to the public. The precise definition of the reference
aggregate and the specific value of the quantitative reference value for monetary
growth  will  be  announced  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  in  December
1998.
However,  while  the  monetary  aggregates  contain  important  and  relevant
information  for  monetary  policy-making,  monetary  developments  will  not
constitute  a  complete  summary  of  all  the  information  about  the  economy  that
needs to be known for an appropriate monetary policy to be set.
•  Second,  there  is  also  a  clear  need  to  look  at  other  indicators.  Consequently,  in
parallel with the analysis of monetary growth in relation to the reference value, a
broadly-based assessment of the outlook for price developments and the risks to
price stability in the euro area will play a major role in the ESCB’s strategy. This
assessment will be made using a wide range of economic and financial variables
as indicators for future price developments.
BIS Review   82/1998
- 5 -
Thus  the  Governing  Council  will  systematically  analyse  all  the  information
available regarding the prospects for, and the risks to, price stability in  the  euro
area as a whole.
This strategy underlines the strong commitment of the Governing Council of the
ECB to its primary objective and should facilitate the achievement of this overriding goal. It will
also ensure the transparency of the ESCB’s decision-making and its accountability. Based on its
strategy, the Governing Council of the ECB will inform the public regularly and in detail about
its  assessment  of  the  monetary,  economic  and  financial  situation  in  the  euro  area  and  the
reasoning behind its specific policy decisions.
This  strategy  is  designed  to  avoid  giving  the  impression  that  monetary  policy
responds “mechanistically” to deviations from a single target or changes to a specific variable.
The monetary policy strategy that has been selected by the Governing Council of the ECB signals
that monetary policy in the euro area will be determined in a manner which will maintain price
stability, responding to new developments in or disturbances to the economy in an appropriate
manner which is consistent with this overriding objective.
The strategy therefore offers a clear and transparent framework within which the
Governing Council of the ECB will be able to assess and present monetary policy decisions.
Please note that the main features of the strategy are also summarised in a press
release to be distributed to you.
Still in the context of preparing for the single monetary policy, you may recall that
in  July  I  informed  you  about  the  range  of  institutions  subject  to  reserve  requirements  and  the
liabilities  included  in  the  reserve  base.  I  also  gave  you  indications  regarding  the  lump-sum
allowance  to  be  deducted  from  an  institution’s  reserve  requirement  and  the  reserve  ratio,  for
which  the  Governing  Council  envisaged  a  range  of  1.5-2.5%.  Today,  the  Governing  Council
discussed  the  last  remaining  open  issues  regarding  the  ESCB’s  minimum  reserve  system  and
confirmed that, first, the lump-sum allowance will be set at a level of 100,000 euros and, second,
the reserve ratio will be set in the middle of the indicated range, i.e. at 2%. Finally, it was agreed
that a credit institution will be allowed to deduct from the reserve base 10% of its debt securities
with a maturity of up to two years and of its money market paper if it cannot provide evidence of
the corresponding interbank liabilities.
An  ECB  Regulation  laying  down  the  features  of  the  ESCB’s  minimum  reserve
system will be published shortly. In the meantime, further details are provided in a separate press
release which is to be issued to you this evening.
BIS Review   82/1998
(b) Foreign exchange policy issues
- 6 -
The  Governing  Council  agreed  on  a  set  of  legal  documentation  setting  out  the
respective roles of the ECB and the euro area national central banks (NCBs) in the management
of the ECB’s foreign reserve assets. The legal documentation specifies, inter alia, the role of the
NCBs in carrying out operations involving the foreign reserve assets of the ECB and incorporates
master netting agreements to be signed by the ECB and market counterparties.
(c) Payment systems issues
As you are aware, TARGET will not be the only system available for cross-border
payments. For non-monetary policy transactions it will, for instance, also be possible to process
payments  via  the  EBA  Euro  Clearing  System  (currently  the  ECU  Clearing  and  Settlement
System).  While  TARGET  is  a  real-time  gross  settlement  system,  the  EBA  alternative  is  a
clearing  system,  i.e.  the  payments  have  to  be  settled  at  the  end  of  the  day.  In  this  regard,  the
Governing Council has agreed that the ECB will be involved. The EBA Euro Clearing System
will, therefore, open a central settlement account at the ECB for its settlements within the euro
area and may also open settlement accounts with those NCBs which agree to do so. The ECB
will  also  hold  the  account  on  which  the  EBA  Euro  Clearing  System’s  liquidity  pool  will  be
maintained. Agreements between the ECB and the EBA covering the operation of these accounts
are currently being finalised.
(d) The euro banknotes
With a view to increasing efficiency in combating counterfeiting, the Governing
Council confirmed the agreement reached by the EMI Council that a Currency Analysis Centre
and a Counterfeit Currency Database will be set up, which will store technical data relating to
counterfeit  euro  banknotes.  I  should  point  out  that  the  intention  is  to  continue  to  deal  with
counterfeits of other currencies (e.g. the national currencies of participating or non-participating
Member  States  and  the  US  dollar)  at  the  national  level.  All  EU  Member  States  will  have  the
option  of  full  participation  in  the  database  system.  Although  a  decision  on  the  location  of  the
Currency Analysis Centre will not be taken until the early part of 1999, the Governing Council
today  approved  the  principles  governing  the  way  in  which  counterfeit  euro  banknotes  will  be
handled. Further details are provided in a separate press release which is to be issued to you this
evening.
The Governing Council has also agreed on the approach to be used for estimating
the  number  of  euro  banknotes  to  be  printed  before  the  launch  date  of  1  January  2002.  The
quantity of euro banknotes to be printed will be determined by the number required to replace the
stocks of national banknotes in circulation (launch stocks) in the participating EU Member States
together with the volume of the logistical stocks needed to ensure that the banknote changeover
operates smoothly. It is currently estimated that up to approximately 13 billion euro banknotes
will  need  to  be  printed  before  the  issue  date  for  the  eleven  participating  Member  States.  This
estimate will be updated regularly as we approach 2002.
A separate press release on banknotes is to be issued to you this evening.
Finally, the Governing Council also addressed the following matters.
BIS Review   82/1998
- 7 -
First,  with  regard  to  statistics,  it  was  agreed  to  publish  an  Addendum  to  the
document entitled the “Money and Banking Statistics Compilation Guide - Guidance provided to
NCBs  for  the  compilation  of  money  and  banking  statistics  for  submission  to  the  ECB”.  The
Addendum covers the treatment of both money market paper and bill-based lending within the
harmonised  framework  for  money  and  banking  statistics.  The  original  Compilation  Guide  was
published by the EMI in April 1998.
Second,  the  Governing  Council  took  stock  of  the  current  state  of  affairs  with
regard to the testing of critical ESCB systems and procedures in the run-up to the start of Stage
Three. The ESCB has just commenced a general “dress rehearsal”, i.e. a final testing phase for all
ESCB systems and procedures.
Finally,  looking  a  little  further  ahead  to  beyond  the  start  of  Stage  Three,  the
Governing Council also agreed that a series  of  tests  should  be  conducted  during  the  course  of
1999 in order to ensure that all ESCB-wide systems and applications are Year 2000 compliant.
BIS Review   82/1998
