Mr.  Yam  discusses  the  political  process  of  monetary  management  in  Hong
Kong  Text of the Thirteenth Susan Yuen Memorial Lecture delivered by the Chief Executive of
the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  Mr.  Joseph  Yam,  JP,  at  the  Hong  Kong  Management
Association on 20/10/98.
 1. I am particularly pleased to be here this evening to deliver the Thirteenth Susan
Yuen Memorial Lecture. I never had the privilege of meeting the late Mrs. Susan Yuen. But in
reading her brief history in the material published by the Hong Kong Management Association, I
found  out  that  she  and  I  both  came  to  Hong  Kong  from  the  Mainland  in  1949.  And  we  both
became the first Chief Executives of HKMAs - the Hong Kong Management Association in her
case and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority in my case. But I fear that I shall never achieve the
distinction of having a Memorial Lecture dedicated in my name. And certainly at the age of fifty
I am content not to have to ponder such matters. It is a sufficient honour to have been invited to
celebrate with you Susan Yuen’s distinguished record of public service.
2. I would like to talk about the political process of monetary management to fit in
with your theme of “Managing Economic Turbulence in Asia”.
Controversy
3. I am sure you are aware of the controversy over how we managed the financial
turmoil  that  we  have  been  facing.  There  have  been  many  complaints  about  a  wide  range  of
issues. Our critics have told us that we should not have squeezed so hard on interest rates last
October and that we should not have increased the cost of borrowing for business and for those
who  have  to  service  their  home  mortgages.  We  should  have  introduced  our  measures  to
strengthen  our  monetary  and  financial  systems  earlier.  We  should  not  have  departed  from  our
free market policy and intervened in the stock and futures markets. That there was a lack of a
“sense of crisis” in how we handled the situation. These are the more significant criticisms.
4.  I  can  fully  understand  the  sentiment  behind  these  criticisms.  The  people  of
Hong Kong have been suffering the worst conditions we have had to face for many years. Even
the most patient and understanding community will have grievances when the value of the assets
they  hold  has  been  halved  while  they  have  to  pay  significantly  higher  interest  costs  for  their
liabilities. Furthermore, income has not been growing, and, for some, it has been shrinking. And,
worse still, the probability that they may lose their jobs has doubled in the past year.
5. So, whatever the cause of this difficult situation, whether or not it arose from
events outside the control of the authorities, it is considered, and rightly so, the responsibility of a
caring government to do what it can to relieve these grievances. Refusal or reluctance to do so,
even for very sound reasons in the larger long-term public interest, is not looked upon  kindly.
Even in cases where the authorities managed to be innovative, perhaps to an extent not normally
expected of bureaucrats, and did the right thing, there is always the easy, popular but legitimate
question of why action was not taken earlier.
The Political Process of Monetary Management
6.  In  Hong  Kong,  the  grievances  of  the  community  are  enthusiastically  and
effectively  aired  by  politicians.  Whether  directly  or  indirectly  elected,  the  politicians  have  the
BIS Review   87/1998
- 2 -
mandate of the people and the  people  of  Hong  Kong  are  well  served  by  them.  But  one  of  the
peculiarities of the system of Hong Kong is that the politicians, although having the mandate of
the people, do not actually have the authority to direct government policies. A consequence of
this  is  that  the  Administration  is  always  kept  on  its  toes,  much  more  so  than  in  many  other
jurisdictions. There are lively debates on almost all issues of significance, not to mention those
that  are  controversial.  This  obviously  has  the  benefit  of  ensuring  that  the  Administration
performs to its best ability. But the inevitable disadvantage is simply that there can be too much
of everything, to the extent of eroding rather than enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of
government. But this is the reality of Hong Kong today and we all have to live with it.
7. The management of any public issue of significance involves first getting the
technicalities right, then explaining them patiently and clearly to all those concerned, and then
handling skillfully the politics surrounding it. More often than not, handling the politics  is  the
most  difficult  part.  You  can  be  100  per  cent  right  technically  and  you  can  spend  all  day
explaining all the fine details, relating them to the policy objective and the public interest. But if
you are not skillful enough in the handling of the politics of the issue, particularly an  issue  in
whose success the confidence of the people plays a crucial part, all your efforts might be wasted.
A  totally  different  perception  than  that  intended  could  well  result,  undermining  the  chance  of
success of what you are trying to achieve.
8.  Let  me  focus  specifically  on  the  management  of  the  political  process
concerning monetary issues. I must say that this task is, for the HKMA, becoming increasingly
difficult and time-consuming. Monetary issues are unfortunately very technical and elusive, but
they affect everybody. Money is dear to the heart of everyone. We work hard to earn it. And we
use  it  everyday,  which  can  often  be,  thank  goodness,  the  more  pleasant  aspect  of  it.  So,  quite
naturally to us, the price and the value of money are things that we should be concerned about.
Here, already to a layperson or to the average politician, we are being esoteric. What is the price
of money? What is the value of money? And  what  are  the  differences  between  the  two?  Why
should we be concerned about them? These are very legitimate questions. And they are in fact
not easy questions to answer or easy concepts to put across.
9. So, imagine trying to explain, and obtain support for, the following proposal:
“to  dampen  interest  rate  volatility  and  lessen  the  interest  rate  pain  by  redefining  the  monetary
base to include debt paper discountable at the HKMA through overnight repurchase agreements
and fully backed by foreign reserves without departing from the monetary rule of currency board
arrangements which requires the monetary base to change only with a corresponding change in
foreign reserves”. This really is a mouthful. And to some, I must have been speaking Greek. But
I can assure you that the wording of the proposal is precise and technically 100 per cent correct.
In fact, this was exactly what we did when we introduced the seven technical measures in early
September to strengthen our monetary system. And the proposal has worked well so far. But had
the proposal been presented in those terms, I think even the most learned academics would have
taken some time to figure out what we were up to.
10. The likely result is that nobody would be willing to comment on the proposal
for fear of exposing ignorance on the subject. This might be considered a good result, in terms of
ourselves  being  able  to  achieve  what  in  our  professional  opinion  should  be  done.  And  if  the
community has faith in the HKMA, confident that we know what we are doing, we may even get
public support. But it is also a risky result. First of all, we can of course be wrong. It would be
naive to think that we can be right all the time. Nobody can be. We can only be less wrong. But
more importantly, public support should not be built merely upon faith in an esoteric and aloof
BIS Review   87/1998
- 3 -
HKMA being professional and acting in the best interest of Hong Kong. Whatever reputation the
HKMA has been able to achieve, domestically and internationally, such support could never be
sustained  for  long.  We  do  run  a  system  that,  at  times,  inflicts  considerable  pain  on  the
community.  Many  of  the  decisions  taken  by  the  HKMA  are  unpopular.  The  pain  and  the
unpopular decisions may become too severe to bear just on the foundation of faith, particularly in
the peculiar political setup of Hong Kong.
11.  An  essential  part  in  the  management  of  the  political  process  concerning
monetary issues, therefore, is to promote a better general understanding on those issues. This is
not  easy.  Not  only  are  those  issues  technical,  but  they  are  also  changing  all  the  time  with  the
rapid  changes  in  the  global  financial  scene.  Financial  liberalization  and  the  globalization  of
financial  markets,  encouraged  by  the  advance  of  telecommunications  and  information
technology,  have  drastically  changed  the  behaviour  of  money.  On  top  of  all  this,  we  have  the
complication that Hong Kong’s monetary system has really only started to take shape in the past
ten years or so, as monetary reform measures were introduced to modernize it so it could cope
with the demands and expectations of modern finance. But these difficulties are not excuses for
not trying. And we have tried; although I must confess, on the basis of the reaction from some of
the politicians to the actions we have taken recently, that the returns on our efforts to promote a
better general understanding of monetary issues in Hong Kong have not been impressive.
12. So we must try harder, and we will. There are then the questions on how and
the areas in which we need to concentrate our efforts. On the former I shall seek advice from my
colleagues. On the latter, the recent episode surrounding our operations in the stock and futures
markets, culminating in the defeated Motion Debate in the Legislative Council on 30 September
1998  to  review  the  HKMA,  provides  excellent  guidance.  If  one  filters  away  the  noise  from
political  posturing,  including  the  rather  unpleasant  and  unnecessary  personal  attacks,  there  are
three areas that require attention.
Basic Monetary Concepts
13.  The  first  area  that  requires  attention  concerns  various  concepts  in  modern
monetary management that need to be more effectively put across. This is essential if discussions
on the technical issues are to be more meaningful. I am aware that this is not intended to be a
lecture on monetary economics, so let me just bring out one or two of them here for illustration.
14.  Under  our  linked  exchange  rate  system,  stability  in  the  exchange  rate  is
ensured  through  the  control  on  what  is  called  the  monetary  base.  If  you  were  to  ask  any
representative grouping of the community, say, the Legislative Council, what the monetary base
is, I would be surprised if more than ten per cent of the group could come up with the correct
answer.  Many  would  be  tempted  to  relate  this  to  the  various  definitions  of  the  money  supply,
because that is the term mostly heard in commentaries on money and finance. But they are quite
different things. The crucial part of the monetary base and the money supply, however defined,
are in fact on the different sides of the balance sheet of the banking system. Put this question to a
group of academics and you would probably, on the contrary, get as many definitions as there are
people in that group.
15. This confusion is understandable and, at least partly, in the context of Hong
Kong, a reflection of the rather peculiar institutional framework for monetary management of the
past that is now, one hopes, history, with the ten years of reforms to our monetary system. You
may be surprised to hear this. It was not until the end of 1996 that the monetary base for Hong
BIS Review   87/1998
- 4 -
Kong was properly defined. This was when, on the occasion of the  introduction  of  Real  Time
Gross  Settlement  for  interbank  transactions,  all  licensed  banks  were  required  to  operate  a
clearing  account  with  the  HKMA  instead  of  with  a  commercial  bank.  Yet  we  have  been,
somehow, controlling, or we claimed to have been controlling, the monetary base ever since the
linked exchange rate system was established in October 1983.
16.  Even  assuming  that  the  definition  of  the  monetary  base  is  well  understood,
there is then the important question of how it should be controlled. Herein lies one of the most
interesting subjects in monetary management and that is the choice between discretionary control
with people making decisions, and automatic rule-based control with no discretionary decisions
involved.  Associated  with  this  are  considerations  concerning,  and  possibly  another  choice
between,  flexibility  in  management  and  the  credibility  of  the  monetary  system.  Even  the  most
professionally  competent  central  banker  can  be  wrong.  A  system  that  involves  discretionary
decisions is therefore subject to human errors of judgement that may undermine the credibility of
the system, and some would go as far as to argue that this would eventually lead to failure of the
system. On the other hand, an entirely rule-based system without any discretion is inflexible and
may  not  serve  the  best  interest  of  the  community,  even  though  short-term  interests  may
sometimes  be  involved  -  witness  the  many  calls  for  lowering  interest  rates  even  when  the
exchange rate is under pressure.
17. Another related conceptual issue that needs to be put across clearly is that the
classical  currency  board  system,  as  structured  in  the  old  colonial  era,  whilst  still  theoretically
sound, has long become impracticable in coping with the complexities of modern finance. In the
old days, transactions were conducted predominantly with the use of physical cash. And so the
focus of attention in currency board theory was merely that the issue of cash should be backed
100  per  cent  by  foreign  reserves  and  rather  simplistically  that  cash  arbitrage  would  keep  the
exchange  rate  stable.  There  was  nothing  much  about  the  monetary  base  and  the  adjustment
process in response to capital flows involving movements in domestic interest rates. The theory
also  did  not  take  into  account  the  many  and  much  larger  volumes  of  transactions  nowadays
conducted with the use of electronic money and settled electronically without the use of physical
cash.  As  a  result,  the  crucial  part  of  the  monetary  base  is  no  longer  the  amount  of  cash  in
circulation but a much smaller yet highly leveraged element in the form of the aggregate balance
that banks have in their clearing accounts maintained with the currency board, that is the HKMA.
18. The old theory also did not take into account the need for the currency board
to be controlling the interbank payments system and therefore performing the role as provider of
liquidity  to  the  banking  system.  As  a  result  when  our  currency  board  arrangements  were
modernized  through  monetary  reform  in  the  past  ten  years,  many  of  our  actions  were
misunderstood even by leading monetary economists. But to be fair, even we ourselves were not
entirely  sure  about  a  few  things,  as  we  moved  into  the  uncharted  waters  of  modern  currency
board theory and practice.
19.  Yet  another  conceptual  issue  to  be  put  across  clearly  is  the  fact  that  an
inevitable cost of fixing the exchange rate through currency board arrangements is interest rate
volatility. An external shock involving any substantial flows of funds into or out of the currency
will lead to interest rate changes. The larger the flow the sharper the changes, in a manner very
much dictated by the market. And as there is little or no discretion on the part of the HKMA on
interest  rates,  the  HKMA  was  in  fact  not  responsible,  for  example,  for  overnight  interbank
interest rates hitting 280% last October. We did not squeeze interest rates. It was those shorting
the Hong Kong dollar who squeezed interest rates and, on that occasion, squeezed themselves as
BIS Review   87/1998
- 5 -
well, along with the innocent borrowers. Interest rate volatility can be dampened by discretionary
action, but that would undermine the credibility of the system. Alternatively this could be done
by  further  modifying  our  currency  board  arrangements  and  incurring  the  cost  in  the  form  of
greater fluctuation in our foreign reserves while eschewing the exercise of discretion. This was
the objective of the seven technical measures we took  in  early  September  to  make  our  system
less susceptible to manipulation.
20. I do not wish to continue to bore you with these conceptual issues. Although
they are technical, they are essential if there is to be sensible and meaningful discussion about
monetary management in Hong Kong. I shall be stepping up the efforts of the HKMA to promote
a better understanding of them.
Transparency
21.  The  second  area  that  requires  attention  in  the  political  process  of  monetary
management concerns the transparency of the HKMA. To at least the minority of those members
of  Legislative  Council  who  supported  the  defeated  Motion  to  review  the  HKMA,  the
transparency of the HKMA was found to be lacking. Although the Motion was defeated, the fact
that transparency was an issue, even to the minority of the Legislature, is quite surprising to me.
It  is  perhaps  not  something  that  I  can  afford  to  ignore.  However,  compared  with  other  central
banks, the HKMA must be among the most transparent in the world. In monetary management
specifically, I am quite sure that we are the most transparent in the world. I know of no other
central bank that discloses information about the monetary base, and operations affecting it, on a
real-time  basis.  There  is  also  an  abundance  of  information  published  in  the  HKMA’s  regular
series  of  monthly,  quarterly  and  annual  reports,  and  in  the  ad  hoc  publications  on  specific
monetary  and  banking  issues.  Figures  on  foreign  reserves  are  published  monthly  and  soon  we
shall be publishing the balance sheet of the Exchange Fund also on a monthly basis.
22.  Perhaps  this  minority  view  was  based  on  the  practice,  now  becoming  quite
common  in  other  central  banks,  that  the  proceedings  of  monetary  policy  committees  are
published, so that the public is made aware of how monetary policy decisions are taken by those
entrusted with the authority to make them. There are the examples of the Federal Open Market
Committee (FOMC) of the Federal Reserve Bank in the United States and the Monetary Policy
Committee  of  the  Bank  of  England.  The  minutes  of  their  meetings  are  published  with  an
appropriate time lag. In Hong Kong we do not have an equivalent of the FOMC or the Monetary
Policy Committee. This is simply because we do not have an independent monetary policy and
an independent body making that policy. We do not have a system whereby the HKMA has to
take discretionary decisions to determine interest rates or to specify monetary targets. There has
therefore not been a need for a mechanism for public scrutiny of discretionary decisions because
there is nothing to scrutinize.
23. Our monetary system is rule-based. To the extent that there is a need to have a
mechanism  for  public  scrutiny,  it  should  be  aimed  at  ensuring  that  the  HKMA  adheres  to  the
rules  and  does  not  indulge  secretly  in  discretionary  monetary  management.  We  have  already
volunteered this mechanism in providing real time information on the monetary base. Changes
and  forecasts  of  changes  to  the  monetary  base  are  announced  almost  immediately  after  the
relevant  transactions  have  been  conducted.  There  is  no  parallel  with  this  practice  in  any  other
jurisdiction.
BIS Review   87/1998
- 6 -
24. But the process of modernization of our currency board arrangements is likely
to be a continuous one, in the light of possible rapid and significant changes in the international
financial architecture. The Financial Secretary as controller of the Exchange Fund, and myself as
Monetary Authority under his delegated authority, are responsible for making decisions in this
area, in consultation with the statutory Exchange Fund Advisory Committee (EFAC). Recently,
with the agreement of the Financial Secretary, a subcommittee of the EFAC on currency board
operations chaired by me has also been set up to advise, among other things, on currency board
arrangements.
25. Whilst it can be argued that transparency in this area of work would help to
enhance the credibility of the system and the HKMA, it must, however, be noted that proposals
in this area are likely to be market sensitive. It will not be easy to strike a balance. But we should
obviously  try.  I  shall  shortly  be  making  a  proposal  to  the  Financial  Secretary  initially  for  the
minutes of meetings of the subcommittee, other than those concerning market sensitive issues, to
be published, with an appropriate time lag. Consideration will also be given to the subcommittee
conducting public hearings to receive opinions and suggestions on monetary management from
members of the public. In the light of experience of this practice, consideration can later be given
to do the same for the minutes of meetings of the EFAC.
Accountability
26.  The  third  area  that  requires  attention  in  the  political  process  of  monetary
management  concerns  the  accountability  of  the  HKMA.  Here  again,  there  are  certain
characteristics peculiar to Hong Kong. Unlike arrangements in other jurisdictions, the HKMA, as
the institution responsible for issues generically called central banking, is not a body established
by  law.  The  legal  entity  is  the  Monetary  Authority,  as  a  person,  appointed  by  the  Financial
Secretary to assist him in the performance of his duties under the Exchange Fund Ordinance. I
have the honour of being the person who has been so appointed. That means I am accountable to
the  Financial  Secretary  for  my  actions  when  exercising  the  authority  delegated  to  me  by  the
Financial Secretary under the Exchange Fund Ordinance. The Financial Secretary is advised by
the EFAC appointed by the Chief Executive of the HKSAR, whose authority has been delegated
to the Financial Secretary.
27.  It  is  through  the  Financial  Secretary  that  the  Monetary  Authority  is
accountable to third parties, and the form this takes is determined by the Financial Secretary. If
the Financial Secretary wants me to appear before the Legislative Council and formally present a
report to the Council every six months, as suggested by some, I am quite happy to do so. But the
Financial  Secretary  must  of  course  make  an  assessment  of  whether  the  implications  of  such  a
practice  are  acceptable.  He  must  take  a  view  on  whether  this  would  introduce  an  avenue  for
political interference in the work of the HKMA, in particular in monetary management. He must
also take a view on whether this would undermine the effectiveness of the relationship between
the Administration, in particular himself, and the HKMA.
28. Insofar as getting things done at the technical level is concerned, for example
in achieving the broad policy objectives of monetary and banking stability, and the development
of  the  financial  infrastructure,  the  existing  relationship  between  the  Administration  and  the
HKMA has worked well. The Hong Kong dollar exchange rate has remained very stable and the
banking  system  robust,  and  Hong  Kong  now  has  one  of  the  most  sophisticated  financial
infrastructures in the world.
BIS Review   87/1998
- 7 -
29.  It  is  of  course  up  to  the  Administration  to  consider  whether,  for  political
reasons,  the  unusual  arrangements  for  the  appointment  of  the  Monetary  Authority  and  the
framework  defining  his  accountability  should  be  looked  at.  But  it  should  be  remembered  that
those unusual arrangements had the agreement of the Legislative Council as recently as late 1992
when  it  approved  the  required  amendments  to  the  Exchange  Fund  Ordinance.  Admittedly,  the
details of the amendments then  reflected  expediency  dictated  by  political  considerations  at  the
time. But the arrangements have worked well for Hong Kong.
30. The Administration may feel that there is a need for the existing arrangements
to be replaced by a separate Ordinance establishing an institution called the HKMA, having its
own  board  and  clearly  defined  functions.  This  appears  sensible  and  is  at  least  consistent  with
arrangements  in  other  jurisdictions.  But  it  is  my  strong  view  that,  should  this  be  considered
desirable for whatever reasons, the opportunity should be taken to achieve greater and not less
autonomy  for  the  HKMA.  There  should  be  more,  and  not  fewer,  safeguards  against  political
interference  in  the  work  of  the  HKMA.  The  Administration  has  indicated  that  it  will  take  the
matter  forward  in  due  course  and  no  doubt  the  Legislature  will  be  consulted  when  the
Administration has formulated more concrete proposals. My advice,  for  what  it  is  worth,  is  to
proceed cautiously and in quieter times when market conditions are less unsettled.
31. Thank you very much again for giving me the honour of delivering the Susan
Yuen Memorial Lecture.
BIS Review   87/1998
