Bank of Japan’s November report of recent economic and financial developments in Japan
BANK OF JAPAN, COMMUNICATION, 17/11/98.
The Bank’s View1
Japan’s economic conditions still continue to deteriorate.
With  respect  to  final  demand,  public  investment  orders  have  increased  significantly.  Net  exports
(exports  minus  imports)  seem  to  be  basically  on  an  upward  trend.  Business  fixed  investment,
however, has been declining under increasingly severe  conditions  for  firms’  fund-raising.  Housing
investment  has  also  declined  further.  In  addition,  private  consumption  has  shown  some  weakness.
Against  this  background  of  weak  final  demand,  production  has  been  reduced  substantially.  As  a
result,  inventories  are  decreasing,  but  the  ratio  of  inventory  to  sales  remains  high  due  to  sluggish
shipments. With the decline in expenditure and production, corporate profits continue to worsen, and
employee income is decreasing. Employment and income conditions have deteriorated as the ratio of
job offers to applications has recorded a historical low and the unemployment rate remains at a high
level.
As  the  above  indicates,  there  remain  continued  negative  interactions  of  production,  income,  and
expenditure.  In  addition,  there  is  a  growing  concern  among  firms  for  fund  availability  toward  the
ends  of  the  calendar  year  and  the  fiscal  year,  given  the  increasingly  cautious  lending  stance  of
financial institutions and the mounting difficulty in fund-raising in the capital market.
With the effects of the comprehensive economic stimulus package and the recent monetary easing,
the  deterioration  of  the  economy  is  expected  to  moderate  gradually.  Nevertheless,  the  economy  is
hardly  expected  to  recover  immediately,  judged  from  the  strong  negative  interactions  and  the
constraints  from  corporate  finance  mentioned  above.  Moreover,  the  appreciation  of  the  yen  since
early autumn may exert pressures on corporate profits for the latter half of the fiscal year, and there
is a growing uncertainty in financial and economic developments overseas. These additional factors
also  need  careful  monitoring.  In  the  above  circumstances,  a  new  legal  framework  to  rebuild  the
stability  of  the  financial  system  was  established  in  October.  It  is  desirable  that,  based  on  this
framework,  banks’  capital  base  should  soon  be  strengthened  sufficiently  to  restore  market
confidence.  Furthermore,  the  government  is  planning  to  launch  emergency  economic  measures  by
the middle of November. The materialization of these measures and their effects on corporate and
household sentiment should be carefully monitored.
With regard to prices, wholesale prices are on a downtrend reflecting the continued expansion in the
output gap. Corporate service prices are weakening further, and consumer prices have fallen below
the previous year’s level. Given the persistently strong negative interactions of production, income,
and expenditure, the expansion in the output gap is unlikely to cease despite the expected effects of
the comprehensive economic stimulus package. Furthermore, the continued decline in wages and the
appreciation  of  the  yen  since  early  autumn  will  exert  downward  pressure  on  prices.  Hence,  the
decline in prices, especially in wholesale prices, may somewhat accelerate in the future.
In the financial markets, interest rates on Euro-yen deposits maturing after the year-end rose after the
middle  of  October.  This  is  partly  because  Japanese  financial  institutions––facing  the  intensified
severity in raising foreign currency funds as reflected in the expansion of the Japan premium––have
raised  yen  funds  vigorously  to  turn  over  the  funds  to  foreign  banks  in  exchange  for  foreign
                                                     
1  The  Bank’s  view  on  recent  economic  and  financial  developments,  determined  by  the  Policy  Board  at  the
Monetary Policy Meeting held on November 13, as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
BIS Review   97/1998
- 2 -
currencies.  Meanwhile,  Treasury  bill  (TB)  rates  lowered  close  to  zero  with  an  increase  of  TB
purchase by foreign banks that had raised yen funds at very low rates.
The interest rate differential between Euro-yen deposits and TBs expanded considerably in parallel
with the heightened market concern over Japanese banks’ foreign currency liquidity risk at the year-
end. Recently, however, the anxiety about worldwide credit crunch, which had  once  intensified  in
international  financial  markets,  appears  to  be  alleviated,  and  Japanese  banks  have  shown
considerable progress in raising foreign currency funds.
Stock prices have rebounded slightly, reflecting favorable market sentiments toward the enactment
of laws aiming to stabilize and revitalize Japan’s financial system and the movement of business tie-
ups and restructuring in the financial industry. However, looking at the recent development of bond
and stock markets as a whole, market participants seem to remain cautious over the outlook of the
economy.
With  regard  to  corporate  finance,  firms  are  further  seeking  to  secure  ample  on-hand  liquidity.
Reflecting  such  increase  in  credit  demand,  the  growth  rate  in  M2+CD  continued  to  show  a  slight
increase in September.
Meanwhile,  Japanese  private  banks  have  taken  more  cautious  attitude  in  extending  loans,  facing
severe  fund-raising  environments  and  deteriorating  business  conditions  of  borrower  companies.
Particularly as the year-end nears, their cautious lending attitude seems to be adversely affecting not
only small and medium-sized firms but also large ones.
In commercial paper and corporate bond markets, issuance rate differentials are further expanding
across  firms  according  to  their  creditworthiness.  The  development  of  severe  corporate  financial
conditions  toward  the  year-end  and  their  influence  on  the  economy  continue  to  warrant  careful
monitoring.
BIS Review   97/1998
