Mr. Duisenberg elucidates the European System of Central Banks’ stability-oriented monetary
policy strategy
Speech  by  the  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Dr.  W.F.  Duisenberg,  at  the  Institute  of
European Affairs in Dublin on 10/11/98.
1. Introduction
On January 1 - in only fifty-two days - Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) will
commence. A single monetary policy will be adopted for the entire euro area - a continent-wide zone
of eleven sovereign states and almost 300 million people.
The advent of the euro offers great opportunities for Europe and Europeans. Transaction costs will
be reduced. Pricing will become more transparent between European countries, encouraging greater
competition and innovation in goods and financial markets. A truly single market will be created.
Above  all,  though,  Monetary  Union  offers  a  unique  opportunity  to  establish  and  maintain  price
stability throughout the eleven countries that will comprise the euro area from 1 January 1999. I am
convinced  that  by  meeting  the  Treaty  mandate  and  fulfilling  the  unambiguous  commitment  of  the
Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  to  maintaining  price  stability  we  shall
ensure that the single monetary policy makes the greatest possible contribution towards raising the
standard  of  living  of  Europe’s  citizens  and  improving  growth  and  employment  prospects.  Price
stability, consequently, is at the core of the “stability culture” that we are creating in Europe.
Today, I should like to describe how we intend to meet our primary objective in the unique - and
potentially difficult - circumstances attending the birth of the euro. At the heart of our approach is
the  “stability-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy”  recently  adopted  by  the  Governing  Council  and
announced to the public last month.
First and foremost, this monetary policy strategy is designed to ensure that the Governing Council is
presented with the information it requires to make effective monetary policy decisions. The Council
must  act  in  a  forward-looking  and  pre-emptive  manner,  changing  interest  rates  to  contain
inflationary or deflationary pressures before such trends become entrenched.
Monetary  policy  is  most  effective  when  it  is  credible,  that  is,  when  the  public  is  convinced  that
monetary policy will successfully maintain price stability over the medium term. Indeed, aside from
enjoying  your  Irish  hospitality,  bolstering  this  conviction  is  the  main  purpose  of  my  speech.
Reassuring you and the wider public of the Governing Council’s commitment to price stability - and
thereby building up the credibility of our new “stability-oriented monetary policy strategy” - will not
only  make  my  own  job  easier  over  the  coming  years.  It  will  also  increase  the  overall  benefits  of
maintaining price stability in the euro area as a whole.
Speeches  such  as  this  are  important.  They  illustrate  the  commitment  of  the  European  System  of
Central  Banks  (ESCB)  to  openness  and  accountability  in  its  decision-making.  Openness  and
accountability are necessary complements to the independence of the ESCB, on which the credibility
of  the  single  monetary  policy  rests.  Moreover,  the  monetary  policy  strategy  must  be  clear  and
transparent  so  that  there  is  no  confusion  or  ambiguity  about  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  and
how this objective will be achieved.
To  this  end,  the  ESCB’s  stability-oriented  strategy  has  been  designed  and  presented  in  a  very
straightforward, realistic and, if I may say so, honest way. These features are central to clarity and
transparency. They complement the many other efforts we have made - and will continue to make -
BIS Review   97/1998
- 2 -
to  ensure  that  our  communication  with  the  public  is  open  and  transparent.  Statements  will  be
released  and  press  conferences,  including  question  and  answer  sessions,  will  be  held  immediately
following Governing Council meetings. Regular monthly publications will be produced by the ECB.
Discussion papers and technical analysis by the ECB staff will be published for professional review
and scientific assessment. In all these regards, the ESCB is exceeding the reporting requirements laid
down in the Maastricht Treaty, which are already among the most stringent applicable to any central
bank.
Furthermore,  in  these  articles  and  other  presentations,  we  shall  address  various  economic  issues
facing Europe, not least the issue of the high level of unemployment. In doing so, we shall make the
best possible use of the knowledge of experts throughout the ESCB and ensure that this expertise is
available to the wider public and the policy-making community.
In this context, let me emphasise that the Governing Council of the ECB is very concerned about the
unacceptably high rate of unemployment in the euro area. However, an inflationary monetary policy
would  not  solve  Europe’s  serious  unemployment  problem.  On  the  contrary,  an  inflationary  policy
would not only unacceptably flout the Maastricht Treaty; a Treaty, let me remind you, that has been
ratified by all the Member States of the European Union and endorsed by the public in referenda in
several countries, including Ireland. An inflationary monetary policy would almost certainly lead to
higher unemployment in the medium run, as long-term interest rates would rise and the benefits of
price stability would be lost. Such a policy would therefore be entirely counterproductive. Let me be
very clear: in the interest of all European citizens, the Governing Council is determined to protect
price stability. The ESCB’s independence is a means to facilitate the achievement of this goal. Only
by  preserving  price  stability  and  thereby  creating  the  stable  environment  required  for  continued
higher employment and growth, can the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) serve the public
and address the public’s understandable concerns.
In  describing  the  ESCB’s  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy  today,  I  shall  emphasise  the
twin  principles  of  clarity  and  transparency  that  are  vital  in  order  to  establish  the  credibility  -  and
therefore ensure the success - of the single monetary policy.
Monetary  Union  is  a  unique  event.  It  is  likely  to  prompt  considerable  changes  in  economic
behaviour and the institutional structure. These changes will be to the benefit of Europe’s citizens,
not  least  as  the  benefits  of  price  stability  are  reaped.  Nonetheless  the  inevitable  and  not  totally
unpredictable changes in behaviour prompted by the introduction of the euro create uncertainty. This
uncertainty will complicate the task of implementing the single monetary policy.
Against this background, the ECB Governing Council has chosen a distinct monetary policy strategy,
one that reflects the special circumstances that it faces at present. Given a natural desire to build on
the success of national central banks in bringing inflation down to its current low level during the
convergence process, the strategy ensures as much continuity as possible with the existing strategies
of the national central banks (NCBs) of the participating Member States. Nevertheless, the chosen
strategy takes into account to the extent necessary the unique situation created by the transition to
Monetary Union.
I shall proceed by describing the three main elements of the stability-oriented strategy. First, I shall
discuss the quantitative definition of the ESCB’s primary objective, namely price stability. Second, I
shall outline the prominent role played by money in the overall strategy. Third, I shall describe the
analysis  of  a  wide  range  of  other  financial  and  economic  indicators  that  will  enter  the  policy
discussion.  Finally,  I  shall  conclude  by  arguing  that  the  stability-oriented  strategy  adopted  by  the
BIS Review   97/1998
- 3 -
ESCB  is,  in  the  present  circumstances,  both  clearer  and  more  transparent  than  any  of  the
alternatives. In consequence, I am confident of its future success.
2. The quantitative definition of price stability
The Maastricht Treaty assigns the ESCB the primary objective of maintaining price stability. In the
interest of accountability, the Governing Council of the ECB has decided to publish a quantitative
definition  of  price  stability,  against  which  its  success  in  fulfilling  the  Treaty’s  mandate  can  be
sensibly judged by the public.
In this context, at its October meeting the Governing Council of the ECB agreed that “price stability
shall be defined as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for
the euro area of below 2%”.
In this way, the Governing Council has clearly and unambiguously defined its objective. If and when
we do not meet this objective, we are obliged to explain why this is the case and what we are going
to do about it. Let me emphasise the over-riding priority we attach to this objective. This priority is
not  only  a  consequence  of  our  legal  obligations  under  the  Treaty.  It  is  also  rooted  in  our  belief  –
supported  by  both  decades  of  experience  and  a  substantial  body  of  theoretical  and  empirical
research –  that  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  is  a  pre-requisite  for  a  sustainable  and
lasting  improvement  in  the  standard  of  living  of  Europe’s  citizens  and  can  lay  the  foundation  for
improving growth and employment prospects in the future.
The  definition  we  have  published  is  clear.  In  particular,  a  specific  price  index  is  identified  with
which to assess the maintenance of price stability. The HICP for the euro area was chosen because it
is  both  sufficiently  harmonised  across  the  different  countries  of  the  euro  area  at  the  start  of  Stage
Three and consistent with the public’s usual focus on consumer prices.
Using the index “for the euro area” highlights that euro area-wide developments, instead of specific
national or regional factors, will be the only determinants of decisions regarding the single monetary
policy.
As I have emphasised in the past, this definition signals the aversion of  the  Governing  Council  to
both  inflation  and  deflation.  The  phrase  “below  2%”  clearly  delineates  the  rate  of  inflation  in  the
HICP  deemed  consistent  with  price  stability.  The  wording  “year-on-year  increases”  implies  that
decreases in the HICP - that is to say deflation in the measured price index - would not be considered
consistent with price stability.
The  Governing  Council  also  announced  that  “price  stability  is  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium
term”. In doing so, it realistically acknowledged that disturbances to the price level can occur in the
short run - for example, those caused by changes in indirect taxes or commodity prices - that cannot
be  controlled  by  monetary  policy  of  the  ESCB.  Such  factors  may  lead  to  occasional  falls  in  the
HICP, or occasional increases above 2%. These are quite normal and consistent with a meaningful
definition  of  price  stability.  By  focusing  on  the  medium  term,  the  ESCB’s  monetary  policy  will
ensure that these transitory deviations from the definition do not become sustained over the medium
term.
By maintaining price stability over the medium term, the appropriate forward-looking and medium-
term orientation is imparted to monetary policy. This will ensure that policy reactions to threats to
price stability are measured and deliberate. Such actions will not introduce unnecessary instability or
uncertainty  into  the  economy,  while  nevertheless  ensuring  that  price  stability  -  and  the  attendant
benefits - are maintained.
BIS Review   97/1998
- 4 -
The prominent role of money in the ESCB’s monetary policy strategy
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  role  money  will  play  in  the  ESCB’s  stability-oriented  monetary  policy
strategy.
Ultimately,  inflation  is  a  monetary  phenomenon.  Assigning  a  prominent  role  to  money  within  the
overall stability-oriented strategy therefore guarantees that the monetary origins of inflation will not
be  neglected  in  the  regular  economic  and  financial  analysis  driving  monetary  policy  decisions.
Moreover,  money  is  a  visible  “nominal  anchor”  for  monetary  policy  that  will  help  to  stabilise  the
public’s medium-term inflation expectations, enhancing the credibility and effectiveness of monetary
policy.
To signal the prominent role attached to money, the Governing Council of the ECB will announce a
quantitative reference value for monetary growth. In this regard, some commentators have assumed
that the ESCB has adopted a conventional monetary target, but simply called it by a different name.
However,  before  announcing  a  formal  intermediate  monetary  target,  certain  conditions  have  to  be
met.  These  requirements  have  been  met  in  the  past  in  several  euro  area  countries,  and  successful
monetary targeting strategies have been pursued. However, one must recognise that, at present, the
evidence as to whether these technical preconditions will be satisfied for the euro area as a whole in
Stage  Three  is  inevitably  sparse.  Monetary  Union  will  cause  changes  in  the  financial  system  and
economic  behaviour,  as  ten  different  currency  zones  are  merged  into  the  single  euro  area.  As  I
mentioned in my introduction, most of these changes will be of great benefit to individuals and firms
in Europe. However, these behavioural and institutional changes are likely to change the relationship
between money, interest rates and prices that has been observed in the past.
Consequently, a realistic alternative to a monetary target - that is, the reference value for monetary
growth - will be announced. As I mentioned earlier, this reference value ensures as far as possible
continuity with successful monetary strategies pursued in the euro area in the past. Nevertheless, it is
a  different  approach  that  reflects  the  special  circumstances  facing  the  ESCB  at  the  start  of  Stage
Three.
This reference value will have two key features:
• 
first, it will be derived in a manner that is clearly  consistent with - and serves the purpose of -
price  stability;
second, it will be constructed  such  that,  in  the  absence  of    special  factors  or  other  distortions,
deviations of monetary  growth from the reference value will signal risks to price  stability.
 The  relationship  between  actual  monetary  growth  and  the  pre-announced  reference  value  will
therefore be regularly and thoroughly analysed by the Governing Council. Where deviations occur,
an explanation will be sought. If this explanation points towards a threat to price stability, monetary
policy will react  appropriately  in  order  to  address  this  threat.  However,  in  contrast  to  the  reaction
that would normally follow under a conventional monetary targeting regime, interest rates will not
be changed in an attempt to correct deviations of money growth from the reference value over the
short term.
The Governing Council would not wish to react in a mechanistic fashion to monetary developments,
precisely  because  the  signals  implied  by  the  money  data  could  be  scrambled  by  the  technical
uncertainties I have mentioned. By announcing a reference value and openly explaining how it will
be used, the Governing Council is presenting its monetary policy strategy to the public in a way that
reflects the manner in which it discusses policy itself. This is the essence of transparency.
BIS Review   97/1998
- 5 -
A  number  of  issues  remain  to  be  finalised  with  regard  to  the  quantitative  reference  value  for
monetary  growth.  First,  the  broad  monetary  aggregate  for  which  the  reference  value  will  be
announced has to be defined. Second, the reference value for monetary growth for 1999 will have to
be derived and published. Progress on these two important issues is well under way and I anticipate a
final announcement by the Governing Council in December.
1. A broadly-based assessment of the outlook for price developments in the euro area
Although  the  monetary  data  contain  information  vital  to  monetary  policy-making,  monetary
developments  alone  will  not,  of  course,  constitute  a  complete  summary  of  all  the  economic
information  necessary  to  enable  appropriate  policy  decisions  to  be  taken.  In  the  ESCB’s  stability-
oriented monetary policy strategy, money is accorded a prominent - but not an exclusive - role.
There  is  a  clear  need  for  the  Governing  Council  to  look  at  a  wide  range  of  other  economic  and
financial indicators. Consequently, in parallel with the analysis of monetary growth in relation to the
reference value, a broadly-based assessment of the outlook for price developments and the risks to
price stability in the euro area will also be undertaken. This assessment will systematically analyse
all  the  other  information  about  the  economic  and  financial  situation,  ensuring  that  the  Governing
Council is as well-informed as possible when making its monetary policy decisions.
Outside  the  ESCB,  some  commentators  have  labelled  this  broadly-based  assessment  an  “inflation
forecast”. Failure to publish “the” inflation forecast is seen by some as contrary to the principle of
transparency. I am afraid that both views are flawed. Allow me to explain why.
While  it  is  true  that  accurate  forecasts  can  contribute  to  the  success  of  an  appropriately  forward-
looking monetary policy, the ESCB should not be judged on, or held accountable for, the accuracy of
its  internal  forecasts.  Rather,  its  performance  in  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  medium  term
should  be  used  by  the  public  to  judge  the  success  of  the  ESCB’s  policies.  Consequently,  the
publication  of  a  forecast  is  only  important  in  so  far  as  it  helps  to  achieve  price  stability  through
increasing the clarity and transparency of the policy-making process. In this regard, there are some
important problems with publishing a single “official inflation forecast”.
Relying on  a  single  forecast  that  attempts  to  summarise  all  the  information  available  from  a  wide
range of indicators would be misguided. The Governing Council will not wish to be presented with a
single  number  to  which  it  will  have  to  react  mechanistically,  if  at  all.  In  contrast,  the  Governing
Council will want to know the economic reasons behind the projected risks to  price  stability.  The
appropriate monetary policy response to a threat to price stability will depend on the nature of the
threat. The Governing Council can only understand the nature of the risk if it is presented with a full
set of data. From these data, it can attempt - with the help of various staff analyses - to identify the
nature  of  the  disturbance  to  price  stability.  Having  identified  the  threat,  an  appropriate  policy
response can be selected and implemented.
Even with the best intentions, making an inflation forecast requires numerous subjective judgements
about developments in the economy. Adjustments will need to be made to forecasts to allow for the
behavioural  and  institutional  changes  caused  by  the  transition  to  Stage  Three.  Even  purely
“model-based”  forecasts  reflect  the  preferences  of  those  who  constructed  the  models.  Against  this
background, publishing an inflation forecast would obscure rather than clarify what the Governing
Council  is  actually  doing.  The  public  would  be  presented  with  a  single  number  intended  to
summarise a thorough and comprehensive analysis of a wide range of indicator variables. However,
such  a  summary  would  inevitably  be  simplistic.  Moreover,  because  publishing  a  single  inflation
BIS Review   97/1998
- 6 -
forecast  would  be  likely  to  suggest  that  monetary  policy  reacts  mechanistically  to  this  forecast,
publication might mislead the public and therefore run counter to the principle of clarity.
The  publication  of  an  inflation  forecast  might  be  problematic  in  other  ways.  If  the  ESCB  were  to
publish a projection based on the assumption of unchanged interest rates, then, when inflationary or
deflationary pressures arose, the projection might be interpreted as suggesting that price stability is
actually in jeopardy. However, this would be very misleading. The Governing Council of the ECB is
fully committed to the maintenance of price stability according to its published definition and would
change  monetary  policy  in  order  to  address  and  contain  the  threat  to  price  stability.  However,  the
publication  of  the  forecast  itself  might  introduce  an  independent  destabilising  effect  into  private
inflation  expectations,  inadvertently  undermining  the  credibility  of  the  single  monetary  policy,
making price stability  harder  to  maintain  and  reducing  the  overall  benefits  of  doing  so.  As  I  have
said in the past, under certain circumstances the publication of the inflation forecast itself may lead
to some form of implicit indexation of wages, imparting a costly self-sustaining momentum to such
forecasts.
If the ESCB were to publish an inflation forecast that incorporated the effects of its policy changes,
rather  than  assuming  that  monetary  policy  was  unchanged,  then  it  would  inevitably  forecast  price
stability over the medium term. This follows from the unambiguous commitment of the Governing
Council  to  meeting  its  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability.  Publishing  such  a  forecast
might be reassuring, but it would not be very informative.
Clearly, the Governing Council could have decided to announce some form of inflation forecast and
justify policy decisions by reference to it. Interest rate increases or decreases could then be explained
on the basis that the inflation forecast pointed to threats to price stability. However, this presentation
of monetary strategy to the public is likely to involve a circular argument. For example, interest rate
increases would be justified on the basis that the inflation forecast pointed to an inflation rate higher
than  that  consistent  with  price  stability.  However,  critical  observers  might  soon  argue  that  the
inflation forecast was above the target precisely because there was a perceived need to raise interest
rates.  Simply  publishing  a  forecast  does  not  explain  why  interest  rates  need  to  be  changed.
Moreover,  as  I  have  said,  simply  presenting  a  forecast  to  the  public  does  not  explain  how  the
conclusion  that  a  rate  rise  is  required  has  been  reached.  On  both  grounds,  publishing  the  forecast
does not enhance the transparency and clarity of the strategy.
The strategy we have chosen at the ESCB avoids this danger. Based on this strategy, the Governing
Council will inform the public regularly of its assessment of the monetary, economic and financial
situation in the euro area. Moreover, when policy decisions are made, the reasoning behind specific
decisions - including the economic rationale according to which judgements have been made - will
be  communicated  to  the  public.  By  presenting  the  analysis  that  is  actually  driving  the  policy
decisions, the ESCB is being both clear - since this analysis is informative about policy changes -
and transparent - since the presentation to the public will reflect the type of discussion I expect to
occur in the Governing Council itself.
2. Conclusion
In  the  present  circumstances,  the  Governing  Council  has  decided  that  following  any  mechanical
policy rule to determine monetary policy in the euro area would be inappropriate. Putting “all our
eggs in one basket” would be especially dangerous at the start of Stage Three, given the uncertainties
that we face. Indeed, a mechanistic approach is unlikely to produce good policy decisions under any
circumstances. To pretend otherwise to the public would be misleading and dangerous.
BIS Review   97/1998
- 7 -
Nevertheless,  the  ESCB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  must  be  clear  and  transparent  if  we  are  to
convince the public of our commitment to maintaining price stability and our ability to do so. We
must be seen to be operating in a solid and coherent framework that leads to consistent and effective
monetary policy decisions.
The stability-oriented monetary policy strategy adopted by the Governing Council of the ECB offers
just such a framework. Having been designed to respect the principles of clarity and transparency, I
am confident that this strategy will be successful. By maintaining price stability in the euro area, the
ESCB  will  thus  lay  part  of  the  necessary  foundation  for  Europe’s  future  economic  stability  and
prosperity.
BIS Review   97/1998
