Mr. George gives an assessment of where the UK economy has come from and where it is
headed
Speech  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  Mr.  E.A.J.  George,  given  at  the  Institute  of
Directors Annual Dinner in London on 19/11/98.
My  Lord  and  President,  Deputy  Lord  Mayor,  Your  Excellency,  My  Lords,  Ladies  and
Gentlemen.
Let me put some of the recent newspaper headlines alongside the facts, in order to put things in
perspective.
First, on the world economy, the headlines read:
•  Meltdown warning in the wake of economic slowdown.
•  G7 nations try to halt slide to depression.
•  Last ditch bid to avert global crisis.
And these are just the supposedly serious newspapers!
The facts are that world output growth is expected by the IMF to be 2% this year and 21/2% next
- compared with 4% in 1997. And the OECD expects growth in the OECD area of 21/4% this
year, 13/4% in 1999, recovering to 21/4% in the year 2000 - compared with 3% in 1997. That
certainly is a very marked slowdown, but it is hardly meltdown or recession.
And on our own economy - the headlines read:
•  Recession looms.
•  The economy is hurtling headlong towards recession.
And even:
• 
It’s official - the economy is shrinking.
The facts are that for the past 6½ years the British economy as a whole has grown at an average
annual rate of over 3% - which is well above its long term trend rate of some 2% - or, if you are
optimistic, some 2½%. And we were still growing, at an annual rate of some 2% in each of the
last two quarters, on the latest published data.
At  the  time  these  headlines  were  written  a  month  or  so  ago  not  one  of  the  28  independent
professional forecasting organisations surveyed by Consensus Forecasts was expecting output to
fall in 1999; and their average expectation was for 1% growth next year. That is broadly in line
with our own latest best guess in the MPC. Your own most recent IOD forecast in September
suggested  slightly  stronger  growth  next  year.  It  is  true  that  Consensus  Forecasts  have  since
revised down their mean expectation - to just over ¾% growth; but even now only one of the 28
contributors expects output to fall.
On unemployment in the UK the headlines read:
* Jobs gloom deepens as layoffs soar.* More jobs go as recession looms.* Jobless up as world
pain hits Britain.
BIS Review   98/1998
- 2 -
And the facts? At the time these headlines were written, the unemployment rate, both nationally
and  in  virtually  every  region  of  the  UK,  apart  from  the  South  East  and  East  Anglia,  was  the
lowest it has been since at least the early 1980s.
I could go on.
Headlines: UK heads for credit crisis. Closed for credit. Credit card sales dive. Facts: bank and
building society lending up by 0.7% in the latest month (September) and by 8.8% over the past
year. Credit card lending was up by over 26% on a year ago.
Headlines: House prices hit as recession clouds gather. Facts: house prices rose by 6.7% over the
past year on the Halifax index and by 7.5% according to the Nationwide.
Now I say all this, President, not to draw attention to the proclivity of headline writers, and some
economic/financial commentators, to sensationalise. My serious point is that, especially at a time
of  unusual  uncertainty  as  at  present,  we  all  need  to  focus  more  carefully  than  ever  on  the
evolving  facts,  and  on  the  more  probable  outcomes  and  not  allow  ourselves  to  become
preoccupied with extreme, even if possible, outcomes.
Against that background, let me offer you  my  own  assessment  of  where  the  UK  economy  has
come from and where it is headed.
Since the recession of the early 1990s the economy as a whole has, as I say, grown at an average
annual rate of just over 3% - well above trend. During this period we were steadily reabsorbing
the spare capacity created by the recession, and this was reflected in a gradual improvement in
the labour market - in a net increase in employment of 1.7 mn people since the end of 1992, and
in a persistent fall in unemployment to - as I say - the lowest rate for nearly 20 years. Meanwhile,
underlying  consumer  price  inflation  has  averaged  2.7%  over  the  past  5  years,  the  lowest  rate
since the early 1960s - and it has been exactly on target - at 2½% - in each of the past 3 months.
About 2 years ago it began to become evident that demand and output growth, in the economy as
a whole, was picking up speed. And as we moved into and through 1997, it became increasingly
obvious that unless we acted to tighten monetary policy, in order to moderate the rate of growth,
we risked overheating, particularly in the labour market, where reports of shortages not just of
skilled but even of unskilled workers, were becoming widespread.
The situation was seriously complicated by an increasing imbalance between the domestic and
the internationally exposed sectors of the economy. Domestic demand for goods, and particularly
for services, was unsustainably strong, and large parts of the economy were doing very well on
the  back  of  that  -  though  they  didn’t  make  too  much  of  a  song  and  dance  about  it.  But  other
sectors,  those  most  exposed  to  international  competition  -  most  of  agriculture,  large  parts  of
manufacturing and some service sectors - were already then having a much more difficult time.
Understandably,  they  were  more  vociferous.  They  had  been  hit,  initially,  by  the  exaggerated
strength of sterling against the major European currencies in the run up to decisions about the
euro. And they were hit, subsequently, by the successive waves of turmoil spreading through the
world economy which saw exchange rates fall and demand dry up in Asia and elsewhere.
So, faced with this dilemma, what were we to do? It is true that the external factors - unhelpful as
they were in a more fundamental sense, in terms of the imbalance in the economy - did act as a
restraining  influence  on  overall  aggregate  demand  and  on  inflation,  and  that  meant  we  had
somewhat  more  time  than  we  would  otherwise  have  had  to  moderate  the  growth  of  domestic
demand. But even allowing for that we in fact had no choice but to tighten policy.
BIS Review   98/1998
- 3 -
It wasn’t that we didn’t know that the internationally-exposed sectors were under the hammer -
we’d have had to be blind as well as deaf not to have known. Our problem was that if we had
held back more than we did, in order to shelter the exposed sectors, we would have put the whole
economy - including the sectors we were trying to protect - at risk of accelerating inflation. And
that  would  have  meant  eventually  having  to  tighten  policy  more  abruptly,  which  would  much
more certainly have plunged the economy into serious recession, a bit further down the road.
The  harsh  reality  is  that  monetary  policy  can  only  target  the  economy  as  a  whole  -  it  cannot
realistically  seek  to  shelter  particular  businesses  or  particular  sectors  or  particular  regions,
however much we might all wish it were otherwise. And, in relation to the economy as a whole,
the effective choice in the situation we faced was not whether or not to tighten, but whether to
tighten sooner, and by less, or later, by more.
So we raised interest rates through the second half of last year - and again in June - trying, as best
we could through our tactics, to minimise any further unwanted upward pressure on sterling.
But things have now clearly moved on.
The outlook for the world economy deteriorated further through the summer under the impact of
a series of new shocks. Japan, the world’s second largest economy, slipped further into recession.
Russia - which had only weeks earlier embarked on an IMF program - saw the collapse of the
rouble  and  default  on  its  debt.  And  acute  nervousness  spread  through  many  of  the  world’s
financial markets. Although there has been some improvement in sentiment over the past month
or two, and although the US and European economies continue to expand, the likelihood remains
that world  economic  growth  will  be  significantly  slower  than  had  been  expected  earlier  in  the
summer. Slower growth of world activity is bound to prolong the restraining external effect on
growth and inflation in the UK, even though the exchange rate has now started to weaken.
At the same time there are also now clearer signs of overall slowdown in our own economy. The
evidence for this is less obvious in the backwards-looking economic and monetary data than it is
in  the  forward-looking  surveys,  but  even  so  the  data  suggest  that  we  are  beginning  to  see  an
easing  of  pressure,  including  an  easing  of  pressure  in  the  labour  market.  And  the  surveys
themselves  now  point  to  a  slowdown  in  service  sector  growth,  including  retail  distribution,  as
well as a sharper decline in manufacturing output.
This prospect is consistent with the reports which we receive directly from the Bank’s network of
regional agents and their 7000-odd industrial and commercial contacts around the country.
Of course we pay very careful attention to this forward-looking evidence of developments in the
economy  alongside  the  data,  and,  like  others,  we  have  revised  down  our  forecasts  for  output
growth and inflation. And we have eased monetary policy quite sharply in the past two months,
in the light of that evidence.
Our current best guess - published in last week’s Inflation Report is that, after the interest rate
cuts,  the  growth  of  overall  output  next  year  will  be  around  1%,  picking  up  through  the
Millennium  to  around  trend  in  the  second  half  of  the  year  2000.  Meanwhile,  we  expect
underlying inflation to remain close to the target rate of 21/2% - though perhaps a little above
that rate during the course of next year. Now no-one likes to see the economy slowing down, but
some  slowdown  was  necessary  at  this  point  in  the  economic  cycle  in  order  to  avoid  an
inflationary upsurge. And if in fact it proves to be as mild as most of the forecasts - including our
own - suggest, it will be a huge improvement on anything we have seen at this stage in the cycle
for decades.
BIS Review   98/1998
- 4 -
It is true of course that the economy may turn out to be weaker than in our central projection.
That projection is the MPC’s very carefully considered view as to the most probable outcome,
but  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  around  it;  and  the  risks  are  somewhat  more  on  the  down
than on the upside. We don’t have a crystal ball. And we don’t pretend to know at all precisely
just how things will in fact turn out - that’s why we publish our forecasts in the form of a fan
with a wide range of uncertainty around the central case. The people to watch out for in this field
are those who do claim to know precisely. What we have to do, in actually operating monetary
policy is to monitor all the relevant evidence as it emerges for signs that the economy is proving
to  be  either  stronger  or  weaker  than  we  expect,  and  modify  our  view  of  the  prospect  for
inflation -  and  our  monetary  policy  -  in  the  light  of  that.  And  in  that  context  I  repeat  the
assurance, which I gave recently to the TUC in Blackpool, that we will act symmetrically. We
will be - have been - just as rigorous in reducing interest rates with the overall evidence pointing
to  the  balance  of  risks  to  inflation  on  the  downside,  as  we  have  been  -  and  will  again  be  -  in
raising rates with the evidence pointing  to  a  significant  or  sustained  overshoot  of  the  inflation
target.
Now  there  are  those  -  perhaps  even  one  or  two  of  you  here  this  evening  -  who  regard  this
assurance  as  cold  comfort.  It  misses  the  point  -  they  say  -  because  the  present  approach  to
monetary  policy  focuses  too  narrowly  on  inflation.  What  we  want  -  they  say  -  is  a  monetary
policy which puts more emphasis on growth and employment. You hear this complaint not just
in this country but increasingly these days in Continental Europe. I must say, President, that it
leaves me totally bemused.
What it suggests is that growth and price stability are seen as alternatives - you can have a bit
more of one if you’re prepared to accept a bit less of the other. I must confess that I thought the
debate had advanced beyond that point and that we really had learned from bitter experience that
there is no trade-off of this sort. In anything other than the short term you can’t have one without
the other.
We’ve  tried  all  too  often  in  the  past  to  increase  the  growth  rate  of  the  economy  simply  by
pumping  up  demand  -  without  sufficient  regard  to  the  underlying,  supply-side,  capacity  of  the
economy  to  meet  that  demand.  The  result,  repeatedly  was  inflationary  boom  followed  by
inevitable bust, and this repeated experience itself engendered a pervasive and damaging short-
termism,  in  both  industrial  and  financial  business  behaviour.  That  simply  made  the  position
worse next time around. What we - and the Bundesbank, and the ECB in future - have to try to
do  is  to  keep  overall  demand  growing  broadly  in  balance  with  the  underlying  supply-side
capacity  of  the  economy,  aiming  to  dampen  rather  than  aggravate  the  economic  cycle;  and
consistent price stability - certainly not falling prices but not accelerating price increases either -
is the measure of our success in achieving that  broader  objective  over  time.  The  debate  is  not
about the ends, it is about the means. Price stability has never to my mind been simply an end in
itself - it would be a pretty dry and unsatisfying objective if that were all that we were about. The
whole point about price stability - even when, as now, it involves a temporary slowdown in the
growth of activity - is that it is a necessary condition for the sustainable growth of activity and
employment and rising living standards, which are of  course  the  truly  good  things  of  life,  and
which we surely all want to see. That is, I think, what we have seen over recent years.
BIS Review   98/1998
