Mr.  Tietmeyer  discusses  prospects  for  Latin  America  in  a  volatile  world
Presentation  by  the  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Prof.  Hans  Tietmeyer,  at  The  Wall  Street
Journal’s  Seventh Annual Conference on the Americas in New York on 2/10/98.
First of all, I would like to thank you most sincerely for your kind invitation to this major
conference. The fact that a European central banker is speaking at a conference on the Americas is also
evidence of advanced globalisation. We are living in one world, even if some of the conditions differ.
Geologists claim that our two continents are moving away from each other, even though it is by rather
less  than  one  inch  a  year.  Fortunately,  that  is  true  only  in  a  geographical  sense.  Economically,  the
continents are moving closer together. For that reason, it is undoubtedly true to say that there can be no
oasis of prosperity in today’s world - even if Europe looks like an island of stability at present. But, of
course, our future, too, depends on the further outlook for the world economy.
The global economy is marked at present by a number of crises and critical situations.
The  history,  forms  and  implications  of  these  crises  have  many  dimensions.  Understandably,  there  are
many questions to which final answers cannot yet be given.
That starts with a precise analysis of the processes involved. Why do the markets react
later in some cases and earlier in others? How do the internal weaknesses of countries interact with the
operation of the financial markets upon the outbreak of, and during, a crisis?
There are a particularly large number of questions on the  economic  implications.  How
quickly  and  how  sustainably  can  the  affected  countries  overcome  the  crisis  of  confidence?  How
successfully can other emerging markets escape the risks of contagion? How much does the turbulence
retard growth in the traditional industrial countries? What are the long-term effects on the global trade
and financial structures?
Finally, we have to ask about the lessons to be learned. How can the emerging markets
bring their internal structures better into line with their degree of integration into the global economy?
What role can international cooperation play in preventing and overcoming crises?
These  and  other  difficult  questions  are  dominating  the  current  international  debate.
However, some fairly sweeping comments can be heard in the debate. People who say that the financial
markets are to blame, that globalisation must be stopped or even reversed. Such views are, of course, too
simplistic  and  inconsistent  with  the  realities  involved.  But  there  are  indeed  legitimate  questions  to  be
asked of the global financial system. At all events, the international community would do well to give
careful consideration to how it can improve the way in which the financial markets work.
Now, in a tempest it is especially important to maintain a clear sense of direction. For
every  serious  analysis,  the  following  two  insights  should  provide  the  guiding  lights:  Global  financial
markets  bring  significant  benefits  overall.  Free  capital  movements  are  an  important  and  worthwhile
achievement.
The  free  movement  of  capital  has  been  crucial  in  promoting  the  global  integration  of
output  and  trade.  It  has  been  instrumental  in  bringing  about  a  marked  increase  in  international  direct
investment  and  has  led  to  a  rapid  spread  of  know-how.  Free  capital  movements  have  made  the  world
more  prosperous  overall.  Capital  is  being  used  more  efficiently  because  the  pool  for  gathering  and
allocating  resources  has  become  larger.  And  investment  decisions  are  geared  more  closely  to  the
economic  yield  of  projects.  Finally,  the  free  movement  of  capital  has  helped  policymakers  in  many
countries to maintain internal economic discipline. The fact that there is a comparatively high degree of
price stability in many parts of the world is undoubtedly also due to open borders and more competition
from abroad. No one should forget those benefits, let alone want to sacrifice them.
BIS Review   81/1998
- 2 -
On the other hand, it is nevertheless correct to say that the global markets are not easy
players and partners. They pose internal challenges which may sometimes be hard. And the international
financial  markets  are  prone  to  exaggerate  at  times,  on  occasion  with  great  severity.  Nowadays,  many
market  players  are  very  short-termist  in  their  actions,  which  can  considerably  heighten  risks.  There  is
herd behaviour in both euphoria and in moments of doubt. Above all, financial crises give rise to risks of
contagion. Countries may be infected even though they have very few economic links with the original
location of the crisis.
Naturally,  it  is  understandable  that  market  players  regard  a  crisis  in  one  country  as  a
reason  to  re-examine  opportunities  and  risks  across  the  board.  Problems  are  caused,  however,  if  the
markets  do  not  make  enough  distinctions  and  fail  to  take  adequate  account  of  conditions  which  are
specific to the individual country. I hope very much that the international financial markets will note and
take due consideration of the evident structural progress made by many countries over the past few years,
especially in Latin America. Apart from that, exaggerations in one direction or the other are ultimately
dangerous for the players in the financial markets themselves - as has been revealed yet again precisely
here during the past few days.
II
What can be done against financial turbulence? First and foremost, financial crises are
not  an  ineluctable  fate.  Internal  weaknesses  or  shortcomings  nearly  always  play  a  considerable  role.
Conversely, it is also true to say that there is no universal patent remedy.
But  this  much  is  certain:  long-term  domestic  stability  and,  above  all,  the  enduring
credibility of internal policies are the best protective measures. Whatever we currently discuss with great
seriousness  and  commitment  at  the  international  level,  even  the  best  possible  architecture  for  global
finance needs sound foundations. Those indispensable foundations are provided by convincing long-term
domestic  policies  on  the  part  of  the  countries  themselves.  That  means:  sound  public  finances,  stable
prices, sound banking and financial sectors, and competition and flexibility in the domestic product and
labour markets. It cannot  be  said  often  enough:  internal  policies  must  be  in  order.  That  is  the  starting
point for any architecture. They are, so to speak, both the foundations and the supporting pillars.
Greater  and,  above  all,  improved  transparency  is  just  as  essential  for  monitoring  the
quality of those foundations and pillars as is regular surveillance by the IMF as part of the Article IV
consultations.  More  than  hitherto,  the  financial  sector  and  its  supervision  should  also  be  the  object  of
examination, not just classical macropolicy.
Of course, one must not expect that greater transparency and strengthened surveillance
by the IMF will mean a perfect world in future. Countries’ internal structures are rarely ideal. And that is
something which a global financial system has to come to terms with. Therefore, external arrangements
among  currencies  and  between  a  country  and  the  global  financial  markets  are  naturally  also  of
importance. However, these must be viable in the real world.
For example, stable exchange rates are undoubtedly desirable. They provide enterprises
and financial investors with planning certainty. In certain cases, exchange rate pegging may be useful for
that  purpose.  Moreover,  an  exchange  rate  peg  may,  for  a  time,  help  to  import  stability  from  outside.
Ultimately, however, that borrowed credibility has to be paid back by internal performance. And every
country  must  also  know  that  in  today’s  dynamic  world  there  may  easily  arise  an  unavoidable  need  to
adjust the exchange rate - not just the nominal exchange rate but also the real one. And that is the reason
why every country has to examine critically whether it has sufficient internal flexibility to hold a nominal
exchange rate peg by means of strenuous internal adjustment. Hence, it is questionable whether installing
a currency board is wise for a country in transition  which  still  has  a  considerable  road  to  travel  in  its
development from a centralised command economy to a market economy. A currency board only makes
sense if it is credible over a lengthy period of time. And it is credible only if the domestic financial sector
BIS Review   81/1998
- 3 -
is sound enough to stand a temporary monetary contraction if the necessity arises. That scarcely seems to
be the case in Russia at the moment.
External  arrangements  have  to  be  particularly  realistic.  That  is  becoming  increasingly
apparent  nowadays  in  the  question  of  the  liberalisation  of  the  financial  markets  in  the  emerging
economies. Without doubt, liberalising capital movements is the right direction to take. But if the internal
financial sector has major problems in handling extensive capital flows in a sound manner, the question
has to be asked about the pace and sequencing with which a country opens itself up.
The subject of controls on capital movements is very much to the fore in the debate at
present, especially for some of the Asian countries in crisis. At the end of the day, every country has to
assess for itself which path it will follow. It is understandable if a country is concerned about becoming
too dependent on hot money - at least, as long as the domestic financial sector is not fully developed.
No one should indulge in any illusions, however. Administrative controls are not an easy
thing in today’s world. The markets will be permanently on the lookout for ways of circumventing those
controls.  And,  mostly,  the  markets  are  more  inventive  than  the  controllers.  Controls  on  capital
movements  also  exact  a  price  in  most  cases.  In  order  to  be  effective,  controls  must  be  comparatively
broadly designed. That implies that effective controls also adversely affect desirable capital movements
to some extent. And controls on capital movements may have the effect of retarding the strengthening of
internal structures. Admittedly, in some cases and for specific areas, it may make sense to buy time for
developing suitable domestic structures. But that time also has to be used. Otherwise, buying time might
backfire. For instance, controls might encourage corruption and cronyism.
For that reason, even controls of capital inflows represent a certain degree of risk. Even
though  there  are  arguments  for  regarding  them,  under  particular  conditions,  as  a  contribution  to
preventing crises and to limiting the potential for a setback. But controls of capital outflows as a means
of crisis management are of a different nature. They may directly attack investors’ confidence. The risk
of a crisis escalating might become unpredictable.
III
Whatever  shape  the  future  architecture  might  take,  there  are  two  indispensable
preconditions  for  a  sound  world  financial  system:  countries  having  a  sound  domestic  policies,  and
appropriate  external  arrangements  with  the  other  currencies  and  with  the  global  markets.  If  these
foundations hold, then it naturally make a lot of sense to go one step further and to ask how international
cooperation can make the world economy more efficient.
A  thorough  debate  on  this  issue  can  be  very  beneficial  if  a  “New  Architecture”  or  a
“New  Bretton  Woods”  does  not  imply  throwing  the  baby  out  with  the  bath  water  but  does  mean
reforming the existing architecture. Since the general principles of the current system are more or less
correct. But they have to be applied coherently. And they have to be generally adopted.
A lot can and should be done. With a growing number of countries participating in the
international  division  of  labour  and  in  the  global  allocation  of  capital,  the  world  needs  more  binding
rules. A lot of work on defining such appropriate rules has already been done during the past few years. I
would just like to remind you of the Basle Capital Accord or of the Core Principles for Effective Banking
Supervision.  The  crucial  challenges  are  to  ensure  that  such  rules  are  actually  implemented  by  the
countries and to ensure that the national authorities are in a position to have the required changes put into
effect by the market players.
In particular, in order to improve the efficiency of financial markets, clear rules should
promote transparency in terms of the positions of both the countries and the players. Recent experience
indicates that the issue of greater transparency is actually a matter for both.
BIS Review   81/1998
- 4 -
So,  without  any  doubt,  there  is  a  strong  case  for  close  international  cooperation.
However, there is one condition for its success. In the longer term, cooperation can only be productive if
it strengthens and does not weaken its own foundations.
There is the one part of those foundations which it must not attack: countries’ internal
soundness.  It  would  therefore  be  short-sighted  to  urge  a  country  or  currency  area  to  relax  monetary
policy more than is reasonable internally. Sooner or later, that extracts a penalty. This is the lesson to be
learned  from  the  current  problems  in  Japan,  which  have  their  origin,  not  least,  in  a  relaxed  monetary
policy  in  the  late  eighties.  At  that  time,  Japan  understood  its  low  interest  rates  as  a  contribution  to
international cooperation. And pressure to do so came at that time from the United States. The result was
the bubble economy. The Japanese financial sector is still suffering from its excessive effects. That is a
burden not just for Japan but for the world as a whole.
Moreover,  there  is  the  other  part  of  the  foundations  which  international  cooperation
should  not  undermine  either:  the  appropriate  arrangements  among  countries  themselves  and  with  the
financial  markets.  International  action  should  improve,  and  not  harm,  the  operation  of  the  financial
markets.  But  that  is  precisely  what  happens  if  there  are  public  bail-outs  of  investors  in  the  event  of  a
crisis. They encourage moral hazard, thus weakening the efficiency of the markets. Therefore, publicly
financed bail-outs ultimately attack the economic basis of legitimacy for free capital markets.
My criticism of some of the IMF’s past activities is not new. In the case of Mexico and,
to some extent, in the crises of a few Asian countries, financial resources have been thrown into the fire
too quickly and too extensively and private investors have not been adequately involved or only fairly
late on. Certainly, the IMF has been under considerable political pressure regarding some of its actions.
That explains much but does not justify everything. There must be no more rescue operations without the
involvement of the private creditors. The IMF cannot and should not be lender of last resort. Fortunately,
there is now growing recognition of this.
I do not wish to be misunderstood: we have urgent need of the IMF. For that reason, I
cannot  agree  with  the  fundamental  criticism  of  the  IMF  either.  We  need  the  IMF,  above  all,  as  an
international  monetary  promoter  of  open  borders  and  free  markets  and  as  an  advocate  of  sound  and
transparent  policies  on  the  part  of  its  members.  That  is  the  task  of  the  IMF.  It  has  the  function  of  a
catalyst.  It  can  assist  many  countries  in  following  and  safeguarding  the  road  to  the  market  economy
internally.  The  IMF  can  help  to  make  global  finance  more  efficient.  Nevertheless,  the  countries
themselves must ensure that their internal financial systems have a sufficiently sound structure. And the
IMF  can  act  as  an  intermediary  in  the  event  of  a  crisis.  In  doing  so,  the  primary  objective  should  be
maintaining access to private capital for countries in crisis. Of course, in such an event financial support
by the IMF might play a limited role. But  support  has  to  be  linked  to  conditionality  which  covers  the
actual causes bearing in mind that the formula for overcoming a crisis might not be the same for every
country affected.
This function of the IMF as a catalyst is not a minor role. In today’s world, it is a crucial
one for which adequate financial resources are essential. The Bundesbank therefore decided yesterday to
notify the IMF of its participation in the New Arrangements to Borrow (NAB). The NAB and the GAB
are, so to speak, reserve tanks for the IMF in the event of an emergency.
However: The ordinary funding of  the  IMF  by  the  “front  door”  is  more  important  and
more fitting for its cooperative role than funding by the “back door” through GAB and NAB. For that
reason,  we  welcomed  the  11th    increase  in  quotas  that  was  agreed  last  year  in  Hong  Kong.  Germany
informed the IMF last summer that it accepts this increase. I hope very much that the increase in quotas
can soon come into force. However, that will not be possible without the largest shareholder, the United
States. It is, above all, here that international responsibility for adequate capital resources of the IMF lies.
BIS Review   81/1998
IV
- 5 -
In  these  troubled  times,  another  forthcoming  change  is  almost  being  forgotten:  the
adoption  of  the  euro  at  the  start  of  next  year.  I  do  not  know  whether  one  should  go  as  far  as  Robert
Mundell, who has described the introduction of the euro as the most important event in monetary history
since the changeover to the gold standard about 120 years ago. It is, at all events, an historic step. It will
change Europe economically and politically. And, for the global scene it means the appearance of a new
player.
We  Europeans  agree  that  the  euro  must  be  enduringly  stable.  To  achieve  that,  we
Europeans still have much to do. The internal stability of the euro will help to stabilise exchange rates
against other currencies. But, naturally enough, there can be no guarantee that the dollar-euro rate will
never fluctuate.
The  credibility  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  of  the  System  of  European  Central
Banks will be crucial for the euro. We can take some pride in stating that, on the markets, there is already
a notable stock of confidence in the European Central Bank, even though it has not yet taken any interest
rate policy decisions of  its  own.  Evidently,  the  markets  are  now  rewarding  the  serious  and  productive
groundwork that has been done and the high degree of unanimity so far in the ECB Governing Council.
And  it  may  be  that  the  markets  are  also  projecting  some  of  the  stability  culture  that  has  evolved
elsewhere in Frankfurt on to the ECB. The ECB will thus not need an excessively tight initial policy - as
is occasionally expected in the markets. The starting interest rate level in January 1999 is therefore likely
to be comparatively close to the present low interest rates in the large countries within the euro area.
A  stable  euro  will  uphold  the  tradition  and  the  heritage  of  the  D-Mark.  That  implies
responsible  handling  of  its  international  role  as  a  reserve  and  investment  currency.  It  also  implies
regarding internal stability as a contribution to open external borders. The euro will be an instrument of
competition and not of insulation from the outside world.
Admittedly, it will not hold up continental drift in geographical terms. A stable currency
cannot do everything. But a stable euro will strengthen the foundations  for  an  orderly  world  economy
and for productive global competition.
BIS Review   81/1998
