Mr Gjedrem focuses on monetary policy challenges in Norway
Article by Mr. Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank, the Norwegian central bank, published in
the Norwegian daily Aftenposten on 3 May 1999.
In  Norway,  fiscal  policy  has  a  prominent  role  in  stabilising  growth  in  production  and
employment. The Government Petroleum Fund shall serve as a buffer so that fluctuations in
the government’s oil revenues do not influence the mainland economy, but only have an effect
on  capital  exports.  The  local  and  centralised  income  settlements  determine  wage  growth.
Monetary policy instruments are oriented with a view to maintaining a stable krone exchange
rate against European currencies.
If the government budget stabilises the domestic economy, wage growth is kept on a par with
the  level  in  Europe,  and  fluctuations  in  oil  revenues  are  absorbed  by  the  Petroleum  Fund,
Norges  Bank  stands  a  good  chance  of  ensuring  exchange  rate  stability  through  monetary
policy.
However,  this  has  not  been  the  case  since  1996.  The  government  budget  has  not  made  a
sufficient contribution to smoothing growth in domestic demand and production, wage growth
has been substantially higher than in other countries, and oil revenues have fluctuated widely.
Furthermore, it seems that the krone is easily exposed to the contagion effects of turbulence in
international markets. The krone exchange rate has fluctuated in spite of Norges Bank’s active
use of instruments. Developments in recent years indicate that Norges Bank cannot fine-tune
movements in the krone exchange rate.
Instruments
Extensive and persistent exchange-market interventions to influence the krone exchange rate
have,  in  Norges  Bank’s  experience,  yielded  poor  results.  Market  participants  may  perceive
such transactions as an interesting opportunity to make a profit, which may trigger enormous
capital movements.
The interest rate is therefore Norges Bank’s most important instrument. Higher interest rates
normally lead to a strengthening of the krone exchange rate. However, interest rates may reach
such  a  high  level  that  this  contributes  to  a  cyclical  downturn.  This  would  undermine  the
credibility of monetary policy and result in downward pressures on the krone. In this situation,
lower interest rates may contribute to stability and strengthen the krone.
Along the same lines, lower interest rates will normally lead to a weakening of the krone. But
if interest rates are so low that this contributes to inflation, this will also undermine monetary
policy credibility, and the krone will be unstable.
The objective and the mandate
Monetary policy can provide a nominal anchor for the economy. Since 1986 the authorities
have  focused  on  exchange  rate  stability.  Price  inflation  has  been  low.  Yields  on  long-term
securities  indicate  no  expectations  of  rising  inflation.  The  perception  of  market  participants
seems to be that Norway will not resume a policy resulting in high inflation.
1
BIS Review  51/1999
The  political  authorities  formulate  Norges  Bank’s  mandate  for  the  conduct  of  monetary
policy. The mandate, formulated in the regulation issued in the spring of 1994, states: “The
monetary  policy  to  be  conducted  by  Norges  Bank  shall  be  aimed  at  maintaining  a  stable
exchange  rate  against  European  currencies,  based  on  the  range  of  the  exchange  rate
maintained  since  the  krone  was  floated  on  10  December  1992.  In  the  event  of  significant
changes in the exchange rate, policy instruments will be oriented with a view to returning the
exchange rate over time to its initial range. No fluctuation margins are established, nor is there
an appurtenant obligation on Norges Bank to intervene in the foreign exchange market” (my
italics).
The regulation is based on the fact that we have a floating exchange rate. The first sentence
means that this is a managed float. Instruments are to be oriented towards maintaining a stable
krone exchange rate against European currencies. Norges Bank chose to define the reference
European currencies as the euro from 1 January 1999.
The last sentence in the regulation distinguishes our system from a fixed exchange rate regime
in that no fluctuation margins have been established around a central rate. To the extent this
system  calls  forth  associations  with  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime,  the  concept  initial  range
should  be  interpreted  as  a  broad  indication  of  a  central  rate  around  which  the  krone  can
fluctuate.
The second sentence refers to significant changes in the exchange rate in relation to the initial
range. It is important to note that no specific values have been defined for significant changes,
such as the fluctuation margins of 2¼ per cent,  6  per  cent  and  15  per  cent  used  by  the  EU
countries  in  their  exchange  rate  regime.  Significant  must  be  given  an  economic  content.  A
reasonable  interpretation  is  that  exchange  rate  movements  must  not  influence  expectations
concerning  price  and  cost  inflation  to  the  extent  that  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  become
self-reinforcing.
The expressions with a view to, over time, aimed at and based on also show that Norges Bank
has considerable scope for exercising discretion.
Exercising discretion
In exercising this discretion, Norges Bank places emphasis on the fundamental conditions for
achieving exchange rate stability over time. Price and cost inflation must be brought down to
the level aimed at by the euro countries. At the same time, monetary policy must not in itself
contribute to a deflationary recession.
The  regulation’s  requirement  with  regard  to  returning  the  exchange  rate  to  its  initial  range
may – if stretched – imply an element of “parity policy”*. For example, in a scenario with a
sharp and prolonged fall in oil prices, the krone exchange rate may remain outside the initial
range for a longer period. If Norges Bank responds by raising interest rates in order to force
the  krone  back  to  its  initial  range,  monetary  policy  could  lead  to  a  recession  that  will
undermine  confidence  in  the  krone.  Similarly,  after  an  appreciation  a  situation  may  arise
whereby a movement of the exchange rate back to the initial range may require that interest
rates be reduced to such a low level that this results in higher inflation. However, this would
weaken the basis for exchange rate stability over time. Hence, Norges Bank cannot with open
eyes  orient  its  policy  instruments  towards  triggering  higher  inflation  or  a  deflationary
recession. If a situation arises whereby Norges Bank is not able to return the exchange rate to
BIS Review  51/1999
2
its initial range without such consequences, the Bank will inform the government authorities
that measures other than those available to the central bank are required.
The present exchange rate range has more or less prevailed for more than ten years. On the
basis of its analyses, Norges Bank does not find grounds to maintain that this range is not the
appropriate one.
Interplay between policy areas
There  are  considerable  differences  between  Norway  and  other  industrial  countries  in  the
structure of the economy, the organisation of decision-making processes and the formulation
of  economic  policy.  In  Norway,  income  and  wage  determination  is  fairly  centralised;  a
number of fora to foster cooperation between the social partners have been established, as has
special  legislation  which  makes  it  easier  to  resolve  labour  conflicts  than  in  many  other
countries.  The  central  government  budget  is  used  more  actively  to  stabilise  economic
developments, partly because the Norwegian state has substantially greater economic leeway
than other countries.
A  salient  feature  of  the  Norwegian  economy  is  the  importance  of  oil  revenues,  which  may
fluctuate considerably from year to year. The Government Petroleum Fund was established to
serve as a buffer against fluctuations in oil revenues. It dampens the impact of changes in oil
prices on the Norwegian krone.
In recent years, a number of countries have switched to a monetary policy regime based on a
target of low inflation. With a passive fiscal policy, monetary policy then in practice assumes
a greater role in the stabilisation of economic developments.
In Norway, we have a  different  institutional  structure  and  monetary  policy  objective.  When
the krone has been stable and inflation shows signs of rising, Norges Bank’s first reaction is to
inform the political authorities that measures other than those available to the central bank are
required.  Norges  Bank  would  do  the  same  if  the  requirement  of  returning  the  krone  to  its
initial  range  could  no  longer  apply.  In  a  country  with  an  inflation  target,  the  central  bank
would deal with this itself, without first consulting with the government authorities. However,
as mentioned, Norges Bank cannot with open eyes inflate or deflate the economy.
Norges Bank’s mandate must be viewed in the light of the emphasis placed by the government
authorities  on  conducting  a  disciplined,  but  active  fiscal  policy.  The  mandate  gives  Norges
Bank  a  basis  for  conducting  a  monetary  policy  that  provides  a  nominal  anchor  for  the
Norwegian economy.
 As used in the Norwegian debate, “parity policy” refers to the monetary policy of the 1920s, when the
Norwegian  krone  was  forced  back  to  its  former  gold  parity  by  means  of  highly  deflationary  policies.
(Footnote not included in Norwegian text).
3
BIS Review  51/1999
