Mr. Tietmeyer addresses the topic of the Eurosystem’s approach to monetary stability
Address by the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Prof. Dr Dr h.c. mult. Hans Tietmeyer to the
Swedish Economic Association in Stockholm on April 12, 1999.
__________________________________________________________________________________
I
At  the  beginning  of  this  year,  the  euro  was  launched  as  a  common  currency  in  eleven  of  the  15
member states of the European Union. As you all know, Germany was one of those countries whereas
Sweden, by its own choice, was not. But I am hopeful that this state of affairs - as far as Sweden is
concerned - will not persist for too long. As the president of the Deutsche Bundesbank and a member
of the Governing Council of the ECB, I have been following the recent debate in your country on the
merits and drawbacks of joining the euro area with particular interest. I hope you will therefore allow
me  to  take  advantage  of  your  invitation  to  argue  in  favour  of  the  Eurosystem’s  approach  to  the
attainment of lasting price stability which contributes to an environment conducive to lasting growth.
I realise that this will not be an easy task in a country whose central bank is now reaping the fruits of
many years of efforts to achieve price stability. The Sveriges Riksbank has recently actually lowered
its repo rate slightly below that of the Eurosystem - thus creating a situation which the Eurosystem, of
course,  could  not  leave  unchanged.  Of  course,  this  was  not  the  only  reason  for  our  somewhat
surprising decision last Thursday. There were other reasons, too. I will come back to them later. In
retrospect, in the eyes of the central banks involved, the merging to form a common, larger monetary
area went beyond a mere geographical reorientation of monetary policy. It is true that, in the run-up to
monetary union (and bolstered by the Maastricht Treaty), there had already been a large measure of
convergence  in  monetary  policy  thinking  in  Europe.  That  primarily  affected  the  ultimate  goal  of
monetary policy, and its institutional framework for achieving that objective. But right up to the start
of  what  was  known  as  stage  three  of  EMU,  there  remained  national  differences  -  some  of  them
substantial - in the practical implementation of policies.
To  be  sure,  the  now  unified  monetary  policy  of  the  Eurosystem  has  recourse  in  many  areas  to
elements of the earlier national approaches. Even so, in the aggregate it represents a conceptual fresh
start. A new system has come into being that calls for adjustments from its members at all levels of
monetary policy action. The Bundesbank, too, was and is affected by this change. We have likewise
had to adjust to the common approach in a number of respects, and are still doing so today. Against
the  background  of  this  experience,  I  should  like  to  single  out  in  this  lecture  some  aspects  of  the
common  monetary  policy  of  the  Eurosystem  which,  as  it  seems  to  me,  are  of  particular  interest  to
those nations which are preparing for participation in the future.
II
The best and most lasting contribution that monetary policy can make to long-run economic welfare is
that of safeguarding price stability.  The Statute of the ESCB annexed to the EC Treaty spells out that
objective correspondingly clearly. And the assignment of tasks by the Swedish Central Bank Act in
the wording in force since the beginning of this year is equally unambiguous. Despite this gratifying
correspondence as regards the overall objective and also the large measure of convergence in practical
orientation, there are still, if one looks more closely, some differences. Of course they should not be
overinterpreted,  nor  should  they  be  neglected.  From  the  standpoint  of  monetary  policy,  with  the
responsibility  for  safeguarding  the  value  of  money,  the  question  arises,  in  particular,  as  to  the
yardstick by which one’s efforts must be measured. Such a yardstick is not provided explicitly in the
Maastricht Treaty. After thorough debate, we in the Governing Council of the ECB decided to define
an  annual  increase  of  less  than  2  %  in  the  Harmonised  Consumer  Price  Index  (HCPI)  as  being
consistent with price stability in the euro area.
In my view: There are good reasons for such a definition: the choice of a broad index at the consumer-
price level takes due account of the addressees of a stability-oriented monetary policy, for ultimately
1
BIS Review 40 /1999
those  are  consumers.  And  the  quantitative  level  of  the  definition  by  the  ECB  Governing  Council
follows from the past experience of the member countries with a long history of stability. By contrast,
as far as I know, Sveriges Riksbank has geared its policy hitherto to an inflation target - measured in
terms of the rise in the Swedish consumer price index - of an annual rate of 2 %. In addition, the Bank
has made it clear that it would tolerate deviations from that target variable in either direction up to a
level of 1 percentage point.1 This was said at least in the Quarterly Review 4/1998 of the Sveriges
Riksbank. On average, therefore, price movements in line with the objective of the Swedish Central
Bank seem to be compatible with the top edge of the quantitative definition of price stability under the
Eurosystem. Even so, on the way to that average, the Swedish target definition tolerates inflation rates
exceeding the Eurosystem’s definition of price stability.2 Much the same also applies to the Bank of
England, which is pursuing a year-on-year inflation target of 2.5 %, measured in terms of the RPIX
(retail price index excluding mortgage interest payments).
That is all of what I say on the small, but not negligible differences in the context of target definition.
In  the  run-up  to  stage  three  of  European  economic  and  monetary  union,  however,  more  heat  was
generated by the debate on which monetary policy strategy should be used to reach the objective than
by the precise definition of what is deemed to be compatible with price stability. In the upshot, the
Eurosystem today is relying on two pillars for attaining its quantitative idea of price stability: on the
one hand, on a comparison of monetary growth with a reference value for the movement of the broad
money  stock  M3;  and,  on  the  other,  on  a  broadly-based  analysis  of  the  prospects  for  future  price
movements in the euro area. But, unlike the practice of the Swedish and UK central banks, both of
which  are  pursuing  a  strategic  approach  of  direct  “inflation  targeting”,  the  Eurosystem’s  policy
approach - at least till now - has not culminated in the publication of an inflation forecast. And, in my
view, there are very good reasons for not doing that! I shall revert to this point later on. In my opinion,
all  this  implies  that  the  Eurosystem  has  opted  for  a  strategy  that  reflects  with  all  due  clarity  the
particular responsibility of monetary policy for medium-term price movements. It thus does justice to
the assignment of roles prescribed by the Maastricht Treaty.
Well, answering the question as to the medium-term orientation of monetary policy is one thing. But
the question as to the shorter-term orientation of monetary policy within the business cycle is quite a
different  matter.  That  debate  is  currently  undergoing  a  renaissance  in  Europe.  Given  the  new
monetary policy regime, which still has to be ”run in”, and the differing former traditions of monetary
policy orientation in the individual countries, that comes as no surprise. Many countries in the euro
area were hardly affected by that question for a long time, since they were primarily pursuing a policy
of exchange-rate orientation. The Eurosystem, however, cannot and will not do that. It has to follow
its  own  internal  orientation!  And,  against  the  background  of  the  clouded  prospects  for  economic
activity  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  calls  for  recourse  to  monetary  assistance  measures,  which  are
comparatively easy to deploy, have become more vociferous of late.
I  should  first  of  all  like  to  emphasise  with  all  due  clarity  that  the  assignment  of  roles  under  the
Maastricht Treaty does not provide for ex ante coordination of different economic policy areas in the
sense  of  coordinated  demand  management.  Incidentally,  such  coordination  is  neither  desirable  nor
necessary if every policy area discharges its own responsibility. Complying with our responsibility for
price stability, we in the Governing Council of the ECB last Thursday decided to lower our interest
rate for the main refinancing operations by 50 basis points. Based on both pillars of our strategy, that
decision  was  taken  in  a  forward-looking  perspective.  We  judged  that  current  trends  in  monetary
aggregates  do  not  signal  future  inflationary  pressures,  and  that  -  assessing  all  other  relevant
                                                     
1 Cf., for instance, Lars Heikensten and Anders Vredin, Inflation targeting and Swedish monetary policy -
experience and problems, in: Sveriges Riksbank (Ed.), Quarterly Review, 4/1998, pages 5-33, especially page 5.
2 A direct comparison of the differing definitions of inflation rates deemed to be consistent with price stability
presupposes that the underlying (different) indices do not diverge substantially. In point of fact, the HCPI
encompasses about 80 % of the Swedish consumer price index. Cf. Sveriges Riksbank, Inflation Report 4/1998,
page 9, footnote 1 and page 51, chart 1 in the appendix, for a comparison of the movements of the two indices.
BIS Review 40/1999
2
information  -  the  price  movements  most  probably  will  keep  in  line  with  our  definition  of  price
stability. Thursday’s decision keeps our monetary policy on a longer-term stability-oriented course.
The  decision  and  its  underlying  rationale  demonstrate  continuity  and  do  not  in  any  way  indicate  a
paradigm change to short term demand management. By doing so, the decision contributes to creating
an  economic  environment  in  which  the  considerable  growth  potential  of  the  Euro  area  can  be
exploited. Those  responsible  for  other  policy  areas  are  urged  now  even  more  to  take  the  necessary
steps to  improve  longer-term  growth  prospects  for  the  euro  area.    A  cut  in  the  central  bank’s  rates
cannot be a substitute for convincing structural reforms in the economies. That should always be kept
in mind in discussions on the stabilisation  potential  of  monetary  policy.  If  monetary  policy  tries  to
meet other objectives, the risk of missing the main objective is great. Specifically, the Eurosystem is
sometimes accused by critics of squandering opportunities because of the type of final goal definition
selected.
That relates, to begin with, to the alleged asymmetry of statistical price rises that are consistent with
price stability in the view of the Eurosystem. But the assumption of asymmetry is based primarily on a
misinterpretation  of  the  quantitative  definition.  Thus,  it  is  quite  clear  from  the  formulation  chosen
that, in the view of the monetary policy makers in the euro area, both a deflation in the sense of a
sustained decline in the price level and a rate of monetary erosion of 2 % and more are deemed to be
harmful. Hence undue importance should not be attached to the fact that the ECB has refrained from
formally defining a floor for the objective of price stability. That is due not least to uncertainties with
regard to the measurement-error problem posed by the Harmonised Consumer Price Index.
But the criticism sometimes also applies to the formulation of the stability objective in the shape of a
target corridor, rather than a possible orientation towards a single-figure target. If the criticism were
warranted  in  this  respect,  it  would,  incidentally,  also  apply  to  the  Swedish  central  bank,  which  -
unlike the practice of inflation targeting in, say, the UK - has likewise formulated its target variable in
the shape of a corridor.
The starting point of this corridor debate is therefore the fact that - at least in theory - a central bank
that  gears  its  policy  to  a  single-figure  target,  rather  than  a  target  corridor  for  price  movements,  is
likely to take monetary countermeasures earlier if changes occur in the price outlook; hence, it tends
to  be  more  activist.  To  the  extent  that  observed  variations  in  inflation  were  due  to  similar  cyclical
fluctuations  in  macroeconomic  activity  around  its  trend  rate,  the  more  activist  policy  would,
according to the critics, achieve two things at once: the stabilisation of the variations in inflation and
the stabilisation of output.
But, in response to that assertion, it must be said that not every change in price movements is due to
cyclical fluctuations in demand. If, however, the cause is to be sought in changes on the supply side
(e.g.  in  advances  in  productivity)  monetary  countermeasures  with  the  aim  of  bringing  the  inflation
rate  back  on  to  its  target  path  as  quickly  as  possible  may  accomplish  just  the  opposite  of  what  is
wanted:  For  example,  such  a  monetary  policy  would  run  the  risk  of  stimulating  macroeconomic
growth to an extent that is incompatible with the long-term production potential of the economy. That
stimulus would then have to be countered again by monetary policy action. Hence an unduly activist
policy would tend to cause volatility by itself.
Moreover,  differing  time-lags  between  taking  the  decision  and  its  coming  into  effect  might  well
engender  unwelcome  cyclical  effects.  Excessively  volatile  monetary  policy  likewise  hampers  long-
term financing in the markets, and thus exacerbates the risk posed to real investment on the financing
side. The criticism of the Eurosystem expressed in this connection also pays too little heed to the role
played by the quantitative definition of price stability within the chosen strategy. It is true that, if an
approach based on inflation targeting is pursued, it is primarily the forecast deviation of the inflation
rate from its target rate that serves as the guideline for the deployment of policy instruments. Hence,
under this approach, the specific definition of the stability objective is indeed of crucial importance
for monetary policy in the short run. That, however, is not the approach adopted by the Eurosystem!
3
BIS Review  40/1999
Instead, the strategy of the Eurosystem opens up other options for the appropriate consideration of the
interaction between the deployment of monetary policy instruments and macroeconomic fluctuations.
At this juncture, I only wish to allude briefly to the fact that the reference value for monetary growth
was  derived  with  due  consideration  of  the  prospective  movement  of  production  potential.  To  this
extent,  the  Eurosystem’s  strategy  already  includes  to  some  extent  a  built-in  stabiliser  within  the
business cycle. Anyway, it seems to me to be questionable how far monetary countermeasures only
based on inflation forecasts (which are by their very nature always uncertain) can satisfy theoretical
requirements. After all, they neglect the uncertainty ruling in practice about future price movements.
The degree to which such uncertainty exists over forecasting horizons that are relevant to monetary
policy is also demonstrated for Sweden, after all, by the inflation forecasts of Sveriges Riksbank.3 For
instance, the width of the corridor in which the future inflation rate will lie with a probability of 50 %
for  a  one-year  time  horizon  is  already  roughly  one  percentage  point.  For  a  two-year  perspective  it
actually  doubles.  If  this  degree  of  uncertainty  of  the  inflation  forecast  is  compared  with  the  target
corridor of the Eurosystem’s definition of price stability, the criticism levelled at the corridor concept
appears at most to be relevant in theory.
III
 A major prerequisite of the Eurosystem being successful in discharging its stability mandate without
incurring unnecessary real economic costs lies in it rapidly acquiring the credibility that it can do just
that. Needless to say, such credibility is particularly essential for a new institution like the ECB. In
this context, it has become fashionable to draw attention to the role played in this by the transparency
of  monetary  policy.  Disinclined  though  I  am  to  question  this  correlation  between  credibility  and
transparency  (quite  the  contrary!),  I  find  myself  unable  fully  to  comprehend  the  criticism  -  mainly
coming from outside the euro area.
First  and  foremost,  the  concept  of  transparency  designates  quite  generally  the  disclosure  of
information that is relevant to the conduct of monetary policy. Such information may relate to utterly
different areas of central bank policy: - to the basic institutional framework under which it operates, -
to  its  precise  objectives,  -  to  its  strategy  and  -  to  the  instruments  at  its  disposal.  In  addition,  the
detailed  and  up-to-date  notification  of  the  general  public  about  monetary  policy  decisions  and  the
reasons behind them must certainly also be included.
There is general agreement on the advantages of monetary policy transparency: firstly, as I mentioned
before,  transparency  is  able  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  Moreover,  the
understanding  of  monetary  policy  is  facilitated  among  the  general  public,  always  provided  it  is
successful;  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  can  be  fostered  more  readily  in  this  way.  This  is
accompanied  by  the  anchoring  of  the  public’s  inflation  expectations  at  the  level  envisaged  by  the
central bank. That minimises friction between monetary policy and other economic policy areas.
Secondly,  the  transparency  of  monetary  policy  plays  a  major  supporting  role  in  connection  with  a
central  bank’s  accountability.  That  applies  particularly  to  central  banks  which,  in  the  light  of  their
legal status, can operate independently of other policy areas. The disclosure of their objectives and of
the reasons for their decisions constitutes the preconditions for an effective “monitoring” of central
bank policy - of its intentions and its efficiency alike - by the public at large. It follows from this that
notably  the  Eurosystem  (as  a  new  monetary  policy  institution,  which,  moreover,  enjoys  a  status  of
substantial independence in the discharge of its stability policy mandate) should endeavour to adopt a
policy  approach  which  is  as  transparent  as  possible.  Frankly  speaking,  I  cannot  see  what  more  the
Eurosystem could do in order to accomplish that. In the first place, its objective is defined with all due
unambiguity in the Treaty of Maastricht. And with respect to the chosen monetary policy strategy, and
                                                     
3 Cf. Sveriges Riksbank, Inflation Report 4/1998, page 42f.
BIS Review 40/1999
4
also to the range of instruments at its disposal, the Eurosystem has meanwhile kept the general public
comprehensively informed.
At the centre of the current debate on the transparency of monetary policy in the euro area is the issue
of how precisely, and especially in which form, the public should be notified of details of the internal
decision-making process and the decision-making rationale. Specifically, the question is, inter alia: to
what  extent  should  information-disseminating  instruments  which  have  been  used  by  other  central
banks likewise be deployed in the Eurosystem? Besides the above-mentioned publication of explicit
inflation forecasts, frequent reference is also made in this connection to the publication of the minutes
of  ECB  Governing  Council  meetings.  I  would  like  to  say  the  following:  Additional  information
presented to the general public actually enhances the transparency of monetary policy only if it can
help to make the monetary policy decision-making process clearer than it was before.
Specifically with reference to the publication of a model-based inflation forecast by the Eurosystem,
that may be doubted. For one thing, the Eurosystem is, after all, not pursuing a strategy of inflation
targeting,  under  which  the  precise  forecast  path  of  future  inflation  (supplemented,  if  need  be,  by
information  on  the  degree  of  uncertainty  of  the  forecast)  plays  the  key  role  in  the  decision-making
process. It is this that distinguishes monetary policy in the euro area from the policy pursued by those
central  banks  which  publish  explicit  inflation  forecasts  and  gear  their  policies  to  them.  The
Eurosystem  is  geared  to  two  pillars:  the  reference  value  for  monetary  growth  and  a  broadly-based
analysis of future price movements. On the publication of an official inflation forecast, that forecast
might  assume,  in  the  eyes  of  the  general  public,  an  importance  which  it  does  not  merit  under  the
strategy adopted.
To this extent, such a forecast could actually be misleading. In any case, it is legitimate to ask whether
it is prudent for a policy-maker to publish a precise forecast. On the one hand, there is always the risk
of  a  self-fulfilling  prophecy,  and  on  the  other,  a  problematic  yardstick  for  his  credibility  may  be
erected without him being fully in control of its realisation himself. For another thing, in view of the
change  in  the  monetary  policy  regime,  inflation  forecasts  for  the  euro  area  are  currently  subject  to
even more uncertainty than usual. The need for frequent revisions also militates against  any  overly
prominent role for that communication tool. Similarly, the debate on a publication of the minutes of
the meetings of the ECB Governing Council reflects in my view not so much the question of principle
concerning  the  enhancement  of  transparency  as,  rather,  the  differing  approaches  towards  achieving
that.
In the “philosophy” of the Eurosystem, the Governing Council of the ECB, as a collective body, is
committed  to  displaying  accountability  vis-à-vis  the  general  public.  National  considerations  should
not  be  of  any  significance  in  the  decisions  taken  by  that  supranationally  operating  body.  The
publication  of  the  standpoints  adopted  or  of  the  final  votes  cast  by  individual  Council  members,
which,  for  them,  always  involves  the  risk  of  being  exposed  to  political  pressure  in  their  respective
countries, tends to be disadvantageous here. Quite apart from the fact that publicising differences of
opinion is likely to do more harm than good to the stabilisation of expectations.
By contrast, it appears to me that the chosen route of detailed notification of the general public by the
ECB  President  immediately  after  the  meetings  of  the  Governing  Council  promises  to  be  more
successful. Those statements by the President discussed and agreed by the Council members reflect
the prevailing assessment of the Governing Council and set forth in some detail the conclusions which
it considers necessary to divulge. That makes the current state of debate transparent to an extent such
as  does  not  obtain  in  any  other  central  bank.  At  any  rate,  a  statement  by  the  ECB  President
immediately after the decision was taken and in front of the critical journalists seems to meet the need
of the public and the markets for explanation and transparency more efficiently than a mere reference
to a later publication of minutes does. To make my views on this point abundantly clear: I consider a
maximum of monetary policy transparency to be desirable. However, I am not convinced that that is
necessarily synonymous with the publication of very specific information on minutes.
5
BIS Review  40/1999
IV
Transparency  and  information  are  indispensable,  not  only  to  the  efficiency  of  monetary  policy  but
also to the avoidance of crises in the financial system. Hence the fostering of appropriate standards of
transparency and disclosure for all market players formed an integral part of the proposals I submitted
last February with a view to improving international financial architecture. Incidentally, the Financial
Stability Forum which I suggested, and which was endorsed by the G-7 ministers and governors, will
convene in Washington on the day after tomorrow under my chairmanship for its constituent meeting.
However, these proposals and ideas must be sharply distinguished from calls for the central bank to
specify preventively how it intends to respond in the event of a crisis besetting the financial system.
The ECB is sometimes criticised for having not clarified its role as a lender of last resort in a crisis
situation. In that connection, transparency may be positively harmful. In this context, two concepts are
of  key  significance:  “lender  of  last  resort”  and  “moral  hazard”.  It  is  its  monopoly  position  in  the
creation of central bank money as a definitive payment medium that enables a central bank to cope
with  a  system-imperilling  liquidity  shortage  in  the  financial  sector.  If  the  central  bank  supplies
liquidity  for  that  purpose  -  i.e.  acts  as  the  lender  of  last  resort  -  that  may  have  undesirable
repercussions.  Just  possibly,  more  liquidity  will  be  created  than  is  consistent  with  the  objective  of
price stability.
Besides this conflict with monetary policy objectives, the role of being the lender of last resort may
also give rise to serious adverse developments in the banking sector: if individual banks believe that
they  can  rely  on  the  central  bank  “bailing  them  out”  in  the  event  of  liquidity  problems,  that
encourages lax risk management or even deliberately over-risky behaviour - that is to say, the above-
mentioned  “moral  hazard”.  Transparency  with  respect  to  the  lender-of-last-resort  function  would
ultimately amount, for those players who regard themselves as being safeguarded thereby, to nothing
but a blank cheque on the central bank. This is why, as long ago as 1974, following the Herstatt crisis,
the G-10 central bank governors expressly reaffirmed the risks associated with any foreseeable action
as lenders of last resort, and rejected ex ante regulations. I regard that statement by the governors as
being as topical as ever. Correspondingly, central banks, if I may borrow a phrase from my colleague
Eddie George of the Bank of England, consistently practice what he called “constructive ambiguity”:
a lower degree of transparency fosters the careful valuation of risks and thus results in a higher degree
of financial market stability.
Furthermore, the Deutsche Bundesbank does not even have an express mandate to safeguard financial
market stability. Even less does that apply to any lender-of-last-resort function, however that may be
defined. Although it is involved in banking supervision, it is not responsible for the decisions itself,
either. In other European countries, most central banks are more directly involved in financial market
supervision and banking supervision.
Historical-induced  differences  in  the  “supervision  culture”  likewise  affect  the  attitude  towards  a
lender-of-last-resort  function.  But  in  the  final  analysis  this,  too,  is  another  variant  of  “constructive
ambiguity”. Incidentally, the Maastricht Treaty deliberately left banking supervision - at least, for the
time being - in the hands of the national authorities. However, that situation can be changed (pursuant
to  article  105  paragraph  6)  by  a  unanimous  decision  of  the  Council  of  Ministers.  Yet  the  ESCB  is
required to contribute to the smooth execution of national supervision over credit institutions, and to
the stability of the financial system. The approach adopted in Germany to the prevention of crises has
been  distinctly  successful  so  far.  It  has  included  -  besides  the  stability-oriented  stance  of  monetary
policy, which has helped, for instance, to avoid exaggerations in asset prices (“asset-price inflation”),
the primarily long-term oriented financial market culture and efficient banking supervision - above all
the mechanisms of internal control and peer-group pressure in the banking industry. I may mention as
examples the very far-reaching deposit guarantee scheme in Germany and the joint audit associations
of the various large categories of banks.
BIS Review 40/1999
6
Correspondingly, in the event of a crisis, all possible private sector solutions are normally sounded
out first, just as in most other countries. The internal control mechanisms of the banking industry in
Germany,  in  respect  of  liquidity  assistance  in  crisis  situations,  led  to  the  establishment  of  what  is
known as the Liquidity Consortium Bank (Liko Bank) in 1974. The various categories of the banking
industry and the Deutsche Bundesbank hold participating interests in that bank. In a crisis, the Liko
Bank can grant short-term liquidity assistance to institutions which are considered to be solvent and
have run into liquidity difficulties through no fault of their own. The Liko Bank is financed through
capital and reserves which can be increased by virtue of an obligation on the part of shareholders to
make  further  contributions  and  by  bills  of  exchange  whose  standing  is  assured  by  corresponding
signatures of other banks. Such securities can be used as blue-chip collateral to obtain funds from the
Bundesbank. Hence the Liko Bank acts, so to speak, as a lender of next-to-last resort. It ensures a kind
of  “institutional  transparency”  as  far  as  the  management  of  liquidity  crises  is  concerned,  without
impinging on the Bundesbank direct. By this means, and thanks to the involvement of the commercial
banks, the moral hazard risk is minimised. This appears to me to be a successful model that might also
be applied in EMU and we have to discuss this.
However, the existing differences in the approaches towards containing systemic risk in the financial
sector in Europe are - it may be emphasised once again - more differences of degree than differences
of a fundamental nature. Hence the ability of the Eurosystem to act in the (unlikely) event of a crisis
imperilling the system is assured. There are in the meantime clear agreements to this effect within the
Eurosystem.  Under  these  agreements,  should  the  need  actually  arise,  the  diverse  national
arrangements would be applied first.
But  it  goes  without  saying  that  the  Eurosystem  would  be  involved  as  well  if  liquidity  effects  on  a
scale relevant to monetary policy were felt. In the shape of the ECB Governing Council and Executive
Board,  the  Eurosystem  has  decision-making  bodies  which  -  if  need  be  -  can  take  the  requisite
decisions swiftly. More cannot be said and more should not be said. The moral hazard risk forbids
that.
V
Viewed as a whole, the approach of the Eurosystem appears to me to be well suited to coping with the
manifold  challenges  faced  by  a  common  monetary  policy.  But  the  real  challenges  lie  outside  the
monetary policy sphere and they have to be addressed convincingly by other policy areas. We all hope
that the euro will be a success story and that the so-called pre-in countries will join the euro as early
as possible. In the light of the desirable early enlargement of the number of participants, at the points
where  there  are  still  differences  between  the  Eurosystem  and  the  “pre-ins”  in  the  monetary  policy
field,  a  further  “convergence  process”  would  undoubtedly  facilitate  the  entry  into  monetary  union.
Furthermore,  given  the  exchange-rate  criterion  set  by  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  the  question  likewise
arises for Sweden and the UK as to accession to the EMS II system. But I am deliberately refraining
from going into that tonight.
At  any  rate,  I  should  welcome  it  if  the  EU  country  Sweden  were  soon  to  take  the  final  step  into
European monetary union. Without a country of such rich tradition and strong economic performance
as Sweden undoubtedly is, European monetary union remains incomplete. That is why  we  were  all
delighted that Sweden ratified the Maastricht Treaty. Myself, I am quite convinced that one day it will
take advantage of the options the Treaty envisages, meet all the convergence requirements and join
the monetary union. But the decision rests, of course, with the Swedes themselves. All I can say is:
you are warmly welcome.
7
BIS Review  40/1999
