Mr Grenville discusses financial crises and globalisation from an Australian perspective
A paper presented by Mr Stephen Grenville, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to
the  Reinventing  Bretton  Woods  Committee  Conference  on  “International  Capital  Mobility  and
Domestic Economic Stability” in Canberra on 15 July 1999.
As part of the debate on the Asian crisis, two separate views emerged to explain the crisis – those who
blamed deficiencies in the crisis countries themselves (cronyism, corruption, misguided policies and
so on), and those who found intrinsic flaws in the international capital markets.
Time  has  brought  some  perspective  to  these  issues,  and  a  consensus  is  emerging  that  a  variety  of
problems contributed. Not surprisingly, with complex and multiple causation, there are lots of things
to be fixed. The domestic/international dichotomy is still a useful one, here, because it allows us to
focus  exclusively  on  the  international  issues,  without  implying  that  the  domestic  deficiencies  were
unimportant.  A  conference  on  “Reinventing  Bretton  Woods”  lends  itself  to  exclusive  focus  on  the
international aspects, and, if “reinventing” is needed, something must have gone wrong with the old
structure of discussion, rule - making and crisis response.
The focus, in this paper, is on Australia, but we need to put this in a wider context to draw out the
lessons for ourselves, and for others:
Why were we in Australia not subject to the same degree of contagion as our near neighbours?
As participants in the debate on reforming the international economic architecture, what elements of
reform should Australia be promoting?
Why Australia escaped
There  were  certainly  serious  concerns,  18 months  ago,  that  the  Asian  crisis  would  do  significant
damage to Australia. But it was not a concern about contagion and a repeat of the Asian problems – in
the form of a major reversal of capital flows. Rather, the issue was that our international environment
would be unfavourable, with stunted growth in our export markets, particularly in the region which
had provided us with such a useful stimulus over recent decades. As things have turned out, domestic
demand has  remained  strong  (with  very  little  adverse  confidence  effects  from  Asia),  and  the  lower
exchange rate effectively buffered us from the worst aspects that had been expected. But it is worth
emphasising that no one, as far as I know, ever expected Australia to be sucked down into the same
financial maelstrom – our adverse impacts were expected to be from secondary effects. It was always
clear that we would avoid the direct contagion, because we were not subject to the fatal combination
that  had  infected  Asia –  the  interaction  of  large  and  volatile  capital  flows,  with  a  fragile  domestic
financial sector. The capital flows to Australia are nothing like as volatile (and are not even as large):
but, more importantly, we did not have a fragile domestic financial sector.
It  is  true  that  Australia  is  very  dependent  on  international  capital  inflows,  with  an  average  current
account deficit of around 4½ per cent of GDP for the last couple of decades. These flows are large,
but nothing like the flows experienced in Asia: in 1996, for example, Thailand received capital flows
equal  to  13  per  cent  of  its  GDP.  Just  as  important,  the  capital  inflows  that  funded  the  Australian
deficit were, by - and - large, quite stable. Even in the mid - 1980s “Banana Republic crisis”, which
saw a large change in the value of the Australian dollar, the most that the current account adjusted in
any one year was a little under 2 per cent of GDP (in 1986/87). Compared with changes in current
account balances in some countries in East Asia in 1998 of up to 15 per cent of GDP in a single year,
our fluctuations were manageable. One - third or more of Australia’s capital inflow is in the form of
foreign direct investment, which, even in the crisis countries, tended to be quite stable. A quite minor
part  was  in  the  form  of  the  elements  which  turned  out  to  be  extraordinarily  volatile  and  flighty  in
1
BIS Review   83/1999
Asia – bank - to - bank flows. The three crisis countries had been receiving bank - to - bank flows at
an  annual  rate  of  around  US$50 billion  in  the  years  leading  up  to  the  crisis,  and  were  subject  to
outflows –  total  reversal –  of  nearly  US$75 billion  in  the  first  nine  months  of  the  crisis.  Nor,
incidentally, were we vulnerable as a creditor: Australian banks had not lent much to Asia.
Australia has had plenty of experience of changing sentiment – “flavour of the month” at one moment
and poor cousin the next – but has not had the kind of total volte face experienced in Asia (“euphoria
turned  to  panic  without  missing  a  beat”  (Sachs  1997)).  One  reason  why  Australia  is  not  subject  to
these sorts of dramatic reversals is the depth and maturity of our financial markets. The institutions
and  instruments  that  foreigners  invested  in  tended  to  be  longstanding  and  stable,  with  quite
well-defined  prices  and  behaviour,  so  there  was  no  basis  for  the  kind  of  blind-panic  flight  that
occurred in Asia. Surprises occur in Australian financial markets, but not to the extent that occurred
in Asia.
More importantly, Australia’s financial sector (centred on the banks) was particularly strong. It might
be worth pausing a moment, simply to record that the strength of the Australian financial sector was
in  large  part  because  it  had  already  had  its  “learning-by-doing”  crisis  nearly  a  decade  earlier.  Just
about every episode of financial deregulation has been accompanied by a period of crisis and turmoil.
In Latin America, in the 1980s, the nub of the issue is captured in the title of the definitive analysis of
the period: “Goodbye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash” (Diaz - Alejandro 1985). Even the
United  States,  less  than  a  decade  ago,  experienced  the  Saving-and-Loans  crisis,  the  direct  result  of
lop-sided deregulation and market-distorting official guarantees. The United Kingdom and Japan had
credit-induced  asset  booms  and  busts  only  a  decade  ago.  Sweden  experienced  a  meltdown  of  its
financial sector in the early 1990s. Australia was not an exception to this generalisation, but had its
crisis in the 1980s. It is hardly surprising that a cosy, protected financial sector, when newly exposed
to the chill winds of international competition and much more hard-edged, sharp-pencil tactics, is at
its most vulnerable. Perhaps the most dangerous aspect is that the additional competition lowers credit
standards – the new competitors look for customers to lend to, and the old institutions preserve their
markets  by  being  readier  to  lend  to  customers  who  previously  would  not  have  been  regarded  as
creditworthy. Deregulation gave borrowers a new-found freedom, and for some of them it was a case
of giving them more rope with which to hang themselves.
“Failure builds character”, they say: so, too, does failure give rise to a corrective process that makes a
repeat less likely. We certainly had this experience in Australia during the 1980s, which was the main
reason why our financial sector was in such good shape when the Asian crisis hit in the 1990s. The
corporate sector also learned the dangers of currency speculation and  became  much  more  cautious.
While  recording  the  immunising  effect  of  “been  there,  done  that”,  it  might  be  worth  remembering
some aspects of this common experience. We had our own foreign-currency-denominated borrowing
experiences  (remember  the  Swiss  franc  loans?),  but  fortunately  they  were,  at  least  in  macro  terms,
insignificant. While we are remembering our luck, we might remind ourselves that Australia’s foreign
exchange  crisis  (which  occurred  in  the  mid  1980s,  associated  with  the  “Banana  Republic”  debate)
occurred separately from the prudential problems in the banking system, which are associated with
the boom and bust of the asset price bubble of the late 1980s. Asia had  its  foreign  exchange  crisis
superimposed on its prudential crisis.
Most of the players in the Australian market have a good understanding of how the foreign exchange
rate  would  normally  behave –  i.e. the  exchange  rate  is  reasonably  well  anchored  in  “the
fundamentals”.  But  even  in  this  world,  some  puzzling  things  still  happen.  One  such  puzzle  is  the
Australian dollar’s tendency to move more than might be expected over the course of the commodity
cycle.  Even  when  terms-of-trade  changes  are  temporary,  we  might  expect  some  change  in  the
exchange rate. But what we have seen, quite persistently since the float, is movement in the exchange
rate  by  around  25  or  30 per  cent  between  peak  and  trough,  and  this  is  much  more  than  can  be
explained  simply  in  terms  of  the  proper  textbook  reaction  to  cyclical  terms-of-trade  changes  (see
Gruen and Kortian (1996)).
BIS Review   83/1999
2
We have, over time, learnt to adapt to this world. With low inflation well established now, there is
less  danger  that  these  cyclical  fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rate  will  damage  inflationary
expectations – they seem to be absorbed, to a large degree, in margins. The Reserve Bank’s response
is to be ready to intervene in the more extreme swings of the exchange rate. We do this principally
because there is always some danger, at the extremes, that these swings may damage confidence in the
domestic economy (particularly in the downward swings). Incidentally, in the process, we make a tidy
profit  through  the  rather  old-fashioned  form  of  trading,  under  which  we  buy  cheap  and  sell  dear
(Andrew  and  Broadbent  (1994)).  This  experience,  over  more  than  a  decade,  has  made  us  sceptical
about the Friedmanite idea that speculators always buy cheap and sell dear, and if they do not, they
quickly  go  out  of  business.  Why  have  the  processes  of  natural  selection  not  weeded  out  our
counterparties from this zero-sum game?1
With  this  experience  in  mind,  we  were  less  surprised  than  some  when  the  Asian  currencies,  once
unhooked from their semi-fixed pegs, moved excessively – each of them over-shooting dramatically,
by  far  more  than  any  conceivable  initial  over-valuation.  For  all  the  virtues  and  advantages  of
exchange rate flexibility, it is dangerously naïve to “sell” the idea that floating the exchange rate will
be a painless solution to international financial integration.
Having made the case that Australia was never vulnerable to the sort of catastrophic capital reversal
that was experienced by some Asian countries, the question is: “why are we so interested in the issues
of new financial architecture?”.The short answer is that we believe that international capital markets
are  not  working  as  well  as  they  should.  Even  if  Australia  can  survive  in  the  current  world,  we  all
(developed  and  emerging  markets  alike)  would  benefit  from  some  changes  in  the  international
architecture.
A reform agenda
Since the crisis broke, there have been five issues on which Australia has spoken out in international
forums:
•  Representational issues;
•  Hedge funds;
 “Bailing-in” the private sector;
•  Capital controls;
•  Transparency.
International representation
                                                     
1
At a recent conference on exchange rates run by one of the big players, they predicted dramatic further
strengthening  from  the  then-prevailing  level  of  US66 cents.    This  was  on  the  basis  that  the  55-day  moving
average  had  moved  above  the  200-day  moving  average,  and  that  they  were  experiencing  strong  customer
demand.    I  asked  them  why  they  had  not  recommended  buying  the  Australian  dollar  six  months  earlier  at
US55 cents.    If  moving-average  and  market-momentum  rules  are  the  guide,  then  it  is  hardly  surprising  that
over-shooting occurs - there simply are not enough market players looking at the “fundamentals”, and prepared to
back their assessment.
3
BIS Review   83/1999
Well  before  the  Asian  crisis,  it  had  been  obvious  that  the  international  institutions  formed  shortly
after World War II no longer represented the current world economy. As a small country, Australia
accepts  that  many  important  international  decisions  will  be  made  in  a  small  sub-set  of  the  largest
countries, such as the G3. It is harder to accept that important decisions (such as the development of
global prudential rules) should be made in a group as unrepresentative as the G10 – which contains
four smallish European countries, of which only one is as large as Australia. If these institutions are
Eurocentric (only one Asian: no Latin American representation), the exclusion of emerging markets is
just  as  obvious.  The  IMF  tackles  these  problems  differently,  with  formal  representation  of  all
members – but few would doubt who is calling the shots, with America alone having enough votes to
veto  issues.  Constituencies  represent  hugely  different  population  sizes  and  degree  of  interest  in
international  issues.  This  is  why  we  were  so  attracted  to  the  idea  of  G22,  when  it  formed  in  the
aftermath of the Asian crisis. In this form, it has been vetoed by the European countries not yet ready
to give up their over-representation on international economic issues. These issues are on-going and
unresolved, but one beneficial result of the Asian crisis is to bring this issue to the fore, and while
G22 no longer exists, a wider representation on the working groups discussing some of the important
issues (such as highly-leveraged institutions, offshore markets and short-term capital flows) has been
achieved.2
Hedge funds
As noted above, Australia had its searing experiences with volatile exchange rates in the mid 1980s,
but has now come to terms – and is comfortable – with its floating exchange rate. We think that, in
general, it works well, and that the float has been enormously beneficial for Australia. We have come
to accept some over-shooting as a puzzling but tolerable quirk of the market.
In  the  most  recent  episode  (coinciding  with  the  Asian  crisis),  however,  we  saw  a  variant  on  this
theme – speculators who believe that they can make money by attacking an exchange rate which has
already over-shot, so that it over-shoots even further. The tactic is straight-forward enough – quietly
take a short position in the currency which is already a bit under-valued, and then, by a mixture of
highly-public additional short selling and vigorous orchestration of market and press opinion, get the
exchange rate to move down quite a bit further. As it does, a bandwagon forms, with market players
anxious to sell the currency as it becomes cheaper, in the belief that it will become cheaper still. As
the herd moves in, the original speculators can square-up their position, at a profit.
This is the world that we saw in operation in the middle of last year. As a matter of shorthand, we
have referred to these attacks as being driven by hedge funds, but this terminology is probably more
specific  than  we  need  to  be  to  make  the  point.  It  is  worth  emphasising,  here,  that  we  think  it  was
useful  that  the  Australian  dollar  moved  down  somewhat  in  1998,  reflecting  the  fundamentals  of  a
much less benign external environment. This softening of the exchange rate was an important factor
in  buffering  Australia  from  the  external  crisis.  But  too  much  of  a  good  thing  is  a  bad  thing.  The
gathering  downward  momentum,  one-sided  sentiment  and  thin  market  were  certainly  matters  of
considerable concern to us, in the middle of last year, and this was reflected in our actions to support
the exchange rate.
The most disturbing element of this is that it was part of a concerted effort at market destabilisation.
Some of the players themselves told us, at the time, that their objective was to push down the yen to
the stage where the renminbi was under irresistible pressure to devalue, which would have broken the
Hong Kong dollar peg. The Australian dollar was a minor secondary target – collateral damage – for
these Masters of the Universe. As things turned out, we came through this episode quite well. But it is
a matter of historical record that this episode came to an end because of the combined effects of the
LTCM  near-meltdown  and  the  financial  crisis  in  Russia –  we  were  saved  by  crises  elsewhere.  So
                                                     
2
We note with some satisfaction that the Financial Stability Forum has recently been enlarged to include
some non-G7 economies, including Australia.
BIS Review   83/1999
4
while we came through that episode quite well, and we are confident that we have the resilience to
weather  similar  episodes,  we  carry  from  this  experience  a  strong  viewpoint  into  the  debate  on
international financial architecture concerning the hedge funds (or, as they are known in that context,
the “highly-leveraged institutions”). There are those who deny, even now, that the hedge funds played
any  significant  role.  For  these  pundits,  it  may  be  enough  to  simply  observe  that  the  hedge  funds
themselves  do  not  deny  their  actions  (George Soros  has  written  a  best-selling  book  about  it!) –  it
walks like a duck, quacks like a duck and says it is a duck – what more evidence do you want? But the
movement of exchange rates over the period – even large currencies such as the yen – provides more
evidence. As the hedge funds cut their short positions in yen to cover their disasters in the rouble, the
yen rose 15 per cent in a little over a day, driven by events unrelated to any Japanese “fundamentals”.
Is this a well-functioning market?
When we first talked about our experience with hedge funds in mid 1998, this was derided as “the
Australian  anecdote”.  But  you  may  recall  the  old  quip  about  the  plural  of  “anecdote”  being
“data”.Hong Kong, South Africa, Malaysia and Thailand all pointed to their “anecdotes”. Then came
the  near-collapse  of  LTCM:  the  tenor  of  the  debate  changed.  But  as  the  LTCM  crisis  recedes,
international  concerns  have  become  more  muted,  even  stifled.  The  G7  authorities  are  prepared  to
concede that there were prudential issues involved in the high leverage of these funds – it threatened
those  who  had  lent  to  them.  But  there  is  less  recognition  of  the  market  integrity  issues  involved –
i.e. the general damage they do by inducing more volatility (and otherwise-unnecessary interest rate
increases) into exchange markets (see two papers by the RBA (1999)).
Bailing-in the private sector
We have argued that there should be a greater readiness, in the event of crisis, to “bail-in” private-
sector  creditors –  i.e. to  require  a  stand-fast  on  repayments  and  the  working  out  of  orderly
arrangements  for  repayment,  which  may  well  involve  delay  in  repayment  and,  possibly,  creditors
taking a “hair-cut” on their repayment.
Some private-sector participants in this debate have articulated a sort of bewildered resentment at the
idea  of  compulsory  bailing-in  in  the  course  of  an  orderly  debt  arrangement:  they  talk  in  terms  of
“consenting adults”, who have freely made a contract which no-one else should rend asunder. It does,
however, seem a bit more complicated than this. First, private creditors accept,  within  all  domestic
jurisdictions, the possibility of bankruptcy procedures in extremis, which involve two elements – the
declaration of inability to pay in full; and some kind of stand-fast in which the available assets are
assembled and decisions  made  on  an  equitable  distribution.  This  procedure,  everywhere,  over-rides
individual  deals  done  either  before  or  after  the  event.  The  justification  for  this  is  that  an  orderly
arrangement is better for just about everyone than an unseemly rush to seize any available assets. This
rationale  carries  over  into  the  international  forum  in  principle,  although  of  course  finding  legal
jurisdiction  is  another  matter  altogether.  This  was  well  illustrated  in  late  1997,  when  Korea  was
within  a  couple  of  days  of  defaulting  on  government-guaranteed  bank  debt  owed  to  foreign  banks.
Under  the  detailed  orchestration  of  the  US  and  IMF  authorities,  a  deal  was  struck  whereby
US$24 billion of bank-to-bank debt was rolled over, at an attractive interest rate for creditors. This
deal changed sentiment towards Korea dramatically, and it would be hard for any creditor to claim
that the outcome was anything except greatly beneficial to them.
But  the  case  for  bailing-in  the  private  sector  goes  beyond  this,  at  least  in  cases  where  the  official
sector (often through the IMF) has taken part in something analogous to a “lender-of-last-resort”, in
which additional funds are made available to shore-up creditor confidence. The rationale for such a
facility  goes  beyond  the  normal  bankruptcy  arrangements,  to  the  further  argument  that  where  the
problem is one of liquidity rather than insolvency, a lender-of-last-resort will avoid “runs” on debtors.
Given that it is taxpayers’ money (usually via the IMF) which is being put at risk to bail-out private-
sector creditors, taxpayers are entitled to expect some contribution from the creditors. The relevant
lessons come from Mexico in 1994/95. Prior to the crisis, investors had received higher returns for the
5
BIS Review   83/1999
risk they were running. When confidence evaporated and creditors refused to roll-over their loans at
the  end  of  1994,  default  loomed.  The  IMF  and  the  US  Government  acted  as  lender-of-last-resort,
repaying all creditors in full and without delay. This was, in almost all aspects, extremely successful.
The  “run”  was  contained,  and  Mexico  experienced  a  “V-shaped”  recovery.  But  it  did  highlight  the
moral hazard that goes with bail-outs – it left the impression that lenders would  be  protected  when
things went wrong (see Dooley (1997)).
The contrast to this is bailing-in the private sector – enforcing a stand-fast and  “hair-cut”.  This  not
only addresses the source of the immediate problem, but it is also equitable, and directly addresses the
moral hazard problem.
In  making  this  case,  Australia  has  argued  that  such  arrangements  should  focus  exclusively  on
sovereign  or  quasi-sovereign  debt,  in  particular  the  bank-to-bank  flows:  the  bulk  of  the  capital
reversal  in  Asia  was  taking  place  between  banks,  who  were  using  their  access  to  government
guarantees in order to finance the capital outflow. This makes an important distinction between those
who can easily “take the money and run” (on the basis of government guarantee) and those who lent
to non-banks, who will have to work through the domestic bankruptcy system to gain repayment.
Much self-righteous indignation has been expressed by private-sector creditors at the very idea that
the authorities might impose stand-fasts and hair-cuts on them. This would sound less disingenuous if
it  was  not  coming  from  the  same  voices  who  were  so  astounded  by  the  Russian  default  of
August 1998 – astounded not by the patently parlous creditworthiness of the country they had lent to,
but by the absence of any official rescue package to save them from default.
Controls on capital flows
Two important lessons from the crisis are:
•  That short-term flows were particularly vulnerable to reversals;
•  That the transition from financial regulation to deregulation is a particularly vulnerable time.
There  is  now  a  wide  acceptance  that,  instead  of  a  blanket  presumption  in  favour  of  quick  and
complete financial deregulation, deregulation should be “orderly”, keeping pace with the build-up of
the necessary institutional infrastructure – particularly capacity for prudential supervision. While this
is now generally accepted, the operational corollary of this is not. If the problem was the huge capital
inflow, what will prevent a recurrence when the next wave of euphoria arrives, and later evaporates?
One aspect is clear enough – far-reaching prudential rules should be put in place – e.g. restrictions on
banks’  short-term  borrowing  and  on  foreign-currency-denominated  borrowing.  In  putting  these
prudential rules in place, it is important not to simply shift the risks out of the formal financial sector
but leave the risk with those who are even more vulnerable – this just makes room for more problems
later.
The  other  issue  is  whether  Chilean-style  controls  on  short-term  capital  inflow  may  also  be  useful.
Such restrictions on short-term borrowers may not be perfect, but they make more sense than some of
the  alternative  “solutions”  which  have  been  put  forward.  One  suggestion  (quoted  by  Greenspan
(1999)) is that countries should hold foreign exchange reserves equal to all the short-term debt which
is going to fall due over the next year. If this is a serious suggestion, then it raises the issue of why
this short-term debt was useful in the first place, if the proceeds of the short-term borrowing have to
be stacked away in reserves (at a lower rate of return than the cost of borrowing).
BIS Review   83/1999
6
One lesson is that countries should resist the blandishments to set up arrangements like the Bangkok
International Banking Facility, and should keep a very wary eye out for the operations of fly-by-night,
foot-in-the-door  financial  entrepreneurs  whose  aim  is  to  sell  sophisticated  (i.e. hard  to  understand)
financial products to unsophisticated (i.e. gullible) customers, under the guise of “market broadening”
Transparency
Great emphasis has been placed on transparency – and it is as hard to disagree with this as it would be
to disagree with the notions of peace, freedom and motherhood. But the transparency which is being
advocated in the debate is a very partial concept. Whereas a case could be made that markets work
better if all participants have full information, the emphasis so far has been confined to getting the
official sector to give detailed and frequent information on foreign exchange reserves, for example.
Meanwhile, the hedge funds and other major players can hold their cards close to their chest (even the
investors in LTCM were not given details of the portfolio). If markets truly work better when better
informed, this principle should apply to all players who are big enough to move markets. This view is
gradually being accepted in some of the work taking place currently in the international arena, so I am
hopeful we will see increased disclosure by all market participants over the coming couple of years.
The context of the debate: Globalisation
Given the complexity of the issues, it has been disappointing that much of the debate has been driven
by ideology. Specifically, ideology seems to add a special piquancy  to  the  debate  on  capital  flows.
The argument here is reminiscent of similar debates on “free floating” for the exchange rate: “free”, in
this context, has the same connotation as “the free world” or “free speech”, i.e. indisputably a Good
Thing. Absence of any rules seems to be a particular virtue. A theologian picked up the flavour of the
debate,  likening  the  arguments  in  The  Wall  Street  Journal  to  his  own  specialisation:  “Behind
descriptions of market reforms, monetary policy and the convolutions of the Dow, I gradually made
out the pieces of a grand narrative about the inner meaning of human history, why things had gone
wrong,  and  how  to  put  them  right.  Theologians  call  these  myths  of  origin,  legends  of  the  fall,  and
doctrines of sin and redemption.” (Cox 1999).3
Some commentators took this vantage-point because they wanted to view the issues as part of a wider
debate  on  the  inevitable  global  triumph  of  the  free-market  paradigm  (see,  for  example,  Zuckerman
(1998)). It was, in many ways, a curious prism through which to view the issues, because it was pretty
clear  that –  whatever  the  deficiencies  of  alternative  systems –  this  was  hardly  a  triumph  of  market
forces.  Whatever  the  advantages  of  more  open  capital  markets,  the  collateral  damage  from  the
excessive inflows and the subsequent massive capital reversals has been great, and could hardly be
justified in terms of some market-clearing or “tâtonnement” process. Whereas it seems hard to deny
that for every foolish borrower there had been a foolish lender, the response was to argue that there
had been a “shortage of liquidity” (i.e. people could not get out of their positions quickly enough!) or
deficient  transparency  (investors,  by  some  extraordinary  oversight,  were  unaware  of  cronyism,
corruption or lack of effective bankruptcy procedures).
For  some,  this  response  was  part  of  the  commercial  imperative  for  maximising  the  return  on
investments – if investors were seen to have been foolish, then this would reduce the chance of them
getting  official  assistance  in  repayment.  At  a  risk  of  sounding  cynical,  it  could  be  argued  that  the
loudest  voices  came  from  the  representatives  of  financial  markets,  who  not  only  saw  commercial
advantage in continuing to open-up new markets, but for whom the experience of Mexico in 1994/95
was  quite  satisfactory,  and  required  no  modification –  they  achieved  good  returns  (including  a  risk
premium) in good times, and they were bailed out – to a greater or lesser degree – in the bad times.
                                                     
3
The same tone had been picked up much earlier:  “Economic liberalism was the organizing principle of
a society engaged in creating a market system.  Born as a mere penchant for non-bureaucratic methods, it evolved
into a veritable faith in man’s secular salvation through a self-regulating market.” (Polanyi 1944, p. 135).
7
BIS Review   83/1999
The  free-market  triumphalists  found  allies  elsewhere.  In  academic  circles,  over  the  years,
considerable intellectual endeavour had gone into showing that markets are efficient – whatever the
convoluted and volatile path of financial prices over time, this is not only rational but indeed optimal
(see, for example, Garber (1990)). The rationale for any one participant in pushing the price further
away from its fundamental equilibrium was often along the lines of the “greater fool” presumption –
however artificially high the price, someone would pay more for it later.
So the first stage of the debate, following the crisis, had an almost surrealistic air about it, with the
IMF  pressing  at  its  Annual  Meeting  in  Hong  Kong  at  the  end  of  1997  to  add  capital  account
deregulation to its mandate, at the very moment when the excessive inflows and reversals had been
shown to be so damaging.
The  wider  debate  on  globalisation  is,  of  course,  very  relevant.  One  recent  contribution  (Friedman
1999)  provides  useful  terminology.  He  talks  of  the  “Electronic  Herd”   –  the  anonymous  fund
managers behind their screens – and sees the proper response for emerging markets being to don the
“Golden Straitjacket”  – whose specifications are a predominantly private-sector economy, balanced
budgets, low tariffs, and open capital markets, including unrestricted foreign investment. This sounds
very much like the “Washington Consensus”, and as a framework of reference it makes good sense,
particularly if it accepts the feasibility (and indeed the desirability) of some adaptation  to  the  local
environment,  and  acknowledges  that  there  is  more  to  a  successful  society  than  an  identikit  market
economy. Friedman acknowledges complexities and subtleties – indeed, his title (The Lexus and the
Olive  Tree)  emphasises  the  need  to  balance  technology  with  tradition.  And  he  does  not  confuse
inevitability with desirability, as the triumphalists do.
But two aspects – the inevitability of the process and whether the end-point is the pure free-market
model –  require  further  comment.  Some  powerful  forces  clearly  do  encompass  the  globe  in  an
irresistible  way –  some  reflecting  superior  technology;  some  reflecting  the  need  for  a  common
standard; and some, the greater world integration through the communications revolution. There are
plenty  of  examples  of  “winner  takes  all”   –  a  dominant  player  or  technology.  But  there  are  just  as
many examples of persistent national characteristics and behaviours. To imply that the whole package
of  essentially-US  systems  and  values  has  to  be  accepted  holus-bolus  over-simplifies  the  forces  at
work.
Perhaps  just  as  important,  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  see  these  forces  of  globalisation  attaching
themselves uniquely to a textbook competitive free-market model.4 Many aspects of globalisation are,
in fact, the opposite: a dominant technology, a winner-takes-all player or a set of market behaviour
rules such as the Basel Capital Adequacy Rules are hardly the world of atomistic competition of the
textbooks. Far from demonstrating Adam Smith’s invisible hand, globalisation is occurring within a
complex set of rules, technical standards and regulations – some imposed by governments, but others
by technological imperatives or by the private players in markets.
This is not to suggest that the end-point should be the 19th century brand of capitalism foreseen by
some  of  the  global  triumphalists.  “On  the  brink  of  the  21st century,  the  United  States  is  at  a  point
reminiscent  of  its  entry  into  the  twentieth. …  Today,  of  course,  the  new  frontier  is  the  global
economy.”  (Zuckerman  1998,  p. 20).  Not  everyone  feels  so  warmly  sentimental  towards  the  age  of
Robber Baron capitalism, and some may feel uncomfortable with the idea that “unimpeded access to
                                                     
4
Friedman (1999, p. 85-86) comes close to putting this pure free-market view:   “those people who are
unhappy with the Darwinian brutality of free-market capitalism don’t have any ready ideological alternative now.
When  it  comes  to  the  question  of  which  system  today  is  the  most  effective  at  generating  rising  standards  of
living, the historical debate is over.   The  answer  is  free-market  capitalism …  Today  there  is  only  free-market
vanilla and North Korea.”.
BIS Review   83/1999
8
that  burgeoning  marketplace  was  the  one  indispensable  condition  for  the  flowering  of  American
enterprise” (ibid, p. 20).5
We need to ask, at the same time, whether the allocation decisions of the Electronic Herd make sense
from an economic viewpoint – are they shifting the capital (and the real resources it represents) to the
highest global usage? On recent performance, the answer would have to be “no”. Leaving aside the
extraordinary volte face from optimism to pessimism in Asia (and the mis-allocated investment that
preceded the crisis), does the reassessment of US equity prices in 1987 (in the deepest market with the
fullest information) make sense? Or the gyration of the yen/US dollar rate, from 80 in April 1995 to
147  a  couple  of  years  later?  Are  markets,  with  their  constant  quest  to  respond  to  the  latest  data,
factoid, or rumour, the best allocators of capital and reliable guardians on the gateway to investment?
Have  the  umpires –  the  credit-rating  agencies –  been  forward-looking  and  insightful  in  their
judgments? What should economies which did wear the Golden Straitjacket but were still subject to
speculative  attack  (e.g. Hong  Kong)  do?  In  short,  should  we  be  spending  more  analytical  time
examining the behaviour of the herd, rather than simply noting its inevitability?
If  we  accept  that  the  outcomes  of  globalisation  are  not,  in  all  their  manifestations,  good,  and  that
countries  are  not  simply  pawns  on  the  global  chessboard,  then  what  needs  to  be  worked  out,  on  a
case-by-case  basis,  is  what  modifications  to  the  cut  of  the  Golden  Straitjacket  can  feasibly  be
achieved.  Is  it  feasible  to  discourage  the  more  volatile  elements  of  the  herd?6    Some  have  resisted
extra rules (collective action clauses and explicit efforts to limit moral hazard), on the grounds that
these will reduce the flow of capital to emerging countries. If absence of moral hazard and full pricing
of risk meant that capital flows would be smaller, then this has to be a plus rather than a minus. If this
meant that very little short-term capital flowed to emerging markets, then it would be hard to argue
that there would be any great loss.7 The harder question is how to achieve effective restraint. But this
should  be  possible.  Just  as  anomalies  in  the  Basel  Capital  Adequacy  Requirements  artificially
encouraged  bank-to-bank  short-term  inflows,  feasible  rules  can  influence  outcomes  in  the  opposite
direction.  Countries  can,  at  least,  avoid  the  frictionless  conduit  represented,  for  example,  by  the
Bangkok International Banking Facility.
Markets can and do accept differences between regulatory regimes, and the view that all capital will
flow  to  the  country  which  prostrates  itself  lowest  before  the  demands  of  the  market  seems
nonsensical.  After  all,  each  of  the  crisis  countries  attracted  excessive  inflows  into  regimes  which
departed  substantially  from  the  Golden  Straitjacket.  More  recently,  Malaysia  tapped  international
capital markets at a time when its anti-market rhetoric was still fresh in the minds of investors.
The starting point should accept the benefits of capital flows and the power of markets in allocating
resources,  but  should  also  recognise  that  in  just  about  every  domestic  market  there  are  (often
extensive) “rules of the game” and market infrastructure: what is needed now is a similar set of rules
of  the  game  for  international  flows.  And  there  should  be  no  presumption  that  the  Electronic  Herd
should,  alone,  set  the  specifications  of  the  Golden  Straitjacket.  There  are  tricky  issues  here –  for
example,  the  handling  of  intellectual  property  rights  will  determine  how  the  benefits  are  shared
between  creator  and  user.  These  are  not  issues  which  the  free  market  determines  well,  and  a
framework of rules is needed to get efficiency and equity.8,9
                                                     
5
“The markets” were seen, even in the age of unbridled capitalism, as being especially volatile:  “While
the productive labors of a society, the functioning of its ships and railroads, its mills and factories, give the effect
of a beautiful order and discipline, of the rhythmic regularity of the days and seasons, its markets, by a strange
contrast, seem to be in a continual state of anarchy.” (Josephson 1934, p. 192).
6
In Friedman’s terminology, the short-horn cattle.
This argument has particular force in relation to Asia, where national saving rates have been so high.
8
Similar variation may be possible in other rules.  Bankruptcy rules, for example, have to fit societies’
views on balancing creditor and debtor rights.  Competition rules, patent rules, legal decisions, all find their basis
in individual societies, with views on property rights and equity which are not ruled solely by the market.
7
9
BIS Review   83/1999
Capital  will  follow  risk-adjusted  profit  opportunities,  and  within  this  constraint,  countries  have
opportunities  to  protect  their  societal  interests.  It  would  be  nonsensical  for  a  country  to  insist  on
reinventing,  ab initio,  technology  or  rules  (e.g. Basel  Capital  rules  for  prudential  supervision  or
accounting rules), but it seems entirely feasible for countries to put their own supplements on rules,
without  becoming  pariahs  in  the  eyes  of  international  financial  markets.  Globalisation  is  an
opportunity for countries to improve their living standards. It is up to individual countries to decide
how deeply they will avail themselves of this opportunity.  It is not an all-or-nothing choice.10 They
may well pay a price for this, in terms of GDP, but this is a choice countries can (and will) make.
Total failure does not await those who modify the rules, sensibly, to fit their views of society and who
recognise that you cannot neatly split production and distribution issues.11 Sovereignty may have been
modified by the Internet, but it has not been abolished.
The early analogy put forward (by Larry Summers (1998)) was with airline travel – bigger planes had
brought great benefits of cheap travel to a wider group, and if this involved the occasional dramatic
large accident, this should not be seen as a reason for banning international plane travel. But where
does  this  analogy  lead?  Surely  to  the  dual  acceptance  of  the  benefits  to  be  derived  from  the  new
technology, with the need – at the same time – to do whatever can be done to make travel safer – even
if this involves some rules and regulations.
Seen in this light, we are back where we should always have been in this debate – contemplating the
transition from regulation to liberalisation, acknowledging the desirability of moving along this path
as quickly as possible, but also acknowledging that it is a bumpy path. There has been, since 1997,
some  progress.  The  core  rhetoric  no  longer  simply  extols  the  importance  of  immediate  and  total
deregulation, but now puts in words like “orderly” to describe the process. To acknowledge this is one
thing: to put it in place is another. In trying to put some practical content into the idea of “orderly”
deregulation,  there  may  be  reminders  of  the  old  Irish  joke  about  asking  the  way  to  Limerick:  “I
wouldn’t go there from here”. There is fairly unanimous agreement that we do want to go there from
here.  But  deregulation  has  some  of  the  characteristics  of  a  rolling  snowball,  whose  momentum  is
self-generated  and  uncontrollable.  While  there  is  a  longstanding  and  extensive  literature  on
“sequencing”, it is rather unsatisfactory. Countries often take the reform/deregulation opportunities in
whatever order they come along. More seriously, the necessary infrastructure is not something which
can  be  created  instantly,12  or  even  in  advance  of  the  requirement.  Rather,  it  is  put  in  place  by
trial-and-error and learning-by-doing, and some old-fashioned good luck is required to get this safety
net firmly in place before it is needed.  What is pretty clear is that the process of “reform-through-
crisis” is a very painful one.
Conclusion
When the Asian crisis first broke, some of us thought of it as an opportunity for reform: there would
be some pain, but the forces of beneficial change would be given impetus. We had in mind, I suppose,
some  version  of  the  Golden  Straitjacket.  As  the  crisis  developed,  it  became  clear  that  for  some
                                                                                                                                                                     
9
As  more  international  trade  takes  place  in  “weightless”  technological  services  and  products  whose
marginal cost is small compared with the average cost, the copyright and patent rules become more important.
Countries which are  large  producers  of  high-technology  product  and  intellectual  property  will  be  interested  in
incorporating into the Golden Straitjacket rules which protect their citizens’ commercial position.
10
Singapore  and  Taiwan  provide  successful  examples -  they  restrict  their  banks  from  lending  domestic
currency offshore, making it difficult for foreign speculators to “short” the currency.
11
As implied by Friedman’s matrix (1999).
Dennis de Tray  (1999)  describes  it  this  way:    “globalization  operates  at  light  speed  along  fiber  optic
12
cables, while institutional development takes decades.”.
BIS Review   83/1999
10
countries (e.g. Indonesia) the downside of the crisis was far outweighing the opportunities for seizing
the moment to reform.
For  all  of  these  countries,  the  ideas  embodied  in  the  Golden  Straitjacket,  or  the  Washington
Consensus, have much to be said for them. Many of the elements were things which these countries
had  been  striving  (however  imperfectly)  to  put  in  place.  The  danger,  now,  is  that  the  idea  will  be
over-simplified and over-sold. I have argued, here, that the basic elements of the Golden Straitjacket
are desirable and, over time, feasible. But it should be possible to adapt it, to some extent, to the local
environment and – more importantly – modify it so that the Electronic Herd is not so damaging.
So this takes us back to the issues raised in Section II – the various proposals made within the context
of the New Architecture debate. Each of the elements Australia has advocated are aimed at building
on the Rules of the Game – bailing-in the private sector; restraining short-term capital; and increased
disclosure by major participants, including hedge funds. Greater transparency is something which all
market participants (not just the official sector) should observe. And, finally, wider representation in
the  economic  councils  of  the  world  would  give  more  legitimacy  to  the  Rules  of  the  Game.  If  the
Golden  Straitjacket  is  to  be  the  current  international  fashion,  then  its  design  should  be  a  more
democratic  process,  not  confined  to  groups  representing  the  (very  different)  international  world  of
half  a  century  ago,  egged  on  by  those  who  want  to  use  globalisation  as  a  battering-ram  for  their
narrow  commercial  advantage.  Some  of  the  discussion  of  globalisation  is  in  terms  of  a  kind  of
breathless  proselytising  for  a  meta-trend  whose  time  has  come –  “coming  ready-or-not”  globalism.
Rather,  it  should  be  an  opportunity  to  reap  the  rewards  which  come  from  sensible  international
integration.
References
Andrew,  R.  and  J.  Broadbent  (1994),  ‘Reserve  Bank  Operations  in  the  Foreign  Exchange  Market:
Effectiveness and Profitability’, Reserve Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper No. 9406.
Cox, H. (1999), ‘The Market as God’, The Atlantic Monthly, March, pp. 18-23.
de Tray, Dennis (1999), ‘World Bank’s Lessons from Indonesian Economic Crisis’, Jakarta Post, 14
April.
Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos F. (1985), ‘Goodbye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash’, Journal of
Development Economics, September/October, 19, pp. 1-24.
Dooley, M.P. (1997), ‘A Model of Crises in Emerging Markets’, NBER Working Paper No. 6300.
Eichengreen,  B.  (1999),  ‘One  Economy,  Ready  or  Not’,  Foreign  Affairs,  May/June,  78(3),
pp. 118-122.
Folkerts-Landau,  D.  and  P.M.  Garber  (1999),  ‘The  New  Architecture  in  Official  Doctrine’,  Global
Markets  Monthly,  Vol. 2,  No. 2,  April 1999,  a  publication  of  Global  Markets  Research,  Deutsche
Bank AG.
Friedman, Thomas L. (1999), The Lexus and the Olive Tree, Farrar, Straus & Giroux, New York.
arber,  Peter  M.  (1990),  ‘Famous  First  Bubbles’,  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives,  Vol. 4,  No. 2,
Spring, pp. 35-54.
Greenspan,  A.  (1999),  Remarks  by  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve
System before The World Bank Conference on Recent Trends in Reserves Management, Washington,
DC, 29 April.
11
BIS Review   83/1999
Gruen, D. and T. Kortian (1996), ‘Why Does the Australian Dollar Move so Closely with the Terms
of Trade?’, Reserve Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper No. 9601.
Josephson,  M.  (1934),  The  Robber  Barons:  The  Great  American  Capitalists  1861-1901,  Harcourt,
Brace and Company, New York.
Krugman, P. (1998), ‘America the Boastful’, Foreign Affairs, May/June, 77(3), pp. 32-45.
Polanyi, K. (1944), The Great Transformation, Octagon Books, New York.
Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  (1999),  ‘The  Impact  of  Hedge  Funds  on  Financial  Markets’,  paper
submitted  to  House  of  Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics,  Finance  and  Public
Administration’s  Inquiry  into  the  International  Financial  Markets  Effects  on  Government  Policy,
June. (This paper is available on the Bank’ s web site - http://www.rba.gov.au)
Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  (1999),  ‘Hedge  Funds,  Financial  Stability  and  Market  Integrity’,  paper
submitted  to  House  of  Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics,  Finance  and  Public
Administration’s  Inquiry  into  the  International  Financial  Markets  Effects  on  Government  Policy,
June. (This paper is available on the Bank’s web site - http://www.rba.gov.au)
Sachs, J.D. (1997), ‘The Wrong Medicine for Asia’, The New York Times, 3 November.
Soros, G. (1998), The Crisis of Global Capitalism, Little, Brown and Company (UK), London.
Summers, L. (1998), ‘Go with the flow’, Financial Times, 11 March.
Zuckerman,  M.B.  (1998),  ‘A  Second  American  Century’,  Foreign  Affairs,  May/June,  77(3),
pp. 18-31.
BIS Review   83/1999
12
