Mr Hayami outlines recent economic conditions in Japan and gives his thoughts on the role
of a central bank and its balance sheet
Speech by the Governor of the Bank of Japan, Mr Masaru Hayami, at the Kisaragi-kai meeting in
Tokyo on 22/12/98.
I. Introduction
I  am  truly  honored  to  have  this  opportunity  to  speak  to  you.  I  will  begin  with  a  brief
outline of recent economic and financial developments in Japan and then give my thoughts on
today’s topic, the role and balance sheet of a central bank.
II. Economic Conditions and Monetary Policy Management
A. Current Economic and Financial Conditions
Japan’s  economy  still  remains  in  a  severe  situation.  Recently,  however,  the  pace  of
economic  deterioration  has  moderated  somewhat,  thanks  to  increased  public  investment  and
exports.  The  decline  in  production  has  decelerated,  reflecting  some  progress  in  inventory
adjustment.  With  regard  to  financial  developments,  the  temporary  increase  in  concern  over
corporate fund-raising toward the year-end has eased gradually, on account of the government’s
expansion  of  credit  guarantee  system  and  the  Bank’s  introduction  of  new  market  operations
measures and lending facilities.
Thus, there have been some bright signs for Japan’s economy. However, it is still unclear
at  this  stage  whether  these  suggest  an  escape  from  the  current  vicious  circle,  or  just  a  pause
before further hardship. The results of the December Tankan——Short-Term Economic Survey
of Enterprises in Japan——published in mid-December showed that the majority of  firms  still
had a cautious view of the economic outlook.
The key to economic recovery lies in whether private demand can lead to a self-sustained
recovery  of  the  economy  while  the  public  sector  is  underpinning  it.  However,  given  the
continued  deterioration  in  corporate  profits  as  well  as  employment  and  income  conditions,
developments  in  business  fixed  investment  and  private  consumption  require  close  attention.
Prices continue to be weak, reflecting a widening output gap in the economy. Therefore, it needs
to be carefully watched whether or not the implementation of the emergency economic package
and  other  measures  will  have  the  intended  effect  of  improving  business  and  household
confidence.
In the financial markets, concern over credit and liquidity risks continues  to  exist.  One
manifestation of this is the market interest rates on instruments maturing after the fiscal year-end
in March 1999, which are likely to remain high.
Under  these  circumstances,  the  Bank  will  maintain  the  current  decisive  easy  stance  of
monetary policy, and continue to do its best to support economic activity and financial stability.
B. The Bank of Japan’s Balance Sheet
The  failure  of  some  financial  institutions  in  autumn  1997  was  followed  by  increased
anxiety  about  the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  which  has  had  a  dampening  influence  on
economic  activity.  The  Bank  has  responded  to  this  situation  by  implementing  a  variety  of
monetary policy measures, including an additional lowering of the target call rate on September
9, 1998 and continued provision of ample liquidity under the relaxed policy stance.
BIS Review   15/1999
– 2 –
The Bank has also taken the following measures in its money  market  operations.  First,
the Bank has injected large amounts of longer-term funds to ease the upward pressure on market
interest rates maturing beyond the end of the semiannual accounting term in September and the
end of the calendar year in 1998. This has caused the Bank’s balance sheet to expand by about 40
percent over the year. Second, the Bank has adopted some new measures to facilitate corporate
financing,  such  as  increasing  commercial  paper  (CP)  repo  operations  and  introducing  a
temporary lending facility in November 1998. As a result, there has been a continuing rise in the
proportion of private-sector debt to the asset account on the Bank’s balance sheet. Third, as part
of its efforts to maintain financial stability, the Bank has expanded special lending  since  1997
under  Article  38  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  Law  of  1997.  The  function  of  these  loans,  which  is  to
provide emergency liquidity to ensure financial system stability, has recently been taken over by
loans to the Deposit Insurance Corporation (DIC).
The Bank’s balance sheet has thus changed dramatically over the past year. The change is
a reflection of the Bank’s constant efforts to combat the economic downturn and the increasing
uncertainty about financial stability. However, the expansion of the balance sheet has also given
rise  to  a  significant  number  of  questions  and  criticisms  focusing  on  a  perceived  threat  to  the
financial soundness of the Bank. I would therefore like to devote the rest of my speech to a fairly
detailed examination of the Bank’s role and its approach to provision of  credit,  in  light  of  the
changes in the Bank’s balance sheet.
III. Extension of Credit by the Bank of Japan
A. The Role of a Central Bank and Its Balance Sheet
Before explaining why the soundness of the Bank’s balance sheet has become an issue, I
need to refer to the mission of a central bank.
In  brief,  the  mission  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  the  central  bank  of  Japan,  is  to  issue
banknotes, ensure the functions of the currency, and contribute to the sound development of the
Japanese economy. Perhaps “ensuring the functions of the currency” sounds a little too abstract.
Specifically, the Bank must first ensure the stability of the currency’s value, and second maintain
an appropriate framework for its circulation. Referring to these two requirements, the role of a
central bank is often defined as maintenance of price stability and financial system stability.
On  a  day-to-day  level,  the  Bank  seeks  to  fulfil  its  mission  by  engaging  in  banking
activities  that  are  similar  to  those  of  commercial  banks.  When  the  economy  is  experiencing
inflation  or  deflation,  the  Bank  tries  to  restore  and  maintain  a  non-inflationary  and  non-
deflationary situation——that is, a situation of price stability——by influencing the quantity of
money in circulation and the levels of various interest rates. The Bank achieves this objective by
influencing  interest  rates  in  the  financial  markets.  And  this  is  done  basically  by  supplying  or
absorbing the appropriate amount of funds through the purchase or sale of financial assets. Such
activity  by  the  central  bank  is  called  “market  operations.”  The  same  is  true  of  the  Bank’s
activities to maintain an orderly financial system. When the stability of the financial system is at
risk due, say, to failure of a commercial bank, the Bank of Japan acts decisively to minimize the
ensuing disturbance by injecting funds into the system. The principal tool the Bank employs in
such cases is lending.
As with commercial banks, the activities of the Bank are clearly reflected in its assets and
liabilities  shown  on  its  balance  sheet.  For  instance,  when  the  Bank  drastically  eases  money  in
order to avert deflation, as is the case at present,  the  Bank  increases  provision  of  funds  in  the
BIS Review   15/1999
– 3 –
markets by increasing its purchase of financial assets. This naturally causes the Bank’s balance
sheet to expand.
The key question is whether or not people will trust their central bank and be willing to
hold  the  country’s  currency  (including  banknotes,  which  bear  no  interest).  This  depends  on
whether or not the central bank’s behavior has measured up to the expectations of the people, and
whether  or  not  it  continues  to  do  so.  One  source  of  clues  for  making  such  a  judgment  is  the
balance sheet, and it is therefore natural that people in Japan and abroad take a keen interest in
the Bank’s balance sheet.
The  Bank’s  balance  sheet  can  be  discussed  from  various  perspectives.  From  the
viewpoint of people’s confidence in a central bank, it is most important that the financial assets
the Bank holds are adequate to secure the banknotes issued. This adequacy, I believe, involves
two specific points. First, the Bank’s assets must be sound and its financial base must be solid—
—the latter means that the Bank must have a sufficient capital base——in order for the Bank to
continue to act decisively as a central bank in total independence of intervention by a third party.
Second,  the  Bank  must  have  a  sufficiently  liquid  asset  portfolio  to  flexibly  inject  or  withdraw
funds as necessary.
I  believe  that  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet  has  also  attracted  growing  attention  in  other
countries.  Some  observers  have  expressed  concern  over  the  expansion  of  the  Bank’s  balance
sheet as a sign of deterioration in its assets. This may be because a rapid growth of the balance
sheet is associated in people’s minds with an increase in nonperforming assets that need to be
disposed  of  at  a  substantial  loss.  But  as  I  stated  at  the  beginning  of  my  speech,  setting  aside
technical  factors,  the  recent  expansion  of  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet  is  primarily  the  result  of
active  provision  of  liquidity  under  the  easing  policy.  Nevertheless,  mere  suspicion  about  an
erosion  of  asset  quality  can  be  a  serious  problem  if  it  undermines  people’s  confidence  in  the
central bank and, in turn, in the national economy. Such loss of confidence could, for example,
result  in  Japan’s  commercial  banks  and  firms  paying  an  unnecessary  premium  when  raising
funds  in  other  countries.  That  is  why  the  Bank  recognizes  the  need  to  be  vigilant  against
deterioration  in  its  assets.  The  Policy  Board,  the  Bank’s  decision-making  body,  constantly
deliberates  whether  the  various  measures  implemented  to  fulfil  the  Bank’s  mission  could
jeopardize the Bank’s credibility because of the resulting changes in its balance sheet.
B. Three Key Principles of the Bank of Japan’s Portfolio Selection
I  will  next  talk  about  the  philosophy  that  guides  the  Bank  in  portfolio  selection——in
other words, the key principles in selecting a central bank’s portfolio. There are three.
The  first  principle  is  to  maintain  the  soundness  of  the  Bank’s  assets.  In  other  words,
assets and collateral held by the Bank must be of high quality.
The  Bank  has  devised  a  number  of  methods  to  achieve  this.  When  supplying  funds  to
financial  institutions  through  loans,  the  Bank  acquires  financial  assets  that  are  trustworthy  as
collateral. When providing funds through market operations, it purchases financial assets  from
financial institutions or other sellers based on repurchase (gensaki or repo) agreements. The only
exception  to  this  rule  for  market  operations  is  when  the  Bank  makes  outright  purchases  of
government bonds. Thus, the credits provided by the Bank are secured by the creditworthiness of
plural entities: not only by the creditworthiness of financial institutions to which the Bank lends
directly,  but  also  by  that  of  the  government  or  the  entities  in  the  non-banking  private  sector,
which are the issuers of the debt instruments. This approach is common among central banks. At
the Bank of Japan, it is called “the double-name principle.”
BIS Review   15/1999
– 4 –
Where  the  collateral  for  the  Bank’s  loans  and  the  financial  assets  purchased  in  market
operations are issued by such entities as private-sector firms, the Bank assesses the eligibility of
these assets according to its own criteria——that is, its internal ratings——and reviews it at least
once a year. If a firm’s financial performance deteriorated, the financial debt of this firm would
no longer be acceptable as collateral or as an instrument of market operations, even if it had once
been deemed to be suitable for such purposes.
Of course, these measures alone are not enough. The double-name principle might reduce
the  probability  of  defaults,  but  taking  a  firm’s  debt  as  collateral  is  not  sufficient  if  the  firm’s
creditworthiness is bolstered by the support of the commercial bank to which the Bank of Japan
is  lending.  Nor  is  it  desirable  for  the  Bank’s  assets  and  collateral  to  be  concentrated  in  the
liabilities  of  firms  in  a  particular  industry.  The  Bank  pays  careful  attention  not  only  to  the
soundness of individual assets but the entire portfolio, ensuring that its assets and collateral are
not exposed to linkages of risk or excessive risk concentration.
The second principle is to maintain neutrality with respect to resource allocation. If the
Bank held an excessive quantity of certain types of financial assets, price making and resource
allocation in the market might be distorted. In view of its role in the economy, the Bank should
do its best to minimize such influences. The supply of funds by the Bank of Japan in the context
of monetary policy management is aimed at influencing the overall level of market interest rates.
Furthermore,  provision  of  funds  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  an  orderly  financial  system  is
aimed solely at containing systemic risk and preventing disruption of the entire financial system.
The third principle is to maintain liquid assets. The assets of the Bank must be such as
can  be  liquidated  at  reasonable  cost  whenever  necessary.  This  is  so  that  the  Bank  is  ready  to
respond to any sudden policy decisions. In the management of monetary policy, if the Bank is to
control interest rates in rapidly moving financial markets, it must be able to acquire or liquidate
financial  assets  instantly  in  order  to  supply  or  absorb  funds.  The  same  principle  applies  to  its
provision of funds to maintain an orderly financial system. Asset liquidity is vital to the Bank’s
capacity to make flexible policy responses while maintaining the Bank’s financial soundness.
Bearing in mind these three principles that guide the Bank in its selection of assets and
collateral, the Bank has made great efforts to adopt new market operations measures and review
collateral  requirements  to  accommodate  current  policy  agenda.  One  example  of  this  is
introduction  of  new  market  operations  tools  to  contribute  indirectly  to  the  development  of
financial  markets.  Another  is  the  Bank’s  “New  Measures  for  Money  Market  Operations  in
Response to the Recent Situations in Corporate Financing Activities,” decided on November 13,
1998.  As  stated  in  the  press  release,  the  aim  of  these  measures  is  to  contribute  to  facilitating
corporate financing activities by devising new methods of market operations and lending.
IV. Some Related Issues
Having outlined the Bank’s principles, I would now like to examine its approach in more
specific terms by addressing some frequently asked questions relating to the balance sheet.
A. Government Debt or Private-Sector Debt?
The  first  question  is  whether  a  central  bank  should  primarily  hold  safe  assets  such  as
government debt. Some believe that holding private-sector debt reduces the quality of the Bank
of Japan’s assets, and that the Bank should buy more government bonds.
In  fact,  the  Bank  already  holds  a  very  substantial  amount  of  government  securities.  Its
holding at the end of November 1998, including short-term securities (financing bills, or FBs),
BIS Review   15/1999
– 5 –
amounted  to  approximately  \52  trillion.  This,  together  with  the  government  securities  worth
about  \5  trillion  borrowed  through  repo  operations,  accounted  for  approximately  two  thirds  of
total assets. However, such a high ratio is not typical of central banks. In fact, the only central
bank having a higher proportion of government securities in its portfolio is the Federal Reserve
of the United States. The central banks in continental Europe primarily purchase private-sector
debt such as bills and deeds in providing liquidity, and therefore government securities comprise
a smaller proportion of their portfolio. The European Central Bank (ECB), which will administer
a common monetary policy for the countries participating in the European Monetary Union from
January 1999, will also accept both government securities and corporate-sector debt as eligible
assets.
Historically, the concept of a central bank dates from when the Bank of England evolved
from  a  commercial  bank  into  a  central  bank.  The  traditional  activities  of  central  banks  have
included provision of funds through the rediscounting of bills discounted by commercial banks.
Thus,  they  have  long  successfully  employed  corporate-sector  debt  as  collateral  for  supplying
funds by adequately managing the risks involved, although this has not always been easy. Before
large-scale issuance of government bonds began in Japan, the Bank of Japan in fact made active
use of corporate-sector debt, especially bills, in providing funds.
The important issue in the portfolio selection of a central bank is not the choice between
government and private-sector debt, but rather the avoidance of distortions in resource allocation
in the respective financial markets. Based on this principle, the Bank intends to make greater use
of selected, sound private-sector debt as market operations instruments or as collateral when it
deems  this  necessary  to  achieve  current  policy  objectives,  such  as  the  development  of  new
markets.
B. Transaction Counterparties
The second question is whether the central bank should make direct contact only with the
banking  sector,  and  influence  the  economy  indirectly.  Some  argue  that  direct  contact  with  the
corporate sector is undesirable in that it creates a potential for arbitrary behavior by the central
bank, or for the prolongation of the life of inefficient firms.
This is a matter of principle of whether a central bank should limit its counterparties to
banks, or whether it should also deal with the non-banking sector.
The  concern  seems  to  have  originated  in  the  Bank’s  active  use  of  private-sector  debt
through such means as expansion of CP repo operations, which may have given the impression
that  the  Bank  is  excessively  involved  in  corporate  fund-raising.  But  this  concern  appears  to
contain a slight misunderstanding. Although the Bank is indeed buying CP——which is a form
of corporate-sector debt——through market operations, it buys the CP from financial institutions
including  banks,  and  therefore  the  counterparties  in  its  operations  have  not  changed.
Furthermore, the Bank does not specify the individual CP issues to be submitted, but rather the
counterparty financial institutions offer issues of their choice from among those deemed eligible
by the Bank. Purchasing CP is no different from providing commercial banks with loans on bills
in the sense that the Bank supplies funds to commercial banks by refinancing corporate debt.
However,  it  merits  consideration  whether  participation  in  market  operations  and  other
Bank transactions should be made open to non-bank entities. If we look at examples overseas, it
appears that the ECB will carry out its market operations only with banks. In the United States,
however,  the  Federal  Reserve  conducts  market  operations  with  so-called  primary  securities
dealers, many of which are securities companies that  do  not  have  accounts  at  Federal  Reserve
BIS Review   15/1999
– 6 –
banks. A key point in considering this counterparty issue is whether the emphasis is on interbank
transactions  or  open  market  transactions.  If  a  central  bank  primarily  conducts  interbank
transactions, the counterparty will naturally be the banking sector. Yet it seems that the global
trend is a growing preference by central banks for open market transactions. In Japan, the Bank
selects  counterparties  according  to  its  own  eligibility  criteria  from  among  banks,  securities
companies,  tanshi  companies  (money  market  broker-cum-dealers),  and  other  institutions  that
have accounts with the Bank.
In  the  final  analysis,  I  think  that  the  rational  solution  to  this  issue  is  not  to  restrict
counterparties to banks, but choose them from a wider range of entities in order to achieve swift
and certain permeation of policy effects and adequate control of counterparty risk, while taking
into  account  such  factors  as  changes  in  the  financial  structure.  It  is  certainly  essential  that  the
money  market,  where  the  central  bank  makes  transactions,  be  sufficiently  developed  in  both
qualitative and quantitative terms. In this regard, Japan will soon have a fully fledged FB market
with the introduction of a public auction system for FB issues. As such open market transactions
expand,  leading  to  diversification  of  financial  services  providers,  the  Bank  will  review  its
selection of counterparties in the Bank’s market operations.
C. Corporate Bonds and Equities
The third question is whether the Bank should purchase corporate bonds and equities in
view of the critical state of the Japanese economy. This argument is based on the fact that the
stock market was at one time supported by the public sector’s purchase of equities. It is also the
view of the advocates of such intervention that, if the Bank is concerned about risks, it can ask
for government guarantees.
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  a  central  bank  can  create  liquidity  but  not
capital. There is intrinsically a definite limit to the extent to which a central bank can take on
private-sector risk. Assuming such risk and compromising the quality of its assets might impair
the Bank’s credibility, which is needed to fulfil its mission. This is why the Bank of Japan Law
of 1997, like the previous law, does not allow the Bank to buy equities, which are subject to large
credit and price volatility risks. Accordingly, the Bank cannot purchase equities and judges that it
should not provide funds in a manner that would involve a similar degree of risk. For the same
reason, it also believes that it is inappropriate for the Bank to purchase corporate bonds outright
and hold them until maturity.
Placement  of  government  guarantees  is  not  a  perfect  solution.  Although  this  would
reduce credit risks, purchase of corporate bonds and equities yet involves another problem——it
might  lead  to  the  long-term  fixing  of  assets  on  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet.  For  example,  loans
extended  to  the  DIC  are  increasing  rapidly,  but  the  Bank  cannot  justify  extending  them  for  a
longer term than necessary just because they are government guaranteed. The prolonged holding
of such assets would reduce the Bank’s flexibility in money market operations. Moreover, if the
balance sheet were left expanded, it would arouse concern about a decline in asset quality. In any
event, the outcome would be an impairment of Japan’s credibility, which would force Japanese
banks and firms to pay unnecessarily high financing costs overseas.
In view of the current state of Japan’s financial system, the Bank is prepared to provide
the  DIC  with  necessary  liquidity  in  order  for  the  corporation  to  perform  its  role  effectively.
However,  I  believe  that  the  DIC  should  subsequently  secure  longer-term  funds  by  swiftly
replacing the Bank’s loans with government-secured bond issues or commercial bank loans. The
Bank must always be ready to carry out flexible money market operations and serve the function
BIS Review   15/1999
– 7 –
of the lender of last resort whenever necessary. And for this, it is essential that the Bank avoid
fixing the massive loans to the DIC on its balance sheet.
V. Rebuilding Japan’s Economy and Financial System
I  hope  my  remarks  today  have  been  able  to  clarify  some  of  the  issues  concerning  the
Bank’s balance sheet. Before ending my speech, since the end of 1998 is only a week away, I
would  like  to  discuss  Japan’s  policy  agenda  for  the  new  year  and  emphasize  the  Bank’s
commitment to it.
The most important task for 1999, given the current state of the Japanese economy, will
be  to  rebuild  the  economy  and  the  financial  system.  The  role  of  the  Bank  will  be  to  work
relentlessly  to  (1)  support  the  rebuilding  of  the  Japanese  economy  by  maintaining  the  current
easy  stance  on  monetary  policy;  and  (2)  continue  to  supply  sufficient  liquidity  to  ensure  the
stability of the financial system.
The  fundamental  problem  confronting  the  Japanese  economy  is  not  a  shortage  of
liquidity,  but  a  shortage  of  capital  and  reluctance  to  take  the  risks  that  would  help  economic
expansion. The cure for these, as I have stated many times, is firstly to strengthen the capital base
of  financial  institutions  and  restore  their  financial  intermediary  functions,  and  secondly  to  act
promptly to create in the capital market an environment that makes it easier for investors to take
risks. As an essential first step toward improvement in these two areas, household and business
confidence must be restored.
In the currency field, January will see the debut of the “euro”. As a result, the world will
have three major currency areas——those of the dollar, the euro, and the yen——each backed by
its  own  giant  economic  sphere.  Overcoming  the  aforementioned  problems  is  a  prerequisite  to
making  the  yen  more  usable  and  reliable  internationally,  enhancing  its  integrity.  This  is  an
extremely  important  step  in  accomplishing  further  development  of  the  Japanese  economy  by
utilizing the world’s capital and innovative management techniques.
To repeat, the priorities in 1999 will be to rebuild Japan’s economy and financial system,
and thereby lay the foundation for a globally credible yen. The Bank of Japan is determined to
support these efforts through its monetary policy and financial system policy.
 BIS Review   15/1999
