Mr Haferkamp focuses on
European capital markets in the first year of EMU
Keynote  address  given  by  Mr  Dieter  Haferkamp,  Member  of  the  Directorate  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank,  at  the  conference  on “The  Pfandbrief:  Global  Perspectives  for  Europe’s  Biggest  Bond
Market” in London on 28 September 1999.
 1.
I am delighted to have been given  this opportunity  to  speak  at  this now  almost traditional
Pfandbrief conference. Keynote speakers at a Euromoney conference have the privilege of choosing
their own topic. I am not a “Pfandbrief” specialist. As a representative of the central bank of a country
participating  in  monetary  union,  I  feel  more  at  home  making  some  comments  on  the  monetary  and
capital market policy environment, which is likely to have a major impact on the development of the
European bond markets and thus also on the fate of the Pfandbrief.
In many ways, the liberalisation of investment services in the European Economic Area, the creation
of  electronic  markets  and  the  internationalisation  of  financial  portfolios  did  away  with  the
segmentation of Europe’s capital markets even in the years prior to monetary union.
But  then,  overnight,  the  start  of  European  monetary  union  brought  about  major  structural  changes
which  forced  all  the  market  participants  to  undergo  the  appropriate  processes  of  adjustment.  This
applies also, and especially, to the market for Pfandbriefe.
The German Pfandbrief goes back more than 200 years. However, only during the past few years have
the  international  capital  markets  discovered  it.  The  Pfandbrief’s  success  story  is  attributable  to  two
factors. The Pfandbrief has an excellent credit quality, and it firmly embodies the principle of investor
protection.  Admittedly,  neither  of  these  advantages  would  have  sufficed  by  themselves  for  the
Pfandbrief to hold its own in intensified European and global competition. It was only the efforts made
by  German  mortgage  banks  to  market  these  bonds  internationally  which  enabled  this  traditional
German product to achieve a breakthrough in the markets.
The most  important  milestone  in these  efforts  was undoubtedly  the introduction  of  Jumbo  bonds  in
May 1995. With the characteristics of the Jumbos the Pfandbrief was also equipped with the liquidity
which globally operating investors expect of today’s capital market instruments. And allow me, as a
representative of the German central bank, to add that the stability of the D-Mark, which was the most
important currency of issue for Pfandbriefe up to the introduction of the euro, contributed more and
more to attracting international investors to the Pfandbrief product.
Like German government bonds up to the end of last year, the Pfandbrief, too, enjoyed the competitive
advantage of having a strong domestic currency. Now, nine months after the start of monetary union,
it can be stated that both products, Pfandbriefe and German Federal bonds, have successfully made the
transition  to  the  age  of  the  euro.  Even  without  the  seal  of  quality  of  the  D-Mark  as  the  issuing
currency, the German Pfandbrief was not only able to maintain its position but also to continuously
improve  it.  Thanks  to  a  thoroughgoing  and  consistent  process  of  modernisation,  it  has  become  an
international  brand-name  product  which  has  prompted  issuers  in  other  countries  to  consider
introducing similar products. Spain and France are two current examples here.
I would now like to comment on two questions:
• 
What  were  the  most  important  changes  in  the  Pfandbrief  environment  caused  by  the
introduction of the euro? What is the shape of the “new” European capital market in which
the Pfandbrief has to stand up to competition?
 And  what  are  the  global  perspectives  of  the  Pfandbrief  market,  the  subject  of  today’s
conference?
1
BIS Review 101/1999
2.
euro?
What changes have now taken place in the capital markets following the introduction of the
The most important consequence of the introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999 has certainly been
the elimination of the exchange-rate risk, which, up to the beginning of the monetary union, was an
important reason for the segmentation of European financial markets. The euro area has now become
the second largest bond market after the US. The euro area countries have a share of slightly less than
one-quarter of the worldwide bond markets.
The reasons for this were the conversion of bonds in circulation at a very early stage and very buoyant
issuing activity in the first few months of monetary union. The distinction between domestic, foreign
and Eurobonds has become largely meaningless. The single currency offers issuers a broader financing
base and allows investors to choose from a much wider range of bonds and stocks in which they can
invest without an exchange-rate risk.
The convergence of the national markets to form a large and liquid European capital market, however,
is  a  process  which  is not  yet complete.  Many  private investors still  prefer to invest  nationally.  It  is
primarily large enterprises that have benefited so far from the freedom of the enlarged markets when
taking up funds.
Even  so,  competition  is  well  under  way.  Issuers  are  compelled  to  gear  their  issuing  policy  more
closely  to  the  requirements  of  international  investors.  Banks  and  European  stock  exchanges  and
financial centres are also feeling the higher wind speed of competition in the euro area. The euro zone
has accelerated the change engendered by the advance of globalisation; in a sense, European financial
markets are undergoing a dual process of radical change.
Many  enterprises  are  finding  that  the  larger  and  more  liquid  Euro  capital  market  offers  more
favourable  financing  conditions  than  traditional  financing  via  a  bank  loan.  Therefore,  powerful
borrowers are reconsidering their method of refinancing and are more and more taking the direct route
to the capital market and the financial service providers operating there. The disintermediation of the
banks  in  the  wholesale  market  is  increasing.  Securitisation  is  intensifying  competition  among  the
banks and is having a crucial impact on the structure of the banking system.
Competition among financial centres has become harder as well. In securities business, the costs and
the  transparency  of  the  trading  platforms  as  well  as  the  efficiency  of  the  settlement  systems  have
become  increasingly  important  in choosing  which  financial  centre to  use.  Thus,  competition  among
financial centres is increasingly also becoming a competition among systems. Now that the triumphant
progress  of  computerisation  has  become  unstoppable,  the  race  for  the  establishment  of  electronic
trading systems has become more heated. Fiercer competition, in terms of both products and costs, has
necessitated concentration and cooperation. The splitting up of the trading platforms for the spot and
futures markets into individual markets and the fragmentation of settlement systems with inefficient
and cost-ineffective settlement procedures, especially those for cross-border securities trading, are no
longer suited to the age of the single currency.
3.
Addressing the issue of the global perspectives of the European financial markets, in general,
and the Pfandbrief market, in particular, requires a brief review of the developments in the European
financial markets since 1 January 1999.
In the money market, the changeover to the euro and to the single monetary policy has taken place
rapidly  and  smoothly.  The  development  of  a  single  European  money  market  made  such  progress
during the first nine months of monetary union that it can now be described as integrated and liquid.
This is a crucial factor both for the ECB’s monetary policy, which is geared to the stability of the euro,
and for the development of the European capital market.
A key factor contributing to the rapid integration of the Euro money market is the TARGET system.
TARGET’s main objectives for the monetary policy of the Eurosystem and the Euro money market
have been achieved; the provision of a safe and reliable mechanism for the settlement of cross-border
payments and a rapid and effective increase in the efficiency of cross-border payments within the EU.
In July, a daily average of slightly more than  ELOOLRQZDVWUDQVDFWHGYLDWKH7$5*(7V\VWHP
BIS Review 101/1999
2
The  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  instruments  are  working  smoothly.  The  main  refinancing
operations are fulfilling the functions assigned to them, which is to signal the monetary policy stance,
to steer the money market rates and to supply the banking system with the bulk of liquidity.
Supplying  the  banking  system  with  liquidity  on  a  more  sustained  basis  through  the  longer-term
refinancing  operations  is  not  posing  any  problems  either.  The  standing  facilities  have  effectively
limited  the  overnight  interest  rates.  The  averaging  provision  applying  within  the  minimum  reserve
system has contributed to smoothing out daily fluctuations of liquidity. Previous experience has shown
that  the  Eurosystem’s  operational framework  constitutes  an  effective  set  of  instruments  for  steering
money market rates and limiting their fluctuations.
By the way, it seems remarkable to me in this context that the dispute over the benchmark rate in the
Euro  money  markets  was  resolved  in  favour  of  the  EURIBOR  far  more  quickly  than  many  market
participants  had  expected.  The  day-to-day  money  market  rate  for  the  euro  (EONIA),  which  is
ascertained by the ECB, has established itself as a representative picture of the market conditions in
the euro area. EONIA and EURIBOR cover the whole range of the Euro money market reference rates
in a consistent manner.
For  the  Pfandbrief  market,  it  was  crucial  in  connection  with  the  decisions  on  the  monetary  policy
instruments  that  Pfandbriefe  were  included  in  the  list  of  tier-one  assets  and  were  thus  treated
“neutrally” in monetary policy terms relative to government bonds. This status has certainly benefited
the competitive position of the Pfandbriefe by increasing its liquidity.
The bond markets had already partly anticipated the introduction of the euro, although, in the final
analysis,  the  euro  bonds  issued  prior  to  the  start  of  monetary  union  were  nothing  other  than  ECU
bonds with the pre-announced conversion rate of 1 to 1.
The  decision  taken  by  the  major  issuers  to  redenominate  bonds  in  circulation  from  the  national
currency  to  euro  at  the  beginning  of  January  this  year  and  to  standardise  the  very  different  market
practices in Europe on internationally consistent market conventions resulted almost overnight in the
emergence of a large and liquid Euro-bond market.
In this context, all the market participants were focusing their attention on the question of who would
set the benchmark for the euro area. Even in the run-up to monetary union, competition among public
issuers  had  increased  owing  to  the  forthcoming  abolition  of  the  exchange-rate-induced  yield
differentials.  The  German  Federal  Government  positioned  itself  at  an  early  stage  for  the  changed
competitive situation and, in cooperation with the Bundesbank, took a number of measures to enhance
the attractiveness of its bonds. These measures included, in particular, concentrating the instruments
on the five major maturity ranges (six months, two, five, ten and 30 years), increasing the volume of
individual  issues,  concentrating  the  Federal  Government’s  and  its  special  funds’  borrowing  on  the
uniform  issuer’s  name  “Federal  Republic  of  Germany”,  introducing  the  stripping  option  in  order  to
capture  the  yield  curve  as  completely  as  possible,  and  introducing  a  transparent  and  efficient  issue
method.
Further  improvements  are  currently  under  discussion,  for  example,  with  respect  to  the  five-year
“Bobls”, whose present dual role as paper for small private investors and for institutional investors is
criticised by major market players.
These measures have enabled Germany to set the benchmark in the important ten-year maturity range.
At the same time, the Bund future has risen to become the most-traded futures contract in the world.
Incidentally, the market for “Jumbo Pfandbrief Bonds” has also benefited from the benchmark role of
the  German  Federal  bonds.  This  market  seems  to  have  good  prospects  of  assuming  the  benchmark
function within the Euro-spread markets in terms of liquidity, credit standing and the stability of the
spread over Federal bonds.
The equity markets cannot yet keep up with the Europe-wide performance of the money and bond
markets.  The  stock  exchange  environment  in  Europe  with  its  differing  rules  and  regulations  is  still
heavily fragmented. With more than 30 stock exchanges, Europe has an enormously high density of
such places. The associated fragmentation of liquidity is naturally not conducive to an efficient  and
3
BIS Review 101/1999
transparent price formation process. Different underlying legal and tax conditions as well as different
accounting rules also hinder the process of growing together to form a single European equity market.
Integration and/or harmonisation is a slow-moving process in this instance, because company, tax and
balance sheet laws are integral parts of each national legal system with its own history and tradition.
Adjustments  and  amendments  are  bound  to  have  an  impact  on  other  areas  of  legislation,  too.
Regulations  which  differ  from  country  to  country  therefore  constitute  major  obstacles  to  the
integration of the markets.
The European Commission recently pointed out in a note to the Council and the European Parliament
that the differing taxation of investment income, differing accounting standards and differing rules for
supervision are major obstacles to a complete integration of the European capital markets.
There are signs of progress, at least in some areas; a case in point are the efforts being made by the
Forum of European Securities Commissions (FESCO). But the stock exchanges themselves are also
called upon to play their part in the necessary consolidation of the market structures and to set aside
national  interests;  today,  no  European  stock  exchange  can  any  longer  afford  to  pursue  “go-alone”
strategies. It now seems foreseeable that the infrastructure of a European stock exchange network will
be  an  electronic  one.  Local  stock  market  centres  are  diminishing  in  significance  to  the  extent  that
modern  technologies  are  increasingly  allowing  market  participation  from  any  desired  location.  It
appears  that  all  parties  involved  have  now  recognised  these  developments  and  started  to  act
accordingly.
4.
markets nine months after the start of monetary union?
What  are  the  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  this  brief  review  of  the  European  financial
The integration of the money markets may be regarded as almost completed. It is far advanced in the
bond market. The stock market still has the largest need for adjustment. As a result, it is primarily in
the stock market that market  forces  are  currently  working  for  change.  The  recent  decision  made  by
European stock exchanges on the creation of a “virtual” cross-border-market is evidence of this. The
common market model presented last week should be an interim solution only. It is in the interest of
the  economy  as  a  whole that  efforts  to  create  a single  European  stock  market  with  a  single  trading
platform make progress. In the long term, investors and issuers will not be content with fragmented
markets.
An  efficient  and  competitive  stock  exchange  in  the  euro  area  also  needs  efficient  clearing  and
settlement.  Experience  gained  in  the  United  States  shows  that  concentrating  on  a  comprehensive
settlement  system  with  a  settlement  platform  which  is  also  competitive  worldwide  is  necessary  for
this.  The  trend  is  already  clearly  towards  a  consolidation  of  the  many  different  existing  clearing
systems in the euro area, which will then also permit closer links between trading and settlement.
An initial major step towards the necessary concentration of clearing and settlement systems has been
made with the merger of Cedel International and Deutsche Börse Clearing. It would be desirable that
at the end of the integration process, there would be a European stock market with a single European
settlement system. In all cases, the central banks are closely watching the continuing developments.
Although the harmonisation efforts in the  bond  markets  are  more  advanced  than  those  on  the  stock
markets and stock exchanges, this does not mean that the developments triggered by monetary union
have  already  come  to  an  end  there.  The  rapid  rise  in  cross-border  capital  flows  continues  to  boost
competition.  In  addition,  in  view  of  the  still  relatively  low  level  of  interest  rates,  investors  are
increasingly looking for spread products which offer a higher yield than government bonds. Despite
the  considerable  progress  made  in  convergence  during  the  run-up  to  monetary  union,  European
government  bonds  are  still  showing  yield  spreads  which  are  mainly  due  to  the  different  levels  of
liquidity and credit standing. But these have now become so small that they offer investors hardly any
interesting opportunities for diversification in terms of spreads.
This may be unsatisfactory for the smaller member states of monetary union which have difficulties in
ensuring sufficient market liquidity over the entire range of the yield curve. However, I believe that
the proposal of conducting joint securities issues of the EU countries through a single issuance agency
BIS Review 101/1999
4
has little chance of success. Experience of corresponding issues by German federal states has shown
that even minor differences in credit standing between the individual debtors behind the single credit
financing lead to a divergence of interests and make any agreement on a single issue project virtually
impossible.  In  addition, there are legal and  practical  problems,  such  as the lack  of  a  legal  basis  for
joint  liability  for  such  single  issues  which  make  a  proposal  of  this  kind  appear  not  very  realistic.
Competition  should therefore  be  maintained  among  public sector  issuers.  In  the interest  of  efficient
markets,  competition  ensures  that  public  sector  debt  management  has  to  strive  continually  for
borrowing at the lowest costs possible. This is the only way of maintaining the discipline which the
market imposes on the public sector through country-specific spreads.
The situation is no different in the market for Pfandbriefe. Foreign Jumbo mortgage bonds, which rely
heavily on the legal basis of the German Mortgage  Bank  Act,  have  been forcing  their  way  into the
international  capital  markets  for  the  first  time  during  the  past  few  weeks.  The  market  for  spread
products,  into  which  yield-oriented  investors  can  diversify  their  investments,  is  hence  becoming
increasingly diverse and competition for German Pfandbriefe is intensifying.
The market for corporate bonds has been growing strongly in Europe but not as strongly as predicted
by  optimistic  forecasts.  In  the  longer  term,  however,  financing  via  bonds  is  likely  to  become  a
worthwhile  alternative  for  enterprises.  The  market  for  corporate  bonds  might  receive  an  additional
boost from  the  persistent  wave  of  mergers  in  Europe.  Financing  of  corporate  mergers  is  often  only
possible through borrowed funds which are likely to be increasingly financed by the issue of corporate
bonds. Finally, investors who are looking for new yield and diversification opportunities will possibly
step up demand for higher-yielding bonds.
There  are  hence  signs  that,  from  a  spread  point  of  view,  corporate  bonds  might  become  the  most
important investment category competing for investors in the future European bond market alongside
government  bonds,  Pfandbriefe  and  bank  bonds.  Other  products,  such  as  asset  backed  securities  or
high-yield junk bonds, are also likely to gain in importance.
The  German  Pfandbrief  market  offering  high  creditworthiness  and  liquidity  as  well  as  high-yield
premiums  compared  with  government  bonds  has  good  prospects  of  becoming  the  most  important
spread market  in the euro area. The  example  of  the  US  agency  market  has  shown that  high  market
liquidity, representation of the entire yield curve and the transparency of the issuing policy are crucial
factors for a successful positioning in the spread market ranking. The German mortgage banks have
already  successfully  tapped  this  potential  over  the  past  few  years  by  a  corresponding  expansion  of
their product range and a commensurate marketing strategy.
Up to the end of last year – as I have already mentioned – the German capital market and its
5.
most  important  products,  the  Federal  Government  bonds  and  the  Jumbo  Pfandbriefe  benefited
crucially from the stability of the D-Mark. In the same way, the development of the European capital
market will hinge on the stability of the euro and on international investors’ confidence in the stability
policy of the European Central Bank.
To  a  certain  extent,  monetary  policy  and  the  capital  markets  are  mutually  dependent:  the  capital
market needs a stable currency, since monetary stability is the foundation on which the capital markets
can flourish. It encourages savings and makes a crucial contribution to long-term capital formation. It
improves  the  real  performance  of  financial  assets  and  thus  makes  a  flight  into  material  assets
superfluous.
Conversely, efficient, highly competitive and stable financial markets are of great importance for the
implementation of monetary policy. It is true that the capital market is not the direct area of operations
for monetary policy. That is the money market. But a successful central bank policy depends on the
predictable and rapid transmission of its measures through efficient and stable financial markets as a
whole, which means the money and capital markets.
The  independence  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  its  commitment  to  a  stability-oriented  monetary
policy and the strict criteria of the Maastricht Treaty are a sound basis for an enduringly stable single
currency. It is true that the euro has lost in value against the US dollar on foreign exchange markets
5
BIS Review 101/1999
since the beginning of the year. I will not make any comments on this here. Enough has been said on
this  subject  by  competent  and  sometimes  not-so-competent  commentators.  The  rapid  growth  of
European interest-rate markets and the high buoyancy of the European capital market in the first nine
months of monetary union do not suggest that there is a very pronounced lack of confidence  in  the
euro.
The  future  development  of  the  euro  as  an  international  investment  and  issuing  currency  will  be
decided  primarily  by  the  markets.  The  preconditions  for  continued  growth  of  the  euro  financial
markets  are  good.  The  euro  capital  market  offers  private  issuers  of  debt  securities  and  equities
considerable advantages. The greater number of issuers and investors who settle their transactions in
the same currency enhances liquidity and allows larger issue volumes. This reduces refinancing costs.
The larger currency area will in the future also attract new investors and issuers to the capital markets
in the euro area. German mortgage banks have positioned themselves early for this development, the
jumbo  Pfandbrief  is  outstandingly  well-suited  to  the  changed  environment  of  monetary  union.  The
global perspectives for Europe’s biggest bond market therefore hold out a great deal of promise.
BIS Review 101/1999
6
