Mr Yam discusses financial stability, region and international co-operation
Speech by the Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Mr Joseph Yam, at the 32nd
Asian Development Bank annual meeting, in Manila, the Philippines, on 2 May 1999.
Introduction
I  am  delighted  and  honoured  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  to  this  distinguished  international
audience. The theme of the forum is regional monetary and financial co-operation. From the point of
view of time, venue, sponsors, and participants, it would, I think, be very hard to come up with a more
appropriate topic than this. In terms of timing, our region is currently, we hope, moving through the
final stages of a period of financial and economic dislocation that has taught us a number of lessons.
The most important of these lessons, in my view, and one consistent with the aims of this forum, is
that  we  need  to  intensify  international  and  regional  co-operation  to  reduce  the  risk  of  such  crises
occurring again. The venue for this forum, Manila, is one of the oldest international financial centres
in  Asia:  it  has  also  been  the  starting  point  for  a  number  of  important  modern  regional  initiatives.
Manila has given its name to the recently established Manila Framework, within which central banks
and finance ministries in the region meet to promote regional co-operation on financial matters. The
beginnings of systematic economic co-operation can also be traced to Manila, with the establishment
here, in 1966, of the Asian Development Bank (ADB).
The ADB, one of the sponsors of this forum, has played a vital role in nurturing growth and technical
advances in Asian economies, and this role has in recent years both deepened, in the assistance it has
been  offering,  and  broadened  in  the  geographical  scope  it  has  been  covering.  The  ADB’  s  joint
sponsorship of this forum is one of many examples of the good work it is doing to address regional
concerns. The co-sponsor of the forum, the Institute of International Finance (IIF), has, in two timely
and important reports issued in March this year, argued strongly for private-sector, as well as public-
sector, initiatives to address global financial crises. The co-sponsors have brought together a diverse
and  experienced  forum  of  participants  from  private-sector  and  public-sector  organisations,  all  of
which have a large stake in ensuring that our regional and global financial systems work properly.
The Hong Kong Experience
As a regional and international financial centre, Hong Kong’s livelihood depends, perhaps to a greater
extent than other economies, on the proper functioning of the international financial system. Our stake
in this, arguably, is larger than other economies. This perhaps explains why we  seem  to  have  been
quite forthcoming, in both our views and our actions, on issues affecting international monetary and
financial stability. This unusual stance has caused some controversy, particularly when we intervened
last summer in the stock and futures markets to deter market manipulation and correct market failure.
Interestingly, the controversy over this issue, which has now happily subsided following the success
of the operation, was then more intense outside of this region than within, and was especially strong
in  the  developed  markets.  I  would  attribute  this  difference  in  sentiment  to  the  relative  lack  of
appreciation, outside of this region rather than within, of the predicament that smaller, open markets
face in the increasingly liberalised international financial system.
Hong Kong supplies a particularly striking example of this vulnerability. Our markets are very free
and open. They are big and liquid enough to attract substantial international capital. But they are also
small, by comparison to the developed markets and the amount of international capital flowing around
the  globe,  seeking  opportunities  for  profit.  They  are  small  to  the  extent  that  the  prices  of  those
markets  are  capable  of  being  pushed  around  by  big  players,  particularly  those  in  a  position  to
influence market sentiment. Being a very externally oriented economy, we pursue an exchange rate
policy that promotes a stable external value for our currency to provide for predictability for all those
who engage in economic activity relating to the predominant external sector. In pursuing this policy,
1
BIS Review   47/1999
we  have  gone  as  far  as  to  adopt  currency  board  arrangements  that  operate  with  a  high  degree  of
transparency  while  eschewing  the  exercise  of  discretionary  monetary  management.  This  eclectic
combination  of  characteristics  and  policies,  which  is  quite  a  common  feature  of  economies  in  this
region, offered great temptation to market manipulation.
Such manipulation is often well timed and co-ordinated with the advance or reversal of capital flows,
since  essentially  the  same  market  players,  acting  in  the  multiple  roles  of  advisors,  agents  and
principals, are involved. One inevitable consequence of this is market panic and overshooting, to the
extent  of  risking  a  meltdown  in  the  monetary  and  financial  systems  concerned.  The  authorities,
obviously,  have  a  responsibility  to  act  to  prevent  this  from  happening.  Some  have  been  in  a  better
position to do so than others, using market means, particularly those with deep pockets. Some have
been forced into closing their markets, albeit temporarily. Others have been quietly happy that they
had  been  a  little  more  conservative  in  their  move  towards  financial  liberalisation.  In  Hong  Kong,
where  our  commitment  to  maintaining  open  markets  is  strong,  in  addition  to  our  unconventional
market  operation,  we  had  to  introduce  measures  that  have  effectively  built  us  a  big  cushion.  The
purpose of this cushion is to help us to absorb the spasmodic international financial shock waves of
mammoth dimensions that can now be generated by the international financial system. Some others,
regrettably, have had to suffer the debilitating consequences of financial meltdown, and to face the
often unjust accusation that these were entirely of their own making.
Domestic responses by economies in this region cannot on their own address the root of the crisis or
lessen the chances of another international financial shock wave. One thing that we have learned from
this  episode  of  financial  turmoil  is  that,  no  matter  how  well  maintained  the  domestic  financial
environment  may  be,  problems  remain  in  our  increasingly  liberalised  international  financial  system
that  cannot  be  resolved  by  individual  jurisdictions  alone.  There  is  a  need  for  regional  and
international  co-operation.  Hong  Kong  has  not,  of  course,  been  alone  in  this  view.  There  is  now
international consensus that something needs to be done, if not on what exactly should be done, in
reforming the international financial architecture.
Financial Crisis: Local, Regional or International
The financial crisis is basically an international one, and I think it is now generally accepted as such.
But, when the financial crisis erupted nearly two years ago in Thailand, and even when it was already
spreading rapidly throughout the region, the explanations put forward by the experts then were largely
local ones: macro-economic imbalances in the crisis-hit countries, cronyism, poor regulation, policy
errors,  and  so  on.  Consistent  with  these  explanations,  the  assumption  was  that  the  International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and the multilateral development banks would fix it country by country, as they
had done before in other localised crises elsewhere in the world. We therefore saw a series of policy
adjustment  programmes  and  financing  packages  targeting  specific  economies.  These  international
financial  institutions  deserve  much  credit  -  far  more  than  they  have  received  -  for  mobilising,
sometimes in a matter of days, financing packages totalling US$400 billion.
But  in  a  new  and  rapidly  changing  international  financial  system,  the  instruments  that  the
international  financial  institutions  have  at  their  disposal  seem  to  be  increasingly  inadequate.  They
soon found out that they can no longer use traditional strategies to deal with novel and unprecedented
problems  thrown  up  by  constantly  changing  technologies  and  ever  more  sophisticated  market
practices. The striking thing about these problems is that they erupt without much warning and to the
surprise  of  even  the  most  knowledgeable  in  this  field.  They  are  also  not  specific  to  individual
economies:  market  liberalisation  and  globalisation  have  made  them  common  problems  for  all
economies that wish to play a part in the international financial system. Indeed, with a few economies
in  Asia  going  through  the  same  process  of  financial  liberalisation  and  encountering  the  same
problems,  the  crisis  was  characterised  as  one  specific  to  Asia,  hence  the  reference  to  the  Asian
financial turmoil.
BIS Review   47/1999
2
But explanations of the financial crisis soon moved from regional to international. Events in Russia
and  Latin  America,  the  Long  Term  Capital  Management  (LTCM)  episode,  and  the  subsequent  de-
leveraging of hedge funds soon made it clear that our regional crisis was more than just a problem of
a few individual economies not keeping their houses in order.  The  root  of  the  crisis  is  in  the  great
increase in the speed, quantity and unpredictability of international capital flows. And many of these
capital flows are mobilised or indirectly influenced by highly leveraged institutions operating behind
a veil of secrecy interlaced with esoteric mathematical models that do not allow the systemic as well
as the rather simpler counter-party risks to be identified, let alone properly managed. As recent events
in this region and throughout the world have shown, this phenomenon has reached a level where it is
capable of disrupting even the largest markets and completely destabilising smaller  markets.  It  will
therefore be useful for us to discuss these issues in greater detail before focusing on what needs to be
done.
International Capital Flows
For a long time it has been taken for granted that capital flows are exactly analogous to trade flows:
that,  wherever  they  occur,  and  in  whatever  form,  they  invariably  benefit  long-term  economic
development,  and  that  therefore  the  looser  the  rein  they  are  given,  the  greater  the  benefit.  This
presumption,  however,  has  been  questioned  recently  in  light  of  the  experience  of  some  emerging
market economies. Professor Bhagwati, for example, in his article last year on “   The Capital Myth”
,  has  argued  that  the  assumption  that  free  capital  is  as  virtuous  as  free  trade  is  wrong  and  that  the
claims of enormous benefits from free capital mobility are not persuasive.
There are undoubtedly many benefits that go with free mobility of international capital. Traditionally,
capital flows take the form of commercial bank lending, foreign direct investment, or equity portfolio
investment.  Over  the  past  few  decades,  these  flows  have  facilitated  the  efficient  cross  border
utilisation  of  capital  and  have  provided  liquidity  in  financial  markets.  By  adding  an  international
dimension to financial intermediation, the mobility of international capital has clearly been helpful in
promoting growth and development in both the capital exporting and the importing economies. The
mobility  of  capital  has  more  recently  been  boosted  by  advances  in  telecommunications  and
information  technology,  allowing  capital  to  move  into  or  out  of  an  economy  in  huge  amount  and
within a very short space of time. The virtue of capital mobility therefore carries the risk of capital
volatility.  The  volatility  is  destabilising  in  both  directions.  Too  rapid  a  build-up  of  capital  inflows
places  severe  upward  pressure  on  domestic  asset  prices,  fuels  inflation,  and  exacerbates  macro-
economic  imbalances.  Conversely,  sudden  and  massive  reversals  of  these  flows  place  intense
downward  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate,  and  therefore  upward  pressure  on  interest  rates,  causing
asset bubbles to burst and splatter. When rapid build-up is followed suddenly by massive withdrawal,
we see the kind of crisis that swept across this region in 1997 and 1998.
The volatility of international capital flows is also attributable in part to the phenomenal growth of
derivatives and the global over-the-counter (OTC) market in the past decade. A survey by the Bank
for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  in  June  1998  estimated  the  size  of  the  global  OTC  derivatives
market  at  an  aggregate  notional  value  of  US$70  trillion.  Despite  the  trauma  of  the  global  financial
crisis  last  year,  there  have  been  no  signs  of  an  overall  slowdown.  According  to  the  US  Federal
Reserve Board, the notional value of derivatives contracts outstanding at US commercial banks, the
leading players in global derivatives markets, grew by more than 30% last year: this is the most rapid
annual growth since 1994.
The sheer volume of derivatives trading does not say much about their associated risks. These new
financial instruments have undeniably helped investors to unbundle their risks. They have promoted
investments and generated substantial benefits to the developing countries receiving such investments.
However,  the  availability  of  derivative  instruments  has  also  increased  the  opportunities  for
speculation that resulted in significant losses with the downturn in markets during the financial crisis.
3
BIS Review   47/1999
The use of swaps, futures, forwards, and other derivative instruments have enabled investors to take
on far greater exposure relative to their capital, and to greatly increase the potential for loss.
Market Stability and Highly Leveraged Institutions
Let me make it clear that the losses or gains by large financial market participants should not be a
concern  to  regulatory  authorities.  Nor  should  the  positions  taken  by  individual  market  participants
normally be of any concern. Speculators or investors, in essence, buy low/sell high or sell high/buy
low, thereby providing liquidity to markets. However, there are two situations in which the very large
positions taken by highly leveraged institutions are of particular concern to regulators.
The  first  situation  is  when  the  highly  leveraged  institutions  taking  very  large  positions  are
overwhelmed by market forces. As the case of LTCM has illustrated, highly leveraged positions can
pose  serious  risks  to  systemic  stability  even  in  the  large  and  established  markets  of  the  developed
economies.  As  the  highly  leveraged  institutions  are,  for  circumstances  they  have  not  factored  into
their  mathematical  models,  forced  to  unwind  their  very  large  positions,  particularly  against  the
background of highly volatile and illiquid market conditions, the credit losses of institutions providing
the highly leveraged institutions with funding can be huge. The rapid de-leveraging of large positions
by highly leveraged institutions is also highly contagious in that it in turn exacerbates volatility and
reduces liquidity not only in the markets concerned, but also in other markets. The rapid de-leveraging
of the short yen positions by the hedge funds in October last year is a good example of the volatility
that can result. The yen strengthened by 11% to 111 over a couple of days. Such volatility affects the
positions  of  yet  other  highly  leveraged  institutions  and  their  counter-parties  providing  them  with
credit. The potential for market dislocation and the systemic risks this posed were so serious that, as
you  all  know,  last  September  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  found  it  necessary  to  broker  an  unusual
package by a consortium of banks to rescue LTCM.
The  second  situation  is  when  the  smaller  markets  are  overwhelmed  by  the  forces  of  the  highly
leveraged institutions. Not  only  does  this  raise  serious  concerns  on  the  risk  to  systemic  stability,  it
also  undermines  the  integrity  and  efficiency  of  the  markets.  By  virtue  of  their  sheer  size  and
aggressive  trading  strategies,  the  highly  leveraged  institutions,  through  their  agencies,  who  usually
also  provide  them  with  the  credit,  and  possibly  also  ride  along  with  them,  often  use  their  market
power to influence the prices in smaller markets. Almost always an attack on a currency in Asia starts
late  on  a  Friday  afternoon  when  the  domestic  markets  in  Asia  are  thin  and  when  the  international
currency markets in London and New York open for business. Almost always a succession of big sell
orders is placed for execution in a short period of time. And almost always the banks, when asked, say
that they are executing those orders on behalf of their customers, whose identity and purpose cannot
be  disclosed  because  client  secrecy  is  sacrosanct.  And  all  this  is  supported  with  an  immaculately
timed  commentary  of  gloom  and  doom.  Some  are  more  objective  than  others,  but  regrettably  the
impression one gets, particularly as a regulator, is that they are aimed at generating undue pessimism
and  panic,  and  consequent  sharp  and  widespread  movements  across  the  currency  and  other  related
financial markets in favour of those behind the attacks.
Most of the activities of the highly leveraged institutions are carried out through the OTC markets,
which  are  very  opaque.  Unlike  organised  exchanges,  OTC  markets  are  subject  to  little,  if  any,
transparency  or  regulatory  requirements,  raising  the  risk  of  price  ramping,  collusion  and  other
misconduct.
International Financial Architecture: International Co-operation for Reform
So  what  can  be  done  about  all  this?  Following  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  crisis,  various
international  forums  and  multilateral  financial  institutions  have  devoted  a  great  deal  of  effort  to
improving the stability and functioning of financial markets. Working group after working group has
been  formed  to  look  into  specific  issues.  There  were  the  three  G-22  working  groups,  the  working
BIS Review   47/1999
4
group  under  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  the  two  transparency  and  disclosure
working groups under the Committee on Global Financial Systems, and now the three working groups
of the G-7 Financial Stability Forum to be formed. And I should not forget the very useful work done
by the IIF, and by other forums in this region. Many helpful reports have been prepared, including the
two  reports  by  the  IIF  released  in  March  this  year  on  risk  management  and  on  transparency  in
emerging markets finance, all of them produced in a highly  co-operative  atmosphere.  I  welcome  in
particular  the  Institute’s  readiness  to  work  with  relevant  public  sector  bodies  on  appropriate
disclosure for private financial institutions active in the international capital markets. I am sure this
international co-operative spirit, not only among international financial institutions, national finance
ministries  and  central  banks,  but  also  with  the  private  sector,  will  in  the  end  produce  helpful
blueprints for action. But this process can take too long. There is always the risk that when the dust
has settled the initiative and enthusiasm, dare I say, on the part of those less affected by the crisis,
may be stifled. There is also the risk that the plight of those who have been seriously affected by the
crisis  is  not  given  the  attention  it  deserves,  simply  because  they  do  not  have  an  adequately
representative voice on the issues at hand at these international forums.
There is no lack of ideas, but they need to be translated into actions sooner rather than later. Let me
take this opportunity to outline three broad approaches mooted at different forums and supported by
us.  The  first  approach  involves  enhancing  the  transparency  of  markets.  Timely  and  reliable
information relevant to decision making by market participants as well as by the regulatory authorities
is crucial to the effective functioning of a market. It is thus important that there should be an adequate
public disclosure framework to provide information that is necessary for counter-parties, creditors and
investors  to  assess  risks  properly.  Not  only  should  increased  transparency  be  promoted  in  markets
trading products in an established exchange. It is also perhaps time to consider whether some suitable
form of transparency requirements should be imposed in OTC markets. This is not an easy task, but I
believe that with earnest international  co-operation,  we  can  achieve  meaningful  results.  Although  a
delicate  balancing  act  is  required,  I  am  confident  that  this  is  possible  without  imposing  heavy
reporting burdens or infringing too much on proprietary information of individual institutions. In this
connection,  the  proposal  by  Germany  for  an  international  credit  register  is  attractive.  The  register
could collect information on the exposures of international financial intermediaries to single counter-
parties that have the potential to create systemic risk.
For  the  public  sector,  the  tasks  include  developing  still  higher  standards  for  macroeconomic  and
financial  data  in  emerging  market  economies,  and  promoting  transparency  in  the  reporting  of  their
holdings  of  foreign  reserves.  Greater  transparency  in  the  operations  of  international  financial
institutions, such as the IMF, is also being pursued.
The  second  approach  involves  designing  an  appropriate  form  of  oversight  of  highly  leveraged
institutions. The Basle Committee’s report on Banks’ Interaction with Highly Leveraged Institutions
recommends  indirect  regulation  in  which  banks  should  adopt  more  prudent  policies  on  the
assessment, measurement and management of their  exposure  to  highly  leveraged  institutions.  Other
tools  of  indirect  regulation  could  include  the  imposition  of  capital  charges  on  lending  to  such
institutions,  raising  margin  and  collateral  requirements,  and  so  on.  While  such  indirect  regulation,
through  creditors,  should  clearly  be  supported,  we  need  to  satisfy  ourselves  that  it  is  an  adequate
safeguard against the highly leveraged institutions causing the type of systemic problems in smaller
markets when their activities overwhelm these markets.
The  third  approach  involves  international  co-operation  to  tackle  regulatory  arbitrage.  As  industrial
and  emerging  countries  continue  to  strengthen  their  own  regulatory  standards,  financial  market
participants may relocate their operations to offshore financial centres to take advantage of relatively
lax  regulatory  standards.  It  is  thus  important  for  offshore  financial  centres  to  strengthen  their
supervisory  systems  and  standards.  To  encourage  these  centres  to  comply  with  international
standards, various measures could be considered. For example, higher risk weights could be applied
5
BIS Review   47/1999
to  counter-party  transactions  for  banks  doing  business  with  a  financial  entity  operating  out  of  an
offshore jurisdiction that does not comply with Basle Core Principles.
Conclusion
Taken together, the three approaches could result in quite an extensive overhaul of the international
financial  architecture  and  a  great  deal  of  co-ordination  on  the  international  front.  This  is  no  easy
undertaking,  and  the  nature  of  the  problem  means  that  the  process  of  reform  needs  to  be  both
comprehensive  in  market  coverage  and  inclusive  in  the  involvement  of  interested  parties.  Cross-
border speculative attacks target the vulnerabilities and weaknesses of particular economies and thrive
by  exploiting  the  gaps  and  inconsistencies  between  jurisdictions.  It  is  therefore  essential  that
emerging markets, and not just the big industrialised economies, are involved in the reform process.
Emerging  markets  have  been  most  affected  by  the  volatilities  of  the  last  couple  of  years,  and  their
experience  is  crucial  for  the  formulation  of  workable  policies:  they  have  a  different  perspective  of
events and different needs from those of the larger, industrialised economies.
Although reform of the financial architecture has to be done on an international basis, there is much
that can also be done through regional co-operation both to help advance the reform process and to
promote parallel and complementary initiatives. Regional forums, of the kind that we are engaged in
today, are way of gathering views and developing consensus so that collectively we can carry more
weight, and speak with a more unified voice, in the international forums. They also help to ensure, for
example, that the standards and best practices formulated in an international context are workable in
the context of Asia.
Regional co-operation can help give a spur to closer international co-operation by ensuring that our
recent experience and our special needs as open, emerging markets are taken into account in the larger
process of reforming the international financial architecture. We are a diverse region, and the crisis of
the past couple of years has affected us all in different ways. But the fact that it has affected all of us
underlines the need for us to work together as a region in our efforts to prevent future crises.
BIS Review   47/1999
6
