Mr Greenspan presents the US Federal Reserve’s semiannual report on monetary policy
Testimony by the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, Mr Alan
Greenspan,  before  the  Committee  on  Banking  and  Financial  Services  of  the  US  House  of
Representatives on 22 July 1999 (July 1999 Humphrey-Hawkins report).
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and other members of the Committee, for this opportunity to present the
Federal Reserve’s semiannual report on monetary policy.
To  date,  1999  has  been  an  exceptional  year  for  the  American  economy,  but  a  challenging  one  for
American monetary policy. Through the first six months of this year, the U.S. economy has further
extended  its  remarkable  performance:  Almost  1¼  million  jobs  were  added  to  payrolls  on  net,  and
gross domestic product apparently expanded at a brisk pace, perhaps near that of the prior three years.
At the root of this impressive expansion of economic activity has been a marked acceleration in the
productivity of our nation’s workforce. This productivity growth has allowed further healthy advances
in  real  wages  and  has  permitted  activity  to  expand  at  a  robust  clip  while  helping  to  foster  price
stability.
Last fall, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) eased monetary policy to counter a seizing-up
of  financial  markets  that  threatened  to  disrupt  economic  activity  significantly.  As  those  markets
recovered,  the  FOMC  had  to  assess  whether  that  policy  stance  remained  appropriate.  By  late  last
month, when it became apparent that much of the financial strain of last fall had eased, that foreign
economies were firming, and that demand in the United States was growing at an unsustainable pace,
the FOMC raised its intended federal funds rate ¼ percentage point, to 5%. To have refrained from
doing so in our judgment would have put the U.S. economy’s expansion at risk.
If  nothing  else,  the  experience  of  the  last  decade  has  reinforced  earlier  evidence  that  a  necessary
condition  for  maximum  sustainable  economic  growth  is  price  stability.  While  product  prices  have
remained remarkably restrained in the face of exceptionally strong demand and expanding potential
supply, it is imperative that we do not become complacent.
The already shrunken pool of job-seekers and considerable strength of aggregate demand suggest that
the  Federal  Reserve  will  need  to  be  especially  alert  to  inflation  risks.  Should  productivity  fail  to
continue  to  accelerate  and  demand  growth  persist  or  strengthen,  the  economy  could  overheat.  That
would  engender  inflationary  pressures  and  put  the  sustainability  of  this  unprecedented  period  of
remarkable growth in jeopardy. One indication that inflation risks were rising would be a tendency for
labor markets to tighten further. But the FOMC also needs to continue to assess whether the existing
degree of pressure in these markets is consistent with sustaining our low-inflation environment. If new
data  suggest  it  is  likely  that  the  pace  of  cost  and  price  increases  will  be  picking  up,  the  Federal
Reserve will have to act promptly and forcefully so as to preclude imbalances from arising that would
only require a more disruptive adjustment later – one that could impair the expansion and bring into
question whether the many gains already made can be sustained.
Recent Developments
A number of important forces have been shaping recent developments in the U.S. economy. One has
been a recovery of financial markets from the disruptions of last fall. By the end of 1998, the extreme
withdrawal from risk-taking and consequent seizing-up of markets had largely dissipated. This year,
risk spreads have narrowed further – though generally not to the unrealistically low levels of a year
ago – and a heavy volume of issuance in credit markets has signaled a return to their more-normal
functioning. Equity prices have risen to new highs and, in the process, have elevated price-earnings
ratios to historic levels.
Abroad, many financial markets and economies also have improved. Brazil weathered a depreciation
of  its  currency  with  limited  fallout  on  its  neighbors.  In  Asia,  a  number  of  the  emerging  market
1
BIS Review   85/1999
economies seemed to be reviving after the trying adjustments of the previous year or so. Progress has
not been universal, and in many economies prospects remain clouded, depending importantly on the
persistence  of  efforts  to  make  fundamental  reforms  whose  necessity  had  been  made  so  painfully
obvious in the crises those economies endured. Nonetheless, the risks of further major disruptions to
financial  and  trade  flows  that  had  concerned  the  FOMC  when  it  eased  policy  last  fall  have  clearly
diminished.  Improving  global  prospects  also  mean  that  the  U.S.  economy  will  no  longer  be
experiencing declines in basic commodity and import prices that held down inflation in recent years.
In the domestic economy, data becoming available this year have tended to confirm that productivity
growth  has  stepped  up.  It  is  this  acceleration  of  productivity  over  recent  years  that  has  explained
much  of  the  surprising  combination  of  a  slowing  in  inflation  and  sustained  rapid  real  growth.
Increased labor productivity has directly limited the rise of unit labor costs and accordingly damped
pressures on prices. This good inflation performance, reinforced also by falling import prices, in turn
has fostered further declines in inflation expectations over recent years that bode well for pressures on
costs and prices going forward.
In testimony before this committee several years ago, I raised the possibility that we were entering a
period  of  technological  innovation  that  occurs  perhaps  once  every  fifty  or  one-hundred  years.  The
evidence then was only marginal and inconclusive. Of course, tremendous advances in computing and
telecommunications were apparent, but their translations into improved overall economic efficiency
and  rising  national  productivity  were  conjectural  at  best.  While  the  growth  of  output  per  hour  had
shown some signs of quickening, the normal variations exhibited by such data in the past were quite
large.  More  intriguing  was  the  remarkable  surge  in  capital  investment  after  1993,  especially  in
high-tech goods, a full two years after a general recovery was under way. This suggested a marked
increase in the perceived prospective rates of return on the newer technologies.
That  American  productivity  growth  has  picked  up  over  the  past  five  years  or  so  has  become
increasingly evident. Nonfarm business productivity (on a methodologically consistent basis) grew at
an average rate of a bit over 1% per year in the 1980s. In recent years, productivity growth has picked
up to more than 2%, with the past year averaging about 2½%.
To  gauge  the  potential  for  similar,  if  not  larger,  gains  in  productivity  going  forward,  we  need  to
attempt to arrive at some understanding of what has occurred to date. A good deal of the acceleration
in output per hour has reflected the sizable increase in the stock of labor-saving equipment. But that is
not  the  whole  story.  Output  has  grown  beyond  what  normally  would  have  been  expected  from
increased  inputs  of  labor  and  capital  alone.  Business  restructuring  and  the  synergies  of  the  new
technologies have enhanced productive efficiencies. American industry quite generally has shared an
improved  level  of  efficiency  and  cost  containment  through  high-tech  capital  investment,  not  solely
newer  industries  at  the  cutting  edge  of  innovation.  Our  century-old  motor  vehicle  industry,  for
example, has raised output per hour by a dramatic 4½% annually on average in the past two years,
compared with a lackluster 1¼% on average earlier this decade. Much the same is true of many other
mature industries, such as steel, textiles, and other stalwarts of an earlier age. This has confirmed the
earlier  indications  of  an  underlying  improvement  in  rates  of  return  on  the  newer  technologies  and
their profitable synergies with the existing capital stock.
These  developments  have  created  a  broad  range  of  potential  innovations  that  have  granted  firms
greater ability to profitably displace costly factors of production whenever profit margins have been
threatened.  Moreover,  the  accelerating  use  of  newer  technologies  has  markedly  enhanced  the
flexibility of our productive facilities. It has dramatically reduced the lead times on the acquisition of
new equipment and enabled firms to adjust quickly to changing market demands. This has indirectly
increased productive capacity and effectively, at least for now, eliminated production bottlenecks and
the shortages and price pressures they inevitably breed.
This greater ability to pare costs, increase production flexibility, and expand capacity are arguably the
major  reasons  why  inflationary  pressures  have  been  held  in  check  in  recent  years.  Others  have
BIS Review   85/1999
2
included  the  one-time  fall  in  the  prices  of  oil,  other  commodities,  and  imports  more  generally.  In
addition, a breaking down of barriers to cross-border trade, owing both to the new technologies and to
the reduction of government restrictions on trade, has intensified the pressures of competition, helping
to  contain  prices.  Coupled  with  the  decline  in  military  spending  worldwide,  this  has  freed  up
resources for more productive endeavors, especially in a number of previously nonmarket economies.
More  generally,  the  consequent  erosion  of  pricing  power  has  imparted  an  important  imperative  to
hold down costs. The availability of new technology to each company and its rivals affords both the
opportunity  and  the  competitive  necessity  of  taking  steps  to  reduce  costs,  which  translates  on  a
consolidated basis into increased national productivity.
The acceleration in productivity owes importantly to new information technologies. Prior to this IT
revolution,  most  of  twentieth-century  business  decisionmaking  had  been  hampered  by  limited
information.  Owing  to  the  paucity  of  timely  knowledge  of  customers’  needs,  the  location  of
inventories, and the status of material flows throughout complex production systems, businesses built
in substantial redundancies.
Doubling up on materials and staffing was essential as a cushion against the inevitable misjudgments
made in real time when decisions were based on information that was hours, days, or even weeks old.
While businesspeople must still operate in an uncertain world, the recent years’ remarkable surge in
the availability of real-time information has enabled them to remove large swaths of inventory safety
stocks, redundant capital equipment, and layers of workers, while arming them with detailed data to
fine-tune specifications to most individual customer needs.
Despite the remarkable progress witnessed to date, history counsels us to be quite modest about our
ability  to  project  the  future  path  and  pace  of  technology  and  its  implications  for  productivity  and
economic growth. We must remember that the pickup in productivity is relatively recent, and a key
question is whether that growth will persist at a high rate, drop back toward the slower standard of
much of the last twenty-five years, or climb even more. By the last I do not just mean that productivity
will continue to grow, but that it will grow at an increasingly faster pace through a continuation of the
process that has so successfully contained inflation and supported economic growth in recent years.
The  business  and  financial  community  does  not  as  yet  appear  to  sense  a  pending  flattening  in  this
process of  increasing  productivity  growth.  This  is  certainly  the  widespread  impression  imparted  by
corporate executives. And it is further evidenced by the earnings forecasts of more than a thousand
securities  analysts  who  regularly  follow  S&P  500  companies  on  a  firm-by-firm  basis,  which
presumably embody what corporate executives are telling them. While the level of these estimates is
no doubt upwardly biased, unless these biases have significantly changed over time, the revisions of
these  estimates  should  be  suggestive  of  changes  in  underlying  economic  forces.  Except  for  a  short
hiatus in the latter part of 1998, analysts’ expectations of five-year earnings growth have been revised
up continually since early 1995. If anything, the pace of those upward revisions has quickened of late.
True,  some  of  that  may  reflect  a  pickup  in  expected  earnings  of  foreign  affiliates,  especially  in
Europe, Japan, and the rest of Asia. But most of this year’s increase almost surely owes to domestic
influences.
There are only a limited number of ways that the expected long-term growth of domestic profits can
increase, and some we can reasonably rule out. There is little evidence that company executives or
security analysts have significantly changed their views in recent months of the longer-term outlook
for continued price containment, the share of profits relative to wages, or anticipated growth of hours
worked.  Rather,  analysts  and  the  company  executives  they  talk  to  appear  to  be  expecting  that  unit
costs will be held in check, or even lowered, as sales expand. Hence, implicit in upward revisions of
their forecasts, when consolidated, is higher expected national productivity growth.
Independent data on costs and prices in recent years tend to confirm what aggregate data on output
and  hours  worked  indicate:  that  productivity  growth  has  risen.  With  price  inflation  stable  and
3
BIS Review   85/1999
domestic operating profit margins rising, the rate of increase in total consolidated unit costs must have
been falling.
Even  taking  into  account  the  evidence  of  declining  unit  interest  costs  of  nonfinancial  corporations,
unit  labor  cost  increases  (which  constitute  three  quarters  of  total  unit  costs)  must  also  be  slowing.
Because  until  very  recently  growth  of  compensation  per  hour  has  been  rising,  albeit  modestly,  it
follows  that  productivity  growth  must  have  been  rising  these  past  five  years,  as  well.  Accelerating
productivity  is  thus  evident  in  underlying  consolidated  income  statements  of  nonfinancial
corporations, as well as in our more direct, though doubtless partly flawed, measures of output and
input.
That  said,  we  must  also  understand  the  limits  to  this  process  of  productivity-driven  growth.  To  be
sure,  the  recent  acceleration  in  productivity  has  provided  an  offset  to  our  taut  labor  markets  by
holding unit costs in check and by adding to the competitive pressures that have contained prices. But
once output-per-hour growth stabilizes, even if at a higher rate, any pickup in the growth of nominal
compensation  per  hour  will  translate  directly  into  a  more-rapid  rate  of  increase  in  unit  labor  costs,
heightening the pressure on firms to raise the prices of the goods and services they sell. Thus, should
the increments of gains in technology that have fostered productivity slow, any extant pressures in the
labor market should ultimately show through to product prices.
Meanwhile,  though,  the  impressive  productivity  growth  of  recent  years  also  has  had  important
implications  for  the  growth  of  aggregate  demand.  If  productivity  is  driving  up  real  incomes  and
profits – and, hence, gross domestic income – then gross domestic product must mirror this rise with
some  combination  of  higher  sales  of  motor  vehicles,  other  consumer  goods,  new  homes,  capital
equipment,  and  net  exports.  By  themselves,  surges  in  economic  growth  are  not  necessarily
unsustainable  –  provided  they  do  not  exceed  the  sum  of  the  rate  of  growth  in  the  labor  force  and
productivity for a protracted period. However, when productivity is accelerating, it is very difficult to
gauge when an economy is in the process of overheating.
In  such  circumstances,  assessing  conditions  in  the  labor  market  can  be  helpful  in  forming  those
judgments. Employment growth has exceeded the growth in working-age population this past year by
almost  ½  percentage  point.  While  somewhat  less  than  the  spread  between  these  growth  rates  over
much of the past few years, this excess is still large enough to continue the further tightening of labor
markets.  It  implies  that  real  GDP  is  growing  faster  than  its  potential.  To  an  important  extent,  this
excess  of  the  growth  of  demand  over  supply  owes  to  the  wealth  effect  as  consumers  increasingly
perceive  their  capital  gains  in  the  stock  and  housing  markets  as  permanent  and,  evidently  as  a
consequence, spend part of them, an issue to which I shall return shortly.
There  can  be  little  doubt  that,  if  the  pool  of  job  seekers  shrinks  sufficiently,  upward  pressures  on
wage costs are inevitable, short – as I have put it previously – of a repeal of the law of supply and
demand.  Such  cost  increases  have  invariably  presaged  rising  inflation  in  the  past,  and  presumably
would in the future, which would threaten the economic expansion.
By themselves, neither rising wages nor swelling employment rolls pose a risk to sustained economic
growth.  Indeed,  the  Federal  Reserve  welcomes  such  developments  and  has  attempted  to  gauge  its
policy  in  recent  years  to  allow  the  economy  to  realize  its  full,  enhanced  potential.  In  doing  so,  we
must  remain  concerned  with  evolving  shorter-run  imbalances  that  can  constrain  long-run  economic
expansion and job growth.
With productivity growth boosting both aggregate demand and aggregate supply, the implications for
the real market interest rates that are consistent with sustainable economic growth are not obvious. In
fact,  current  real  rates,  although  somewhat  high  by  historical  standards,  have  been  consistent  with
continuing rapid growth in an environment where, as a consequence of greater productivity growth,
capital gains and high returns on investment give both households and businesses enhanced incentives
to spend.
BIS Review   85/1999
4
Other Considerations
Even  if  labor  supply  and  demand  were  in  balance,  however,  other  aspects  of  the  economic
environment may exhibit imbalances that could have important implications for future developments.
For  example,  in  recent  years,  as  a  number  of  analysts  have  pointed  out,  a  significant  shortfall  has
emerged in the private saving with which to finance domestic investment in plant and equipment and
houses.
One  offset  to  the  decline  in  household  saving  out  of  income  has  been  a  major  shift  of  the  federal
budget  to  surplus.  Of  course,  an  important  part  of  that  budgetary  improvement,  in  turn,  owes  to
augmented revenues from capital gains and other taxes that have flowed from the rising market value
of  assets.  Still,  the  budget  surpluses  have  helped  to  hold  down  interest  rates  and  facilitate  private
spending.
The  remaining  gap  between  private  saving  and  domestic  investment  has  been  filled  by  a  sizable
increase in saving invested from abroad, largely a consequence of the technologically driven marked
increase  in  rates  of  return  on  U.S.  investments.  Moreover,  in  recent  years,  with  many  foreign
economies  faltering,  U.S.  investments  have  looked  particularly  attractive.  As  U.S.  international
indebtedness mounts, however, and foreign economies revive, capital inflows from abroad that enable
domestic investment to exceed domestic saving may be difficult to sustain. Any resulting decline in
demand for dollar assets could well be associated with higher market interest rates, unless domestic
saving rebounds.
Near-Term Outlook
Going  forward,  the  Members  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  and  presidents  of  the  Federal  Reserve
Banks  believe  there  are  mechanisms  in  place  that  should  help  to  slow  the  growth  of  spending  to  a
pace more consistent with that of potential output growth. Consumption growth should slow some, if,
as seems most likely, outsized gains in share values are not repeated. In that event, businesses may
trim their capital spending plans, a tendency that would be reinforced by the higher level of market
interest  rates  that  borrowers  now  face.  But  with  large  unexploited  long-term  profit  opportunities
stemming  from  still-burgeoning  innovations  and  falling  prices  of  many  capital  goods,  the  typical
cyclical retrenchment could be muted.
Working to offset somewhat this anticipated slowing of the growth of domestic demand, our export
markets  can  be  expected  to  be  more  buoyant  because  of  the  revival  in  growth  in  many  of  our
important trading partners.
After considering the various forces at work in the near term, most of the Federal Reserve governors
and Bank presidents expect the growth rate of real GDP to be between 3½ and 3¾% over the four
quarters of 1999 and 2½ to 3% in 2000. The unemployment rate is expected to remain in the range of
the past eighteen months.
Inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percent change in the consumer price index, is expected to
be 2¼ to 2½% over the four quarters of this year. CPI increases thus far in 1999 have been greater
than the average in 1998, but the governors and bank presidents do not anticipate a further pickup in
inflation going forward. An abatement of the recent run-up in energy prices would contribute to such
a  pattern,  but  policymakers’  forecasts  also  reflect  their  determination  to  hold  the  line  on  inflation,
through policy actions if necessary. The central tendency of their CPI inflation forecasts for 2000 is
2 to 2½%.
5
BIS Review   85/1999
Pre-emptive Policymaking
In its deliberations this year, the FOMC has had to wrestle with the issue of what policy setting has
the capacity to sustain this remarkable expansion, now in its ninth year. For monetary policy to foster
maximum  sustainable  economic  growth,  it  is  useful  to  pre-empt  forces  of  imbalance  before  they
threaten  economic  stability.  But  this  may  not  always  be  possible  –  the  future  at  times  can  be  too
opaque to penetrate. When we can be pre-emptive, we should be, because modest pre-emptive actions
can obviate more drastic actions at a later date that could destabilize the economy.
I  should  emphasize  that  pre-emptive  policymaking  is  equally  applicable  in  both  directions,  as  has
been  evident  over  the  years  both  in  our  inclination  to  raise  interest  rates  when  the  potential  for
inflationary pressures emerged, as in the spring of 1994, or to lower rates when the more palpable risk
was  economic  weakness,  as  in  the  fall  of  last  year.  This  even-handedness  is  necessary  because
emerging  adverse  trends  may  fall  on  either  side  of  our  long-run  objective  of  price  stability.  Stable
prices  allow  households  and  firms  to  concentrate  their  efforts  on  what  they  do  best:  consuming,
producing,  saving,  and  investing.  A  rapidly  rising  or  a  falling  general  price  level  would  confound
market signals and place strains on the system that ultimately may throttle economic expansion.
In the face of uncertainty, the Federal Reserve at times has been willing to move policy based on an
assessment  that  risks  to  the  outlook  were  disproportionately  skewed  in  one  direction  or  the  other,
rather  than  on  a  firm  conviction  that,  absent  action,  the  economy  would  develop  imbalances.  For
instance, both the modest policy tightening of the spring of 1997 and some portion of the easing of
last fall could be viewed as insurance against potential adverse economic outcomes.
As I have already indicated, by its June meeting the FOMC was of the view that the full extent of this
insurance was no longer needed. It also did not believe that its recent modest tightening would put the
risks  of  inflation  going  forward  completely  into  balance.  However,  given  the  many  uncertainties
surrounding developments on both the supply and demand side of the economy, the FOMC did not
want to foster the impression that it was committed in short order to tighten further. Rather, it judged
that it would need to evaluate the incoming data for more signs that further imbalances were likely to
develop.
Pre-emptive policymaking requires that the Federal Reserve continually monitor economic conditions,
update forecasts, and appraise the setting of its policy instrument. Equity prices figure importantly in
that  forecasting  process  because  they  influence  aggregate  demand.  As  I  testified  last  month,  the
central bank cannot effectively directly target stock or other asset prices. Should an asset bubble arise,
or even if one is already in train, monetary policy properly calibrated can doubtless mitigate at least
part  of  the  impact  on  the  economy.  And,  obviously,  if  we  could  find  a  way  to  prevent  or  deflate
emerging bubbles, we would be better off. But identifying a bubble in the process of inflating may be
among  the  most  formidable  challenges  confronting  a  central  bank,  pitting  its  own  assessment  of
fundamentals against the combined judgment of millions of investors.
By itself, the interpretation that we are currently enjoying productivity acceleration does not ensure
that  equity  prices  are  not  overextended.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  if  the  nation’s  productivity
growth has stepped up, the level of profits and their future potential would be elevated. That prospect
has supported higher stock prices. The danger is that in these circumstances, an unwarranted, perhaps
euphoric, extension of recent developments can drive equity  prices  to  levels  that  are  unsupportable
even  if  risks  in  the  future  become  relatively  small.  Such  straying  above  fundamentals  could  create
problems  for  our  economy  when  the  inevitable  adjustment  occurs.  It  is  the  job  of  economic
policymakers  to  mitigate  the  fallout  when  it  occurs  and,  hopefully,  ease  the  transition  to  the  next
expansion.
BIS Review   85/1999
6
Century Date Change Preparations
I would be remiss in this overview of near-term economic developments if I did not relay the ongoing
efforts of the Federal Reserve, other financial regulators, and the private sector to come to grips with
the rollover of their computer systems at the start of the upcoming century. While I have been in this
business  too  long  to  promise  that  2000  will  open  on  an  entirely  trouble-free  note,  the  efforts  to
address potential problems in the banking and financial system have been exhaustive. For our part, the
Federal  Reserve  System  has  now  completed  remediation  and  testing  of  all  its  mission-critical
applications, including testing its securities and funds-transfer systems with our thousands of financial
institution customers.
As we have said previously, while we do not believe consumers need to hold excess cash because we
expect  the  full  array  of  payment  options  to  work,  we  have  taken  precautions  to  ensure  that  ample
currency  is  available.  Further,  the  Federal  Reserve  established  a  special  liquidity  facility  at  which
sound depository institutions with  good  collateral  can  readily  borrow  at  a  slight  penalty  rate  in  the
months surrounding the rollover. The availability of this back-stop funding should make depository
institutions  more  willing  to  provide  loans  and  lines  of  credit  to  other  financial  institutions  and
businesses and to meet any deposit withdrawals as this century closes.
The banking industry is also working hard, and with evident success, to prepare for the event. By the
end of May, 98% of the nation’s depository  institutions  examined  by  Federal  Financial  Institutions
Examination  Council  agencies  were  making  satisfactory  progress  on  their  Year  2000  preparations.
The  agencies  are  now  in  the  process  of  examining  supervised  institutions  for  compliance  with  the
June 30  milestone  date  for  completing  testing  and  implementation  of  remediated  mission-critical
systems. Supervisors also expect institutions to prepare business resumption contingency plans and to
maintain open lines of communication with customers and counterparties about their own readiness.
The  few  remaining  laggards  among  financial  institutions  in  Year  2000  preparedness  have  been
targeted for additional follow-up and, as necessary, will be subject to formal enforcement actions.
Conclusion
As a result of our nation’s ongoing favorable economic performance, not only has the broad majority
of our people moved to a higher standard of living, but a strong economy also has managed to bring
into the productive workforce many who had for too long been at its periphery. The unemployment
rate for those with less than a high-school education has declined from 10¾% in early 1994 to 6¾%
today, twice the percentage point decline in the overall unemployment rate. These gains have enabled
large segments of our society to obtain skills on the job and the self-esteem associated with work.
The questions before us today are what macroeconomic policy settings can best extend this favorable
performance. No doubt, a monetary policy focused on promoting price stability over the long run and
a fiscal policy focused on enhancing national saving by accumulating budget surpluses have been key
elements  in  creating  an  environment  fostering  the  capital  investment  that  has  driven  the  gains  to
productivity and living standards. I am confident that by maintaining this discipline, policymakers in
the Congress, in the executive branch, and at the Federal Reserve will give our vital U.S. economy its
best chance of continuing its remarkable progress.
7
BIS Review   85/1999
