Mr Thiessen’s statement on the Bank of Canada’s Monetary Policy Report
Opening statement of the Governor of the Bank of Canada, Mr Gordon Thiessen, before the
Standing Committee on Finance of the House of Commons on 26 May 1999.
It  is  always  a  pleasure  to  appear  before  your  Committee  following  the  publication  of  our
Monetary Policy Report. We released our ninth Report last Wednesday. The Bank of Canada
began publishing these Reports on a semiannual basis four years ago, as part of our effort to
increase the transparency and accountability of the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy.
The main focus of every Monetary Policy Report is how well Canada is doing in managing
inflation. But controlling inflation is not an end in itself. The objective of monetary policy is
to help create and maintain a monetary climate that favours good economic performance, an
economy where growth and employment are strong and Canadians feel prosperous. The Bank
feels strongly that the best thing that monetary policy can do to help long-term growth in the
economy is to preserve low and stable inflation. Indeed, I believe the low and stable inflation
rate we have had in Canada in recent years has helped us through some difficult times.
However, I am also happy to report that the global financial system is much more stable than
it  was  at  the  time  of  my  last  appearance  before  you  six  months  ago.  The  shock  from  the
financial crisis in Southeast Asia, which began almost two years ago, was compounded last
August by Russia’s default on its external debt. The turbulence that followed has now largely
subsided  and  investor  confidence  is  being  restored.  As  a  result,  the  outlook  for  the  world
economy has become more positive than it was last November.
Financial  markets  have  steadied  in  Southeast  Asia,  and  prospects  are  good  for  a  gradual
recovery  there.  In  Brazil  the  authorities  have  taken  major  steps  to  address  their  difficulties.
Overall,  global  financial  markets  now  seem  better  able  to  assess  risk.  Interest  rate  cuts  by
central banks in all major countries have helped restore investor confidence.
Most importantly for Canada, the US economy has continued to outperform expectations with
strong growth and, as yet, no definitive sign of inflation pressure. Nonetheless, there is still a
fair  degree  of  uncertainty  about  the  overall  external  environment,  given  the  divergent
performance of the major economies. Japan is still in recession and Europe has been slowing
down. Because of this, we are expecting only a slow recovery in world commodity prices this
year.
In Canada, the recent driving force in our economy has been exports. The strong demand in
the US economy, the relatively weak Canadian dollar and increasingly competitive Canadian
manufacturers are allowing us to sell into the United States very successfully.
What  we  are  expecting  to  see  now,  however,  is  an  increase  here  at  home  in  consumer  and
business  spending.  We  believe  that  the  improvement  in  business  and  consumer  confidence
that we have seen in the last few months, the better employment picture and recent reductions
in interest rates will all help support domestic spending.
To  be  more  specific,  compared  with  six  months  ago,  we  at  the  Bank  have  raised  our
projection for growth in the economy in 1999 to between 2¾ and 3¾ per cent. We have such a
wide range because of the international uncertainties that I mentioned a moment ago. The high
end of this range is well above the latest consensus among private sector  forecasters.  If  the
1
BIS Review   61/1999
economy  does  grow  at  the  higher  end  of  this  range,  it  is  likely  to  be  because  of  stronger
exports and more substitutions of Canadian goods for imports due to Canada’s good price and
cost  performance.  Our  economy  should  continue  to  expand  next  year  at  a  broadly  similar
pace.
On the basis of these growth forecasts, we would expect the trend of inflation to rise modestly
over the next 18 months but remain in the lower half of the Bank’s 1 to 3 per cent target range
for  inflation.  There  is  an  increasing  level  of  confidence,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  that
Canada’s inflation will remain stable.
Another source of uncertainty for the Bank at the present time is in estimating the margin of
unused capacity in the economy. If economic activity expands as forecast, the traditional way
of measuring these things tells us that the current margin of economic slack should be taken
up  in  the  second  half  of  next  year.  However,  the  economy  seems  to  have  undergone  some
significant changes during the 1990s, and the traditional estimates of slack may no longer be
accurate. As a result, the Bank will be placing increased weight on a range  of  indicators  to
assess the degree of pressure on the economy’s production capacity. What we have in mind
are  such  things  as  movements  in  inflation  relative  to  expectations,  growth  of  money  and
credit,  wage  pressures,  evidence  of  supply  bottlenecks  and  the  information  provided  to  our
regional representatives from their business contacts.
We will not know just how much the Canadian economy has changed until its capacity limits
come  under  more  pressure.  While  the  confidence  of  Canadians  in  ongoing  low  inflation
allows monetary policy more room to accommodate demand pressures that test the limits of
capacity,  it  will  be  very  important  for  the  Bank  to  be  vigilant  in  following  the  array  of
indicators I have mentioned. We must not undermine the solid basis of low inflation and low
interest rates that has been established in Canada.
BIS Review   61/1999
2
