Mr Lopes’ speech before the Economic Affairs Commission of the Federal Senate
Summary of a speech by the new President of the Central Bank of Brazil, Mr Francisco Lopes,
before  the  Economic  Affairs  Commission  of  the  Federal  Senate  in  Brasilia  on  26/1/99.
Translated from Jornal do Brasil of 27/1/99.
Inflation
I  am  sure  inflation  will  not  come  back.  Of  course,  there  will  be  some  adjustment  in  relative
prices but there is no possibility of resuming the old inflationary process. We will have to put in
place  tight monetary policy and prevent any forms of indexation, opportunism or speculation. As
the Brazilian economy is relatively closed - imports correspond to 8% of GDP - a devaluation of
50%, (i.e. the exchange rate stabilising at the very depreciated level of R$ 1.80), would add about
4 to 5% to the rate of inflation.
Overvaluation of the real
The  use  of  the  exchange  rate  anchor  made  an  exchange  rate  overvaluation  inevitable.
Nevertheless we had imagined it would be possible to shift from the mini-band regime to the free
floating regime in a rather gradual way, while the economy was still attracting foreign capital.
But reality sometimes frustrates the best intentions. With the benefit of hindsight (after the Asian
and Russian crises), the widening of the exchange rate band in April last year, which widened the
amplitude of the exchange rate fluctuation by 1% per year, was a rather timid movement. But it is
easy to be wise after the event.
Wider exchange rate band
The attempt to shift from the mini band to the wider band lasted for 48 hours. We knew that it
had  limited  chances  of  success.  Within  four  days  we  had  lost  almost  US$  6  billion  in
international  reserves.  And  the  free  floating  exchange  rate  regime,  supported  by  a  solid  fiscal
stance, has become our new objective. The idea of widening the band under the model designed
and issued as of January 13th was good, but unfortunately it came too late.
Centralisation of Foreign Exchange Transactions
Suggestions  about  centralising  exchange  market  operations  shock  me.  Because  centralising
exchange market transactions in the central bank amounts to having no foreign exchange regime,
it  leads  the  country  to  the  moratorium,  with  the  re-negotiation  of  debts.  Credit  lines  to  Brazil
would  be  cut.  It  means  violating  the  rules  of  the  game.  It  would  be  a  completely  arbitrary  act
which would have terrible consequences.
Economic Growth
The first semester of this year will be hard. But I believe that from next year we will achieve high
rates of growth - maybe spectacular rates of growth.
Interest rates
Interest rates will be kept high at first, but not for a long time.
Dollarisation
I do not see any case for dollarisation in Brazil. It is a little bit strange for a country to be without
its  own  currency.  There  will  come  the  day  when  the  adoption  of  a  single  currency  within  the
MERCOSUR will be taken into account by its member countries.  But then a common currency
BIS Review   /1998
– 2 –
of the region, not the dollar, will be agreed upon and the first step in this direction is to have a
strong real.
Responsibility
I have been in the government since the beginning of 1995. I feel myself responsible for what has
been  done  during  this  whole  period.  Pedro  Malan  has  a  key  role  in  the  government.  Few
Brazilians  have  his  international  credentials.  He  has  good  relations  with  men  that  make  this
world of international finance. His continued presence is essential to consolidate this transition
period.  But  we  should  care  about  policies  rather  than  names.  Malan  and  I  are  carrying  out  a
mission.
Devaluation of the real
No  economy  in  the  world  could  sustain  a  devaluation  in  real  terms  of  40%.  The  difficulty  in
maintaining a devaluation of that magnitude is that inflation would resume. The exchange rate
has overshot, but it will come back, appreciating as time elapses.
Currency Board
I  would  like  to  stress  my  opposition  to  the  idea  of  adopting  a  currency  board  in  Brazil.  This
subject  has  already  been  examined  and  the  government  has  decided  against  it.  The  Brazilian
economy  is  not  dollarised  and  I  believe  it  would  be  a  disastrous  policy  option.  Brazil  tried  a
similar regime in 1906. Nowadays, money supply in the expanded concept (M4) comes to R$450
billion, while international reserves reach US$ 36 billion. To implement this regime we would
have  to  dollarise  and  lengthen  the  maturity  of  these  deposits.  This  government  is  definitely
committed to avoid such measures.
Future
The devaluation of the real will improve the fiscal balance, as it will permit interest rates to fall
in  the  future.  Foreign  investors  will  return,  sustaining  economic  growth.  My  optimism  is  not
foolish. The next six months will be very hard. I am optimistic on what will take place after that.
Unemployment
I believe that the unemployment rate has to do more with the overvalued exchange rate than with
the level of economic activity. Enterprises were being crushed.
BIS Review   10/1999
