Mr Mboweni explains the position taken by the
Reserve Bank of South Africa on inflation targeting
Address by Mr Tito Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the biennial Congress
of the Economic Society of South Africa, Pretoria, on 6 September 1999.
 Introduction
In my Governor’s Address at the Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders of the Reserve Bank on
24 August 1999, I stated that it is advisable to move away from the “eclectic” or informal inflation
targeting monetary policy framework to formal inflation targeting. This change is necessary because
the eclectic framework  has  at times  created  uncertainties  about  Reserve  Bank  decisions and  actions
which were perceived as being in conflict with the stated guidelines for the growth in money supply
and bank credit extension.
What are the main characteristics of inflation targeting?
The question may be asked whether the adoption of inflation targeting will lead to a more effective
monetary policy? I believe that this will be the case and that inflation targeting should minimise the
social and economic cost of achieving price stability. In my address this evening I want to explain this
position that has been taken by the Reserve Bank by elaborating on the following aspects of inflation
targeting, namely:
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
What are the preconditions that have to be met before implementing inflation targeting?
What  factors  should  be  taken  into  consideration  with  the  implementation  of  inflation
targeting?
Are there any disadvantages in shifting to an inflation targeting framework?
What are the advantages of inflation targeting?
Characteristics of inflation targeting
A  number  of  industrial  countries,  such  as  New  Zealand,  Canada,  the  United  Kingdom,  Sweden,
Finland, Australia and Spain have adopted an inflation targeting framework during the 1990s. More
recently some of the developing countries have also opted for this monetary policy framework. The
Czech Republic has operated a fully fledged inflation targeting regime since December 1997. Israel,
Chile  and  Mexico  are  countries  that  have  one-year  inflation  targets,  while  Poland,  Hungary  and
recently Brazil have multi-year inflation targets.
The motives for the adoption of inflation targeting have varied considerably from country to country.
In some countries, such as the United Kingdom and Sweden, the collapse of their exchange rates led to
inflation targeting in order to assure the public that monetary policy would remain disciplined. Other
countries,  such  as  Canada,  introduced  inflation  targeting  because  of  problems  experienced  with  the
targeting of monetary aggregates.
Whatever the motives of the countries were, the adoption of an inflation targeting strategy in all cases
reduced the role of formal intermediate targets or guidelines, such as the exchange rate or the growth
rate  in  money  supply.  Commitment  to  an  intermediate  target  would  be  inconsistent  with  inflation
targeting except if it is the only determining factor of inflation. Obviously this is unlikely. Although
growth  in  money  supply  is  a  precondition  for  a  general  rise  in  prices,  it  is  not  the  only  factor  that
causes inflation.
1
BIS Review 93/1999
In  an  inflation  targeting  framework  the  central  bank  has to adopt  a  strategy  of  determining  directly
what  the  likely  path  of  inflation  will  be.  In  inflation  targeting  close  attention  is  typically  given  to
changes in indicators which in the past have affected inflation. This has led to sophisticated models for
the prediction of inflation and detailed assessments of factors  that could  affect it. The  prediction of
inflation  is  of  the  utmost  importance  in  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  because  changes  in
policy measures are based on likely future price developments.
The  fact  that  inflation  targeting  has  to  rely  on  forecasting  has  led  to  the  criticism  that  this  is  a
weakness  of  the  technique  because  forecasts  are  inherently  unreliable.  Although  it  is  true  that  an
inflation  targeting  framework  is  based  on  forecasts,  it  is  also  true  that  any  other  monetary  policy
framework has to take account of the fact that policy changes will only affect inflation some time in
the future.  If  the objective  of the central  bank  is  the  attainment  of  financial stability,  it  will  always
have to take a view on how its current policy stance will effect future price developments, whatever
monetary policy framework it decides to pursue. The difference between inflation targeting and other
monetary policy frameworks is that inflation targeting makes forecasting explicit and transparent.
The adoption of inflation targeting by a central bank does not mean that the central bank must apply
definite  rules  and  is  not  left  with  any  discretion.  Exclusive  emphasis  on  inflation  goals  over  the
short-term  could  lead  to  a  highly  unstable  real  economy  in  the  case  of  serious  supply  shocks.  If  a
severe  supply  shock  hits  the  economy,  keeping  inflation  close  to  the  long-run  target  could  be  very
costly  in  terms  of  lost  output.  In  such  cases,  some  discretion  must  be  applied.  Many  of  the  central
banks opt for escape clauses in these circumstances. Others have defined the inflation target in such a
way that changes in food prices, the price of oil or the effects of value added tax are excluded from the
index that they target.
The  degree  to  which  the  central  bank  is  held  formally  accountable  for  inflation  outcomes  varies
considerably. In New Zealand the tenure of the Governor of the central bank is linked directly to the
achievement of the inflation targets. In most other countries there are no explicit sanctions on central
banks  if  they  miss  the  target.  However,  missing  the  target  by  a  very  wide  margin  and  consistently
would,  of  course,  lead  to  lost  reputation  or  prestige  and  eventually  perhaps  to  a  request  for  the
resignation of the officials involved in targeting. In most countries applying this framework it is still
too early to determine what prospective penalties will be applied.
The  achievement  of  the  target  is,  however,  also  important  because  it  affects  the  credibility  of  the
central bank. An inflation targeting framework can only be successful if the public is convinced that
the central bank is serious about containing inflation. This means that the government and the central
bank cannot simply change to inflation targeting without reference to anyone else. It must ensure that
the ordinary people in the street  are  in  favour  of  price  stability.  Any  misconception  that the central
bank  is  not  concerned  about  economic  growth  and  employment  creation  must  be  removed.  It  is
important  that  the  public  does  not  get  the  impression  that  the  central  bank  is  dogmatic  about  the
containment of inflation and does not care about other critical issues of importance to the economy.
It is also important that the public is ensured that there are no hidden agendas, in other words that the
objectives stated will be the ones actually pursued. Bill Allen, an official of the Bank of England, at
the beginning of this year in a speech at the Reserve Bank indicated that this was a major issue in the
United Kingdom when they adopted inflation targeting  in 1992. This  was  partly  due  to  their  mixed
historical  record  at  that  time  in  achieving  monetary  policy  objectives  and  partly  because  monetary
policy  had  traditionally  been  conducted  in  an  environment  of  considerable  mystery  and  secrecy.
Fortunately, we have progressed somewhat on both these fronts in South Africa and there should not
be any difficulties in switching to inflation targeting.
Advantages of inflation targeting
What  are  the  advantages  of  inflation  targeting  for  South  Africa?  Firstly,  inflation  targeting  can
improve the coordination between monetary policy and other macroeconomic policies depending on
the way the target is set and whether the target is consistent with other policy objectives. The setting of
inflation targets should preferably (but not compulsorily) be a joint effort between the government and
BIS Review 93/1999
2
the  central  bank.  Inflation  targeting  will  be  most  effective  when  economic  policies  are  well
coordinated. This coordination must be clearly spelled out and all stakeholders should be consulted,
including business and the trade union movement.
A  formalised  coordinated  approach  will  probably  lead  to  the  best  results.  The  Reserve  Bank  is
therefore of the opinion that with the adoption of inflation targets a policy target agreement should be
drawn up that would be signed by the Minister of Finance on behalf of Cabinet and the Governor of
the Reserve Bank to define precisely the coordinated effort needed to contain inflation in pursuit of the
broader  economic  objectives  of  sustainable  high  economic  growth  and  employment  creation.  While
this agreement should define the practical implication of the Reserve Bank’s goal of price stability, it
should also guarantee the instrumental independence of the Reserve Bank.
Secondly,  the  announcement  of  inflation  targets  clarifies  the  central  bank’s  intentions  and  reduces
uncertainty about the future course of monetary policy. Inflation targets make policy transparent. They
make the central bank’s intentions explicit in a way that should improve the planning of the private
sector.
Thirdly,  inflation  targeting  helps  to  discipline  monetary  policy  and  strengthens  the  central  bank’s
accountability. If targets are not met, the central bank has to explain what went wrong. This leads to a
better understanding on the part of the public on what basis monetary policy decisions were made.
Disadvantages of inflation targeting
Although  inflation  targeting  has  certain  definite  advantages  when  compared  with  other  monetary
policy  frameworks,  it  could  also  have  certain  disadvantages.  One  of  the  limitations  of  inflation
targeting is that it is a complicated approach to implement. Although all monetary policy frameworks
should be forward looking, inflation targeting relies heavily on forecasts. Where inaccurate forecasts
are made public it can obscure the central bank’s objectives and reduce its credibility.
Compared with other monetary policy frameworks there is also the risk that inflation targeting could
lead to inefficient  output stabilisation. This  can occur  particularly  in the event  of  significant  supply
shocks, such as sharp changes in the price of oil.
Preconditions for inflation targeting
In view of these potential disadvantages of inflation targeting, it is important that certain preconditions
are met before a decision is taken to implement this framework. In this regard it is important that a
central  bank  is  free  to  pursue  financial  stability.  The  inflation  target  may  be  jointly  set  by  the
government  and  the  central  bank.  However,  once  the  target  has  been  determined  the  central  bank
should be free to use any instrument to achieve the ultimate objective.
In  the  application  of  inflation  targeting  it  is  further  important  that  there  is  a  commitment  by  all
authorities  to  the  objective  of  price  stability.  Preferably  there  should  be  close  cooperation  between
monetary policy and other policies, and in this coordinated effort the inflation objective should be an
inherent part of overall policy.
To  implement  inflation  targeting  it  is  important  that  well-developed  financial  markets  exist  in  a
country.  The  policy  instruments  generally  used  by  monetary  authorities  require  effective  money,
capital  and  foreign  exchange  markets.  If  financial  markets  do  not  react  quickly  to  the  instruments
applied, it obviously reduces the effectiveness of monetary policy and leads to a delay in impacting on
inflation.
For the implementation of inflation targeting the central bank must have the necessary resources, i.e.
human,  technological,  etc.  Inflation  targeting  requires  sophisticated  forecasting  models  which  need
advanced  computer  hardware  and  software.  In  developing  economies  in particular,  this  could  be  an
important constraint on the implementation of inflation targeting.
3
BIS Review 93/1999
Fortunately, the Reserve Bank’s staff should be able to refine and strengthen the Bank’s forecasting
framework,  especially  with  the  help  of  international  experts  in  this  field.  The  Bank  has  enough
experience  in  information  technology  for  the  implementation  of  inflation  targeting  and  the  other
preconditions are generally met in the case of South Africa.
a high degree of transparency is ensured.
a satisfactory forecasting framework is developed; and
a decision is taken on the inflation target that will be set;
The implementation of inflation targeting
Before inflation targeting is implemented, it is important that:
• 
• 
• 
In all inflation targeting countries the practice has been to specify the target in terms of the consumer
price  index,  or  some  variant  thereof.  There  is,  however,  no  consensus  on  how  inflation  should  be
measured. Preferably the index should include a range of products whose prices fully describe changes
in the cost of living and are generally accepted by the public. Including prices over which policy has
no control may lead to misleading signals when these prices move out of line. Policymakers in many
instances  have  accordingly  opted  for  a  target  that  excludes  certain  measurable  components  that  are
either unpredictable, volatile or unresponsive to policy.
In  addition,  a  choice  has  to  be  made  between  setting  a  single  point  or  a  target  range.  This  choice
reflects a trade-off – a narrower band may be interpreted as indicating a stronger commitment to the
inflation target, but frequent breaches could undermine credibility. A fixed point target is much more
difficult to hit than a band. A single point provides the best focus for inflation expectations and avoids
the  disadvantage  of  a  band  which  tends  to  concentrate  expectations  towards  its  upper  boundary.  A
band, however, leaves some discretion to the central bank and can provide more flexibility in the case
of unforeseen price shocks.
It is also important to decide at what level the target should be set. Preferably it should rather be on the
low  rather  than  on  the  high  side.  High  targets  may  give  the  impression  that  the  central  bank  is  not
serious about combatting inflation. It is accordingly better to lengthen the period over which the target
will be reached than starting at too high a level.
The  implementation  of  inflation  targeting  requires  that  the  authorities  must  be  able  to  develop  a
satisfactory forecasting framework. Although South Africa has experienced major structural changes
in  recent  years,  it  seems  that  we  are  in  a  position  to  forecast  inflation.  The  Reserve  Bank  already
makes regular inflation forecasts using a large macroeconomic model which is based on a wide range
of  financial  and  economic  equations.  In  the  application  of  inflation  targeting  it  will  be  prudent  to
supplement this large model with a number of smaller and single equation models.
Mervyn King, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, recently stated that forecasting, more than
any other aspect of economics, brings the discipline into disrepute. Forecasts should not be presented
as  a  single  number  but  rather  as  a  probability  distribution.  The  Bank  of  England  has  accordingly
adopted a so-called fan-chart forecasting technique which shows the relatively likelihood of possible
inflation outcomes.  Careful consideration  will  have  to  be  given  to  these  techniques  of  other  central
banks before inflation targeting is introduced in South Africa.
It is important that the Reserve Bank enhances transparency for the effective operation of an inflation
targeting framework. Transparency introduces predictability and helps to ensure that expectations are
consistent with the objective of price stability, thus lowering the cost of achieving the inflation target.
As pointed out by prominent economists many years ago, monetary policy should avoid exacerbating
fluctuations of output and employment by introducing unnecessary uncertainty.
A transparent monetary policy will mean that changes in short-term interest rates should not surprise
the market. Markets should be able to anticipate decisions taken by the Reserve Bank. Transparency
should promote the predictability of policy. In this regard Mervyn King has stated that a successful
BIS Review 93/1999
4
central  bank  should  be  boring,  it  is  like  a  referee  whose  success  is  judged  by  how  little  his  or  her
decisions intrude on the game.
Although  the  Reserve  Bank  has  progressed  considerably  in  recent  years  in  providing  more  detailed
information  to  the  market  and  in  explaining  its  policy  stance,  the  Bank  has  decided  that  with  the
introduction  of  inflation  targeting  it  will  improve  the  transparency  of  monetary  policy  further  by
periodic  testimony  to  Parliament,  the  regular  publication  of  a  monetary  policy  review  report  and
focussed statements after the meetings of the Monetary Policy Committee. In both cases the Bank will
provide  an  assessment  of  how  it  perceives  the  underlying  economic  and  financial  conditions  and
explain the monetary policy stance.
Conclusion
Although inflation targeting is a difficult monetary policy framework to apply in practice, most of the
preconditions  for  its  implementation  can  be  met  in  South  Africa.  Inflation  targeting  should  lead  to
closer economic coordination and greater transparency and accountability. It is, however, at the same
time important that our house is in order before we implement this framework. In other words we must
get our ducks in a row first.
Thank you very much.
5
BIS Review 93/1999
