Mr Yam discusses the sustainability of monetary and exchange rate policies
Speech by the Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Mr Joseph Yam, JP, at
the  International  Conference  on  Central  Banking  Policies:  Leading  the  Way  Towards
Sustainable Growth presented by the Monetary and Foreign Exchange Authority of Macau on
14 May 1999.
Dr. Pessoa, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a pleasure to be back in this beautiful city, and an honour to be invited to take part in such
an  important  and  timely  conference.  I  warmly  congratulate  the  Monetary  and  Foreign
Exchange Authority of Macau on having put together a stimulating programme, and on having
chosen this splendid new cultural centre for the venue. Apart from the inherent interest of the
topics under discussion, the conference is significant in at least two respects. It takes place at a
time when we are beginning to emerge from what has been, for much of this region, a period
of  sharp  economic  crisis,  so  that  the  questions  we  are  addressing  today  perhaps  have  more
relevance than ever. The conference is also taking place seven months before Macau becomes
a  Special  Administrative  region  of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China,  on  20  December  1999.
Hong Kong, Macau’s neighbour across the Pearl River Estuary, has a much shorter history as
a city, but it does have a slightly longer experience as a Special Administrative region under
the ‘one country, two systems’ formula. I am happy to report that this experience has been a
successful one, particularly from the point of view of monetary autonomy. Indeed, the Basic
Law has, since 1 July 1997, provided Hong Kong with far greater autonomy in its monetary
and  financial  affairs,  and  this  autonomy  has  been  confirmed  in  practice  by  the  clear
confidence  that  the  Central  Government  has  placed  in  our  ability  to  manage  things  on  our
own.
I make this point, not because Macau needs any reassurance from Hong Kong, but because it
is a striking illustration of how some of the deepest forebodings about future events can often
be  the  product  of  the  most  dismal  misjudgements.  Two  years  ago,  gloomy  scenarios  were
being painted - not about an Asian financial crisis - but about the impending demise of Hong
Kong’s monetary autonomy under Chinese rule: about  the  breaking  of  the  link  between  the
Hong  Kong  dollar  and  the  U.S.  dollar,  the  absorption  of  Hong  Kong’s  substantial  foreign
reserves by the Mainland, and so on. Of course, nothing of the kind has happened, and there
may well be lessons here to apply to some of the more lurid scenarios that are being drawn up
for the first of January 2000. Our topic this morning, however, is not the Year 2000 problem,
but the perennial question of how to devise sustainable and realistic monetary and exchange
rate policies  in  an  uncertain  global  financial  environment.  The  first  part  of  my  presentation
will deal with the theoretical and practical approaches to this issue, particularly in the light of
the Asian financial crisis. In the second part, I shall focus on Hong Kong’s experience, since
1983, of a linked exchange rate system. Finally, I shall return to the regional perspective and
examine the prospects for greater exchange rate stability through monetary co-operation and
other routes.
Choice of exchange rate regime
Few of us, I think, would disagree with the proposition that there is no single exchange rate
regime that is suitable to all economies all of the time. Indeed, given the experience of the last
couple of years, one may be tempted to conclude that there is no regime that is satisfactory
any of the time. The difficult choices and trade-offs involved in devising a workable regime
1
BIS Review   53/1999
call to mind a cartoon I once saw that theorised that the dinosaurs became extinct when they
tried, unsuccessfully, to devise an exchange rate mechanism. But modern governments cannot
escape the choice, and it is opportune to reconsider what options are available in light of the
recent experience in Asia and elsewhere.
It  is  now  well  understood  that  exchange  rate  and  monetary  regimes  are  inextricably  linked.
The  days  when  significant  barriers  to  capital  movements  allowed  governments  to  pursue
independent  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies  are  long  gone.  So  any  decision  on  an
exchange rate framework is not narrowly confined to external considerations, but must reflect
broader policy choices, as well as the structure of the economy in question. The practical and
theoretical considerations involved in deciding on an appropriate exchange rate system can be
reduced  to  four  broad  factors:  the  external  versus  domestic  orientation  of  the  economy;  the
flexibility of its cost-price structure; the exposure to financial shocks; and the reputation and
credibility of policy makers.
These  factors,  naturally,  differ  from  one  economy  to  another.  In  theory,  the  choice  is
straightforward  enough:  the  best  system  is  the  system  that  best  accommodates  a  country’s
“natural endowment” of these factors. Success in practice, however, is not simply — or even
primarily — a question of choosing the preferred exchange rate framework from a textbook
perspective. Policymakers on the ground need to address the much more demanding challenge
of ensuring consistency between the overall policy framework and the exchange rate regime.
Experience shows us that governments can choose exchange rate systems that do not appear
optimal according to standard economic criteria yet still make them work if other policies are
up to the task. At the same time, a regime that is appropriate on theoretical grounds will yield
unsatisfactory results if it is not supported by other policies.
Consider, for instance, an economy with relatively inflexible wages and prices that adopts a
fixed  exchange  rate  regime.  Such  an  economy  would  need  to  ensure  maximum  scope  for
fiscal  policy  to  buffer  shocks  that  would  otherwise  lead  to  unacceptable  swings  in
unemployment.  This  would  require  a  rather  conservative  underlying  fiscal  policy  in  normal
times to avoid a loss of confidence at times when fiscal stimulus is needed. Similarly, a very
open economy that chooses a flexible exchange rate regime must ensure that its policies are
set in a long-term framework that establishes a clear anchor for inflation. Otherwise, external
shocks that cause large movements in the exchange rate can lead to policy uncertainties and
broader instability.
These lessons have been learnt well, and the view that overall macroeconomic policies must
complement  the  functioning  of  the  exchange  rate  regime  is  now  generally  accepted.
Unfortunately,  the  challenges  do  not  end  there.  Ensuring  that  macroeconomic  policies  are
mutually consistent is merely a necessary — not sufficient — condition for ensuring stability
in a world experiencing an explosion in capital flows. The volume, velocity and volatility of
global capital movements introduce a whole new dimension to policy making — a dimension
that is relatively recent, and one that we are only gradually learning to deal with.
How do capital flows affect the sustainability of exchange rate and monetary policies? There
is a school of thought that maintains that mobile international capital can play a useful global
role  as  a  sort  of  ‘policeman’  of  sound  policies.  The  theory  is  that,  in  a  liberalised  global
financial  system,  international  capital  flows  reward  countries  with  sound  economic  policies
and  punish  those  which  pursue  unbalanced  and  inconsistent  policies.  International  capital
flows also prevent distortions from getting as far out of line as they would if the economy in
BIS Review   53/1999
2
question was closed to outside investors. Thus, according to this view, capital flows act as an
early warning system that forces quick corrections of policy errors.
Undoubtedly, there have been circumstances in the past that have lent substance to this view.
In the Latin debt crisis of the late 1970s and early 1980s, for example, many borrowers were
clearly  pursuing  unsustainable  and  destabilising  macroeconomic  policies.  The  resulting
outflow of  funds  and  the  short-term  economic  crisis  that  ensued  served  to  bring  policies  to
task and to trigger lasting economic reforms in some countries, notably Chile.
More  recent  experience,  however,  raises  serious  questions  about  this  view  of  the  role  of
international capital as a robust, reliable and objective referee of the soundness of economic
policies.  Events  during  the  Asian  crisis  naturally  come  to  mind.  The  flight  of  international
capital bore practically no relation to a forward-looking assessment of changes in the policies
and macroeconomic fundamentals of the region. It is true that some countries were pursuing
quasi-fixed exchange rate regimes that may have allowed pressures to build up for too long.
But these same exchange rate regimes were in place when the funds were flowing in, which
suggests that they were not viewed as a serious structural flaw by investors at that time.
Similarly, the underlying weaknesses in many Asian economies that so many observers (with
the  benefit  of  hindsight)  now  point  to  —  ‘crony  capitalism’,  inadequate  risk  management,
speculative lending to the property sector — were all present at the time when the funds were
pouring into the region. Not only did these weaknesses fail to deter investors on the way in:
the  abundance  of  inward  investment  prior  to  the  crisis  tended  to  exacerbate  the  problems,
rather  than  act  as  a  corrective  force  on  policies.  More  recently,  we  have  witnessed  what
appears to be the start of a new wave of capital flowing back into the region, even though it is
far from clear that these structural problems have been fully addressed.
I think it is not going too far to say that these ‘hot’ capital flows not only failed to act in a way
that  policed  policies  effectively,  but  actually  became  a  powerful  destabilising  force  in  their
own  right.  The  huge  swings  in  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates  that  resulted  from  capital
flight in this region did far-reaching damage to corporate, financial, and government sectors,
which, in turn, reinforced the initial withdrawal of capital. In such an environment, it requires
a  very  courageous  investor  to  be  willing  to  step  in  against  such  a  speculative  tidal  wave,
regardless of how far out of line with reality markets may have gone.
Pursuing  sustainable  exchange  rate  and  monetary  policies  requires  countries  to  devise
defensive  strategies  against  such  forces.  This  is  no  easy  task.  Capital  controls  have  been
suggested by some. In Hong Kong’s case, such controls would be anathema to our free market
philosophy: they are anyway prohibited by Hong Kong’s Basic Law (as they are, with effect
from  20  December,  in  the  Basic  Law  of  Macau).  But,  even  for  jurisdictions  that  wish  to
consider the option, the practical problems are considerable. Traditional types of controls have
impeded growth, and have proven difficult to administer. Attempts to impose capital controls
may  also  foster  evasion  that  undermines  the  transparency  and  integrity  of  markets.  More
recently, innovative schemes have been suggested aiming at taxing short-term capital inflows,
or otherwise obliging lenders and borrowers to pay a price that reflects the risk to the overall
economy of this activity. Some of these proposals are quite interesting and may be appropriate
for  consideration  by  some  developing  countries,  especially  those  in  the  process  of  financial
liberalisation.
3
BIS Review   53/1999
There  are  limits  to  the  amount  that  regulation  of  short-term  capital  inflows  can  achieve.  It
would not, for instance, prevent massive speculative positions from being quietly built up in
currency  and  stock  markets.  It  would  not  stop  manipulation  of  individual  markets  by  large
investors.  And  it  would  not  stop  speculators  from  exploiting  the  reality  that  sharp  capital
movements can themselves affect an economy’s fundamentals and panic other investors. For
the avoidance of any misunderstanding I should state once again, for the record, that I am not
advocating capital controls of any kind for Hong Kong.
The concerns that arise from ‘hot’ capital flows are particularly acute in Asia, whose markets
are relatively small by the standards of the large industrial countries, yet relatively liquid by
the standards of developing markets as a whole. The world will not become a safer place for
such  countries  —  or  a  better  place  for  intermediating  capital  flows  that  ultimately  foster
growth  and  development  —  until  we  take  concrete  steps  to  reform  the  global  financial
architecture.
Transparency is a critical issue. On the one hand, there is widespread support for the notion
that governments should be more open in their operations — and I am happy to say that Hong
Kong is at the leading edge in this area. On the other hand, there is only lukewarm support for
the notion that the operation of markets could be enhanced by increased transparency on the
part of private participants. I fail to see the basis for this asymmetry on conceptual grounds.
On practical grounds, there are no doubt important issues to be resolved and obstacles to be
overcome. But progress will not be made until all parties concerned start to address the issue
in  a  more  energetic  and  concerted  manner.  By  ‘all  parties’  I  mean  both  the  industrialised
countries and the emerging market economies. Countries that perceive that they have little at
stake  in  improving  the  system  from  their  own  perspective  may  be  underestimating  the
implications  on  their  own  growth  of  sound  growth  in  emerging  market  economies.  And
emerging  markets  that  have  been  through  the  crises  of  the  past  two  years  have  valuable
experience to contribute and special needs to address.
The path taken by Hong Kong
Let me now turn to Hong Kong’s experience in the light of the general points I have made
above.  As  you  may  know,  Hong  Kong  had  only  a  relatively  brief  experience  with  floating
exchange rates, from 1974-83. This episode was not very satisfactory: inflation rose to rather
high  and  volatile  levels,  and  the  period  ended  in  an  exchange  rate  crisis  triggered  by
uncertainties about the objectives of monetary policy and about Hong Kong’s political future.
Against this unfavourable background, the linked exchange rate system was reintroduced to
restore confidence and stabilise expectations. In addition to these psychological factors, there
was  -  and  still  is  -  a  strong  case  for  believing  that  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  was
appropriate  from  the  point  of  view  of  Hong  Kong’s  fundamentals.  Hong  Kong  is  a  very
externally  oriented  economy,  with  a  completely  open  capital  account  and  a  large  financial
sector. These factors leave us heavily exposed to financial shocks stemming from volatilities
either  in  domestic  confidence  or  in  external  markets.  As  the  recent  experience  has  shown,
financial  shocks  can  feed  on  themselves  when  they  induce  large  swings  in  interest  and
exchange rates that undermine the fundamentals and further reduce confidence.
At the same time, Hong Kong possesses a highly flexible economic structure that has proven
capable of adapting quickly to new circumstances. This flexibility owes much to the inherent
entrepreneurial  instincts  of  the  people  and  to  a  tradition  of  economic  management  that  has
BIS Review   53/1999
4
emphasised the role of market forces, self-reliance and individual initiative. Our exchange rate
system has, I believe, supported this flexibility by establishing a clear anchor on which to base
decision-making.  It  is  evident  to  Hong  Kong  residents  that  the  ultimate  responsibility  for
adjusting  to  new  challenges  lies  with  themselves.  Armed  with  this  knowledge,  people  have
continued  to  behave  in  a  pragmatic  and  realistic  manner  in  response  to  changing
circumstances, even as rising incomes have brought unprecedented prosperity. Affluence has
not bred complacency.
The response to the Asian crisis bears this out. Coming at the same time as the bursting of
short-lived bubble in property markets, the crisis led to a plunge in property prices of some
40-50%,  from  the  peaks  in  mid-1997  to  the  troughs  twelve  months  later.  Yet  this  striking
decline has been accommodated without major incident. Mortgage delinquencies have edged
up,  but  they  remain  below  the  typical  levels  in  industrial  countries,  and  the  banks  remain
highly capitalised and profitable. Equally important, property prices have dropped quickly to
levels  consistent  with  underlying  supply  and  demand.  As  a  result,  markets  have  remained
liquid,  and  activity  has  recently  picked  up.  There  is  a  renewed  sense  of  optimism  that,
whatever adjustments remain to be worked out, the worst is now over.
In labour markets, wage freezes are the norm, combined in many cases with cuts in bonuses in
sectors that have been most affected by the crisis. Nominal wages are likely to show little, if
any, growth this year, compared with increases of 7-8% in the period leading up to the crisis.
Price  inflation  has  also  dropped  markedly,  and  has  turned  negative  in  recent  months.  Price
reductions inevitably cause short-run dislocations. But they are a key channel of adjustment
for Hong Kong, and the improvements in our competitiveness that result will set the stage for
a  sound  recovery.  The  important  consideration  is  that  this  process  should  be  completed
quickly, and there is every indication that it will be.
A few critics maintain that we should have ‘let the link go’ during the crisis to allow nominal
exchange  rate  depreciation  to  restore  our  competitiveness.  I  believe  that  such  a  step  would
have been fraught with risks. Any direct impact on growth would almost certainly have been
offset  by  reduced  confidence  in  our  longer-term  policy  direction  and  heightened  anxieties
about the short-term impact on the financial and corporate sectors. I  do  not  need  to  remind
you that Hong Kong did not suffer from the structural problems in these sectors that have been
ascribed to some other economies. But there is no guarantee that major and lasting damage
would not have been done by the types of dramatic exchange rate overshooting that have been
witnessed elsewhere in the region. And it is unrealistic to expect that exchange rates would
not have overshot, given Hong Kong’s openness and exposure to international capital flows. If
Hong Kong’s peg had been abandoned last year, it is likely that the attacks on other regional
currencies would have been even more dramatic and widespread, with negative feedback on
the region and on our own performance. That Asia — including Hong Kong — now appears
to be entering a recovery phase was by no means assured twelve months ago. We might well
wonder what conditions we could now be facing had the crisis proceeded to yet another level,
with widespread currency collapses along the lines witnessed in Indonesia.
Other observers have argued that, from a longer-term perspective, fixed exchange rate regimes
are  inflexible  and  stifle  growth.  Again,  I  believe  that  Hong  Kong’s  experience  belies  this
view. I would agree that, in the absence of the ability to adjust interest rates in response to
cyclical conditions, output fluctuations can be larger than would otherwise be the case — at
least in response to certain types of shocks. At the same time, though, the certainty generated
5
BIS Review   53/1999
by  such  a  solid  and  clear-cut  anchor  reduces  the  impact  of  shocks  to  confidence  and  other
factors that might undermine policy credibility.
At the end of the day, the question is an empirical one. Here, there is no evidence that Hong
Kong’s  long  term  growth  has  been  impeded  by  our  exchange  rate  regime.  Indeed,  there  is
some evidence that Hong Kong has grown more rapidly than would otherwise be expected on
the  basis  of  our  factor  endowments.  Perhaps  this  should  not  be  surprising.  It  would  seem
natural  that  the  very  flexibility  required  to  respond  to  short-term  shocks  under  a  fixed
exchange rate regime would foster a climate of innovation capable of turning challenges into
opportunities.  Hong  Kong’s  involvement  in  the  rapid  opening  and  development  of  the
Mainland economy is an excellent example of this.
It seems to me, then, that the sustainability of our exchange rate system has been demonstrated
through  its  performance.  While  the  economic  logic  is  important,  of  course,  it  is  irrelevant
unless  it  is  complemented  by  a  high  degree  of  public  support  —  the  ultimate  test  of
sustainability  is  that  the  public  at  large  recognise  and  endorse  the  benefits  of  the  linked
exchange rate. The high degree of public support that the linked exchange rate continues to
enjoy — in spite of the painful aspects of the current adjustment process  —  testifies  to  the
strength of the consensus that our system is appropriate.
The choices for Asian economies
The linked exchange rate system, with its strict currency board arrangements, has served Hong
Kong  well  since  1983.  I  might  add  here  that  the  currency  of  Macau,  the  pataca,  has  been
linked  to  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  since  as  long  ago  as  1977.  But  not  all  economies  are  in  a
position  to  meet  the  preconditions  necessary  for  linked  exchange  rates  to  endure.  In  the
aftermath  of  financial  crisis  in  Asia  and  elsewhere,  many  economies  are  searching  for  new
approaches to exchange rate management. The recent trend is clearly towards more flexible
exchange  rate  mechanisms.  We  cannot  ignore  a  smaller  camp,  though,  that  is  opting  for
greater fixity  of  exchange  rates,  supported  by  more  robust  institutional  structures  than  have
sometimes  been  in  place  in  the  past.  The  integration  of  European  monetary  systems  in  the
form  of  EMU  is  an  obvious  example.  Similarly,  a  handful  of  economies  have  successfully
adopted currency board systems similar to our own.
We must recognise, however, that many economies do not currently have the preconditions to
make such a regime work successfully. It seems inevitable that they will have to live for the
time being with some sort of managed float. The disadvantages of this system are that the lack
of  a  transparent  anchor  and  of  a  clear  commitment  to  some  well-defined  policy  objective
make  credibility  difficult  to  establish.  These  conditions  invite  over-shooting  in  financial
markets, as speculators attempt to test the limits to which the authorities are willing to let the
exchange rate move.
How can the authorities anchor policies and expectations in such an environment? The only
policy  rule  in  common  use  in  developed  countries  with  floating  exchange  rates  is  inflation
targeting:  so  far  this  appears  to  have  been  quite  successful,  although  the  experience  is  still
limited. The technical requirements are demanding, however, and especially so for developing
economies. Policy makers must be able to accurately forecast not only inflation but also the
response of inflation to changes in the policy levers. This is a challenging enough task for the
highly  trained  staff  in  central  banks  of  developed  economies,  who  generally  benefit  from
dealing  with  a  relatively  stable  economic  structure  and  from  considerable  experience  in
BIS Review   53/1999
6
monetary  management  under  floating  exchange  rates.  Needless  to  say,  the  success  of
developing economies in operating such a system is far from assured.
An alternative approach would be to proceed along the same path that Europe is pursuing, in
the form of a monetary union. There are clear advantages to this approach. One of these is the
creation  of  markets  in  a  single  currency  that  are  sufficiently  large  to  make  it  difficult  for
individual speculators or groups of speculators to manipulate markets. Another advantage is
that trade within the monetary union is fostered by the certainty and ease of transaction in a
single currency. Of course, as the EMU experience shows, there are important political issues
that must be resolved before  monetary  union  can  become  a  reality.  Decision-making  power
for  monetary  policy  must  be  vested  in  an  agency  that  is  both  independent  but  accountable;
other macroeconomic policies must be harmonised; and structural policies must support the
flexible adjustment needed to accommodate shocks.
Looking  at  this  region,  I  believe  that  the  economic  advantages  of  some  form  of  ‘Asian
Currency Unit’ are clear. But I have no illusions about the practical and political difficulties
involved in creating such a structure.  Moves  in  this  direction  will  undoubtedly  be  part  of  a
long, drawn-out process. In Europe, the process took many decades. In our own politically and
economically diverse region, we have even more hurdles to overcome, so it is unrealistic to
expect rapid progress. But discussion of these issues, even if only at the theoretical level, will
help  focus  our  thinking  and  perhaps  lead  to  small,  practical  steps  that  can  improve  our
individual exchange rate systems along the way.
A unilateral — but asymmetric — approach to monetary union can, of course, be achieved by
simply adopting the currency of another country. This has been a topical issue of late, with the
dollarisation option that is being widely discussed for Argentina. Some  have  suggested  that
this  might  also  be  an  option  for  Hong  Kong.  Compared  with  our  currency  board  system,  it
would represent an even more irrevocable link to an anchor currency — one that might well
be expected to eliminate currency risk premia and speculative attacks. But there are also costs:
a loss of seignorage; constraints on liquidity management, including the provision of lender-
of-last-resort support; and substantial costs associated with the transition process. In the case
of  Hong  Kong,  we  would  also  face  important  legal  issues  regarding  the  provisions  of  the
Basic Law, as well as how to provide an efficient US dollar clearing and settlement system in
Hong Kong. We will continue to study these issues because, at the very least, research into all
possible options helps us to clarify and refine our existing policies. I am, however, confident
that the measures taken last autumn to strengthen the currency board arrangements, and the
additional  credibility  gained  from  weathering  the  storm  of  1997-98,  have  put  the  existing
system on an even more solid — and sustainable — footing.
Conclusion
To recap the main arguments in this presentation, let me reiterate that exchange rate policies
must  meet  the  needs  of  the  economy  they  serve  if  they  are  to  be  more  than  mere  empty
promises. They must also be compatible with broader policy choices and capable of sustaining
the  external  shocks  that  arise  in  an  increasingly  globalised  financial  environment.  In
particular, as the Asian financial crisis has demonstrated, the exchange rate regimes devised
for small and open economies must be able to deal with ‘hot’ capital flows, which are not only
the  conductors  of  external  shocks,  but  increasingly  the  main  agents  of  volatility  and
instability. This is no easy matter, as the collapse of one exchange rate policy after another has
shown. Much can be done by individual governments to craft exchange rate policies that truly
7
BIS Review   53/1999
complement  economic  fundamentals.  But  actions  by  individual  jurisdictions  can  only  go  so
far  towards  tackling  problems  that  also  arise  from  defects  in  the  international  financial
architecture  and  not  just  out  of  local  imbalances.  Reforms  to  the  international  financial
architecture  are  needed  to  help  ensure  that  capital  flows  reinforce,  rather  than  undermine,
monetary stability. In the long run, we should also be looking towards a more sophisticated
and solidly based regional financial system: this would include taking further the debt market
and  infrastructural  development  that  is  already  in  progress,  as  well  as  greater  monetary  co-
operation - perhaps, on the distant horizon, even monetary union.
For Hong Kong’s part, the experience of the last two years has left us more firmly convinced
of  the  appropriateness  of  our  linked  exchange  rate  system  to  the  special  needs  and
characteristics of Hong Kong’s economy, and more confident in our ability to defend the link
under the currency board arrangements. I am not so complacent as to suppose that there is no
room  for  improvement,  and  we  continue  to  explore  ways  of  refining  the  system.  Nor  do  I
suggest that such a system is suitable for every economy in the region. But I believe that it has
provided  Hong  Kong  with  the  anchor  of  monetary  stability  that  such  an  externally  oriented
economy needs, particularly during these years of global instability. I also believe that it will
continue to serve Hong Kong well in the years to come.
BIS Review   53/1999
8
