Mr Stals’ statement on South Africa as an emerging market
Statement  by  the  Govenor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  Mr  Chris  Stals,  at  the  Annual
Dinner of Ethos Private Equity in Stellenbosch on 29 March 1999.
The emerging financial markets of South Africa
South Africa is well-known in the international financial community for the sophistication of its
financial markets. Founded on a good legal and accounting infrastructure, on a long experience of
more than one hundred years which started with the need for the financing of the early gold mines
of the Witwatersrand, on a good education system, and on transparent and universally recognised
macroeconomic fiscal and monetary policies, the country is well placed to be one of the leaders,
albeit of the second league of world financial market structures, i.e. after the more established and
super-financial markets of the major industrial countries.
For  some  years,  the  development  of  the  South  African  financial  markets  was  shackled  by  the
constraints  of  the  socio-political  problems  of  the  country.  In  the  economic  field,  the  restrictive
measures of boycotts, sanctions, disinvestment campaigns and isolation placed severe restrictions
on  the  development  of  the  South  African  financial  markets.  The  socio-political  reforms  of  the
early 1990’s removed most of these constraints, and new challenges have emerged since 1994 to
reintroduce the South African financial markets into the global system, just  at  a  time  when  the
global  system  underwent  one  of  the  most  revolutionary  changes  in  its  total  history,  a  process
which has become known as “the globalisation of financial markets”.
South Africans took  up  these  challenges  with  enthusiasm  and  the  results  achieved  with,  firstly,
restoring  normal  relations  with  the  international  markets  and,  secondly,  adapting  to  the  major
changes in the global system are often underrated. Progress made in the South African markets is,
perhaps,  best  illustrated  by  the  almost  explosive  increases  in  turnovers  in  the  major  financial
markets:
•  Secondary  trading  in  shares  on  the  Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange  increased,  in  terms  of
number of shares traded, from 5.1 billion in 1995 to 9 billion in 1996, 17.9 billion in 1997 and
34.4 billion in 1998. The total value of shares traded increased from R63 billion in 1995 to
R117 billion in 1996, R207 billion in 1997 and R319 billion in 1998.
•  The increase in total turnover in the secondary market for bonds was equally spectacular. The
total  value  of  transactions  in  secondary  trading  on  the  Bond  Exchange  of  South  Africa
increased  from  just  over  R2  trillion  in  1995  to  R4.3  trillion  in  1997  and  to  R8.5  trillion  in
1998.
•  Activity in the market for derivatives likewise increased quite significantly over the past few
years. The number of contracts traded in both futures and options on futures transactions more
than doubled from 1995 to 1998.
•  The South African market in foreign exchange made its contribution to the development of
the  overall  financial  markets.  The  average  daily  turnover  in  this  market  increased  from  US
$2.7 billion in 1995 to $8.0 billion in 1998. At one stage, in the middle of 1998, the average
daily amount exceeded $10 billion.
These developments in the South African financial markets obviously dictated major changes in
the official policy approach and in regulatory requirements for the various financial institutions.
The “big bang“ changes introduced by the Johannesburg Stock Exchange, the changes introduced
by the Department of Finance in the primary marketing of government bonds, the switch from a
fixed  bank  rate  to  a  fluctuating  rate  for  repurchase  transactions  by  the  Reserve  Bank,  and  the
1
BIS Review   38/1999
upgrading of the national payment, clearing and settlement system are just a few examples of the
flexibility in official policy that supported the developments of the past few years.
The expansion of total activity in the financial markets for obvious reasons also attracted  more
foreign  participation.  A  great  number  of  foreign  banking  institutions,  for  example,  established
themselves in South Africa. At this stage, almost thirty foreign banks now operate in the South
African  market  through  branches  or  subsidiaries  established  here,  and  more  than  sixty  foreign
banks have established representative offices in South Africa. Foreign investors have taken active
participation in a number of the member stockbroking firms of the Johannesburg Stock Exchange,
and  participate  as  authorised  dealers  for  the  Department  of  Finance  in  primary  issues  of,  and
secondary trading in, government bonds.
Last year, non-residents accounted for 28.5 per cent of the total value of transactions in shares on
the Johannesburg Stock Exchange, and for 16.2 per cent of the total value of transactions in bonds
traded  on  the  South  African  Bond  Exchange.  The  development  of  the  South  African  financial
markets in recent years was therefore supported to an important extent by the active participation
of non-residents. In the process, South Africa not only succeeded in rejoining the world financial
markets, but also in keeping abreast of the major developments in the process of globalisation of
financial markets.
The phasing-out of exchange controls as a contributing factor
An  important  precondition  for  the  incorporation  of  the  South  African  financial  markets  in  the
global  economy  was  the  lifting  of  exchange  controls.  South  Africa  had  to  face  this  daunting
challenge in 1994 with the knowledge that the country had no foreign reserves at its disposal at
that stage to finance any net outflow of capital. It had to rely, therefore, on inflows of capital to
generate the foreign exchange reserves that would be needed for the financing of any outflows,
following upon the removal of the controls.
In the beginning, the South African monetary authorities were often criticised for not being more
bold, and for following a policy of gradualism instead of a “big bang” approach for the removal of
exchange controls. In retrospect, and taking account of the magnitude of the gross flows into and
out of South Africa over the past five years, the path followed by the authorities was undoubtedly
the correct one.
On balance, and on a gross basis, non-residents increased their claims on South African residents
by  more  than  R200  billion  over  the  past  five  years.  This  enabled  South  Africa  to  finance  an
accumulated current account deficit of about R40 billion, to increase the net foreign reserves by
about R35 billion, and to allow private South African residents to accumulate about R130 billion
in foreign assets. This included about R60 billion of foreign direct investment by South African
corporates, about R65 billion held by institutional investors in foreign assets, and about R4 billion
invested by private individuals outside of the country.
The process of the gradual removal of exchange controls resulted in the effective withdrawal of
about 70 per cent, [or even more], of the exchange controls that existed at the beginning of 1994.
At this stage, South Africa has no effective exchange controls any more on:
•  current account transactions of the balance of payments; or
• 
the inward or outward transfer of funds owned by non-residents.
BIS Review   38/1999
2
In the case of residents, limits were introduced for amounts that can now be invested outside of
the country by corporates, institutional investors and private individuals. The further phasing-out
of  exchange  controls  requires  the  gradual  raising  of  these  ceilings  until  they  are  no  longer
restrictive.
The only area in which no concessions of any significance were made so far refers to the blocked
funds of emigrants or former residents of South Africa. The Government must still take a decision
on the implementation of a programme for what will most probably be a gradual release of the
blocked funds of former residents.
The globalisation process
The  liberalisation  of  the  South  African  financial  sector  and  concurrent  developments  in  the
structure  of  and  volumes  in  the  capital,  money  and  foreign  exchange  markets  supported  the
absorption of the South African markets in the process of globalisation.
Last  week,  Mr  Andrew  Crockett,  General  Manager  and  chief  executive  officer  of  the  Bank  for
International  Settlements  in  Basle,  delivered  the  annual  Gerhard  de  Kock  Memorial  Lecture  in
Pretoria. He gave the following definition of globalisation:
“Globalisation  is  a  term  that  is  widely  used,  but  defies  precise  definition.  I  take  it  to  mean  a
process in which geographic and market barriers are being rapidly eroded. Economic agents are
now able to make financial transactions with little hindrance in all major markets of the world.
Not  only  this,  they  can  switch  with  increasing  ease  between  different  types  of  intermediation,
each of which is in increasingly close competition with the others”.
Globalisation  holds  many  advantages  for  a  country  such  as  South  Africa.  It  gives  developing
countries or emerging markets easier access to the surplus saving of the more mature industrial
countries of the world. The advantages in globalisation for South Africa are clearly illustrated by
the  figures  on  gross  cross-border  capital  flows  over  the  past  five  years  quoted  above.  The
volatility  in  these  capital  flows,  however,  can  also  cause  many  macroeconomic  problems  for
participating  countries,  particularly  in  the  short-term,  when  international  investment  sentiments
may change very quickly and often unpredictably.
Last  year,  South  Africa  felt  the  full  impact  of  adverse  developments  in  the  global  financial
markets when large amounts of portfolio funds previously invested in the country were suddenly
withdrawn.  To  illustrate  the  severeness  of  this  problem,  the  flows  of  non-resident  portfolio
investments into and out of the South African Bond Exchange last year can be quoted. In the first
four  months  of  1998,  non-residents  increased  their  holdings  of  South  African  bonds  by  R16
billion. In the subsequent eight months, that is from May to December 1998, they reduced their
investments in these bonds by R26 billion, to become net disinvestors of R10 billion for the year
as a whole.
These volatile capital flows had serious implications for the South African financial markets. The
exchange  rate  of  the  rand  depreciated  by  about  20  per  cent;  liquidity  was  drained  from  the
domestic  banking  sector;  interest  rates  rose  to  extremely  high  levels,  and  the  rate  of  inflation
increased  from  5  per  cent  in  April  1998  to  9.4  per  cent  in  December  1998.  These  adverse
developments  in  the  financial  markets  had  a  serious  depressing  effect  on  growth  in  the  South
African economy.
3
BIS Review   38/1999
South  Africa  was,  of  course,  not  the  only  country  that  was  so  hard  hit  by  the  adverse
developments in the global financial markets that began as a more localised East Asian crisis in
the  second  half  of  1997.  In  the  end,  emerging  markets  in  Latin  America,  Central  and  Eastern
Europe  and  in  Africa  all  suffered  from  the  contagion  effect  of  the  East  Asian  crisis.  Even
financial markets in the industrial countries were affected, as evidenced by the near-collapse in
September 1998 of the Long-Term Capital Management fund in New York.
There are at this stage numerous initiatives in progress at the international level to improve the
international  financial  architecture  in  an  effort  to  create  greater  stability  in  the  global  financial
markets. It is widely accepted, however, that the developments of the past decade cannot be rolled
back. In the words of Professor Klaus Schwab of the World Economic Forum:
“The financial globalisation is no longer a process – it is now a situation. We should therefore no
longer talk of globalisation, but rather of globality”.
The outlook for South Africa as an emerging market
The question can now be asked what the outlook for South Africa is as an emerging market in this
unfolding brave new world?
Firstly, what are the prospects for the further expansion of the South African financial markets? It
is unlikely that the rate of expansion in the volumes in the various markets experienced over the
past few years will be maintained. There are, however, a number of further important structural
reforms now in progress that will provide further stimulus, further expansion and more growth in
the markets. A few can be mentioned:
•  The  implementation  of  the  STRATE  (Share  Transactions  Totally  Electronic)  system  of  the
Johannesburg Stock Exchange to provide a secure electronic settlement environment for share
transactions;
•  The  immobilisation,  dematerialisation  and  concentration  in  a  fully  electronic  Central
Securities Depository of paper scrip and certificates to facilitate immediate payment against
delivery of financial asset transactions;
•  The further extension of the National Payment, Clearing and Settlement System (SAMOS) to
provide for real-time on-line settlement on a gross basis for all large transactions, and same-
day settlement for all transactions with and within the banking sector;
•  The further extension of international participation at all levels in the South African financial
markets.
Secondly, will the remaining exchange controls be removed to provide a further stimulus to the
development  of  the  South  African  financial  markets?  Here  again,  the  answer  must  be  in  the
positive. The removal of exchange controls is a one-way process that should not be reversed, not
even when international capital flows go against the country, as happened in the past year.
The continued integration of South Africa in the world financial markets will force a greater use
of the  versatile  major  driving  force  of  globalisation,  and  that  is  electronic  communication.  The
emergence  of  a  global  electronic  network  for  trade  (e-commerce),  financial  transactions  (e-
payments) and money transactions (e-money) makes the retention of exchange controls on current
account or capital transactions virtually impossible.
Thirdly, will the process of financial globalisation continue, and will it provide further stimulus to
the  expansion  of  financial  markets?  It  is  true  that  globalisation  played  havoc  with  the  world
BIS Review   38/1999
4
financial  markets  last  year  and  created  many  macroeconomic  hardships,  particularly  in  the
emerging markets of the world. It is also true that there is some backtracking by certain countries
from the process of globalisation.
It is also true that the integration of the world financial markets is a process that is irreversible.
South Africa’s attitude is therefore not to withdraw from globalisation, but rather to learn from
the  lessons  of  the  past,  and  to  adapt  more  effectively  to  the  vicissitudes  of  this  new  world
financial environment. In the final situation, South Africa with its low domestic savings rate and
urgent  requirement  for  the  expansion  of  its  production  capacity,  needs  foreign  investment  to
finance economic development in the interest of all the people of this country.
The process of globalisation brings with it growing competition amongst the approximately thirty
countries that have now been grouped together as the emerging markets of the world. Investors,
mainly  from  the  industrial  countries,  have  many  options  on  where  they  can  invest  their  funds.
South Africa came through the financial turmoil of the past eighteen months relatively well. The
banking sector stood up to the strains without any major mishap, the financial markets continued
to  function  effectively,  and  the  macroeconomic  adjustments  were  painful  but  nevertheless  less
severe than in most of the other affected countries. Perhaps our fiscal and monetary policies were
not as bad as local critics perceived them to be. The final assessment is now being made in the
global markets. Some foreign investments are beginning to flow back into South Africa. Since the
beginning of this year, non-residents have again increased their holdings of South African bonds
by almost R4 billion.
The world financial markets are returning to a situation of more stability. Serious efforts are now
being made at the multinational level to improve the architecture of the world financial system.
After the turmoil of the past eighteen months, a period of sobering consolidation will at this stage
have a salutary effect on this exciting process of the worldwide integration of financial markets.
In the longer-term, the process will continue. And South Africa will hopefully continue to be an
active participant in the process, and will come out as one of the winners in this very competitive
environment.
5
BIS Review   38/1999
