Mr Latter comments on the euro: first impressions from Hong Kong
Address by Mr Tony Latter, a Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority,
at  the  seminar  entitled,  “Five  months  of  the  euro:  what  does  it  mean  for  business  in  Hong
Kong?” held in Hong Kong on 11 May 1999.
Introduction
It’s probably true to say that the arrival of the euro passed without incident and almost without
notice in Hong Kong. You might think this a somewhat ungracious statement with which to
begin. But it certainly does not mean that the euro is unimportant to Hong Kong. What the
statement tells us, first and foremost, is that the preparations for the euro by those sections of
the community for which its arrival was of immediate importance - and here I refer principally
to the financial sector and parts of the commercial sector - were totally successful in ensuring
a smooth and hence unremarkable transition. I would like to congratulate all concerned on that
achievement.
At the other extreme, my opening remark could also be taken as confirmation that the arrival
of the euro was of no direct importance to the man in the street, who may never even have
seen a European currency; even if he has, he will not have to confront the euro in physical
form until the banknotes appear in 2002.
I should like to spend a few minutes discussing two aspects of the euro. One is its impact on
and implications for the conduct of financial and commercial business here, essentially at the
micro  level.  The  other  relates  to  some  macroeconomic  policy  aspects  of  the  euro’s  birth,
which are also relevant to Hong Kong despite our being some 10,000 kilometres distant.
Consequences for financial markets and trade
As  one  would  have  expected,  the  wholesale  financial  markets  switched  quite  rapidly  to
quoting and dealing mostly in euros instead of the constituent currencies, and many businesses
also  chose  quickly  to  redenominate  their  relevant  accounts,  although  a  significant  number
have not yet done so.  The  choice  is  largely  one  of  practicality  and  economy,  rather  than  of
economic significance, given that, formally, the parent currencies are now no more than sub-
denominations  of  the  euro;  one  might  therefore  expect  people  to  opt  quite  quickly  for  the
convenience  of  a  unified  denomination  rather  than  to  continue  operating  with  up  to  eleven
separate ones.
So far as I have been able to ascertain, the euro is trading in foreign exchange markets just as
one would expect a major international currency to trade - that is, with good liquidity and fine
spreads.  However,  total  turnover  is  less  than  that  for  the  predecessor  currencies  taken
together; indeed one would be disturbed if that were not the case, since the rationale for cross
trades  and  arbitrage  between  the  former  currencies  has  evaporated.  That  is  why  in  most
financial centres - and Hong Kong is no exception - dealing rooms have been slimmed down.
This is the dividend in respect of resource saving which represents one of the net benefits of
moving to a single currency, even though the forex traders whose skills are no longer in such
demand may not see it that way.
In  the  bond  market  we  have  witnessed  the  first  Hong  Kong  corporate  issue  in  euro,  which
generated good demand - primarily from European investors but also with significant interest
1
BIS Review   53/1999
from local buyers. In former times an issue of this sort in any of the parent currencies would
probably  have  been  rarer,  because  the  individual  markets  lacked  maturity.  A  significant
consequence  of  the  euro’s  arrival  is  that  there  now  exists  a  market  with  the  potential  for  a
critical mass of liquidity well beyond that which the individual parent currency markets ever
managed to achieve. There is further evidence to support that view in provisional reports that
global international bond issuance in euro this year has exceeded that of issuance in the parent
currencies  during  the  equivalent  period  last  year,  while  the  same  comparison  for  non-euro
European  currencies  shows  a  decline  (although  I  have  not  yet  seen  the  formal  statistics  by
which to confirm this). This has been achieved despite the fact that the process of establishing
the euro firmly in these markets is not yet complete. Investors are still feeling their way: for
example,  deciding  on  a  benchmark  yield  for  the  euro,  when  there  is  a  significant  spread  of
perceived  credit  risk  even  between  member  state  governments,  is  one  area  where  fund
managers may still be finding their feet.
Although I am not close to it myself, it is my impression that the industrial and commercial
sectors have also adapted well to the euro, although the amount of adaptation that has been
required differs across individual cases. Many may not be affected, but equally many may be
experiencing a drift towards more quoting and invoicing in euro; in some cases there will be
pressure to do so which, on competitive grounds, they can ill afford to ignore. And there will
be  some  who  find  themselves  at  a  slight  competitive  disadvantage  if  they  are  bidding  for
business in a euroland country against a competitor from another euroland country; previously
both bidders had to take account of exchange risks and conversion costs, but now it is only the
Hong Kong bidder who faces these.
Finally, I understand that among the general public there was an initial burst of interest in euro
deposits (over and above mere redenomination of existing ones in the parent currencies), but
that this interest waned somewhat with the euro’s subsequent depreciation.
Challenges for policy
Turning now to macroeconomic issues, we in the Hong Kong Monetary Authority have had a
particular interest in the arrival of the euro, since it was the final step in the transition of the
eleven  participating  countries  from  closely  aligned  rates  to  irrevocably  fixed  rates,  and  has
therefore consolidated the number of economies where, like Hong Kong, some form of fixed
exchange rate arrangement is regarded as both desirable and workable.
Of course, I accept that technically the eleven currencies have not been fixed or pegged to one
another, but have gone a stage further and been replaced by a single successor. But the critical
point is that the euro countries individually have to a large extent, as Hong Kong did to an
even larger extent over fifteen years ago, surrendered scope for exchange rate adjustment as
an instrument of policy. In the euro case the surrender is not total since, although no member
can any longer move relative to the ten other participants, the European Central Bank can of
course  still  pursue  an  independent  monetary  policy  relative  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  Hong
Kong is more tightly bound, since we are linked to the US dollar over whose wider value we
have no influence.
When we pegged the Hong Kong dollar to the US dollar in 1983 we did so at a time of crisis
and  partly  because  there  was,  for  institutional  reasons,  effectively  no  viable  alternative
available  to  us  at  the  time.  European  countries,  by  contrast,  had  a  full  range  of  workable
BIS Review   53/1999
2
options and chose the euro only after a long and thorough process of analysis, deliberation and
preparation.
If  adopting  a  fixed  rate  was  going  to  succeed  anywhere,  Hong  Kong  was  certainly  a  prime
candidate, because of the proven flexibility of the economy - not least the labour market, in
terms  of  both  inter-sectoral  mobility  and  wage-cost  flexibility.  What  has  been  surprising  to
many  outside  observers  about  the  road  to  the  euro  is  that,  while  it  has  all  along  been
acknowledged  that  greater  internal  flexibility  within  the  member  economies  would  be
required as a substitute for adjustment of relative price levels via the exchange rate, progress
in that direction has been extremely slow. Indeed, in the period since the euro proposal first
acquired  real  momentum  it  is  probably  true  to  say  that  some  of  the  internal  adjustment
mechanisms in participant countries have become more rigid rather than less so.
It  is  perhaps  not  surprising,  therefore,  to  hear  of  worries  about  possible  tensions  in
policy-making which the persisting disparities of economic performance across Euroland may
cause. I have even read - but from sources which are probably more gossip than anything else
- of the possibility of Maastricht budget deficit criteria in parts of Euroland being breached in
order  to  sustain  or  stimulate  growth.  Of  course,  you  may  argue  that  this  -  budgetary
relaxation - is precisely what we are doing in Hong Kong. Yes, but we are employing fiscal
policy as an additional instrument to the flexible structure of our market economy, whereas in
Europe the danger would be of it being regarded more as a substitute, although I acknowledge
that a significant part of budgetary spending there is nowadays directed towards achieving the
necessary  structural  reforms.  And  in  Hong  Kong  we  are  working  from  a  position  in  which
monetary policy is clearly quite tight and has to remain so for the moment (given our link to
the US dollar), whereas euro monetary policy is not so rigidly constrained.
In the broader sweep of history, a regime of fixed exchange rates is by no means an outlier.
Remember that most of the world’s currencies were fixed on some sort of metallic standard
until the first world war, and that the world enjoyed 25 years of virtually fixed rates after the
second. Interestingly, I have seen it argued that one of the reasons (though certainly neither the
only one nor the primary one) for it being impossible to sustain fixed rates in the inter-war
period may have been the growing rigidity of labour markets as the century progressed. And
one  of  the  main  reasons  for  the  breakdown  of  the  Bretton  Woods  arrangements  at  the
beginning of the 1970s was the collapse of budgetary discipline of one member in particular -
the United States. There are no doubt lessons from history, even though the read-across to the
present day may be subject to many qualifications.
Personally, I would expect the fiscal discipline of Maastricht to be retained and observed. And
I am yet more confident that the European Central Bank will remain steadfast in its counter-
inflationary role. That combination will, as is widely  acknowledged,  transfer  a  considerable
burden  of  adjustment  onto  structural  and  microeconomic  policies.  It  is  good  that  the  focus
should rest there and it will be even better when more progress is visible on that front - better
not simply for Europe but for the world, which needs a strong European economy. And within
Europe itself I feel that there is something of a political imperative for the impact of the euro
to have been demonstrated as unequivocally beneficial by the time that the potentially rather
emotional withdrawal of national banknotes takes place in 2002.
The  concerns  over  the  apparent  tensions  in  economic  policy  in  consequence  of  the  euro’s
arrival  have  plainly  had  some  adverse  effect  on  sentiment  towards  the  euro  in  foreign
exchange markets, although we know that other factors, notably the conflict in the Balkans,
3
BIS Review   53/1999
have been important too. When you look at the ups and downs of the relationships between
the world’s leading currencies over the years you will recognise that the depreciation in the
euro  since  its  inception  is  not  all  that  exceptional,  however  much  we  may  regret  that
movements of this sort may nowadays be regarded as within the definition of normal. But the
attitude  of  international  businesses  and  investors  outside  Euroland  to  the  euro  will  be
coloured, to a degree, by perceptions of its likely volatility, and in that sense the start has not
been as auspicious as one might have wished.
Prospects and opportunities
But  I  suspect  that  those  of  us  living  a  long  way  from  Euroland  tend  to  underestimate  the
impact which the euro is having in terms of cost savings and risk reduction in cross-border
trade,  although  we  may  see  and  feel  something  of  the  side  effects  in  terms  of  heightened
competition and usage of the euro in world business. At the same time, as I tried to elaborate
earlier,  the  euro  has  the  potential  to  become  a  force  in  global  financial  markets.  As  that
happens, we in Hong Kong hope to play our part. Indeed, we believe we are excellently placed
to be involved in the expansion of usage of the euro in international financial markets.
As  a  central  banker  I  must  repeat  that  I  hope  and  expect  that  the  ECB  will  be  a  staunch
guardian  of  monetary  discipline.  This  certainly  does  not  mean  that  we  can  make  accurate
predictions  about  the  exchange  rate  or  interest  rates,  but  it  is  likely  to  mean  that  the  euro
should in due course consolidate itself as a leading world currency in trade and finance, not
least  in  this  part  of  the  world.  Meanwhile,  the  unified  currency  provides  Euroland  with  the
opportunity  to  strengthen  its  collective  economy,  albeit  an  opportunity  which  has  to  be
worked upon. And a strong and stable European economy is probably of greater importance to
the world at large than is any particular level for the euro’s exchange rate.
So, the euro has arrived. It has already made an impact on financial markets and trade, and
that impact is likely to expand over time. We disregard it at our cost. And we should focus on
the  longer-term  implications  of  the  euro  rather  than  dwell  too  much  on  its  short-term
vicissitudes.
Finally, in Hong Kong we should perhaps be watching with special interest the evolution of
the euro and the way in which the associated macroeconomic challenges within Euroland are
tackled, to see what lessons might be put in store for a future generation of central bankers in
this  region,  who  might  at  some  stage  decide  that  the  time  had  come  to  launch  a  similar
initiative.
BIS Review   53/1999
4
