Mr  Duisenberg  reports  on  the  outcome  of  the  latest  meeting  of  the  ECB  Governing
Council
Introductory statement by the President of the European Central Bank, Dr W F Duisenberg at
the press conference held in Frankfurt on 6 May 1999.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  here  today  to  report  on  the  outcome  of
today’s meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB.
The  Governing  Council  reviewed,  as  usual,  the  main  monetary,  financial  and  other
economic  indicators  in  line  with  its  monetary  policy  strategy.  Following  this  discussion  it
decided to keep the ECB’s interest rates unchanged. The interest rate on the main refinancing
operations will thus remain 2.5%. In addition, the interest rate on the marginal lending facility
will continue to be 3.5% and that on the deposit facility will remain 1.5%. Let me give you
some details about our latest assessment  of  the  monetary  policy  stance  and  thereby  provide
explanations for the decisions taken today.
Overall,  monetary  developments  and  our  broadly  based  assessment  of  future  price
developments do not signal dangers to price stability over the short and medium term.
With regard to monetary developments in the euro area, in March 1999 the 12-month rate of
growth  of  M3  remained  constant  at  5.1%.  While  the  pace  of  increase  in  overnight  deposits
reduced further, signalling the waning influence of the uncertainties surrounding the launch of
the euro, deposits with an agreed maturity of up to two years grew at a stronger pace in March
than in February 1999. The latest figure for the three-month moving average of M3 growth,
covering the first quarter of 1999, was 5.2%. This was 0.2 percentage point higher than in the
previous  three-month  period,  covering  the  period  December  1998  to  February  1999.  The
Governing Council also noted that the annual rate of growth of total credit was broadly stable
at 7.5% in March 1999. In line with the assessment it had made on the occasion of its previous
meetings, the Governing Council took the view that recent monetary trends should not be seen
as a warning signal with regard to the future evolution of inflation. As we have emphasised in
the past, the monetary data in early 1999 may be affected by the special circumstances related
to the changeover to Stage Three of EMU. In addition, the three-month moving average of M3
growth remains relatively close to the reference value of 4½%.
As regards financial indicators, I should like to stress that recent developments in bond yields
in  the  euro  area  were  accompanied  by  some  decoupling  of  yields  from  those  in  the  United
States, as differentials between euro area long-term interest rates and comparable rates in the
United States have widened.
As  regards  the  evolution  of  the  world  economy,  recent  developments  tend  to  confirm  the
picture of a mild overall improvement in the external environment beyond the euro area. As
before, however, the main features range from continuously strong growth of the US economy
to continuously weak output in Japan.
For the euro area, only a few additional data for economic indicators have become available,
and  the  assessment  of  forthcoming  GDP  developments  is  currently  complicated  by  the  fact
that the next release will be based on revised data in accordance with the new concept of the
European System of Accounts (ESA 95). Industrial production declined at the beginning of
this  year,  and  data  on  retail  sales  volumes  suggest  that  the  pace  of  growth  slowed  down
somewhat around the turn of the year, but recently there are preliminary indications of some
improvement.  Recent  developments  in  the  labour  market  show  a  somewhat  decelerating
1
BIS Review  51/1999
employment  growth  towards  the  end  of  last  year.  The  rate  of  unemployment  remained
unchanged  in  March  1999,  following  two  consecutive  declines  in  January  and  February.
Industrial  confidence  declined  further  in  the  first  quarter  of  1999,  but  preliminary  April
figures  from  the  European  Commission  point  to  a  slight  improvement.  Given  the  latest
developments  up  to  April,  it  would  appear  that  consumer  confidence  reached  a  peak  at  the
beginning of this year since when it has moderated slightly.
As  expected,  the  trend  towards  decreasing  inflation  rates  appears  to  have  been  reversed  in
March.  In  March  the  annual  rate  of  increase  of  consumer  prices  as  measured  by  the
Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices  (HICP)  was  1.0%,  compared  with  0.8%  in  the
previous four months. This was essentially a consequence of the substantial rise in oil prices
which  began  in  mid-February  feeding  through  to  energy  prices  in  the  HICP.  In  addition,
unprocessed  food  prices  have  continued  to  exert  some  upward  pressure  on  overall  price
increases  in  recent  months.  Excluding  the  more  volatile  HICP  components  of  energy  and
food, the rate of increase in consumer prices in March remained at 1.1% - i.e. unchanged from
the rate observed in February and marginally lower than that recorded at the turn of the year.
In conclusion, at this point in time the general outlook for price stability remains favourable.
Although the lower effective exchange rate of the euro and the rise in oil prices may lead to
some  upward  pressure  on  headline  HICP  inflation  in  the  coming  months,  the  current
economic  situation  is  likely  to  contribute  to  containing  this  upward  pressure.  At  the  same
time,  current  monetary  developments  and  other  available  indicators  do  not  point  to
inflationary  risks  over  the  medium  term.  On  the  basis  of  this  assessment  the  Governing
Council decided to keep the ECB’s interest rates at their current levels.
In  addition  to  reviewing  the  main  monetary,  financial  and  other  economic  indicators,  the
Governing  Council  considered  a  report  prepared  by  the  ECB’s  Banking  Supervision
Committee on “The effects of technology on the EU banking systems”. The report assesses
the extent to which technological developments have taken place and are expected to occur in
the EU banking systems, the main categories of banking risks affected by these developments
and  the  strategic  responses  that  EU  banks  are  devising.  The  Governing  Council  agreed  to
publish the report, which will be made available in due course.
BIS Review  51/1999
2
