Mr Meister reviews the subject of bank insolvencies and moral hazard
Statement by Mr. Edgar Meister, a member of the Directorate of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at a
symposium hosted by the University of Frankfurt on 1/2/99.
One of the pillars of our market economy is the fact that entrepreneurs are personally responsible
for their business activities. Generally, this principle also applies to banks. However, banks, as
financial intermediaries and providers of financial services, play a special role in an economy. A
crisis of one major bank, let alone the whole banking system, would have a serious impact on
economic activity, and this also goes for the real sector. But then again, the special role of banks
must  not  be  interpreted  to  mean  that  bank  boards  can  count  on  government  support  in
emergencies. If they could, the risk of a precarious situation in the banking sector would increase
even more. This would create a “moral hazard”, which would result in banks taking excessive
risks  in  order  to  obtain  higher  returns,  in  the  confidence  that  they  could  rely  on  government
support in the event of a failure.
Banking  supervisors  must  try  to  prevent  both  scenarios  —  serious  external  effects  of  bank
insolvencies,  for  one  thing,  and  moral  hazard,  for  another  —  from  happening.  The  crisis  in
South-East  Asia  has  shown  that  government  guarantees  and  expectations  of  international
assistance — which were met in the end — can lead to serious misalignments in a crisis situation
(To quote Tietmeyer: “Do not display too much money in the shop windows”).
Avoiding crises must be the prime concern. Efficient banking supervision can make an essential
contribution  to  this  objective.  Supervisors  should  be  guided  by  the  principle:  “As  much
entrepreneurial leeway as possible, yet as much state supervision as required”. There have been
some recent proposals to confer more supervisory tasks to the private sector (G30). In principle,
increased mutual monitoring among the banks, and hence a strengthening of market discipline, is
a welcome idea. Nevertheless, conceptual and practical problems should not be overlooked. For
instance, more self-regulation by the market participants implies a transfer of legislative powers,
but  it  does  not  mean  that  responsibility  for  resolving  systemic  crises  would  also  shift  to  the
private sector.
State supervision will remain necessary as long as systemic risks exist which cannot be limited
sufficiently  through  preventive  measures  or  eliminated  within  the  context  of  market  control.
Besides,  the  self-regulation  model,  inter  alia,  assumes  that  the  financial  sector  is  highly
transparent for the market, e. g. regarding in-house procedures, which is hardly feasible.
Allow me to briefly outline the German prudential approach:
•  Banking supervision is guided by the principle that a bank's management is responsible for its
business decisions. Therefore, banking supervision in Germany does not actively intervene in
banking activities, i. e. by making specific recommendations.
•  From the central bank's perspective, I would like to stress that it cannot be the task of a central
bank to bail out insolvent credit institutions. The Ministry of Finance would be responsible for
that, if tax revenue were required for assistance measures. But even cases such as financially
sound institutions merely having liquidity problems should, if possible, be resolved with the
help  of  private  or  semi-private  lenders  before  reaching  the  gates  of  the  central  bank.  The
Liquidity Consortium Bank in Germany is such a “lender of penultimate resort”. In addition to
the three categories of credit institutions, the Bundesbank also has a stake in this Consortium
Bank, and it provides refinancing against collateral. Apart from that, the Bundesbank has not
committed itself in a binding manner to take action in the event of a crisis. It would also be
BIS Review   15/1999
– 2 –
desirable if a liquidity consortium bank or comparable institutions were established in other
European countries.
•  If it were not possible for the creditworthiness of an institution to be restored either by other
institutions or with the help of the deposit guarantee scheme, having that institution exit the
market would, in general, be a feasible consequence. However, if such a step posed a serious
threat to the stability of the banking system, i. e. if the institution in question were “too big to
fail”,  a  joint  solution  would  have  to  be  found  by  all  the  private  market  players  and  public
bodies concerned. Already the number of institutions we must consider to be “too big to fail”
has risen in the recent past, and further mergers will cause this number to keep rising. Mergers
of global players do not only raise new questions in banking supervision. They also pose the
risk  that  size  leads  to  moral  hazard  effects.  For  precisely  this  reason,  each  crisis  must  be
assessed  individually.  The  key  principle  is  that  the  government's  response  must  not  be
predictable and that private market players should be involved in potential rescue operations
to the greatest possible extent.
•  The  recent  financial  crises  have  been  increasingly  drawing  attention  to  international  crisis
management. In my opinion, the aforementioned principles should be applied in this context,
too: there should be no explicit or implicit government guarantees regarding the solvency of
the  respective  banking  system;  temporary  liquidity  crises  should  be  resolved,  wherever
possible,  before  government  intervention  becomes  necessary;  the  private  sector  should  be
comprehensively involved both in crisis management and in loss-sharing.
•  International support measures must always remain an exception and never become the rule.
Under no circumstances should private investors be able to rely on public bodies to assume
their  losses  in  the  end.  Instead,  I  believe  it  would  be  desirable  to  create  an  international
liquidity safeguarding fund made up of the major global players, which would also have the
most to gain from a largely deregulated and sound financial system. This will not be an easy
undertaking,  since  there  seem  to  be  few  incentives  for  a  bank  to  assume  other  institutions'
risks. Nevertheless this road should be taken in order to strengthen market discipline. I believe
that  membership  in  a  club  comprising  the  major  global  players  would  be  a  special  quality
which  could  actually  become  attractive  for  those  institutions.  Besides,  it  seems  quite
conceivable that banking supervision might be willing  to  grant  those  institutions  more  self-
regulatory powers.
The case of the Hedge Funds LTCM proves that the private sector can find solutions  without
having recourse to public funds. At that time, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was only
acting as an intermediary to bring national and international financial institutions together, which
then provided the necessary funds.
The same principle applies both nationally and internationally: moral hazard problems can only
be  prevented  by  emphasising  and  requiring  that  responsibility  be  taken  by  financial  market
participants, and by limiting the intervention of public bodies. Avoiding moral hazard will also
increase the stability of the system and improve crisis management.
 BIS Review   15/1999
