Mr Sabirin looks at how to create value with macroeconomic adjustments
Keynote  address  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Indonesia,  Dr  Syahril  Sabirin,  at  the  Presidents
Forum Dinner organized by Business Week in Singapore on 4/2/99.
Ladies and Gentlemen
It is both a pleasure and a great honor for me to be here to speak at this important forum. Let me
extend  my  gratitude  to  the  organizer  and  express  my  warm  welcome  to  all  participants  in  this
gathering this evening.
The  economic  crisis  that  swept  this  region  since  almost  two  years  ago  has  resulted  in  a
previously-unimaginable loss to the economies in the region: the loss of confidence from within and
without, the loss of the value of assets, the loss of employment opportunities, and more importantly
the  loss  of  opportunity  to  continue  the  high  growth  performance  that  the  region  had  enjoyed  for
many years. But there are two aspects that I hope, and I believe, have not been lost, namely: (one)
the pride that once these economies were called the Asian Tigers and that the performance of these
economies  was  named  the  East  Asian  Miracle,  and  (two)  the  confidence  and  the  enthusiasm  that
these economies can become high performers once again.
The value and everything else that were lost have to be regained. I do believe that the foundations
that once transformed these regional economies into an economic growth area were not easily swept
away. This region still possesses many ingredients for growth. It is endowed with a large industrious
labor  force,  the  basic  economic  machinery  is  well  developed,  some  of  the  economies  are  rich  in
natural resources, and – very importantly - the economies have the ability to adopt and implement
the  necessary  economic  adjustment  measures.  It  is  the  economic  adjustment  measures,  or
macroeconomic policies in general, that I would like to focus on this evening, and what kind of value
they have created for the economies.
In a market oriented economy, the aim of macroeconomic policies can be summarized, in my view,
in  a  simple  phrase,  namely  to  establish  a  conducive  environment  for  economic  activities  to  take
place  and  for  businesses  to  grow.  Such  an  environment  must  consist  of  a  number  of  things,
including  price  stability,  exchange  rate  stability,  a  well-functioning  credit  and  payment  system,
efficient  public  administration,  a  just  and  well-functioning  legal  system,  and  well-developed
infrastructures.  It  is  such  an  environment  that  the  crisis-affected  countries  would  need  to  rebuild.
And  it  is  such  an  environment  that  the  policy  makers  in  this  region  have  been  struggling  to
redevelop.
As it is often true in many cases, problems and crises also bring with them opportunities. Among the
opportunities  associated  with  the  economic  crisis  in  Asia  is  the  opportunity  to  look  back  and
examine very closely what is lacking and what needs to be done to strengthen the foundations for
growth.
The  policy  makers  in  this  region  have  made  use  of  the  opportunities  to  restructure  the  banking
system,  to  introduce  or  revise  the  bankruptcy  law  as  well  as  the  law  on  competition,  to  trim  and
privatize state-owned enterprises, to redefine the role of the central bank, and many other things. All
these together should constitute a more solid foundation for future growth.
The policy makers in this region have gone a long way. The monetary policies, and macroeconomic
policies  in  general,  have  shown  very  encouraging  results  in  terms  of  price  and  exchange  rate
stability. Interest rates, which had to be kept high during the stabilization period, have come down to
more affordable levels. Economic activities have shown some pick-up. And, it is quite possible in
my view that this region can become a growth center once again.
BIS Review   16/1999
– 2 –
However, we need to remain cautious given the uncertainties that linger in the world economy today.
Recent devaluation of the Brazilian real, followed by the change in the exchange rate system, is just
another  illustration  of  how  high  the  uncertainty  is.  Therefore,  in  formulating  future  strategic
directions, in my view, we need to be optimistic, but cautiously optimistic.
At the same time, the world is ever-changing. Quite a number of new developments have taken place
in recent years, which directly or indirectly shaped the environment we are operating in. This year
we also witnessed the launching of the euro. Although it still remains to be seen, I hope the euro will
contribute  substantially  to  a  greater  stability  in  the  currency  markets,  something  we  need  badly
today. In the technology sector, we are witnessing an extraordinary growth of the internet industries,
which to some extent can be illustrated by skyrocketing prices of internet stocks in  United  States.
Following  this  trend,  we  are  also  witnessing  efforts  by  many  enterprises  to  make  a  foray  into
e-commerce.  This  phenomenon  most  likely  will  change  the  way  we  do  trade  and  business  in  the
future.
Although  at  this  juncture  it  is  still  hard  to  predict  the  impact  of  these  structural  changes  on  our
environment, at least there are some obvious elements influencing the direction. Those are factors
such  as 
integration,
macroeconomic  adjustments,  liberalization  and  direction  towards  market  economy  at  the  macro
level. No less important is our expectation in the future and forward looking strategies which most of
the time play an important role in driving economic activities.
innovations,  strategic  alignments  at 
level  and  economic 
the  micro 
With those new forces driving our world economy towards a new direction, the pace differs across
countries. For crisis impacted countries in this region, the opportunities will be dependent upon the
speed  of  recovery  of  those  economies  which  are  also  affected  by  the  degree  of  success  of
macroeconomic  adjustments.  In  fact,  macroeconomic  adjustments  have  been  typically  one  key
strategy in this region. For the case of Indonesia, high growth in the past was substantially facilitated
by many adjustment measures in our economy, particularly in the financial sector.
Therefore,  in  responding  to  the  current  crisis,  it  is  important  for  the  authorities  in  this  region  to
reinvent  this  key  element  and  incorporate  it  into  the  changing  environment.  Just  as  on  the  micro
level we need to understand our strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and our key competence, the
similar  approach  to  some  degree  may  be  used  in  the  macro  level.  Macroeconomic  adjustments
should adapt to the changing environment and I think elements of this approach can be found in the
efforts  of  regional  authorities  to  respond  the  current  crisis.  Combined  with  those  current  driving
factors  I  have  mentioned,  and  positive  elements  that  still  exist  in  this  region,  I  believe  the  value
created  will  be  more  significantly  measured  by  better  resource  allocation  in  every  element  of  the
economy and more synergies obtained. If any single entity of the economy can generate maximum
value  from  its  business,  aided  among  other  things  by  conducive  macroeconomic  situation,  the
economy as a whole will create substantial value as well.
Ladies and gentlemen,
As you are evaluating business strategic directions in this region, allow me to update you with some
recent  developments  in  Indonesia,  which  I  hope  may  be  taken  into  account  in  weighing  risks  and
opportunities.  Although  the  crisis  has  severely  impacted  our  economy,  bringing  around  a  14%
contraction, not all of the economic sectors were affected. Agriculture, which traditionally has been
our backbone in securing food supplies and mass employment,  was  less  affected  by  the  crisis  and
still  recorded  positive  growth.  Food  production,  plantation  and  forestry  have  recorded  substantial
growth  relative  to  the  impact  of  crisis.  Indeed,  disturbance  to  the  agriculture  sector  was  more
attributed  to  natural  causes  such  as  El  Niño.  In  some  provinces  many  farmers  are  even  enjoying
windfall profits from the large depreciation of the rupiah.
BIS Review   16/1999
– 3 –
This fact shows that during the crisis economic activities shift somewhat to resource based sectors.
For Indonesia this shift is natural considering the abundant resources available in the  country.  For
this crisis period, this development is heartening since securing food prices is very important in our
efforts  to  control  inflation,  especially  that  of  basic  necessities,  and  to  arrest  pressures  from  social
unrest  and  income  disparities.  In  this  respect,  we  are  quite  happy  that  our  inflation  was  slightly
below  our  target  of  80%  last  year,  thanks  to  improved  distribution  of  food  and  other  basic
necessities.  More  importantly,  the  rate  has  sharply  decelerated  in  the  past  few  months.  In  fact  in
October the rate was negative, in November it was close to zero, although the months of December
and  January  again  recorded  positive  rates  due  to  holiday  times.  In  1999  as  a  whole  we  expect
inflation to be below 20%, and with this expectation interest rates can be expected to decline during
the remaining months so as to stimulate economic recovery.
As  compared  to  a  level  of  around  71%  in  August  last  year,  interest  rates  now  are  much  lower  at
around 37%. In the coming weeks and months, we will monitor the monetary situation very closely
and run our monetary policy very cautiously. Although we believe that the current interest rate is still
too high in real terms, our monetary stance will be relaxed to make interest rate decline only when
we are convinced that such a stance would not create any jitters in the exchange market.
Ladies and gentlemen,
When we look back just to a few months ago, that is to the month of May 1998 when the current
government  was  installed,  we  have  accomplished  quite  a  lot  in  such  a  short  period  of  time.
Politically, a very drastic reform to democracy has taken place. With the approval by Parliament of
the  basic  political  laws  and  with  a  clear  agenda  for  a  general  election  in  June  and  presidential
election in October or November, a solid foundation for democracy is already established. We are
confident that by the end of the year, if not already now, we will be the third largest democracy in
the world.
 We also have accomplished quite a lot in improving our legal system. Among other things, a new
bankruptcy law has been enacted and a special bankruptcy court is already in place. And the law on
competition  is  about  to  be  completed  by  Parliament,  and  a  new  draft  law  on  central  bank,  which
stresses the independence of the central bank, has been submitted to Parliament. On the economic
front,  a  lot  more  has  been  done.  The  last  important  piece  we  are  currently  working  on  is  the
restructuring  and  recapitalization  of  the  banking  system.  The  sharp  economic  decline  during  the
crisis  has  reduced  the  value  of  banks’  assets  quite  significantly,  leaving  many  of  the  banks  with
negative  net  worth.  Without  sufficient  recapitalization  of  the  banking  system,  economic  recovery
cannot  take  place.  We  have  practically  completed  the  preparation  process  for  recapitalization,
including  due  diligence  by  international  auditing  firms,  preparation  and  examination  of  business
plans, and tight fit and proper tests for the management and the banks. The actual recapitalization
process will take place shortly.
Along with banks’ restructuring, companies’ restructuring should also take place at the same time. A
number  of  actions  in  synergy  are  being  conducted  for  this  purpose.  Aside  from  the  INDRA
(Indonesian  Debt  Restructuring  Agency)  scheme,  the  Jakarta  Initiative  was  established  to  help
facilitate  the  meetings  between  debtors  and  creditors,  and  a  special  task  force  to  help  banks
restructure their assets was also set up. We should expect  that  the  restructuring  of  companies  will
take place along with the restructuring of the banks, and they should be strengthening each other’s
progress.
BIS Review  16/1999
– 4 –
Ladies and Gentlemen,
With  all  of  those  ongoing  readjustments  in  our  economic  landscape  today,  we  believe  that  our
economy is heading for a new and structurally more sound economy supported by sound pillars of a
modern economy. We are promoting more competition, eliminating monopolies, dismantling trade
barriers, and eliminating inefficiencies as well as implementing more market mechanisms. To some
extent, this crisis has taught us valuable lessons on how to improve our economy’s efficiency in the
future.
Looking at its elements, our economic reform comprises the most comprehensive and fundamental
adjustments  covering  many  important  ingredients  for  a  more  sustainable  open  and  market  driven
economy. Those agendas perhaps were not even imagined a few years ago when our economy was
running high, which unfortunately also tended to mask some weaknesses in our economic structure.
We are committed to fix all of the weaknesses while maintaining much of what we have achieved in
the past. In this regard we are bound not to deviate from many important underlying principles that
have driven our economic growth in last three decades. Indonesia is still an open economy based on
market mechanisms.
As my final remarks, I would like to illustrate the attitude of many Indonesians in observing many
changes in our society today. Many of us like to explore philosophical understandings among these
changes. Many believe that those changes, although this may be painful, are necessary in achieving
better condition. There are always lessons and insightful meaning for those who understand, mostly
those  who  possess  positive  minds  and  forward  looking  orientation.  With  this  positivism  we  will
finally see light at the end of the dark tunnel.
Our economic activities will continue to develop and will be driven by adjustments in our economy
and by those who can see opportunities amidst the changes taking place in Indonesia today. And I
am  sure  there  are  ample  business  enterprises  keen  to  benefit  from  the  opportunities  in  Indonesia.
This is particularly true for those who take a long-run view on Indonesia. Although in the short run
some some still perceive Indonesia as a relatively high risk country, the rewards for doing business
in or with Indonesia now, I believe, should also be high.
I am aware that you are here to weigh risk and reward to evaluate your business directions. By so
doing you are aiming to increase the value of your business and your shareholders. As a monetary
authority  in  Indonesia,  we  do  similar  things  to  create  value  by  committing  to  our  macroeconomic
adjustments, reducing uncertainties and focusing on the directions we have established. This synergy
is of a greater value for our stakeholders, namely the people at large.
 BIS Review   16/1999
