Bank of Japan’s monthly report of recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 16/02/99.
The Bank’s View2
The  economic  deterioration  in  Japan  has  become  moderate  against  the  background  of  the
increase in public investment.
Business  fixed  investment  has  been  declining  significantly.  As  for  housing  investment,
housing starts are bottoming out but remain at a low level. Recovery in private consumption
has  been  weak  on  the  whole,  although  partial  improvement  in  sales  of  goods  has  been
observed.  Meanwhile,  net  exports  (exports  minus  imports)  basically  remain  on  a  gradually
increasing 
this
development of final demand and the continued progress in inventory adjustments, industrial
production, which had been on a downtrend, is leveling off.
increasing  considerably.  Reflecting 
trend,  and  public 
investment 
is 
Corporate profits continue to decline. Employment and household income conditions are still
deteriorating as the unemployment rate is at a historically high level, and winter bonuses have
decreased  significantly.  Conditions  in  corporate  finance  are  currently  improving,  but  firms
apparently  cannot  remove  their  anxiety  about  the  availability  of  funds  in  the  future.
Consequently,  corporate  and  household  sentiment  remains  cautious,  and  a  recovery  has  not
yet been observed in private demand.
As  for  the  future  developments,  the  increase  in  public  investment  is  likely  to  underpin  the
economy  toward  the  first  half  of  fiscal  1999  with  the  implementation  of  the  government’s
economic  measures.  Furthermore,  the  Bank’s  monetary  and  financial  measures  and  the
government’s  measures  to  alleviate  the  credit  crunch  will  continue  to  be  in  effect.
Nevertheless,  an  immediate  self-sustained  recovery  in  private  demand  is  hardly  expected,
since corporate profits and household income are still deteriorating and the constraints from
corporate  finance  are  likely  to  persist  for  some  time  due  to  cautious  lending  attitudes  of
private  banks.  Moreover,  attention  should  be  paid  to  (1)  the  effects  of  the  continued
appreciation of the yen since autumn 1998; (2) those of the recent rise in long-term interest
rates; and (3) the uncertainty in financial and economic developments abroad. To lead Japan’s
economy into a steady recovery, it is important to prepare an  environment  where  firms  and
households  can  regain  confidence  in  Japan’s  economic  future  by,  for  instance,  promptly
restoring the stability of the financial system.
With  regard  to  prices,  reflecting  the  large  output  gap,  domestic  wholesale  prices  are  on  a
downtrend,  and  corporate  service  prices  are  weakening.  Consumer  prices  have  increased
above  the  previous  year’s  level  due  to  the  rise  in  prices  of  perishables.  Excluding  this
temporary effect, consumer prices basically remain weak. As for the outlook, although public
investment  is  expected  to  increase,  distinct  narrowing  in  the  output  gap  is  hardly  expected
toward the first half of 1999, as private demand is likely to remain sluggish. Furthermore, the
decline  in  wages  and  the  appreciation  of  the  yen  since  autumn  1998  are  likely  to  continue
exerting downward pressure on prices. Hence, prices are expected to remain on a downtrend.
                                                     
1 This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy
Meeting was held on February 12, 1999.
2 The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the
Monetary Policy Meeting held on February 12, as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review   18/1999
In the financial markets, the Japan premium and Euro-yen interest rates (both on three-month
contracts)  remain  stable  despite  the  approach  of  the  fiscal  year-end.  This  reflects  the
abatement of the market’s anxiety about liquidity and credit risks of Japanese banks against
the  background  of  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  maintenance  of  a  decisive  stance  on  easy  monetary
policy as well as the formulation of the framework to restore the stability of Japan’s financial
system.
Yields on Japanese government bonds have risen again reflecting the market’s concern over
the prospective expansion of fiscal deficits. In the foreign exchange market, the trend has been
toward a higher yen. Stock prices continue to be weak. Considering that these developments
can  be  a  hindrance  to  an  economic  recovery,  their  ensuing  developments  require  close
attention.
With regard to corporate finance, credit demand for economic activities remains weak, as a
result of the significant decrease in business fixed investment. Firms’ moves to increase their
on-hand liquidity in the face of difficult fund-raising conditions are gradually settling down.
Although private banks have basically retained their cautious lending stance, they continue to
actively  utilize  the  credit  guarantee  system.  As  a  result,  the  previously  tightened  credit
conditions are easing somewhat.
Nevertheless,  private  banks  and  capital  market  participants  are  still  cautious  of  corporate
credit risk, and thus firms with relatively low credit ratings remain under severe fund-raising
conditions.
The  situation  continues  to  warrant  careful  monitoring,  particularly  with  regard  to  how
corporate finance develops toward the end of the fiscal year.
 BIS Review   18/1999
2
