Mr Thiessen gives an update on the Canadian economy
and on the state of Year 2000 readiness in the Canadian financial sector
Speech  by  Mr  Gordon  Thiessen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Chamber  of  Commerce
Regina, Saskatchewan on 23 September 1999.
 It is always a pleasure to return and speak to people in my home province. This time, we are here for a
meeting of the Bank of Canada’s Board of Directors. Once a year, our Board meets outside Ottawa, in
a different part of the country. This year, we are delighted to be in Regina.
Today, I would like to give you an update on the Canadian economy – its recent performance and its
prospects. I would also like to brief you on the state of Year 2000 readiness in the Canadian financial
sector.
The recent performance of the Canadian economy
Here in Saskatchewan, you know only too well that the last couple of years have been difficult for the
Canadian economy, especially for producers of primary commodities. But there is reason for optimism
as we look ahead. To fully appreciate why, we need to understand the international shocks that have
buffeted our economy since mid-1997 and how we have dealt with them.
The global financial crisis, which started in Southeast Asia in mid-1997 and spread to other countries
during 1998, led to a sharp decline in the world prices of primary commodities. By this time last year,
the average price (in US dollars) of key commodities produced in Canada had fallen by about 20%
over the course of the previous 18 months.
And when Russia declared a standstill on the servicing of its debt in August 1998, the effects were felt
far  and  wide.  Conditions  tightened  in  financial  markets  everywhere.  Many  highly  rated  corporate
borrowers in the industrial countries were faced with a reduction in the availability of credit and with
higher  borrowing  costs  –  the  same  conditions  that  faced  governments  from  emerging-market
economies.
Nevertheless,  the  Canadian  economy  has  fared  surprisingly  well  over  the  past  year.  Of  course,  we
have  not  experienced  booming  conditions.  Indeed,  some  of  our  primary  sectors,  such  as  farming,
continue to struggle with low prices. Grain prices, in particular, have been plagued by ample global
supplies and weak demand. But, on the whole, the economy has performed well. I expect that when
the numbers for the third quarter of this year are out, they will show that output has grown by about
4% since the third quarter of 1998. This compares with growth of only 2½% over the same period the
year before.
To be sure, the economic impact of the Asian crisis on Canada has been moderated by the strength of
the  US  economy  and  by  the  prompt  response  of  major  central  banks,  particularly  the  US  Federal
Reserve, to the global financial difficulties. And the efforts made by emerging-market economies in
Asia  to  deal  with  their  problems  have  helped  to  gradually  repair  confidence  and  improve  world
economic conditions.
Although these positive developments are certainly important, it is also true that we have coped better
with this crisis than in the past because our economy is now operating from a firmer base than it has
for  some  time.  This  reflects  a  number  of  fundamental  improvements  in  our  economic  structure.  I
would highlight three in particular:
• 
first,  our  low-inflation  record  and  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  commitment  to  keeping  inflation
low;
1
BIS Review 100/1999
  second,  the  virtual  elimination  of  government  deficits  and  the  beginning  of  a  downward
trend in the high level of public debt to the size of our economy (as measured by the ratio of
public debt to GDP);
third,  the  major  restructuring  of  Canadian  businesses  during  the  1990s  in  response  to
stronger global competition and to technological change.
It has not, of course, all been smooth sailing. You will recall that throughout the summer of 1998 our
currency kept losing ground in reaction to the sharp fall in commodity prices, which was made worse
by  the  fallout  from  events  in  Russia.  And  with  signs  of  a  potential  loss  of  confidence  in  Canadian
dollar assets, the Bank of Canada moved to raise short-term interest rates significantly in August 1998.
But once we got through that period of unusual global turmoil, we were able to reverse that increase
rather quickly. Consequently, Canadian interest rates for all maturities fell back to levels below those
in the United States, consistent with Canada’s lower inflation rate.
The downward movement in the Canadian dollar, besides softening the impact on our resource sector,
encouraged a rather prompt increase in exports of manufactured goods. This helped to compensate for
the  reduction  in  receipts  from  commodity  exports.  With  this  shift  of  economic  activity  out  of  the
resource  sector  and  into  manufacturing,  conditions  in  the  labour  market  did  not  deteriorate  as  one
might have expected. In fact, the unemployment rate has continued to decline over the past 12 months
– from 8.3% to its current level of 7.8%. And despite the loss of jobs in the resource sector, close to
350,000 net new jobs have been created across the economy over this period.
The three factors I mentioned earlier – low inflation, reduced budget deficits and debts, and business
restructuring – have provided a sound base for the Canadian economy during this turbulent time. They
have  also  helped  smooth  the  process  of  exchange  rate  and  economic  adjustment  that  I  have  been
describing.
Because  of  our  good  inflation  record  in  recent  years,  achieved  through  the  Bank’s  commitment  to
inflation targets, inflation remained subdued, even as our currency was falling and causing prices of
imported goods to rise. Low inflation and a much improved fiscal position have helped to keep interest
rates  down.  At  the  same  time,  because  of  restructuring,  many  more  Canadian  firms  have  been  in  a
strong  position  to  take  advantage  of  the  low  Canadian  dollar  and  increase  their  sales  abroad.  Low
interest rates have also made it easier for businesses to finance investments so that they can expand
production capacity and increase their foreign sales.
The outlook for the Canadian economy
The fundamental improvements in our economic foundation and the way that Canada has coped with
these recent external financial difficulties give us good reason to be optimistic about the future.
The export sector has been an important source of strength for the Canadian economy for some time
now.  Recently,  the  stimulus  from  spending  by  Canadian  households  and  businesses  has  also  been
growing.  Indeed,  with  the  waning  of  last  autumn’s  global  strains,  consumers  have  regained  the
confidence to go out and buy a new car, a house, or furnishings. And businesses have revived their
plans for investment in machinery and equipment (including continued buoyant spending on computer
upgrades,  partly  related  to  Year  2000  readiness).  With  improved  confidence,  relatively  low  interest
rates, and gains in employment, these trends should continue.
Clearly, conditions outside Canada remain crucial to our economic outlook. In Europe, prospects for
stronger  growth  now  look  better  than  they  did  a  few  months  back.  Even  for  the  troubled  Japanese
economy,  next  year  should  be  brighter.  Forecasts  for  a  number  of  emerging-market  economies,
particularly in Asia, have also been revised up. And with these improved global prospects, the prices
of a number of our key commodities – especially energy, base metals, and minerals – have risen.
Of course, for Canada the external influence that matters the most is the US economy. That economy
has  turned  in  an  amazing  performance  in  the  past  seven  years  –  robust  output  growth,  low
unemployment,  and  low  inflation.  But  with  US  consumers  and  businesses  continuing  to  spend
BIS Review 100/1999
2
strongly, and labour markets tightening further, some signs of cost pressures have emerged recently.
This has rekindled concerns about a pickup of inflation down the road. And it has prompted the US
Federal Reserve to reverse part of last autumn’s easing, by raising interest rates twice this summer, in
an effort to return the economy to a more sustainable, non-inflationary pace.
The Fed’s success in preventing the US economy from overheating and bringing it  down  to  a  “soft
landing”  is critical  for the  world  economy  and  especially  for  Canada.  The  worst  case  for  us  would
have been for the Fed to have delayed action and risked another inflationary boom. Not only would
this require more drastic tightening by the Fed down the road, but it could well lead to a recession –
another episode of boom and bust.
The  Bank  of  Canada  did  not  follow  the  two  interest  rate  increases  made  by  the  Fed  this  summer.
While  there  is  no  reason  that  changes  in  US  interest  rates  should  automatically  trigger  similar
movements here, neither is it the case that such developments are irrelevant for us. Canada is closely
integrated  into the  world  economy  and  international  financial  markets.  Developments  in  the  United
States,  the  world’s  largest  economy,  will  always  have  a  major  global  impact.  When  it  comes  to
Canada, the central bank must carefully assess the economic and financial circumstances in the United
States that are behind any move by the Fed and their likely implications for our economy. Sometimes
this will mean that the Bank of Canada will respond to a Fed move and sometimes it won’t.
The interest rate actions taken by the Fed this summer improve the odds of continued, non-inflationary
economic expansion in the United States. This is good news for all concerned. But it also means that
we cannot count on the US economy to provide the same strong stimulus for Canadian exports in the
future as it has in the recent past. Thus, the improved outlook for Europe and the firmer markets for
primary  commodities  are  particularly  welcome  developments  for  Canada.  These  external  factors,
along  with  the  relatively  low  domestic  interest  rates  and  improved  employment  conditions  that  I
mentioned, bode well for sustained economic expansion in Canada. Altogether, our economy should
continue to grow at a healthy pace and take up slack in production capacity.
Core inflation is expected to stay low over the next year, in the bottom half of the Bank’s 1% to 3%
target range. But as the economy begins to produce at full capacity, monetary policy will have to be
mindful of the potential for price pressures.
However, there is a lot of uncertainty and imprecision in our estimates of the economy’s capacity to
produce.  For  example,  we do  not  know  to  what  extent  large  investments  in  new  technology  and  in
machinery and equipment during the 1990s may have raised production capacity. Consequently, the
Bank  will  be  putting  more  emphasis  on,  and  carefully  watching,  a  range  of  indicators  to  assess  the
degree of pressure on capacity and on inflation. The interpretation of developments on this front will
be an important challenge for monetary policy in the period ahead, one that will require a great deal of
careful analysis.
The Year 2000 changeover in the financial sector
With the end of the millennium approaching, any review of near-term economic developments would
be incomplete without a word on the efforts by financial sector participants and public sector agencies,
including the Bank of Canada, to deal with the implications of the Year 2000 date change.
As part of its commitment to Canadians, the Bank seeks to promote the safety and soundness of our
financial system. With this in mind, we have for some time now been working closely with various
Canadian and international organizations to minimize any effects on our financial sector as we head
into the year 2000.
Today, I can tell you that the Canadian financial sector has done its homework. It has been passing its
Year 2000 tests. And contingency plans have been made. So, at the dawn of the new year, the Bank
expects that it will be “business as usual,” but we will also be ready if anything unusual happens.
Efforts to identify and fix potential Year 2000 problems in the Canadian financial sector started early.
And they have been exhaustive, with expenditures in the billions of dollars.
3
BIS Review 100/1999
Operators of systems shared by the financial sector have made the necessary changes and fully tested
them. For example, last June, the Canadian Payments Association and its members participated in a
Global Payments Systems test to verify the ability of financial institutions around the world to send
and receive international payments. Domestic clearing and settlement systems have also been tested,
as have all systems used by the markets for transactions involving Canadian debt and other securities.
They are ready to operate in a Year 2000 environment.
At the same time, virtually all individual financial institutions have completed and tested changes to
their critical systems, including those that support automated banking machines, credit and debit cards,
and telephone banking. And major Canadian deposit-taking institutions have guaranteed the safety of
their  clients’  accounts  and  records  from  any  Year  2000  computer-related  disruptions.  The  Bank  of
Canada has given the same guarantee for Canada Savings Bonds records.
Of course, the Bank of Canada’s own critical computer systems have also been reviewed, upgraded as
necessary, and tested. And they are Year 2000 ready.
An important issue for the financial sector is the state of preparedness of providers of infrastructure
services (e.g. electricity, telecommunications). These, too, are reporting that they are Year 2000 ready.
With  all  the  effort,  time,  and  resources  devoted  to  the  task,  it  is  not  surprising  that  a  number  of
knowledgeable Year 2000 commentators have singled out the Canadian financial sector, especially the
banking  sector,  as  one  of  the  world  leaders  in  Year  2000  preparedness.  That  is  a  strong  vote  of
confidence, which should help reassure Canadians.
Still, we cannot afford to be complacent and relax our efforts. Computer systems will continue to be
monitored  and  retested  right  up  to  the  end  of  the  year.  There  is  also  a  need  for  ongoing  clear,
responsible  communication  to  keep  the  public  well-informed  and  confident  in  a  smooth  Year  2000
transition. At the same time, increasing attention is rightly being paid to contingency plans.
In this connection, the Bank of Canada has recently announced a number of arrangements to provide
an additional measure of confidence to financial institutions and the general public. We are putting in
place a special line of credit to assure these institutions and the users of financial services that if there
is  any  unusual  demand  for  liquidity  around  the  turn  of  the  year,  it  will  be  met.  And  the  Bank  is
prepared to accept a wider-than-normal range of collateral to support any liquidity loans it provides.
We  have  also  made  arrangements  to  counter  any  unusual  pressures  on  money  market  interest  rates
during this period.
All this should be enough to reassure the vast majority of Canadians that the safest place to keep their
money  is  with  their  financial  institutions.  In  fact,  they  should  prepare  for  the  century-changeover
weekend much as they would for any other long weekend.
Nevertheless, there will be some who still feel that they need to take further precautions. Those who
prefer  a  little  extra  reassurance  in  the  form  of  additional  cash  can  rest  easy  –  it  will  be  readily
available. The Bank has increased considerably its inventory of bank notes. And it has been working
with financial institutions to ensure that the system can meet an increase in demand for cash across
Canada. But let me reiterate that there is no reason for Canadians to feel that cash is the only way they
can pay for goods and services over the New Year’s weekend.
Overall,  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  other  financial  sector  participants  have  every  confidence  that
Canadians can plan on it being “business as usual” in the financial sector heading into the year 2000.
BIS Review 100/1999
4
