Mr Thiessen discusses the euro: its economic implications and its lessons for Canada
Remarks by the Governor of the Bank of Canada, Mr Gordon Thiessen, to the Canadian Club of
Ottawa in Ottawa, Ontario on 20/1/99.
We have just witnessed the dawn of a new era in Europe. Beginning this month, 11 of the 15
member countries of the European Union have joined in a currency union. And they are using the
euro  as  their  common  currency.  The  currency  union  is  yet  another  step  on  the  road  to  greater
economic, social, and political integration in Europe – a vision some 50 years in the making.
To be sure, this is a remarkable achievement. Especially when you think that not too long ago
many observers were still very sceptical that these countries would be prepared to give up their
national  currencies.  Or,  indeed,  that  they  would  be  able  to  meet  the  requirements  for
participation.
The  launching  of  the  euro  has  naturally  piqued  public  interest  in  Canada,  leading  some
commentators to suggest that we should consider a similar  type  of  monetary  arrangement  as  a
follow-up to the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
Today, I would like to talk about some of the economic implications of the European currency
union.  I  also  intend  to  examine  whether  this  common  currency  model  has  any  relevance  for
North America. Should Canada be thinking of a new monetary arrangement along similar lines?
A common currency for Europe
The introduction of the euro no doubt qualifies as an economic event of historic proportions. And
some of the commitments required of the participating countries have, indeed, been momentous.
This  month,  11  European  countries  permanently  locked  in  their  exchange  rates,  adopted  a
common  currency,  and  effectively  ceded  the  conduct  of  their  national  monetary  policy  to  a
supranational  institution  –  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB).  To  some  degree,  the  national
central banks of the participating countries are now like the regional federal reserve banks in the
United States.
To  understand  how  this  major  change  in  European  monetary  arrangements  came  to  be,  it  is
important to keep in mind that profound political forces started the process and have provided
the  impetus  for  action  through  the  years.  Indeed,  one  could  argue  that  had  this  been  a  strictly
economic  initiative  it  might  not  have  materialized.  The  impetus  essentially  stemmed  from  the
belief  that  greater  economic  integration  would  foster  permanent  reconciliation,  and  thus  peace
and  stability,  among  European  nations.  And  with  a  shared  currency,  the  economic  integration
would become much more difficult to reverse.
The history leading up to the adoption of the euro is fascinating, with roots extending back to the
years  immediately  following  World  War  II.  I  will  not  go  through  the  steps  that  led  to  the
introduction  of  the  euro.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  process  has  been  a  major  political,
administrative, and technical feat.
Imagine the logistics of transposing monetary values from national currencies – German marks,
French francs, Italian lire, etc. – into euros during the first weekend of 1999. And apparently this
conversion was carried out without any major hitches.
But  the  process  of  conversion  is  not  yet  complete.  New  euro  notes  and  coins  are  not  actually
circulating yet, and will not be until January 2002. While financial market transactions must be
BIS Review   7/1999
– 2 –
carried out in euros, for all other transactions the use of the euro is optional over the next three
years.  The  euro  can  now  be  used  for  purchases  by  credit  or  debit  card,  cheque,  or  traveller’s
cheque. Companies may do their accounting and pay their workers’ salaries in euros. But, on the
whole, most Europeans are unlikely to notice much change right away in their daily lives, other
than that prices in stores may be quoted in both euros and the old domestic currency.
What is crucial, however, is that the conversion rates of the national currencies in the monetary
union  are  now  irrevocably  fixed  against  the  euro  and  against  each  other.  In  this  sense,  the
national currencies now exist only as price measures and as temporary subdivisions of the euro.
Just  as  the  Canadian  dollar  is  composed  of  100  cents,  you  can  think  of  the  euro  as  being
temporarily composed of 6.56 French francs or 1.96 German marks.
What are the economic implications of the euro?
What does it mean for these 11 countries to be sharing a common currency?
First, you may have noticed that, as much as the launching of a common currency across these
countries  (collectively  referred  to  as  euroland)  was  a  major  event,  it  did  not  have  a  dramatic
initial financial or economic impact. This is because of arrangements that have been in place for
some time. For example, all currencies in the system had been effectively pegged to the German
mark since May 1998; and some for much longer. With pegged exchange rates, interest rates in
participating  countries  have  tended  to  move  together,  in  line  with  German  interest  rates.  And
over the past year, short-term official interest rates in all 11 countries gradually converged to the
current  single  rate  of  3%.  Moreover,  with  an  effective  common  market  already  operating  in
Europe, a common trade policy and more integrated internal markets have been in place for some
time.
Just what does the arrival of the euro change, then?
A shared currency undoubtedly brings a number of economic benefits to the euro-zone countries.
The main benefit comes from eliminating the costs of conversion from one currency to another in
the 11 member countries. Thus, the flow of goods, services, and capital across national borders is
no longer complicated by the use of different currencies. Comparisons of prices among suppliers
throughout  the  euro  zone  are  easier  to  make,  which  should  spur  greater  competition  and
efficiency.  And  there  is  no  need  for  hedging  to  protect  buyers  or  sellers  against  the  risk  of
currency movements. On the whole, there is greater certainty about the future when the risk of
exchange rate fluctuations is  eliminated  among  countries  that  have  highly  integrated  trade  and
investment.
The migration to the euro has required a major investment in time, resources, and technology by
financial sector institutions to prepare for the conversion. But over time, euroland is likely to end
up with deeper and more liquid bond and stock markets. And that has the potential to enhance
Europe’s  share  of  the  global  financial  industry  and  the  euro’s  attractiveness  as  a  major
international reserve currency. Of course, this will not happen overnight. It will take time.
As for economic policy, the main change that comes with the euro is the shifting of responsibility
for monetary policy from national central banks to the European Central Bank. Beginning this
month, a single monetary policy applies across all euroland countries – just as here in Canada we
have the same monetary policy right across the country. The responsibility for monetary policy
decisions  for  the  euro  zone  is  now  in  the  hands  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB.  The
BIS Review   7/1999
– 3 –
council  consists  of  six  members  of  an  Executive  Board  plus  the  governors  of  the  11  national
central banks. The ECB is an autonomous institution with a mandate to achieve price stability.
Under these new arrangements, member countries give up that part of their national sovereignty
which  relates  to  monetary  policy.  In  effect,  individual  countries  no  longer  have  the  option  to
pursue an independent national monetary policy. What is the significance of this?
Over  the  longer  term,  monetary  policy  has  its  effects  only  on  the  rate  of  inflation.  So  if  all
euroland countries were already aiming at price stability, the loss of sovereignty involved in not
being  able  to  choose  a  national  inflation  target  may  not  seem  all  that  important.  Nonetheless,
there  can  be  differences  of  opinion  about  the  appropriate  definition  of  price  stability  or  how
quickly to return to the target inflation rate when unanticipated events cause a deviation from the
target.
More  importantly,  with  a  common  currency,  individual  countries  can  no  longer  benefit  from
having their national currency operate as a buffer in the event of an economic shock. Take the
case of a sharp rise in world energy prices. In this instance, an energy-producing country would
experience  rising  incomes,  expansionary  demand  pressures,  and  perhaps  increased  capital
inflows.  Countries  that  are  heavy  users  of  energy  would  experience  the  opposite  effects.
Exchange rate movements can help smooth the economic adjustment to such a shock, through a
rise in the currency of the energy-producing country and a decline in the currency of the energy-
importing country. Where exchange rate movements are not an option, as within the current euro
area, greater price and wage flexibility or greater worker and capital mobility between national
economies  will  be  needed  in  response  to  the  shock.  Otherwise,  the  adjustment  will  be  more
painful and costly, involving greater fluctuations in national output and employment. Europe is
still  characterized  by  significant  wage  and  price  rigidities  and  by  low  worker  mobility,  which
could make the adjustment to shocks more difficult. Evidently, the hope is that participation in
the currency union will act as a catalyst for action to reduce or eliminate these rigidities.
The economic case for a common currency in Europe rests mainly on a judgment that buffering
differential shocks in the partner countries will be a less important consideration than the benefits
from  lower  transactions  costs  and  from  the  greater  economic  certainty  because  of  reduced
currency risk. This presumes that the economic structures of these countries are sufficiently alike
that any shocks will be felt by all of them at roughly the same time and to a similar degree. A
good number of the euro countries probably fall into this category. Those that do not may find
themselves having to adopt measures to increase price and wage flexibility, as well as encourage
worker and capital mobility, to take the place of adjustments in the exchange rate.
What are the implications and relevance of the European currency model for Canada?
Canada’s trade links with Europe are relatively modest. Only 4% of our exports go to euroland
countries  and  about  7%  of  our  imports  come  from  there.  So  the  direct  economic  effects  on
Canada from any developments in Europe related to the move to a common currency are likely to
be  rather  limited,  at  least  in  the  short  run.  Of  course,  should  the  new  monetary  union  lead  to
changes  in  world  trade  and  finance  over  time,  Canada  would  feel  an  impact,  like  any  other
country.  But  it  is  difficult  to  assess  the  likelihood  and  extent  of  any  such  changes.  In  the
meantime, I hope that Canadian businesses trading with Europe have made the adjustment to the
new currency and are seeking to benefit from the lower costs of operating in Europe that go with
it.
BIS Review   7/1999
– 4 –
One  thing  that  the  launching  of  the  euro  has  done  in  Canada  is  to  generate  discussion  of  the
notion that we should be thinking of a North American monetary union with the United States
(and perhaps Mexico). The decline in the external value of the Canadian dollar over the past year
has, no doubt, heightened interest in the issue.
Before I get into the arguments, let me remind you that we are talking about a currency union,
not just a fixed exchange rate. Fixed rates that can be adjusted (that is, devalued or revalued) do
not eliminate exchange rate uncertainty. Indeed, as we have seen recently in Asia, in Mexico in
1994, and in Europe in 1992, when adjustments are resisted, fixed exchange rates can become
unsustainable.
To  obtain  the  economic  benefits  that  I  described  earlier,  a  currency  union,  not  just  a  fixed
exchange rate, is required.* But, as I have also noted, even with a currency union the economic
benefits  come  at  a  price.  And  that  price  is  the  loss  of  a  degree  of  political  and  economic
autonomy and flexibility. Just how significant would that price be for Canada?
It  is  important  to  remember  that,  in  the  case  of  euroland,  the  monetary  union  is  a  considered,
conscious choice that fits into the long-envisioned larger plan of greater economic, social, and
political  integration.  But  in  North  America,  there  are  no  parallels  to  these  profound  political
forces.  Nor  does  NAFTA  entail  the  degree  of  economic  integration  involved  in  the  European
Union.
Moreover, for Canada, any monetary union one might imagine with the United States would not
only result in a loss of autonomy over monetary policy but would work very differently from the
European monetary union. In Europe, there are three large partners of roughly comparable size
and  eight  other  medium-  and  smaller-size  participants.  Any  North  American  monetary
arrangement would most likely mean that Canada would have to adopt the US currency.
For Canada, the other major problem with a single North American currency is that we would be
giving up the buffer that a flexible exchange rate provides in dealing with shocks that affect us
differently from the United States. An important contrast between Canada and the United States
is  the  distinctly  different  impact  that  fluctuations  in  the  world  prices  of  primary  commodities
have  on  our  two  economies.  To  a  significant  degree,  Canada  is  still  an  important  producer  of
primary  commodities.  And  we  are  major  net  exporters  of  such  commodities,  while  the
Americans are small net importers. Thus, Canadian and US terms of trade (the ratio of export to
import prices) move in opposite directions when there is a sharp movement in world commodity
prices. Take the past two years or so: with a decline of over 25% in such prices, our terms of
trade deteriorated by about 6% while the US terms of trade improved by 5%.
When  the  terms  of  trade  turn  against  us,  it  means  that,  on  average,  we  receive  less  attractive
prices for the goods we sell abroad compared with the prices we pay for the products we import.
As a nation, we become less well off compared with our trading partners. That is reality, and we
have to adjust to it, whether we are on a floating or a fixed exchange rate or even in a currency
union.  The  value  of  the  Canadian  dollar  reflected  that  reality  by  moving  lower  last  year.  This
helped to smooth the process of adjustment. If the exchange rate is not allowed to move, then the
 Another arrangement that would involve greater commitment to exchange rate stability than just a fixed exchange
rate is a currency board. With a currency board, there is a legislated commitment to convert local currency into the
currency used as an anchor, say the US dollar, at a fixed exchange rate. And enough reserves would be held in US
dollars  to  cover  all  the  local  currency  issued  by  the  currency  board  country.  But,  as  the  recent  pressures  on  the
currency boards of Argentina and Hong Kong demonstrate, even then, exchange rate uncertainty is not completely
eliminated, especially at times of major global nervousness and volatility.
BIS Review   7/1999
– 5 –
adjustment  would  have  to  take  place  primarily  through  declines  in  prices  and  wages  and  the
movement of labour and capital. And if those did not readily occur, the adjustment would take
longer and cost more in terms of losses in output and employment.
It is precisely for these reasons, and not by accident, that the Government of Canada has, for the
better part of the past 50 years, operated a floating exchange rate.
Concluding remarks
The introduction of the euro ushers in an exciting new era for the Europeans, and we should all
wish  them  well.  But  the  euro  is  not  a  blueprint  for  a  North  American  monetary  union.  The
political  objectives  that  motivated  monetary  union  in  Europe  do  not  have  a  parallel  in  North
America.
More importantly, Canada has a very useful economic safety valve in its floating exchange rate.
Because  movements  in  the  Canadian  dollar  reflect  external  shocks  as  well  as  any  domestic
economic  difficulties  we  may  face,  there  is  sometimes  a  tendency  in  Canada  to  blame  such
movements as the cause of our problems. In fact, these currency movements are a consequence,
not a cause. Exchange rate flexibility has served us well over time. Why would we want to give it
up?
 BIS Review   7/1999
