Ms Hessius speaks about the monetary policy and growth conditions
for Sweden’s economy
Speech given by Ms Kerstin Hessius, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank at the Chairmens’
Conference of the Västmanland’s Local Authorities Association on 27 August 1999.
 The whole speech
The bright picture of the Swedish economy that has been coming to the fore in recent years now seems
to be becoming increasingly distinct. Growth is stable and employment is rising, accompanied by price
increases that are moderate. It is important now that this bright picture can become permanent and that
the work of creating good conditions for long-term economic development continues. Today I shall be
considering the economic situation in Sweden and the rest of the world, with some discussion of the
conditions for consolidating the favourable trend.
Functions of the Riksbank
Ever since Sweden abandoned the fixed exchange rate regime in November 1992, monetary policy has
been conducted with its sights on inflation. Sweden was one of the first countries to adopt an inflation
targeting strategy. In many respects, the period with the inflation target has been characterised by good
results in the Swedish economy. Interest rates and inflation have fallen to levels that are historically
low  and,  after  the  crisis  in  the  early  1990s,  growth  has  been  comparatively  high  and  stable.  The
general  public’s  expectations  of  inflation  two  years  ahead  are  below  2%,  which  suggests  that  the
inflation  targeting  policy  has  achieved  credibility  –  a  matter  that  is  crucial  for  monetary  policy’s
ability to produce good results.
The  foundation  for  monetary  policy  credibility  has  been  strengthened  in  that  the  new  legislation  in
force from the beginning of this year has created a more independent central bank. Maintaining price
stability is now the Riksbank’s statutory function.
The Riksbank has defined its target as being to keep annual inflation, expressed as the change in the
consumer price index (CPI), at 2%. The ambition to keep inflation low stems from the insights about
inflation’s harmful effects on the economy – that higher growth and employment cannot be generated
in the longer run by means of higher inflation. It is other matters, such as how the economy functions,
achievements in technology and the educational system, that determine those factors. The best way for
monetary policy to contribute to high growth and employment is therefore to improve the long-term
growth potential via low inflation.
To  achieve  its  objective,  the  Riksbank  uses  its  instrumental  rate,  the  repo  rate.  If  the  Riksbank’s
monetary stance is unduly expansionary, that is, if the repo rate is too low to ensure macroeconomic
balance,  in  time  the  economy  will  be  liable  to  overheat.  Demand  then  grows  more  rapidly  than
production  capacity  and  this  generates  inflationary  pressures.  If,  instead,  the  Riksbank’s  monetary
stance is unduly restrictive, that is, if the repo rate is set too high, the result may be declining demand,
a weaker price trend and unsatisfactory growth.
The  full  effect  of  an  interest  rate  adjustment  takes  between  twelve  and  twenty-four  months  to
materialise. This means that the interest rate has to be set on the basis of the Riksbank’s assessment of
the macroeconomic trend and inflation prospects in that period. However, the inflation assessments are
subject  to  uncertainty  and  this  risk  spectrum  has  to  be  considered  too.  Since  December  1997  the
Riksbank’s  inflation  forecast  includes  what  is  known  as  an  uncertainty  interval.  This  interval
represents the Riksbank’s assessment of the uncertainties in the forecast.
1
BIS Review 90/1999
Targeting CPI inflation, however, has certain drawbacks. At the beginning of this year the Executive
Board  of  the  Riksbank  therefore  clarified  the  inflation  target  in  some  respects,  stating  that,  under
certain specific circumstances, the Riksbank may have grounds for interpreting  the  CPI  target  more
flexibly.  Price  formation  in  the  past  three  years,  for  example,  has  been  affected  by  some  clearly
identifiable price movements that monetary policy neither can nor shall aim to  counter in  full. This
applies mainly to decreased indirect taxes and the direct effects that the Riksbank’s own interest rate
adjustments exert on interest expenditure and thereby on CPI inflation.
The economic situation in Sweden
Labour market
As I mentioned earlier, monetary policy’s primary contribution to the development of employment lies
in creating conditions for a stable economic trend. A predictable monetary policy, focused on a clearly
defined inflation target, provides good guidance for wage negotiations. One of the main reasons why
wage formation did not function satisfactorily during most of the 1980s was probably that stabilisation
policy did not work. Inflation exceeded the official target on several occasions in that period and the
labour market organisations had difficulty in discerning the rules of the game. One example of this is
the government ambition of bringing inflation down in the mid-1980s: a crisis package was presented
in 1983, aimed at inflation rates of 4% in 1994 and 3% in 1995; when inflation exceeded these targets,
the employee organisations considered that a 5% ceiling on wage increases was no longer acceptable.
Today’s confidence in the Riksbank’s current inflation target facilitates wage negotiations. The 1997
wage round, for instance, took the 2% inflation target as a starting point.
The  development  of  wages  is  always  a  central  factor  in  inflation  assessments,  but  the  difficulties
involved in forecasting wages are considerable. The indicators used by the Riksbank include data on
wages  and  unit  labour  costs,  shortage  figures  (bottlenecks)  at  industry  level,  wage  drift  and
unemployment relative to unfilled job vacancies. Another factor of importance for monetary policy is
the  equilibrium  level  of  unemployment,  that  is,  the  level  of  unemployment  that  is  compatible  with
stable  inflation.  Attempts  to  push  unemployment  down  below  the  equilibrium  level  with  the  aid  of
monetary  stimuli  are  liable  to  just  boost  inflation.  Maintaining  an  expansionary  monetary  stance
cannot therefore generate permanently higher employment.
During the past year the situation in the Swedish labour market has improved appreciably. Since the
beginning of 1999 the number in employment has risen by almost 100,000. A continued improvement
can  be  expected,  but  more  employers  are  reporting  difficulties  in  recruiting  qualified  labour  even
though  unemployment  in  Sweden  is  still  historically  high.  There  is  still  a  need  for  measures  of  a
structural nature to improve the workings of the labour market and thereby the long-term conditions
for economic growth.
Consumption
The demand side of the Swedish economy, above all private sector demand, has picked up properly in
recent  years.  In  1997  private  consumption  rose  1.6%  from  the  previous  year,  followed  by  2.4%  in
1998 and a preliminary rate of 3.4% between the first halves of 1998 and 1999. Major factors behind
the growth of private consumption are the better labour market situation, rising disposable income and
increments to household wealth.
The  consumption  trend  is  particularly  dependent  on  future  household  income.  Expectations  of  an
improvement will lead to increased spending on consumption at the expense of current saving.
At present, households’ optimism about their own economy seems to have stabilised at a level that is
historically  high.  The  Riksbank  envisages  that  household  expenditure  on  consumption  will  be
stimulated in the future by, for example, rising real wages, low interest costs and tax relief. Moreover,
international  economic  prospects  have  stabilised  and  employment  in  Sweden  has  risen.  These
developments suggest that the consumption trend will remain favourable.
BIS Review 90/1999
2
Public sector
The financial position of the public sector has been strengthened appreciably in recent years, partly as
a  result  of  decreased  unemployment,  but  also  because  interest  expenditure  on  government  debt  has
been reduced as a consequence of lower interest rates and debt repayment. This has been accompanied
by  comparatively  high  tax  payments  from  households as  well as the corporate  sector.  For  1998  the
financial surplus – measured as public sector revenue less expenditure – was almost SEK 40 billion,
which is equivalent to over 2% of GDP.
In recent years the central government budget process has been changed with a view to tightening the
control  of  government  spending.  The  new  budget  process  includes  a  spending  ceiling  that  sets  the
maximum level for central government expenditures. In addition to the new budget process, the goal
has  been  established  of achieving  a  general  government  financial surplus  equivalent  to  2%  of  GDP
over the business cycle. Thus, the goal is formulated in terms of the average over the business cycle,
not as an annual target.
These rules do not owe their existence to happenstance. Both the expenditure ceiling and the goal of a
government financial surplus over the business cycle serve to promote greater confidence in economic
policy.  The  direction  of  budget  policy,  like  the  monetary  stance,  is  highly  important  for  economic
developments.  The  observance  of  these  rules  is  important.  Stable  fundamental  rules  encourage
economic agents to make long-term decisions.
The international situation
Favourable conditions in the rest of the world are of course of major importance for economic growth
in Sweden.
In the euro area there are now also increasing signs that activity is picking up. Incoming statistics on
confidence indicators, for instance from Italy, France and Germany, show that households as well as
firms foresee a brighter future than before.
Moreover, the Japanese economy seems to be recovering from its poor performance in recent years.
Still,  the  latest  statistics  suggest  that  the  trend  for  manufacturing  output  remains  weak,  making  it
advisable to wait for further statistics before taking a Japanese upswing as given.
The US economy remains strong. GDP growth in the first quarter this year was over 4% and over 2%
in the second quarter. Household expenditure on consumption has gone on rising more rapidly than
current income, so saving has fallen and is now at a record low. This has been accompanied by a weak
price  trend  for  a  majority  of  goods.  Nevertheless,  the  US  Federal  Reserve  now  considers  that
inflationary pressure is building up. At the two most recent meetings the Federal Reserve has raised
interest rates in order to forestall an unduly rapid increase in consumer prices.
New economic relationships?
The prolonged strength displayed by the US economy has been unexpected. In the past five years US
economic growth has averaged an annual rate of over 3%. At the same time, the average rate of CPI
inflation has been little more than 2%.
Some observers consider that this performance represents a new economic era in which high economic
growth and falling unemployment can be achieved without generating increased inflationary pressure.
According to this view, potential output has risen in recent years, accompanied by a fall in equilibrium
unemployment. Explanations for this could be, for example, improved productivity as a result of new
technology  and  increased  international  competition.  An  alternative  explanation  is  that  transitory
factors, such as the loss of global demand in connection with the crisis in Southeast Asia, have caused
prices to fall or remain unchanged.
In  Sweden,  too,  economic  growth  since  the  mid-1990s  has  been  comparatively  good  without
inflationary pressure giving cause for concern. The monetary stance has been adjusted accordingly and
3
BIS Review 90/1999
the repo rate is currently 2.9%. It is too early, however, to say whether or not this is a sign of some far-
reaching change in the Swedish economy. The Riksbank will have to take a close look at the incoming
statistics and endeavour to arrive at a conclusion.
Conclusion
There are many signs that the Swedish economy is growing more rapidly. It is only now that we are
beginning to see growth rates above 3%. For the Riksbank – as well as for the economy in general – it
is important that this trend does not again land us in a situation where inflation is high and variable.
Provided the cards are played correctly, growth can be sustained and lead to a permanent increase in
employment.
This  calls  for  an  adjustment  of  demand  to  the  economy’s  productive  capacity.  It  is  important  that
structural measures which primarily improve the workings of the economy are implemented in good
time.  The  good  consumption  trend  can  then  be  met  by  rising  output  and  high  growth  can  be
maintained without this necessarily leading to unduly high inflation.
As I have already made clear on several occasions, I consider that tax cuts, in tune with the established
guidelines  for  budget  policy,  are  motivated.  The  tax-to-GDP  ratio  has  risen  in  recent  years  as  a
consequence of the growth of private consumption and rising wage bills; today the ratio is above 50%.
The Swedish economy would probably function better with lower taxes.
The reforms that are needed in the tax system – as well as those I consider should occur in the labour
market – can be arranged, however, in such a way that they promote the aims of stabilisation policy.
Tax  cuts  in  Sweden  are  probably  needed that  confer  long-term  benefits  on  both  the  supply  and  the
demand side of the economy; a long-term tax reform with those ambitions would be desirable. In the
present situation, however, with growth seemingly reaching around 3.5% this year and 3% in 2000,
tax  cuts  and  labour  market  reforms  that  primarily  favour  the  supply  side  would  increase  the
opportunities  for  good  growth  without  contributing  to  increased  inflationary  pressure.  That  would
lessen the risk of overheating and facilitate the interaction of fiscal and monetary policies.
There is the problem, however, that evidence of good results – be they in the national economy or in
one’s own enterprise – tend to weaken demands for changes which are needed for more sustainable
achievements. I would also say that the less one does in the good years, the tougher the going is likely
to  be  when  times  are  worse.  Not  infrequently,  necessary  measures  are  not  taken  until  a  crisis  is
actually looming. Today we are reaping the harvest from many important structural changes that were
implemented during the crisis in the first half of the 1990s. It is up to every decision-maker to consider
which measures we can now take in order to create robust long-term conditions for the economy.
BIS Review 90/1999
4
