Mr Bäckström discusses international financial stability
Speech given by the Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, Mr Urban Bäckström1, at a seminar at the
South African Reserve Bank in Pretoria on 9 August 1999.
 Introduction
Financial stability is a topical subject in the light of events in the past decade – years that saw financial
problems in a number of European countries as well  as  in Mexico and  Asia, the  devaluation  of the
rouble and suspended payments in Russia, considerable turbulence in western financial markets and
financial unrest in Brazil. The crisis in the international financial system developed, to cite President
Clinton,  from  being  “just  a  few  small  glitches  in  the  road”  into  “the  worst  financial  crisis  in  fifty
years”.
The problem is that crises will always be intrinsically difficult to forecast. Recall that the scale of the
Mexican crisis in 1994 was foreseen by very few. In South-East Asia the onset, duration and scope of
the recession were all missed by the forecasting community. In the last spring, no one had anticipated
the extent of the turmoil in financial markets that would be generated by the Russian devaluation and
moratorium.  The  ways  in  which  rising  credit  spreads  led  to  losses  by  highly  leveraged  investors,
liquidity shortages and the virtual drying-up of some markets were generally not foreseen. The track
record shows that there are many things we do not understand and cannot predict. That conclusion is
underscored by a look at existing attempts to build early-warning systems for various types of crisis.
Either these systems miss out on crises that actually occur or they sound the alarm for crises that do
not occur.
Nevertheless,  given  the  costs  and  the  difficulties  of  managing  the  successive  crises  over  the  past
decade,  we  must  continue  to  devote  considerable  efforts  to  avoiding  future  crises  and  try  hard  to
understand the kinds of vulnerability that lie behind them. The crises during the 1990s have revealed
serious flaws not only in macroeconomic management but also, just as important, in the structure and
regulation of the financial system in both debtor and creditor countries. The work now being carried
out in various international fora is thorough and can be summarised under three headings:
• 
Crisis  prevention,  including  the  development  of  good  practice  standards  and  transparency
codes, and incentives for both borrowers and lenders to act prudently.
  Crisis  containment,  including  the  establishment  of  official  contingent  lines  and  possible
forms of private sector finance which may reduce the severity of any crisis.
Crisis  resolution,  where  the  emphasis  is  on  possible  ways  of  creating  a  more  orderly
environment  for  restructuring  external  debt,  on  principles  to  guide  the  restructuring  of
banking systems in the wake of a crisis, and on handling corporate insolvency.
Much  of  this  work  involves  international  institutions  like,  for  instance,  the  International  Monetary
Fund,  the  World  Bank,  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking
Supervision, and the OECD, as well as the newly created Financial Stability Forum.
1 Governor  Bäckström  is  also  Chairman  of  the  Board  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements.  Before
becoming Governor of the Riksbank in 1994 he was State Secretary in the Ministry of Finance with responsibility for
Fiscal  and  Financial  Affairs,  which  included  the  responsibility,  under  the  minister,  for  the  handling  of  the  Swedish
banking crisis in the early 1990s.
1
BIS Review 88/1999
However,  the  work,  often  hard,  of  implementing  policies  and  codes  lies  with  national  authorities.
These  measures  will  contribute  to  improved  financial  stability  only  if  countries  actually  adopt  and
implement them. A crucial ingredient in achieving this is of course to involve countries, formally or
informally,  in  the  development  of  the  policies,  codes  and  standards.  But  even  if  that  is  achieved,  I
know from my own experience how difficult the actual implementation sometimes can be, not least for
political  reasons.  I  would  also  like  to  make  the  point  that  today’s  favourable  trends  in  the  world
economy should not lead us to conclude that the danger is over. Instead, policymakers throughout the
world  must  continue  to  work  on  forestalling  new  problems  both  because  some  evident  threats  to
international  financial  and  economic  stability  still  remain  and  because  there  may  well  be
vulnerabilities that are not so evident.
The run up to the financial turbulence of the 1990s
During the past twenty years, the financial systems in many countries have been deregulated. For the
first  time  since  the  outbreak  of  World  War  One,  capital  can  again  pass  more  or  less  freely  across
national borders. Moreover, major changes in communication and information technology have paved
the way for new instruments and methods for risk management. Taken as a whole, this has led to the
financial  system  being  more  extensive  and  global  today  than  ever  before.  This  holds  even  though
capital flows relative to GDP were also large at the end of the last century.
The  rapid  financial  development  and  internationalisation  are  per  se  a  logical  consequence  of  the
production of goods and services being globalised, with a massive increase in cross-border trade. They
also have to do with growing wealth in many parts of the world. This in turn has increased the need for
new financial solutions for businesses and households. The increasing globalisation of production and
trade in goods and services generates a demand for a more developed and internationalised financial
system  so  that  the  opportunities  for  increased  prosperity  can  be  used  to  the  full.  Note  that  this,  as
always, involves a trade-off between risk and return. It is of course possible to substantially increase
stability,  in  the  sense  of  lowering  risk,  by  measures  that  result  in  very  low  returns.  However  the
solution is not to turn back to a less turbulent, but also less prosperous past regime of capital controls.
The transition to a more global financial system has certainly not been free from problems. It should
not be forgotten that extensive capital regulations entail a mispricing of risks. Deregulation then leads
to  desirable  price  adjustments.  But  it  is  often  during  these  transitional  corrections  that  financial
problems are liable to occur. Changes have often occurred too quickly for the system, including the
institutional  infrastructure,  to  be  able  to  keep  up.  In  most  cases,  neither  the  banks  nor  the  public
authorities had the necessary prerequisites for adapting to the new conditions that were created by a
freer capital market. The expansion of lending had too free a rein in many countries and the authorities
did not properly monitor what was happening at either micro or macro level.
Economic  overheating  often  followed  the  deregulation  and  opening  up  of  the  domestic  financial
system due to a rapid expansion of credit rapidly. Asset prices rose sharply and imbalances developed.
Furthermore, in countries with a fixed exchange rate system, extensive short-term borrowing abroad
was stimulated. A large proportion of these funds was often channelled through the domestic banking
system and rendered this rather vulnerable. When capital flows subsequently reversed, the adjustment
was often violent. Production fell, unemployment rose and both the currency and the banking system
faced an acute crisis.
Apart from the actual process of financial market deregulation, there may have been other factors at
work.  The  openings  for  capital  investment  in  so-called  emerging  markets  created  opportunities  for
international  investors  for  achieving  high  returns.  Between  1990  and  1997, the  annual  flow  to  Asia
alone was equivalent to around 25% of the affected countries’ aggregate GDP. This was a combination
of  bank  lending  and  portfolio  investments;  60%  of  the  lending  from  international  banks  was  short-
term.
That capital moves from one part of the world to another if the yield is seen to be higher is, of course,
positive in itself. The problem lay in the conditions for productive investments being less good than
had been hoped. Later, when the Asian economies ran into problems, the capital flows reversed and
serious financial turbulence broke out.
A further way of achieving a high return was to take increased risks by debt financing and complex
financial  instruments.  This  created  a  starting  point  for  so-called  highly  leveraged  institutions.  Long
Term Capital Management was one extreme example.
International banks engaged in lending directly to countries where the returns were high. At the same
time, they lent capital to hedge funds that invested in the same countries. In some cases, moreover, the
banks owned shares directly in these funds. There are grounds for saying that risk-taking was high in
many cases. The good profits created a culture of deceptive security and stimulated further risk-taking.
To  this  can  be  added  the  false  sense  of  security  that  the  new  mathematical  models  imparted.  They
were  seen  to  function  well  under  normal  circumstances  but  failed  to  do  so  when  they  were  most
needed, i.e. in turbulent times.
Domestic policies, institutions and rules, important factors behind crises …
Although several of these factors may have played some part in the run-up to recent financial crises, it
is important to bear in mind that financial crises almost always originate in an unsuccessful domestic
economic policy and in the structure and regulation of the domestic financial system. While modern
international financial markets have possibly contributed to an earlier appearance of crises and to their
spreading,  a  deregulated  financial  system  with  free  capital  movements  as  such  is  not  the  basic
problem. It is striking that several countries most affected by financial turbulence in the 1990s were
relatively  new  participants  in  the  international  financial  system  without  having  first  established  a
sound domestic financial system and a sound economic policy. That conclusion also holds for my own
country, Sweden, which experienced a severe crisis in the early 1990s.
One  obvious  insight  is,  and  I  quote  Fed  Chairman  Alan  Greenspan,  “that  participation  in  the
international financial system with all its benefits carries with it an obligation to maintain a level of
stability and a set of strong and transparent institutions and rules if an economy is to participate safely
and  effectively  in  markets  that  have  become  highly  sensitive  to  misallocation  of  capital  and  other
policy errors”.
Thus,  emerging  market  economies  must  reform  their  domestic  financial  systems,  just  as  we  did  in
Sweden after our crisis, if they want to enjoy the benefits of an open international financial system.
Accordingly,  further  progress in  establishing  a  sound  legal  infrastructure,  covering  both  bankruptcy
procedures and effective corporate governance, would seem to be very high on the list of priorities.
It is also important to understand the dangers inherent in adjustable peg exchange rate systems. It is
still  far  too  early  to  draw  the  firm  conclusion  that  the  only  viable  exchange  rate  regimes,  in  all
circumstances, are a free float on the one hand and a currency board or a monetary union on the other.
Nevertheless,  one  common  characteristic  of  the  main  crises  of  the  recent  past  –  Mexico,  Thailand,
Indonesia,  Korea,  Russia,  Brazil  and,  for  that  matter,  my  own  country  Sweden  –  has  been  that  the
authorities  had  adopted  a  more  or  less  rigid  exchange  rate  regime  that  ultimately  proved  to  be
unsustainable.  One  clear  lesson  seems  to  be  that,  in  many  circumstances,  once  a  weak  peg  comes
under fire, defending it is often a losing battle, especially if the exchange rate does not properly reflect
the development in the real economy. Another drawback to a fixed, but adjustable, peg is that it may
stimulate  excessive  short-term  capital  inflow  and  thus  in  itself  generate  vulnerability  because  the
central bank is seemingly absorbing the exchange rate risk. Against this background, a key question is
the  appropriate  exit  strategy  to  another  exchange  rate  regime  or  a  timely  adjustment  of  the  pegged
exchange rate should the need arise.
An additional insight is that the simultaneous occurrence of foreign exchange rate crises and banking
crises is probably the single most  important reason  why  some  countries  have  suffered  much  deeper
recessions  when  their  currency  pegs  collapsed  or  came  under  a  severe  speculative  attack.  The
contractionary  shock  to  most  European  countries  in  1992-93  was  clearly  much  smaller  than  for
Sweden and Finland in the early 1990s and for Mexico in 1995 and Asian countries in 1997-98.
3
BIS Review 88/1999
Thus,  authorities  in  countries  that  receive  capital  inflows  should  prepare  for  the  day  when  the
movement  might  reverse.  Countries  that  are  vulnerable  in  this  regard  should  carefully  consider  the
adequacy of their foreign exchange reserves, particularly in relation to their short-term external debt.
Since  large  numbers  of  countries  cannot  build  up  their  reserves  by  increasing  their  trade  surpluses
simultaneously, this would seem to argue for greater use of contingent lending facilities provided by
the private sector. Given such arrangements, recourse to the new IMF Contingent Credit Lines would
then add public sector to private sector affirmation that the domestic policies being followed by the
borrowing country are sensible and sustainable.
… but the international dimension should also be recognised
To say that the key to avoiding future crises in emerging markets must be found in domestic reforms is
not  to  deny  that  part  of  the  solution  may  still  lie  in  measures  that  change  the  way  in  which
international  financial  markets  sometimes  operate.  While  financial  liberalisation  and  international
financial integration bring unquestionable benefits, they can also be subject to episodes of excessive
risk-taking. In recent years, there does seem to have been imprudent lending, and not just to emerging
market economies but also to borrowers within the industrial world.
In  part  this  has  been  spurred  by  competitive  forces.  That  such  forces  will  diminish  as  financial
restructuring  accelerates  seems  unlikely.  However,  the  potential  of  public  safety  nets  to  distort
incentives and breed complacency can also be discerned and these structures should be re-evaluated. It
is important that all investors are held accountable for  their  decisions. The international  community
should also ensure that all investors and lenders play their part in the resolution of any future financial
crisis  and,  to  this  end,  should  implement,  inter  alia,  changes  to  international  bond  covenants  that
would facilitate debt restructuring should this become necessary.
The  events  of  the  past  decade  have  made  it  clear  that  greater  efforts  are  needed  to  strengthen  the
functioning of markets. Information asymmetries lie at the heart of market failure, and the market’s
way of resolving them can give rise to unpredictable outcomes. Ensuring that markets have adequate
information about national economies, the strength of financial systems, aggregate positions and the
financial  standing  of  counterparties  is  important.  Equally,  if  not  more,  important  is  to  ensure  that
market  participants’  approach  to  risk  management  reflects  the  full  balance  of  costs  and  rewards
implied  in  their  decisions.  Internal  risk  assessment  procedures  must  recognise  the  interrelationships
that exist between categories of risk before, not when, markets are under strain.
