Mr  Sherwin  discusses  reform  of  the  global  financial  architecture  from  a  New  Zealand
perspective
Address  by  Murray  Sherwin,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the
International Law Association in Wellington, New Zealand on 9 July 1999.
In October of last year, I gave an address to a meeting of the New Zealand Institute of International
Affairs under the title “Asian Prospects and Challenges”. That address took place while the effects of
the Asian crisis were still unfolding and in the wake of the Russian default, the subsequent collapse
and rescue of the LTCM hedge fund, and the associated blowout in global risk premia. Brazil was in
strife at the time, and the calls for a substantial overhaul of the global financial architecture were loud
and strident. The key themes in that address were that:
•  The countries of Asia had suffered a severe shock, and that the initial financial impact would be
followed by “real” impacts in the form of declining output and incomes, declining asset values,
company failures, rising unemployment along with increasing poverty and social stresses.
•  The  damage  to  balance  sheets  was  enormous,  with  the  financial  sectors  of  the  worst  affected
countries  carrying  capital  losses  of  the  order  of  25  to  50  percent  of  GDP.  Substantial  capital
losses had also occurred in the corporate sectors of those countries.
•  Those  balance  sheet  holes  would  have  to  be  filled  before  any  economic  recovery  could  be
considered robust. Foreign investment would inevitably have to play a significant role in that task,
and would bring other benefits besides speeding the recovery.
•  To  entice  private  investors  back  into  the  region,  it  would  be  necessary  to  make  substantial
progress on such basic components of market infrastructure such as accounting standards, audit
standards, transparency, the legal underpinnings of bankruptcy law proceedings and commercial
law more generally.
•  Better risk identification and risk management would be necessary, in both the public and private
sectors.
•  Asia  would  eventually  recover,  but  growth  would  probably  settle  at  something  closer  to  4  to  6
percent rather than the 7 to 10 percent growth rates of old.
In one sense, the 7 months since I made those comments have shown me to be the perennial pessimist
that economists traditionally are. It is not called the dismal science for nothing. Whereas in October,
the consensus expectation for the 1999 growth of the six most affected Asian economies was around -
0.9  percent,  the  corresponding  number  now  is  +1.1  percent.  Recovery  has  appeared  earlier  and
stronger than I had expected.
In another sense, however, I think my comments of last October remain absolutely valid. The list of
prerequisites for robust sustainable growth in Asia is unaltered. And while progress has been made on
many fronts, my concern is that the reform process remains inadequate. Indeed, the risk now is that an
early return to positive growth is, in some cases, weakening the political will to undertake those still
necessary  domestic  policy  reforms.  To  that  extent,  the  recovery  now  underway  is  that  much  more
susceptible to reversal and that much more vulnerable to further crises in the future.
While Asia has been recovering, the debate continues on what caused the crash, and how a repetition
can be avoided. If nothing else, the constant shuttling of international bureaucrats to meetings of this
“G” or that “G” has kept otherwise empty airlines and hotels in business.
1
BIS Review   82/1999
What I would like to do today is survey some of the work taking place under the general heading of
“reforming  the  global  financial  architecture”  and  to  put  some  New  Zealand  perspectives  on  that
process. Note that these are not necessarily the views of the New Zealand Government. Rather they
are the views of an individual who happens to have followed the discussion and attended a number of
meetings  where  these  issues  were  under  discussion.  My  comments  will  be  necessarily  partial  and
selective.  Why  that  is  so  is  neatly  summarized  by  Barry  Eichengreen  (University  of  California,
Berkeley) in a recent publication (“Toward  a  New  International  Financial  Architecture.  A  practical
Post-Asia Agenda”, Institute for International Economics, 1999).
Eichengreen notes that the list of proposals for reform grows longer day by day. Moreover, he notes
that:
“Many  of  these  proposals  are  contradictory  and  mutually  incompatible.  Some  recommend  that
policymakers renew their efforts to liberalize international capital markets, while others plump for the
reimposition of capital controls. Some insist on the need for greater exchange rate flexibility, while
others regard nothing as more important than the re-establishment of stable, even fixed exchange rates
between currencies. Some suggest that the international community should respond more forcefully to
crises, while others recommend that it stand back and let nature, in the form of the markets, take its
course. Some emphasize the need for more funding for the IMF while others call for the abolition of
the institution. Some suggest that the Fund must root out corruption and compel countries to install
the institutional prerequisites for stable financial markets, while others insist that it should limit its
advice  to  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  and  refrain  from  meddling  in  the  internal  affairs  of  its
members.”
I will quote Eichengreen at length, largely because I find his analysis and assessment as persuasive as
any I have encountered on this subject – which is another way of saying that for the most part I agree
with  him.  I  am  particularly  attracted  to  his  dismissal  of  the  more  ambitious  reform  proposals,
including those sponsored by some G7 governments, as unworthy of much discussion simply because
“They  have  not  a  snowball’s  chance  in  hell  of  being  implemented.  They  all  assume  a  degree  of
intellectual consensus and political will that simply does not exist.”
Eichengreen goes on to list a set of key assumptions that condition his thinking on these issues. Those
also bear repeating:
•  Liberalized  financial  markets  have  compelling  benefits.  This  is  an  argument  about  savings
mobilization,  and  efficient  allocation  of  investment,  together  with  the  benefits  of  allowing
consumption  smoothing  and  risk  diversification.  Note  that  it  is  not  a  closed-minded  piece  of
ideology, but a proposition that, despite their obvious weaknesses, markets generally do a better
job of allocating resources than do governments.
 International financial liberalization and growing international capital flows are largely inevitable
and  irreversible.  At  the  core  of  the  global  trend  towards  financial  liberalization  lie  changes  in
information and communications technology. This rapidly emerging and pervasive technological
capability makes it more difficult to restrict the range of financial transactions in which market
participants engage. As the technology becomes more pervasive, and the benefits from accessing
it  expand,  so  too  the  costs  associated  with  constraints  on  its  use  must  grow.  Moreover,  it  is
difficult  to  limit  international  financial  transactions  when  domestic  financial  transactions  are
being  freed.  Given  that  the  case  for  domestic  capital  market  liberalisation  is  overwhelming,  it
follows that it will be increasingly difficult and costly to limit international financial transactions.
•  Notwithstanding  the  manifest  benefits  of  financial  liberalisation,  capital  markets  do  not  work
perfectly;  they  are  characterised  by  information  asymmetries  that  give  rise  to  sharp  corrections
and, in the worst case, financial crises. Here, Eichengreen recognises that there are characteristics
BIS Review   82/1999
2
of  financial  markets  that  make  them  prone  to  occasional  distress,  to  overshooting  and  to  herd
behaviour.  The  banking  system  will  often  be  the  point  at  which  stresses  associated  with  this
behaviour come to the surface. So, however positively we view markets, history and the structure
of financial markets warns us to expect periodic crises.
•  This  instability  provides  a  compelling  argument  for  erecting  a  financial  safety  net,  despite  the
moral  hazard  that  may  result.  Eichengreen  argues  that  history  shows  the  need  for  deposit
insurance and a lender of last resort to contain systemic risks to the financial market. He suggests
that, by analogy, there is an argument for an international lender of last resort, but muses whether
the IMF or any other candidate has the capacity to carry out such a role, or the ability to contain
the  moral  hazard  that  results.  In  domestic  markets,  he  argues  that  moral  hazard  concerns
underscore the need for vigorous supervision and regulation of financial institutions covered by
lender of last resort facilities.
It is in this area that I have the greatest reservations about the Eichengreen prescription, reflecting our
own  aversion  to  excessive  reliance  on  banking  supervision  and  on  well-intentioned,  but  ultimately
self-defeating,  financial  safety  nets.  But  in  accepting  his  previous  point  that  occasional  bouts  of
financial  instability  are  likely  to  be  a  characteristic  of  deregulated  financial  systems,  we  are
compelled to consider the need for some means of moderating the impact of those inevitable bouts of
instability. Where we differ, I think, is on the potential to push the management of those risks back to
the private sector.
 Information  and  transaction  costs  prevent  decentralised  markets  from  quickly  and  efficiently
resolving crises. Creditors face incentives to run for the exits at the first sign of trouble and, in
doing  so,  are  likely  to  exacerbate  any  emerging  problem.  This  makes  it  difficult  to  orchestrate
outcomes that might better preserve value and facilitate its “fairer” distribution. At the national
level, insolvency and bankruptcy codes exist which give the courts power to impose restructuring
and  settlement  terms.  In  Eichengreen’s  view,  the  absence  of  an  international  bankruptcy  court
with similar powers is a problem.
•  Economic policy is framed in a politicised environment. This is a very simple but important point.
It cannot be assumed that regulators and other economic policy makers will carry out their tasks
without  allowing  themselves  to  be  influenced  by  political  considerations.  And  mostly,  national
governments  will  not  cede  their  sovereignty  or  control  of  domestic  economic  affairs  to  an
international body. That is a reality that should influence any thinking on the list of proposals to
reform the international financial architecture.
Pulling  all  of  this  together,  Eichengreen’s  conclusions  are  “…predicated  on  the  notion  that
international capital mobility is now a financial fact of life, and the problem for policy is ensure that
the benefits of capital mobility exceed its costs rather than pretending that it can be made to go away.
They are based on the belief that financial markets can malfunction, creating a compelling case for a
financial safety net and therefore a role for the IMF, but also posing problems of moral hazard that
must  be  addressed.  They  acknowledge  that  crises  will  still  occur  and  that  there  is  a  need  to  create
institutional  mechanisms  to  overcome  the  information  asymmetries  and  collective-action  problems
that  prevent  them  from  being  rapidly  resolved.  They  acknowledge  the  existence  of  political
limits…[on the range of policy options].”
With that backdrop, let me turn to the efforts to reform the global financial architecture that are now
underway in a number of different international forums. What we can see, first up, is that those with
modest ambitions are least likely to be disappointed with what will emerge at the end of this process
of reform.
3
BIS Review   82/1999
The current list of work underway is summarized in a paper presented in April this year to the IMF’s
Interim Committee. That paper listed the following initiatives, in best IMF bureaucratese, as “reforms
that, at a general level, command broad support.”
•  To  promote  transparency  and  accountability,  and  to  develop,  disseminate  and  monitor
implementation of better standards and best practices;
•  To  strengthen  financial  systems,  including  through  better  supervision,  and  appropriate
mechanisms for managing bank failures;
•  To pay greater attention to the orderly liberalization of capital markets;
•  To involve the private sector more fully in forestalling and resolving crises;
•  To ensure that systemic issues are adequately addressed, including the appropriate exchange rate
regimes and the adequacy of the Fund’s resources.
The paper also made reference to the essential lead role of the World Bank in developing codes of
good practices in social policies and in developing social safety nets before crisis strikes.
To take each of those in turn:
Transparency and standards
Broadly, this looks like being the most significant product of the whole global financial architecture
reform effort. The primary initiatives include improved quality, coverage and timeliness of national
statistics;  improved  accounting  and  audit  standards;  developing  codes  of  good  practice  on
transparency in fiscal, monetary and financial regulation policies; enhanced transparency within the
operations  of  the  major  international  financial  institutions;  and  improved  bankruptcy,  corporate
governance,  insurance  and  securities  regulation.  It  is  mostly  unspectacular,  quite  technical  and
thoroughly  conventional.  It  aims  mostly  at  sharpening  the  incentives  towards  good  governance,
together  with  improved  risk  identification  and  risk  management  within  both  the  public  and  private
sectors. Generally it is about ensuring that domestic market and policy structures are compatible with
the reality and disciplines of internationally mobile capital.
In general, this seems like thoroughly sensible work. If there are reservations on my part, they relate
largely to the risk that international standard setting becomes a substitute for intelligent case-by-case
risk assessment. Standards of good practice can too readily become excessively rigid templates which
fail  to  adequately  distinguish  between  diverse  circumstances  or  fail  to  evolve  with  changing
circumstances. Form can come to dominate substance and, in those circumstances, such standards can
become  an  impediment  to  sensible  risk  management  rather  than  an  aid.  In  essence,  the  risk  is  that
those responsible for the management of banks or other enterprises stop thinking about the underlying
risks  their  businesses  face  and,  instead,  become  focused  on  what  is  required  to  conform  to  the
regulators’ standards.
Strengthening financial systems
A number of different agencies have fingers in this particular pie.
The Basel Committee of Banking Supervisors is reviewing gaps in its existing framework. The work
underway  includes  data  related  issues,  methods  for  dealing  with  weak  banks,  disclosure  standards,
financial sector safety nets, licensing, governance plus legal and judicial issues. In addition, a review
of the 1988 Capital Accord is underway. Banks’  dealings  with  highly  leveraged  institutions  (hedge
BIS Review   82/1999
4
funds) have also been under review, with an eye to reducing the risk of further surprises of the LTCM
type.
The  Financial  Stability  Forum  has  been  established,  under  the  chairmanship  of  Andrew  Crockett,
General  Manager  of  the  BIS,  with  the  aim  of  strengthening  cooperation  among  the  international
organisations, regulatory associations and expert groups with responsibilities in the field of financial
regulation and oversight. The core work is taking place in three groups looking at, respectively, hedge
funds, off-shore financial centres and short-term capital flows.
The International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC) is  completing  its  work  on  developing  a
core  set  of  international  accounting  standards  that  could  be  adopted  for  international  cross-border
listings.
The OECD and the World Bank have finalised the  development  of  guiding  principles  on  corporate
governance.
The IMF is strengthening its surveillance of countries’ financial systems in the course of its Article IV
consultations, with a view to improving evaluations of their soundness and vulnerabilities. This is also
likely to include reviews of member countries’ compliance with the various standards, guidelines and
principles referred to.
The  IMF,  World  Bank  and  the  UN  Commission  on  International  Trade  Law  (UNCITRAL)  are  all
working on guidelines for effective insolvency regimes, especially for use in developing countries.
Again, this work falls mostly into the category of good, sturdy but unspectacular. Nothing wrong with
that, of course. However, the most important work in the field of strengthening financial systems rests
not with the myriad of international agencies listed above, but with the countries now vulnerable to
financial crises. The hard effort will be in lifting management quality in banks in the developing and
emerging economies, in improving risk recognition and risk management, in improving the regulatory
regimes in those countries and improving the quality of regulators and supervisors. And the solution
for  weak  banking  systems  is  not  government  underwriting.  It  lies  in  building  structures  in  which
individual banks can be allowed to fail, and in which shareholders can be allowed to suffer losses,
without putting in jeopardy the entire financial system of the countries concerned.
To put some particular New Zealand perspectives on these issues, I feel that strengthening the market
disciplines  on  banks  and  other  corporate  entities  is  an  important  policy  objective.  Governments
cannot  underwrite  private  entrepreneurial  activity  without  encouraging  over-investment  and  leaving
themselves vulnerable to subsequent collapses. In the banking sector, the empirical  evidence  seems
overwhelming that government-owned banks are likely to be weakest in risk management. (Depositors
assume they cannot fail, because of government ownership. The managers, for that reason, are  less
likely to be sensitive to deteriorating asset quality). And government-owned banks are most likely to
be encouraged into dubious lending for reasons other than sound commercial judgement.
Moreover, you will not be surprised to hear a New Zealander argue that real benefits can flow from a
willingness to allow foreign ownership of banks. Those benefits include access to skills and control
systems that might not be available locally, the introduction of international business standards into
local  markets,  and  reduced  vulnerability  to  inappropriate  political  influence.  Another  important
element  is  that  the  introduction  of  foreign  capital  constitutes  a  useful  device  for  spreading  risk  in
small and narrowly based economies. The consequences of unforeseen shocks are thus rendered less
damaging.  Well  capitalised  and  reputable  foreign  owned  banks  are  less  likely  to  fail  and  have  the
capacity  to  bear  some  of  the  consequences  of  a  localised  shock.  If  necessary,  foreign  owners  can
provide additional equity to support their local banking operation.
Capital account issues
5
BIS Review   82/1999
There has been a long-standing presumption within the Western economic orthodoxy that the case for
liberalising  capital  account  transactions  is  essentially  analogous  to  that  for  liberalising  trade.  That
presumption has come under serious review and challenge subsequent to the Asian meltdown of 1997
and 1998. Recent debates at the Board of the IMF reflect that revisionism, with a new willingness to
accept that capital account liberalisation carries risks and needs to be managed. Discussion tends to
focus  on  issues  of  the  speed  and  sequencing  of  capital  account  liberalisation,  and  on  the  role  and
effectiveness of capital controls. On the question of controls, a new orthodoxy seems to be emerging
around  the  distinction  between  controls  on  inflows  of  capital  à  la  Chile  (more  worthy  in  some
circumstances)  and  controls  on  outflows  of  capital  (unworthy  generally,  although  some  still  see  a
temporary role in crisis situations).
The  on-going  work  in  this  area  within  the  IMF  relates  to  reviewing  the  experience  of  countries  in
using  different  forms  of  capital  controls,  and  in  liberalising  different  components  of  the  capital
account, seeking to draw conclusions for best practices. There is also work underway to improve the
reporting and monitoring of capital flows, especially private sector short-term flows related to inter-
bank transactions.
As  a  very  small  economy,  well  integrated  with  global  financial  markets,  New  Zealand  well
understands the concerns some countries have regarding the risks and uncertainties that international
capital mobility can pose. But like Eichengreen, I have long since come to accept that capital mobility
is just one of the realities of life. Like good food and wine, it can be wonderfully enjoyable – when
taken with due recognition of one’s capacity to absorb it. But fatal when taken to excess. To take the
good food and wine metaphor a little further, the ready availability of essentially endless quantities of
gourmet fare simply makes all the more important the qualities of discipline and self-control. It is, of
course, possible that the restaurateur will assist  you  in  exercising  that  self-restraint,  but  none  of  us
should rely on him to do so.
So it rests primarily with each country to manage its own affairs to gain the undoubted benefits  of
access to the pool of international savings, while avoiding the damage from over-indulgence. To quote
Eichengreen again “… badly managed banks and open international capital markets are a combustible
mix. The most direct way of reducing this danger is to strengthen banks’ risk-management practices
and supervisors’ oversight and regulation of those practices”.
But that doesn’t leave the provider of capital without responsibility, which brings me to one of the
most challenging aspects of the current debate.
Involving the private sector in forestalling and resolving crises
By the time the Asian crisis had completed its first lap early in 1998, it had become abundantly clear
that, to use a term coined by Michel Camdessus, the world had just witnessed “the first financial crisis
of  the  21st  century”.  Camdessus  was  acknowledging  that  the  Asian  crisis  was  different  from  those
that the IMF had grown accustomed to dealing with over its first 50 years. No longer could the IMF
assume that failures of macro-policy, primarily monetary and fiscal policies, would lie at the core of
every  crisis.  Instead,  Asia  represented  essentially  a  crisis  of  the  private  sector.  I  think  that  is  an
important part of the explanation for why the IMF found it so difficult to respond to the Asian crisis,
and why its critics contend so vigorously that the IMF “got it wrong” in Asia. In essence, the Fund
was confronted with a set of problems that were, in many respects, new and unfamiliar.
If the origins of the Asian crisis lay in the private sector, what of the solutions? I think one important
conclusion that flows very readily from the Asian experience is that raising large scale public funding
for rescue packages, as occurred in Thailand and Indonesia, and was done more in “virtual” form for
Korea, will be difficult to repeat in the future. This is particularly the case where funds raised from
the taxpayers of the international community are seen to be going mostly to facilitate the escape of
BIS Review   82/1999
6
private investors from investments that have turned, for whatever reason, to mush. For that reason, the
question of “bailing-in the private sector” has been a topic of intense debate amongst those who think
about international economic crisis management. This term covers a range of suggested measures by
which  the  private  sector  would  be  obliged  to  take  a  share  of  the  downside  risk  of  cross-border
investment activities.
I  won’t  dwell  on  the  particular  proposals  that  have  emerged.  In  general,  there  seems  to  be  broad
acceptance of the principle that private investors should bear their fair share of the risks. However,
just what that means, and how that might be achieved are questions of enormous complexity. A key
issue, it seems, is that emerging countries are often in favour of the private foreign investors sharing
risks (ie, taking some losses when trouble strikes), but many seem reluctant to face the prospect of
increased  cost  of  funds,  and/or  reduced  supply  of  foreign  investment,  that  will  be  associated  with
contracts that put more risk on the investor. That is both unfortunate and misguided. Any increased
costs should be viewed in the same way as an insurance premium – the price paid for reduced risk.
There is a great deal that can be done to make countries less vulnerable to volatile capital flows – and
coincidentally, to reduce those insurance costs. These include:
•  Avoiding  an  accumulation  of  short-term  debt  and  ensuring  that  reserves  and  banking  system
liquidity are adequate to provide a significant buffer against a disruption in investment flows.
•  Avoiding  “off-balance  sheet”  transactions  or  loan  contract  clauses    that  have  the  effect  of
allowing the lender to withdraw funding at  short notice.
•  Exploring the possibilities for private contingent credit lines that provide additional liquidity, or
reduce debt service burdens, at times of stress.
Also,  some  degree  of  consensus  seems  to  be  emerging  around  the  need  to  re-assess  the  capital
standards established by the Basel Committee on  Banking  Supervision  with  a  view  to  reducing  the
perceived bias towards short-term interbank credit lines from industrial countries to emerging market
banks.
In  addition,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  work  underway  in  exploring  the  possibilities  of  modified  bond
contracts. This is aimed at making it easier to manage a restructuring of bond terms, for example, to
lengthen the maturity or defer interest payments temporarily, in the event of a crisis.
Systemic issues
Under this category comes research work to better understand the implications for economic policy
makers  of  the  globalisation  of  the  international  monetary  and  financial  system.  A  key  area  for
attention  is  that  of  exchange  rate  regimes,  the  impact  of  exchange  rate  volatility  and  how  best  to
manage the inevitable swings in capital flows.
I believe that much of this work will end up focusing heavily  on  strengthening  financial  systems  –
stronger balance sheets with more equity, improved risk recognition and risk management, stronger
accounting  and  audit  standards,  increased  transparency  and  improved  standards  of  banking
supervision.  This  is  all  aimed  at  providing  a  more  stable  basis  for  cross-border  investment  flows
rather than trying to act directly to stabilise or control those flows.
Also under the “systemic issues” heading comes work on developing the IMF’s capacity to respond to
crises. We have already seen the new Contingent Credit Line (CCL) introduced. Personally, I see very
little merit in this, and many dangers. For the IMF to be recommitting to support particular countries
simply raises the stakes when policy quality deteriorates to the point where the Fund should withdraw
7
BIS Review   82/1999
that pre-commitment. It also implies that when faced with capital flight, access to additional funding
is a key part of the required response. The risk, or course, is that access to additional funding simply
further defers the necessary policy and asset price adjustments, and makes the subsequent collapse all
the more expensive.
In addition to the CCL, the IMF now has access to the NAB funding, which together with the GAB
gives it around US$ 46 billion in available resources for crisis management. It now has its 11th quota
increase in place as well, which lifts total quotas from around US$ 200 billion to US$ 290 billion.
The  unfinished  debates  relate  to  the  role  of  the  IMF  and  World  Bank  going  forward,  issues  of
representation at the key policy forums – the old established structures now in place in bodies like the
IMF  and  its  Interim  Committee  now  look  to  be  thoroughly  out  of  synch  with  the  current  global
distribution of economic weight. For all of that, as the G22/G33 progression showed, the old order is
not yet ready to die.
APEC
My final comments on this territory relate to the place of APEC in this territory. Much of the debate I
have covered will emerge in a variety of guises within the APEC Finance process. This is primarily
the responsibility of my Treasury and MFAT colleagues, rather than the Reserve Bank, so I will step
only lightly here.
The New Zealand priorities for the APEC Finance Ministers process will focus on three key themes:
•  Open robust economies
•  Credible, effective processes, and
•  Strong global economies.
Under the first of these, finding ways to encourage the development of strong financial markets within
the APEC group is a key to meeting the long-term goal of open markets. APEC will not be looking to
duplicate work already taking place under the various umbrellas I have referred to. But it can draw on
that  work,  and  use  processes  such  at  individual  action  plans  (IAP’s)  and  voluntary  action  plans
(VAP’s) to give it momentum within APEC.
New Zealand is promoting a VAP on Supporting Freer and Stable Capital Flows. This is split into two
parts. Part 1 is an information-gathering phase and has already started. It includes some work being
commissioned from the IMF on countries’ experiences with capital account liberalisation (including
the  efficacy  of  capital  controls  as  a  transition  measure),  a  PECC  update  of  a  1995  survey  of
impediments  to  investment  within  each  APEC  economy,  and  an  ADB  study  of  the  role  played  by
capital in the economic development process along with work on reform sequencing. I understand that
Part 1 is intended to be completed in the next year or so, with a synthesis of the various studies being
submitted to APEC Finance Ministers in September 2000.
Part 2 is intended to take the form of Voluntary Action Plans by individual APEC economies, drawing
on the wisdom distilled in Part 1. An initiative on strengthening financial markets is being developed
as a pilot of part 2 of the VAP. This initiative will involve pulling together the relevant international
standards  in  the  area  of  financial  markets,  as  reference  points  for  economies  to  self  assess  the
adequacy of their policies and to identify future reforms, and as a basis for peer review within APEC.
This  initiative  will  focus  on  such  matters  as  banking  supervision,  payments  systems,  corporate
governance and disclosure standards. This  initiative  will  be  discussed  further  at  the  APEC  Finance
Deputies’ meeting in Wellington in August.
BIS Review   82/1999
8
The  issue  of  developing  domestic  bond  markets  has  also  been  prominent  on  the  APEC  Finance
Agenda.  Guidelines  of  best  practice  in  this  field  are  being  developed  for  preliminary  discussion  in
August.  The  objective  here  is  to  encourage  APEC  economies  to  remove  the  impediments  to  the
development of domestic bond markets, in recognition that some economies are very dependent on the
banking system for funding.
Other areas of work involve, for example, the ADB efforts to coordinate a project aimed at boosting
training for APEC area banking supervisors and securities market  regulators  and  some  useful  work
already undertaken in the field of corporate governance.
APEC  represents  an  interesting  grouping  of  economies,  with  diverse  experience  and  diverse
circumstances.  Hopefully,  New  Zealand  can  apply  its  time  in  the  chair  to  help  focus  the  APEC
discussion  on  reform  of  the  global  financial  architecture.  If  we  are  successful,  we  can  ensure  that
APEC is an effective “outreach” mechanism providing cogent, well thought through and influential
commentary to the G7, IMF and other key forums considering the architectural issues.
9
BIS Review   82/1999
