Mr Carse discusses the importance of ethics in banking
Speech given by Mr David Carse, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at
the Banking Conference on Business Ethics in Hong Kong on 15 September 1999.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak today at this important conference on business ethics.
This is an area that is becoming a growth industry, and it is one that it is particularly relevant to banks
given the position of trust that they occupy. Indeed, this is one of the daunting things about giving a
speech about the importance of ethics in banking. It all seems too obvious. After all, what do we mean
by ethics in business? It means, I would suggest, trying to be a good corporate citizen; trying as an
organisation  to  adhere  to  certain  ethical  values;  and  trying  to  do  the  right  thing  by  all  the  various
stakeholders – customers, employees, suppliers and shareholders – that any business organisation has.
It means, as one writer has put it, “choosing the good over the bad, the right over the wrong, the fair
over the unfair”.
Put  this  way,  is  there  any  respectable  bank  that  would  claim  not  to  attach  high  importance  to  core
ethical values such as honesty, integrity, fairness, responsible citizenship and accountability? Is there
any bank that would claim that it was right to accept bribes in return for loans, to lend to connected
parties  and  to  cheat  customers?  Unfortunately,  it  is  not  as  simple  as  this.  If  it  were  the  case  that
business  ethics  simply  represented  values  which  everyone  accepted  and  put  into  practice,  this
conference  and  my  speech  would  both be  superfluous.  However,  there is sometimes  a  gap  between
what banks claim and what they do. As the Asian crisis has demonstrated, ethical values are still not
firmly entrenched and followed in many banks in the region. Bribery and corruption have been one of
the  root  causes  of  the  banking  problems,  and  the  Bank  Bali  scandal  has  shown  that  the  process  of
reform still has a long way to go.
However, leaving aside such blatant examples of unethical behaviour, even the most well meaning of
banks  are  going  to  confront  moral  dilemmas  in  the  course  of  business.  These  dilemmas  are  more
complex than the simple: “should I lie, cheat or steal variety?” They pose difficult choices that have
the potential to damage reputation and lead to financial losses. The problem is that in an increasingly
complex  business  environment  the  choice  is  not  always  the  simple  one  between  what  is  right  and
wrong. It is more often between what is right and less right – in other words between shades of grey.
This increases the need for organisations to adhere to a strong set of values to steer them through the
minefield  of  ethical  choices  with  which  they  are  faced  as  they  make  business  decisions.  It  is  also
necessary to ensure that the behaviour of the organisation is in practice aligned with these values and
that employees buy into them, so that the organisation actually practises what it preaches.
Let me try to put some flesh on these arguments with some practical examples of ethical dilemmas
involving banks that have been in the news recently.  I have said that banking business is becoming
more complex. One aspect of this is the globalisation of business activities which may be summed up
as  the  tendency  of  the  world  to  become  one  market  place.  As  banks  reach  out  beyond  their  home
market,  they  become  exposed  to  unfamiliar  business  environments  and  customers  whose  ethical
standards may be very different from their own. This puts extra strain on the “know your customer”
policy upon which regulators are so insistent. Business dealings with Russia are a case in point. Here
you  have  the  situation  of  a  country  that  is  making  the  transition  from  a  communist  to  a  capitalist
economy.  This  naturally  creates  profit  opportunities  for  Western  banks.  It  could  indeed  almost  be
argued  that  these  banks  have  a  moral  responsibility  to  assist  in  transforming  the  Russian  economy.
Unfortunately,  somewhere  along  the  line,  this  transformation  has  gone  wrong,  and  the  borderline
between what is legitimate and illegitimate business in Russia has become blurred, to say the least.
In this situation, what should a bank do? The decision can obviously be viewed in strictly commercial
terms. But there is an ethical dimension as well. Is it right for the bank to do business with Russian
1
BIS Review 98/1999
customers and to handle funds flowing out of Russia where it cannot be sure about the origin of the
funds? No doubt many banks are asking themselves these questions, in the wake of the stories of huge
amounts of Russian money being laundered through Bank of New York and possibly other Western
banks.  Note  that  there  is  no  suggestion  at  this  stage  that  the  banks  actively  participated  in  money
laundering. Indeed, it is not yet clear if money laundering, as opposed to capital flight, is what was
going on. However, difficult questions are going to be asked, not least by the US Congress, and the
banks concerned are going to have to cope with the negative publicity.
Ethical dilemmas can also arise when banks try to innovate, particularly when they stray outside their
home  territory.  Take  an  example  from  my  own  country,  in  the  form  of  the  Bank  of  Scotland’s
proposed joint venture in telephone banking with the American evangelist Dr Pat Robertson. This was
designed  to  enable  the  bank  to  expand  abroad  with  the  help  of  new  technology  and  to  attract
US$3 billion in deposits. On the face of it this appears to be a reasonable business decision, so where
does  the  ethical  dimension  arise?  The  problem,  as  you  may  be  aware,  is  that  Dr  Robertson  is  not
simply a religious leader, he is also a right wing politician with controversial views  on a  variety  of
issues, including gay rights. News of the Bank of Scotland’s proposed business link with such a person
did not go down very well with gay activists or trade unionists in Scotland or indeed with shareholders
and  the  public  generally.  Matters  were  not  helped  when  Dr  Robertson  was  highly  critical  of  moral
values in Scotland. The bank was forced to pull out of the deal, to pay compensation to Dr Robertson
and to issue a public apology in which it stressed its “long-standing commitment to ethical values”.
Despite the apology, the whole episode was widely regarded as a public relations disaster.
What lessons can be learned from this episode? The first, I suppose, is that banks need to be careful
about business relationships with controversial politicians, whether  of  the  right  or  left  wing  variety.
The second is the increasing power of the media and social pressure groups to throw the spotlight on
what they regard as “unethical” business activities. In the case of banks, such activities might include
financing  the  arms  trade  or  industries  that  damage  the  environment.  The  third  is  the  way  in  which
ethical  values  change  and  how  they  can  differ  between  societies:  anti-gay  attitudes  are  no  doubt
acceptable in the Mid-West of the United States, but they were clearly felt to violate modern notions
of fairness, equality and non-discrimination in modern-day Scotland. The final point is how small the
global market place has become and how events in one country can impinge on others. The chairman
of  the  bank  commented  that  they  had  not  foreseen  how  the  controversy  surrounding  Dr  Robertson
would cross the Atlantic to Scotland where he has no political constituency or business. This provoked
the comment that the bank did not appreciate how new technology has shrunk the world.
The moral of the story is that banks need to consider how their actions – anywhere in the world – will
affect their customers or be perceived by them. But customers are not the only people the banks have
to worry about. They also need to take account of regulators in the various jurisdictions in which they
operate and the fact that regulatory standards may shift over time. The Credit Suisse Group has, for
example,  recently  run  into  problems  with  the  Japanese  regulators  because  one  of  its  subsidiaries  in
Japan  was  accused  of  engaging  in  window-dressing  transactions  with  Japanese  banks.  These
transactions  are  now  deemed  by  the  current  regulators  to  be  “inappropriate”,  though  they  were
apparently not so regarded in the past. This illustrates that banks may encounter what has been termed
“regulatory risk” not simply when they break the law. It also shows the problems they face in deciding
which  transactions  are  indeed  “appropriate”  where  the  rules  of  the  game  in  the  various  markets  in
which they operate may not be clearly defined, or where the rules are shifting in line with changing
standards of what is right or wrong.
The  global  reach  of  many  businesses  creates  practical  problems  of  control  and  of  enforcement  of
compliance with regulatory and ethical standards, as the collapse of Barings Bank clearly showed. But
these issues also arise in domestic markets as the banks diversify into fee-related businesses such as
the sale of insurance and investment management and advice. Leaving aside the possible risks from
rogue fund managers, these activities can raise conflicts of interest and the issue of whether particular
products are suitable for the needs of their customers. The classic case of how things can go wrong is
the  recent  pension  mis-selling  scandal  in  the  UK.  Hundreds  of  thousands  of  employees  were
persuaded  by  pension  salesmen  and  the  companies  they  represented  (including  major  banks  and
insurance companies) to switch from occupational pension schemes provided by their employers into
BIS Review 98/1999
2
personal plans provided by the companies. It turned out that in many cases, the employees were much
worse  off than  if  they  had  stayed  in their original schemes.  The  banks  and  other  pension  providers
stood accused of failing to give their customers suitable advice and sufficient information on the costs
and benefits of making the switch. The end-result is that the offending companies have been “named
and shamed” by the Government and pressurised into paying billions of pounds in compensation. The
reputation of these firms, many of whom are household names in the UK, has suffered as a result. This
comes  at  an  awkward  time  when  banks  in  the  UK  and  elsewhere  are  attempting  to  expand  their
bancassurance activities and to persuade the public to trust them with their long-term savings.
Banks  in  Hong  Kong  will  need  to  bear  this  lesson  in  mind  as  we  embark  upon  the  Mandatory
Provident Fund Scheme. They will also have to be alive to the other types of ethical conflict that may
arise as the banking environment becomes increasingly competitive and there is even more focus on
the bottom line. The HKMA has already pointed out that as a result of interest rate deregulation that
there will be both winners and losers among bank customers. Those with small balances and relatively
large volume of transactions may find that increased fees outweigh the benefit of any increase in the
interest paid on their deposits. As has happened elsewhere, banks may also become more selective in
their choice of customers and the level of customer service may be affected if the number of branches
is pruned to save costs.
A move towards a user pays approach and a reduction in cross-subsidisation are manifestations of the
greater efficiency that deregulation is intended to produce. But banks will need to be careful that this
process is handled with tact and sensitivity. Otherwise, they may be open to accusations from sections
of the community that they are neglecting their social responsibility by curtailing or increasing the cost
of basic banking services to the economically disadvantaged. This was certainly the accusation made
against the Australian banks after deregulation there. A further aspect is that the possibility of higher
and more extensive charges for banking services will make it all the more important for the banks to
deliver sufficient information to their customers about these charges.
Let  me  clarify  at  this  point  the  HKMA’s  attitude  to  ethical  matters  and  particularly  the  issue  of
“fairness”  to  customers.  Our  main  responsibility  under  the  Banking  Ordinance  is  to  promote  the
general stability and effective working of the banking system. In common with banking regulators in
other  countries,  we  interpret  this  to  mean  that  our  principal  concern  should  be  to  determine  that
individual banks are financially sound and prudently managed. The aim is to reduce the risk of bank
failure that would result in depositors losing money and threaten the stability of the banking system as
a whole. We concentrate therefore on checking that the banks have adequate capital and liquidity and
effective management and internal controls.
However, this is not all that we do. Section 7 of the Banking Ordinance goes on to say, among other
things, that our functions include the following aspects that have a distinct “ethical” flavour:
• 
taking reasonable steps to ensure that authorised institutions operate in a “responsible, honest
and business-like manner”;
 promoting  and  encouraging  “proper  standards  of  conduct  and  sound  and  prudent  business
practices” ;
suppressing “illegal, dishonourable or improper practices”.
• 
These  specific  functions  can  be  related  to  our  general  function  of  promoting  the  stability  of  the
banking sector. Clearly, if banks are involved in illegal or improper activities (such as fraud or money
laundering) this may threaten the reputation not only of the bank concerned but also of the banking
system as a whole. This in turn may lead to a loss of public confidence in the banks.
I believe however that our functions also imply a broader interest in the concept of “fairness” in the
provision of banking services. This is not to say that the HKMA should act as a “consumer watchdog”
in investigating and adjudicating on disputes between banks and their customers on matters such as the
cost or quality of banking services. But at the same time we should not be indifferent to how banks
treat their customers in general. If banks consistently provide a bad or unfair service, this may damage
the  reputation  of  the  banks  and  destroy  customer  loyalty  and  confidence.  Taken  to  extremes,  the
3
BIS Review 98/1999
system as a  whole  could  be  brought  into  disrepute. This is  why  we  promoted the  Code  of  Banking
Practice issued jointly in 1997 by the two industry associations. The Code is intended to be observed
by authorised institutions in dealing with their personal customers, and it provides an extremely useful
mechanism for the promotion of fair and transparent banking services in Hong Kong.
What tools can banks use to manage ethics in their own organisations? No doubt you will have been
discussing this during the course of the seminar and I will not go into a lot of detail in this speech.
Clearly,  the first  essential  is  for  the  bank  itself  to  be  clear  about  the  key  ethical  values  to  which  it
subscribes.  It  then  needs  to  ensure  that  the  organisation  and  the  employees  act  in  accordance  with
these values. This can be done through the adoption of codes of conduct. The former Commissioner of
Banking issued a guideline in 1986 which requires all authorised institutions in Hong Kong to prepare
a code of conduct for their staff setting out the standards to which they are expected to adhere. It is
also  necessary  to  have  policies  and  procedures  designed  to  ensure  compliance  with  the  standards
specified in the code of conduct. For example, many companies now employ “ethics officers” and give
their staff specific training and advice on ethical issues. The guideline issued by the Commissioner of
Banking recommends that all institutions should appoint at least one senior officer to handle queries
from staff and other matters relating to the code of conduct.
Codes of conduct and the means to enforce them are important tools. But I would caution against too
narrow a compliance-based  approach towards  ethics  management.  It  appears from  survey  responses
carried  out  in  some  US  companies  that  the  most  important  factor  in  controlling  unethical  conduct
within companies is how staff perceive the value that senior management attaches to ethical behaviour.
What matters in other words is the general culture of the organisation and the example that is set by
those  at  the  top.  An  important  way  in  which  behaviour  of  staff  can  be  influenced  is,  for  example,
through remuneration policy, and senior management needs to be careful to ensure that rewards are
not given to staff who uses dubious practices to gain business.
This brings me round to the role of the board of directors in banks. As you will recall, we commented
in our recent Policy Response to the Banking Sector Consultancy Study on the need for high standards
of  corporate  governance  within  the  banking  system  as  the  environment  becomes  more  competitive.
We had in mind particularly the need to enhance systems of risk management, and we noted that the
primary responsibility for ensuring this rested with the board of directors. We could equally make the
same point in relation to the promotion of high ethical standards within banks. The board of directors
has  an  important  role  to  play  in  establishing  the  overall  culture  of  an  organisation.  It  is  also  the
ultimate body for resolving the type of complex ethical dilemmas I referred to earlier, and ensuring in
particular that the reputation risks in new business strategies or products are carefully addressed.
I hope that this conference and my speech, have demonstrated that high ethical standards in banks are
neither a luxury nor an abstract ideal. Rather, they are a vital aspect of protecting and enhancing the
bank’s brand image, and ensuring its long-term business survival. Behaving ethically is not only the
right thing for banks to do, it also makes sound business sense.
BIS Review 98/1999
4
