Mr Heikensten discusses the new currency and the Swedish economy
Speech by the First Deputy Governor of the Bank of  Sweden,  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  before  the
Swedish Shareholders’Association in Sölvesborg, Bromölla, on 23/1/99.
On New Year’s Day, ten currencies in Europe were replaced by a single, common currency. The
changeover went well, no doubt exceeding some expectations. The elaborate systems that were
used in earnest for the first time to transmit cross-border payments functioned properly, with no
serious  technical  hitches.  This  made  it  possible  to  establish  a  uniform  instrumental  rate  for
monetary policy throughout the euro area. The new currency also had a favourable reception in
financial markets, accompanied by falling interest rates.
EMU has thus got off to a successful start. But the challenges posed by monetary union and any
risks connected with the project are mainly of a different nature. They are economic and political,
affecting the participants as well as non-euro countries. With eleven countries subscribing to a
single monetary policy, the conditions for economic policy in Europe have changed. So have the
terms  for  Sweden  and  economic  policy  here.  These  matters  have  not  yet  been  discussed  at  all
fully in Sweden.
Under  these  circumstances,  I  shall  be  opening  our  debate  today  by  touching  briefly  on  four
issues: the new challenges posed by the euro to economic policy in Europe; the consequences for
Sweden; the path of the krona’s exchange rate; and current monetary policy.
Challenges to EU economic policies
The euro’s successful launch was underpinned by intensive preparations. Now that the euro has
been introduced, there is still work to be done to ensure that the monetary union also functions
properly in the longer run.
One of the major challenges is to achieve a good working relationship in the euro area between
the single monetary policy and other components of economic policy. Achieving this interaction
can be difficult even at the national level. Sweden’s problems in the 1980s are a good example:
fiscal policy was not sufficiently tight to counter the rapid expansion of credit and neither was
the  supply  side  functioning  all  that  well,  which  also  contributed  to  the  overheating.  In  the
monetary  union,  the  single  monetary  policy  has  to  mesh  with  the  national  fiscal,  wage  and
structural policies of eleven countries.
While decisions about the other components of economic policy are still mainly national, they
are highly important for the monetary union’s success. It is envisaged that good interaction will
be  achieved  in  that  the  euro  countries  monitor  each  other  and  jointly  discuss  their  national
policies. Starting from mutually agreed policy guidelines, each EU country is to present regular
accounts of how it intends to fulfil the common objectives. If a country’s policy diverges from
the agreed guidelines, the idea is that other countries will protest at an early stage; each country
must shoulder its share of the responsibility for this.
The work of constructing uniform rules has made most progress in the field of fiscal policy. Here
the Stability and Growth Pact lays down clear constraints on budget policy: the countries are to
strive  for  budgetary  positions  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus  in  the  medium  term  and  under
normal circumstances they are to prevent the budget deficit from exceeding 3 per cent of GDP. A
process has been set up for supporting the forces in each country that back a responsible policy.
The process gets its muscle from the ultimate possibility of applying sanctions to countries that
do not follow the guidelines.
BIS Review   9/1999
– 2 –
The background to the EU countries’ agreement on strict guidelines in this field is the concern
about the  size  of  government  debt  and  the  central  role  of  fiscal  policy  in  relation  to  monetary
policy.  Fiscal  policy  affects  price  stability  both  via  the  level  of  economic  activity  and  via
expectations of future inflation. Without the support of generally consolidated fiscal policies in
the  euro  area,  the  task  of  achieving  price  stability  would  be  a  heavy  one.  Problems  and
shortcomings  in  fiscal  policy  hit  growth  and  employment  in  that  they  necessitate  a  level  of
interest rates that is higher than otherwise.
Today, far too few countries fulfil the medium-term fiscal policy objectives and the major euro
countries have very small margins to the Pact’s definition of an excessive deficit. This can lead
to problems in the Union, particularly if a weaker economic development were to result in further
budgetary deterioration.
Considering the size of government debt in a number of EU countries, continued adherence to a
tight budget policy is to be desired. Such a policy can make further interest rate cuts possible if
economic activity slackens and inflation prospects improve. There is a consensus on this today in
the European Union but reaching an agreement on how the countries should share the burden of
adjustment  can  be  difficult.  It  will  no  doubt  require  many  lengthy  discussions,  which  have
already begun, between the finance ministers of the euro countries.
Consequences for Sweden
The Riksdag (Sweden’s parliament) has decided to stay outside the monetary union at present.
We are accordingly continuing to conduct our own monetary policy with a flexible exchange rate
and an inflation target.
The political consequences of being outside the euro area were considered by the Riksbank in its
submission on the report from the EMU Enquiry. The conclusion that the consequences would be
considerable has been reinforced now that the monetary union has started with eleven countries.
This would be even clearer if Denmark and the United Kingdom were to decide to join.
It is also clear, from discussions in which I have taken part, that the advent of the euro has been
accompanied by closer collaboration on the construction of economic policies in Europe, as well
as on Europe’s actions on the global stage. In these respects Sweden now carries less weight.
A  distinct  message  that  we  intend  to  remain  outside  the  euro  area  for  the  foreseeable  future
would probably weaken our influence in the European Union still more. Our partners in Europe
would  then  be  less  interested  in  allowing  for  our  positions  on  other  matters  as  well.  The
monetary union is, after all, one of the Community’s most central integration projects.
On the other hand, the economic consequences of Sweden still having a flexible exchange rate
should not be exaggerated, at least in the short run. Basically, the development of the exchange
rate and interest rates depends on how we manage Sweden’s economy relative to the euro area. If
we  succeed  in  making  our  economic  policy  credible,  the  costs  of  remaining  outside  for  some
years should not be unduly high. But our decision not to participate does mean that we need to be
extra clear in demonstrating our determination to implement a sound economic policy, focused
on sustained growth with low inflation and high employment. There are no easy short cuts, even
in the short run.
That Sweden, as a euro outsider with a flexible exchange rate, will have to live with exchange
rate fluctuations is evident from events last autumn. We know from international experience that
BIS Review   9/1999
– 3 –
floating exchange rates do in fact float. Not even good economic fundamentals suffice to ensure
stability in financial markets. Here we have a price for being outside the monetary union.
The exchange rate
The exchange rate is an important but elusive item in assessments of inflation. Last autumn, the
main  assessment  was  that  the  krona  would  become  successively  stronger  as  the  financial
turbulence  subsided  and  relatively  more  importance  was  attached  to  the  favourable  economic
fundamentals, which include low inflation and a growing surplus on public finances. Recently,
moreover,  it  seems  that  such  a  process  has  begun.  Signals  of  a  move  by  Sweden  towards  the
monetary union may perhaps have acted as a catalyst here.
The new political signals about the handling of the EMU issue have brought the question of the
krona’s equilibrium level to the fore. Participation in the euro area means that at some stage the
krona’s exchange rate with the euro will have to be locked. In the discussion that will then be
held  with  colleagues  in  Europe,  the  actual  decision  will  be  a  matter  for  the  Government.  The
Riksbank,  however,  is  responsible  for  choosing  the  conversion  rate  we  find  reasonable  on
Sweden’s  behalf.  Meanwhile,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  we  are  dealing  with  negotiations
between Sweden and the other EU member states, so it may be inadvisable to get tied down in
matters of detail at an early stage.
The  Riksbank  has  made  it  clear  on  numerous  occasions  that  it  considers  the  krona  to  be
undervalued.  Much  of  the  debate  on  this  issue  has  stemmed  from  an  article  on  the  krona’s
equilibrium exchange rate that was published early in 1996 in our Quarterly Review. The article
was intended to serve as a basis for public debate; in our opinion it provided the best foundation
that was then available for discussing the krona’s long-term value.
The krona’s equilibrium value is naturally something that the Riksbank considers continuously
and the analysis is constantly being developed. Accounts of various aspects of the exchange rate
have been presented in the Inflation Report. The material that will be produced in the event of
Sweden  deciding  to  participate  in  ERM2/EMU  will  have  to  incorporate  the  additional
information since 1996. It should also be noted that the levels and intervals that were presented
in  the  article  refer  to  the  krona’s  trade-weighted  exchange  rate  and  are  therefore  not  directly
applicable to the question of a reasonable central rate for the krona against the euro. Furthermore,
the euro is a new currency. Arriving at just the right future exchange rate for the krona against
the euro is therefore not exactly easy.
Although the financial markets are naturally eager to know, at this stage it is too early to allow
the  discussion  of  the  krona’s  path  to  focus  on  specific  intervals  or  levels.  But  the  course  is
clear—in the event of a euro peg, the rate for the krona will be stronger than the current level.
Current monetary policy
In  conclusion  I  should  like  to  say  something  about  the  monetary  policy  situation  in  Sweden.
International economic prospects gradually deteriorated during 1998. Knock-on effects from the
crisis that originated in Asia were included from an early stage  in  the  Riksbank’s  spectrum  of
risks. Early in 1998, it was judged that they would be countered by other factors, not least a good
development of domestic demand. In June, however, when price tendencies proved to be more
subdued than expected earlier, the repo rate was lowered by 0.25 percentage points.
During the autumn, increasingly clear signs of an international slowdown were accentuated by
growing  turbulence  in  financial  markets.  The  Riksbank  considered  that  the  effects  on  the
BIS Review   9/1999
– 4 –
Swedish economy and the path of inflation would be of a magnitude that warranted an easing of
the monetary stance. In November the repo rate was accordingly lowered in two steps from 4.10
to 3.60 per cent. In the December  Inflation  Report  the  assessment  was  still  that  in  one  to  two
years  time,  both  CPI  and  underlying  inflation  would  be  below  the  Riksbank’s  price  stability
target  of  2  per  cent.  On  December  16th  the  repo  rate  was  therefore  lowered  by  another  0.20
percentage points to 3.40 per cent. With this cut, the monetary stance was considered to be well
balanced; responsibility for monetary policy’s future formulation was left to the Riksbank’s new
Executive Board, which would be taking over in the new year.
Since the publication of the December Report, international economic activity can hardly be said
to  have  changed  appreciably  for  the  better.  Prospects  for  both  the  euro  area  and  the  Japanese
economy seem to have worsened, if anything, at least for the coming year. In the euro area it is
manufacturing which has weakened in particular, while consumption still seems to be following
a relatively favourable path. Developments in the United States are still fairly strong but some
slowdown  is  still  foreseen.  The  situation  in  Brazil  in  recent  days  has  created  some  renewed
unrest in international financial markets, with a limited flight to safe assets. This, too, may affect
future  international  activity,  though  the  turbulence  in  the  wake  of  the  falling  real  seems,  if
anything, to have been less than expected.
The economic statistics for Sweden suggest that industrial activity  may  go  on  weakening.  The
picture of total resource utilisation is still difficult to assess but there is much to suggest that the
proportion  of  unutilised  resources  is  still  comparatively  large.  Forward  indicators,  such  as
incoming orders, also point to a further deterioration.
At  the  same  time,  households’  expectations  of  their  own  economic  situation  indicate  that  the
development  of  private  consumption  will  remain  relatively  good.  Household  optimism  is
supported  by  increased  employment  and  a  favourable  development  of  disposable  income.
However,  the  sustainability  of  this  development  is  uncertain,  as  it  was  last  autumn,  partly
because households and firms differ in their assessments of the future. Negative news from the
business  community  may  make  households  more  pessimistic,  and  so  may  renewed  unrest  in
financial  markets.  Recently,  moreover,  there  have  been  tendencies  for  households  to  be  more
uneasy about their own economic situation.
A  more  positive  development  is  favoured  by  the  fact  that  the  international  financial  crisis  has
subsided.  During  the  autumn  there  were  strong  fears  that  financial  problems  would  subdue
international activity for several years. With the normalisation to date, the probability of this has
decreased.
The December outcome for consumer prices was somewhat lower than expected. The CPI fell
0.6  per  cent,  which  can  be  compared  with  our  forecast  of  a  fall  of  0.3  per  cent.  The  main
explanations are a weaker development of commodity prices and falling interest rates.
The assessment of future inflationary pressure has to take these and other factors into account. At
the same time, the downward path of market interest rates in recent months represents a demand
stimulus further ahead. This, too, must be considered in the assessment of inflation.
If  nothing  untoward  happens,  the  Riksbank’s  next  monetary  policy  meeting  will  be  held  on
February 11th. It will then be up to the new Executive Board to evaluate the information that has
been received and decide the level of the repo rate.
 BIS Review   9/1999
