Mr Stals looks at South Africa’s financial and economic prospects for the next five years
Address  by  the  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  Dr  Chris  Stals,  at  conferences
organised by Omega Investment Research (Pty) Ltd held in Frankfurt on 25/1/99 and Zurich on
27/1/99.
This  overview  of  the  South  African  economy  is  presented  in  three  parts.  Firstly,  recent
developments in the economy and the current situation are summarised to provide a background
for possible future developments. Secondly, the more important structural economic adjustments
that  are  now  in  progress  and  that  will  have  an  important  influence  on  the  course  of  future
developments are referred to. Thirdly, a longer-term view is taken of developments over the most
recent past two five-year periods, supplemented with a forecast for the next five years.
1. Recent developments and the current situation
The year 1998 turned out to be a very frustrating one for the South African economy. During the
first  quarter,  encouraging  signals  of  an  imminent  improvement  in  underlying  conditions
emerged. Substantial amounts of foreign capital flowed into the country, mainly in the form of
portfolio  investments  in  South  African  bonds  and  equities.  The  country’s  foreign  reserves
increased sharply; there was upward pressure on the exchange rate of the rand; domestic liquidity
increased; and interest rates declined.
At  that  stage,  there  was  some  optimism  that  the  fairly  depressed  conditions  in  real  economic
activity since the second half of 1997 would be turned into a new upswing during the course of
1998. Growth in real gross domestic product, which had declined from a level of about 3½ per
cent per year in 1995 and 1996 to below 2 per cent in 1997, was predicted to rise again in 1998.
However, the South African economy was severely shocked when the large inflows of foreign
funds in the form of portfolio investment in South African bonds were suddenly reversed in May
1998. Non-residents increased their holdings of South African bonds by R16 billion during the
first four months, but then became net sellers, and reduced their holdings of South African bonds
by R26 billion over the next eight months. It is interesting to note that, throughout last year, non-
residents remained more positive about investment in South African equities and increased their
holdings of shares acquired through the Johannesburg Stock Exchange by R42 billion over the
year  as  a  whole.  Despite  the  large  disinvestment  in  bonds,  non-residents  still  increased  their
overall holdings of South African securities by R32 billion.
The abrupt change that took place in May in the Bond Exchange nevertheless had far-reaching
effects for the South African financial situation. The yield on long-term government bonds, for
example, rose from a monthly average of 12.9 per cent in April to over 18 per cent in September,
and  fluctuated  widely  on  a  daily  basis  to  peak  at  over  21  per  cent  at  one  stage.  The  adverse
effects  of  the  net  selling  of  bonds  by  non-residents  quickly  spilled  over  into  the  market  for
foreign exchange. Pressures in this market led to an eventual devaluation in the nominal effective
exchange rate of the rand of 16.4 per cent from the end of April 1998 to 31 December 1998. The
country’s net gold and foreign exchange reserves, which increased by almost R19 billion over the
fifteen months that ended in March 1998, then declined again by R12½ billion over the last three
quarters of last year. At the end of 1998, the total official reserves of the country amounted to
about R31.6 billion, the equivalent of about two months’ imports.
These changes in the capital account of the balance of payments, which were obviously directly
linked to the worldwide dispersion of the East Asian crisis, forced the Reserve Bank to switch to
BIS Review   13/1999
– 2 –
a  more  restrictive  monetary  policy.  The  interest  rate  on  the  Reserve  Bank’s  daily  repurchase
transactions with banking institutions increased from below 15 per cent in early April 1998 to
almost 22 per cent in August. In light of the declining amount of liquidity in the banking sector,
and  the  rising  rate  for  Reserve  Bank  accommodation,  banking  institutions  raised  their  prime
lending rate from 18 per cent in April 1998 to over 25 per cent in August.
With these adverse developments in the financial markets, the outlook for an early improvement
in real economic activity faded. On the contrary, overall economic activity slowed down further.
In the third quarter, total real gross domestic product indeed showed an annualised rate of decline
of  2½  per  cent.  It  is  estimated  that,  on  balance,  total  gross  domestic  product  in  1998  was  not
much different from that of 1997.
The  negative  developments  in  the  global  financial  and  commodity  markets  had  some  adverse
effects also on the current account of the balance of payments. The deficit indeed increased from
a level of about R7 billion in the first half of the year to a level of about R18 billion in the second
half.  Special  imports,  however,  contributed  to  this  increase  in  the  negative  balance,  and
indications are that the growth in imports is now slowing down in line with the more depressed
domestic demand, whereas certain exports are beginning to react positively to the depreciation of
the rand last year.
Short-term developments in the  South  African  economy  were  therefore  very  much  affected  by
the  turmoil  of  the  past  year  in  the  global  financial  markets,  and  by  negative  developments  in
international  commodity  markets.  The  current  situation  creates  frustration  for  the  monetary
authorities, who have an understanding of the need for  some  stimulation  of  domestic  demand,
but  also  an  obligation  to  protect  overall  financial  stability  in  an  unfriendly  and  volatile
international financial environment.
The  strong  link  between  internal  economic  developments  in  South  Africa  and  changes  in  the
international situation was illustrated clearly when global financial markets became more stable
towards the end of last year and in the early weeks of 1999. The strained South African financial
situation simultaneously eased to such an extent that the exchange rate of the rand appreciated
from  about  R6.30  to  the  United  States  dollar  in  August  1998  to  R5.70  early  in  January  1999.
Domestic interest rates declined by about 3 full percentage points from the extremely high levels
reached last year.
In  the  past  ten  days,  however,  negative  developments  in  the  Brazilian  situation  once  again
created new pressures in the South African market for foreign exchange, and put some brakes on
the declining trend in interest rates. In the short term, the fate of the South African economy is
now to an important extent determined outside of the country. Should the international situation
stabilise  and  improve  during  the  course  of  1999,  the  South  African  economy  will  be  sure  to
follow.
2. Structural economic adjustment
As  already  explained,  cyclical  developments  in  the  South  African  economy  turned  negative  in
1997  and  remained  depressed  throughout  1998.  The  business  cycle  will  hopefully  swing  more
positive again as the international financial situation becomes more stable (in the second half of
this  year?).  There  are,  however,  a  number  of  fundamental  or  more  basic  deficiencies  in  the
economy  which  were  identified  by  Government  in  its  Macroeconomic  Strategy  for  Growth,
Employment  and  Redistribution  (GEAR),  published  in  June  1996,  and  which  also  needs
attention.
BIS Review   13/1999
– 3 –
In  the  GEAR  document,  Government  recognised  that  the  most  important  economic  problem
facing South Africa at this juncture is the large and growing unemployment in the country. This
problem  not  only  provides  a  serious  economic  challenge  for  macroeconomic  policy,  but  also
contributes to adverse socio-political developments. For example, the seriously disrupting crime
and violence situation in the country can be linked directly to growing unemployment. In its turn,
the crime and violence makes economic recovery more difficult. The country is therefore trapped
in a vicious circle of growing unemployment, more crime and violence, lower economic growth,
and, therefore, more unemployment.
The  Government’s  GEAR  programme  supports  its  earlier  Reconstruction  and  Development
Programme  (RDP),  providing  for  the  social  upliftment  of  the  South  African  community,
particularly  of  the  disadvantaged  groups  of  the  past.  The  RDP  focused  the  attention  on  the
demand  side  of  the  economy,  that  is  on  the  huge  and  legitimate  needs  of  millions  of  South
Africans that still live in poverty. It is understood by Government, however, that the means to
provide  for  RDP  can  only  come  from  increases  in  the  production  of  goods  and  services.  The
disappointing past performances of the supply side of the economy must therefore be addressed
in order to make it possible to meet the accumulated pent-up demand by producing more goods
and services in the country.
The main strategies in the GEAR programme provide for the following:
         a fiscal deficit reduction programme to contain debt service obligations, counter inflation and
free resources for investment;
a reduction in tariffs to contain input prices and facilitate industrial restructuring;
a  commitment  to  moderate  wage  demands,  supported  by  an  appropriately  structured
flexibility within the collective bargaining system;
an exchange rate policy to keep the real effective rate stable at a competitive level;
a consistent monetary policy to prevent a resurgence of inflation;
the gradual relaxation of exchange controls;
the restructuring of state assets (privatisation);
tax incentives to stimulate new investment in competitive and labour-absorbing projects; and
a strengthened levy system to fund training on a scale commensurate with needs.
South Africa is in a process of gradually implementing the GEAR strategy, although Government
is often criticised for moving too slowly, particularly with the privatisation programme, and with
the introduction of more flexibility in the labour market. The adverse cyclical developments of
the  past  eighteen  months,  and  the  dismal  performance  of  the  economy  in  the  short  term,
encouraged the critics of GEAR to condemn it as a failure. There are therefore strong pressures
within  the  country  for  Government  to  relinquish  the  strategy  and  to  replace  it  with  a  more
populist approach.
Government, however, remains committed to the gradual restructuring of the economy with the
objective of raising the economic growth potential to at least 5 per cent over a six-year period. It
BIS Review   13/1999
– 4 –
is admitted that some of the strategies provided for in the 1996 GEAR document may need some
revision  in  light  of  recent  economic  developments,  but  the  essence  of  the  strategy  must  be
retained and must be pursued and implemented with determination.
In a recent study of the South African economy, economists from Goldman Sachs of New York
concluded as follows: “The GNU (Government of National Unity) successfully led the country
through the first phase of the transition (1994-98) from the apartheid era. The GNU completed a
program  of  structural  reforms,  including  progressive  current  and  capital  account  liberalization,
committed  to  respect  the  independence  of  the  SARB  (South  African  Reserve  Bank),  and
announced a development strategy emphasizing gradual fiscal consolidation.
However, a second round of structural reforms to address structural rigidities on the supply-side
of  the  economy  are  required  if  real  GDP  growth  and  employment  are  to  be  boosted  in  a
significant  and  sustainable  way.  These  reforms  include  liberalization  of  labor  markets,
completion of the trade reforms, completion of capital account liberalization, and further public
sector reform -- including an aggressive privatization program”.
3. Longer-term developments in the South African economy
Turning to the longer-term developments in the South African economy, it is interesting to note
that  some  remarkable  improvements  did  take  place  in  parts  of  the  economy  over  the  past  five
years. An analysis of a few selected key economic indicators of developments over the past ten
years (see Table 1 attached to this document) reveals the following:
• The rate of growth in real economic activity as reflected in changes in gross domestic product
increased from a yearly average of 0 per  cent in the first period (1989 to 1993) to 2 per cent
in  the  second  period  (1994  to  1998).  Similarly,  the  rate  of  growth  in  real  gross    domestic
expenditure  changed  from  minus  ½  per  cent  to  positive  growth  of  3  per  cent  per  annum.
Greater confidence was also reflected in a substantial improvement in gross domestic fixed
investment, which declined by 2½ per cent per year from 1989 to 1993, but then increased by
7 per cent per year from 1994 to 1998.  One of the emerging weaknesses in the economy is
reflected in the decline over these two periods in gross domestic saving as a percentage of
gross domestic product, from an annual average of 19 per cent in the first, to 16 per cent in
the second period.
• Where  the  economy  failed  most  was  in  the  creation  of  jobs.  Total  employment  indeed
declined by an average annual rate of 2 per cent  from 1994 to 1998, which was even worse
than  the  average  decline  of  1.3  per  cent  in  the  preceding  period  of  five  years.  Despite  the
further  increase  in  unemployment,  the  annual  rate  of  increase  in  average  real  wages  and
salaries more than doubled, from 1.7 per cent in the first, to 3.9 per cent in the second period.
• A further positive development was a dramatic switch-around in the net capital flows from
abroad -- from persistent outflows before 1994 to a  cumulative net inflow of more than R50
billion  over  the  next  five  years.  The  relatively  large  capital  inflows  made  it  possible  to
tolerate  a  deterioration  in  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments  --  from  forced
surpluses  in  the  first,  to  continuous  deficits  in  the  second  period,  reflecting  a  substantial
increase  in  total    domestic  expenditure  at  a  rate  that  outpaced  the  rate  of  growth  in  gross
domestic product. It should also be noted that, with the removal  of international boycotts and
sanctions  against  South  Africa  after  1993,  both  merchandise  imports  and  exports  started
expanding at a much higher rate.
BIS Review   13/1999
– 5 –
• A further important improvement in the economy is reflected in the decline in  the  average
annual rate of inflation, which was still in double digit territory during the first period, but
stayed comfortably below the 10 per cent level in the second.
It is obvious from an analysis of the macroeconomic statistics that, in the process of structural
adjustment, South Africa must, over the next five years, succeed in its stated objective to turn
around the trend of the past ten years for total employment to decline consistently. This remains
the most daunting challenge for the South African economy.
The forecast for possible developments over the next five years provided in Table 1 is, like all
economic forecasts, based on past trends, and on discretionary assumptions about possible future
developments. For the purpose of this forecast, it was assumed that Government will continue to
implement the GEAR strategy and will retain disciplined fiscal and monetary policies. It was also
assumed that South Africa will be able to attract a fairly substantial amount of foreign investment
funds over the next five years -- an amount at least equal to the total net inflows of the past five
years, with hopefully a greater part of it in direct instead of portfolio investment.
A  further  requirement  for  the  strategy  to  succeed  is  that  monetary  policy  will  remain  fairly
restrictive,  and  interest  rates  will  be  retained  at  a  relatively  high  level.  It  also  requires  some
further reduction in the deficit on the Budget of central government from about 4½ per cent of
gross domestic product this year to 2½ per cent in the near future.
It should, furthermore, be remembered that, apart from the shortcomings of the economy referred
to  above,  South  Africa  also  offers  many  advantages  that  provide  a  strong  basis  for  future
economic development. These include a well-developed infrastructure, sound and well-managed
financial  institutions,  sophisticated  and  modern  financial  markets,  and  highly-developed  skills
and experience in areas such as engineering, architecture, the legal professions, medical care, and
business management. Add to this the possibilities that are being opened up for an expansion of
South Africa’s economic relations with the rest of Africa, and there are many reasons for being
optimistic about the economic potential of the country.
On the assumptions made about the implementation of macroeconomic policy, and on condition
that the existing advantages present in the South African economy will be protected and further
expanded, the following forecast for possible developments in the South African economy over
the next five years does not seem to be unrealistic.
• The capacity of the economy to produce goods and services will be raised gradually to reach
a  level  of  5  per  cent  by  the  year  2004.  This  will  give  an  average  annual  rate  of  growth  in
gross domestic product of about 3 per cent over the next five years.
• Net capital inflows into the country at a rate of more than R10  billion per annum will make
it possible to maintain growth of at least 3 per cent per annum in gross domestic expenditure,
also rising gradually to about 6 per cent per year by 2004.
• This will include a continuous growth in gross domestic fixed investment at an average rate
of 4 per cent per annum.
• The  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments  will  remain  under  pressure,  and  a  rising
deficit will require more capital inflows.  Positive steps will have to be taken (in line with the
GEAR strategy) to attract more direct foreign investment into the country.
BIS Review   13/1999
– 6 –
 Inflation will decline gradually and will come in line with the level of inflation in the major
industrial countries of the world.
• The process of gradually removing exchange controls will be completed, and South Africa
will become even more integrated in the world economy.
• South Africa’s leading economic role in Southern Africa will be firmly established through
SADC, and will gradually expand beyond the Southern Africa region.
It must be expected that the path of economic development in South Africa over the next five
years will not be a smooth one. The structural economic reforms, further integration in the world
economy,  and  the  continuing  socio-political  reforms  in  the  country  will  all  at  times  have  a
destabilising  effect  on  the  domestic  economy.  It  will  be  extremely  difficult  at  this  stage  to
provide any sensible year-to-year forecast of possible developments in the economy. The attempt
to take a longer-term perspective covering the next five years, therefore, makes more sense.
The forecast also indicates that total employment in the country should soon start rising, although
it will still require a major effort to make up for existing backlogs.
4. Conclusion
Based on a short-term analysis, the South African economy is rather depressed at this stage, and
is  very  dependent  on  some  improvement  in  the  international  economic  environment  for
sustainable recovery.
An analysis of developments in a few important macroeconomic aggregates reveals significant
improvements  in  the  performance  of  the  overall  economy  over  the  past  five  years,  but  also
exposes a few structural weaknesses that must be addressed urgently in order to raise the total
production capacity.
Finally, if well-managed, the South African economy has the potential of making further steady
progress over the next five years to reach the objective of at least 5 per cent growth per annum,
and of creating more jobs.
Should the country want to achieve more ambitious targets in the next five years, and I believe
even that would be possible, we shall, in the words of the Goldman Sachs economists, have to
apply the same strategies, but with less timidity, and more aggression.
BIS Review   13/1999
– 7 –
Table l: Selected Key Economic Indicators
(Average annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)
                                         1989 to    1994 to     1999 to
                                            1993       1998       2003*
    1. Real gross domestic product             0         +2          +3
    2. Real gross domestic                    -½         +3          +3
    expenditure
    3. Real gross domestic fixed             -2½         +7          +4
    investment
    4. Ratio of gross domestic              19         16         ...
    saving to gdp
    5. Employment                           -1.3       -2.0          +1
    6. Real salaries and wages per          +1.7       +3.9         1.5
    worker
    7. Balance of payments (R
    billions)
                                        +R 5.2b    -R 7.9b       -R 9b
       * Current account (average)       -R26.6b    +R50.9b         ...
       * Capital account
         (cumulative total)
    8. Merchandise
       * Imports                            +2.2      +9.2           +7
       * Exports (including gold)           +2.9       +6.4          +5
    9. Consumer prices                     +13.6       +8.1         5.5
    10. Prime overdraft rate of            19.2%      18.9%        15.5
    banks (level)
    11. Central Government Budget            4.9        5.1         2.5
    deficit as % of gdp
     *Forecast
 BIS Review   13/1999
– 8 –
BIS Review   13/1999
