Mr Brash addresses the question of inflation targeting: is New Zealand’s experience relevant to
developing countries?
Text  of  the  sixth  L  K  Jha  Memorial  Lecture  given  by  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New
Zealand, Dr Donald T Brash, in Mumbai on 17 June 1999.
Introduction
Mr Governor, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am deeply honoured to have been invited to give this sixth Memorial Lecture in memory of Shri L K
Jha.
I never had the privilege of meeting L K Jha, although I did visit India in the late 1960s when he was
Governor of the Reserve Bank of India and I was a staff member of the Commission on International
Development – better known as the Pearson Commission. But from all that I have read of him he was
one of India’s most distinguished sons – an economist of distinction, a Governor of the Reserve Bank
of  India,  a  distinguished  diplomat,  a  respected  leader  in  the  Indian  Civil  Service,  the  Deputy
Chairman of the Brandt Commission, Chairman of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in the
late 1950s, Governor of Jammu and Kashmir, and so much more. He was, too, an ardent supporter of
liberalisation,  and  had  no  doubt  that,  in  the  long  run,  it  would  improve  the  competitiveness  of  the
Indian economy to the benefit of the Indian people. He would, I am sure, have been an enthusiastic
supporter of many of the changes in India’s economy in recent years, while no doubt urging a still
faster rate of progress.
I am also honoured to have been invited to give this Lecture by my good friend, Dr Bimal Jalan. I
mentioned a moment ago that, in the late 1960s, when L K Jha was Governor of the Reserve Bank of
India, I was a staff member of the Pearson Commission. Dr Bimal Jalan was also a staff member of
the Commission at that time. And since there were only 13 of us on the staff in total, Dr Jalan and I
got  to  know  each  other  very  well.  I  developed  a  very  healthy  respect  for  him,  and  indeed  a  strong
friendship with him, at that time. Our paths have diverged in the years since then, and it is for this
reason  a  particular  pleasure  to  be  here  in  Mumbai  at  a  time  when  he  has  assumed  the  enormous
responsibility of guiding India’s central bank.
The  Governor  has  suggested  that  I  talk  today  about  inflation  targeting  in  New  Zealand,  and  in
particular  comment  on  whether  New  Zealand’s  experience  with  inflation  targeting  might  be  of
relevance to developing countries. I am delighted to do that. But let me say at the very beginning that,
while New Zealand’s experience with inflation targeting has, I believe, been a positive one, I do not
want  to  lecture  you,  or  developing  countries  more  generally,  about  what  is  best  for  you  or  other
developing countries. Every country has circumstances and traditions which are a little different and,
while I believe that inflation targeting is an approach to monetary policy formulation which deserves
serious consideration, the ultimate decision about how best to run monetary policy must obviously be
made by each country in the light of their circumstances and traditions.
The background to New Zealand’s move to explicit inflation targeting
To understand why we in New Zealand moved to inflation targeting, it is worth recalling some of the
history. It has some similarities to the experiences of other countries recently.
Prior  to  the  mid-1980s,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  was  closely  modelled  on  the  Bank  of
England. We provided advice to the Minister of Finance, but the day-to-day decisions on monetary
policy were made by him. The legislation under which we operated required us, in formulating our
advice, to have regard for the inflation rate, employment, growth, and a range of other good things.
1
BIS Review   78/1999
And the result? We never experienced hyper-inflation, but we did have one of the worst inflation rates
among OECD countries (above 10 per cent per annum for more than a decade). Importantly for the
subsequent political recognition that such inflation did not enable us to grow any faster, our growth
rate was the lowest in the OECD. Monetary policy followed a cycle which looked suspiciously like
the  three-yearly  election  cycle.  And  in  1984,  the  whole  business  culminated  in  a  foreign  exchange
crisis  which  looks  in  retrospect  remarkably  like  some  of  those  experienced  in  East  Asia  in  recent
times  -  where  the  previously-pegged  exchange  rate  came  under  huge  pressure  and  eventually  gave
way. The economic damage inflicted by that crisis on the balance sheets of banks and corporates was
relatively mild compared with the damage which has been sustained in, say, Thailand or Indonesia,
but  that  was  partly  because  the  Government  itself  had,  through  the  Reserve  Bank,  sold  a  lot  of
forward  exchange  contracts.  Honouring  those  contracts  was  very  expensive  for  New  Zealand
taxpayers.
So what to do then? Initially, we devalued and began freeing up the financial sector. In March 1985,
we floated the New Zealand dollar with the explicit objective of enabling monetary policy to focus on
the single objective of reducing inflation, without having that objective complicated by concerns for
maintaining a fixed exchange rate. While still formally simply advisers to the Minister of Finance, the
Reserve Bank was given clear instructions by the Minister that we now had the single objective of
achieving price stability, and that he had no interest in knowing the mechanics of how we achieved it.
We were given de facto independence.
Not long afterwards, the Minister asked the Bank to suggest ways in which it might be  possible  to
change the legislative framework in order to prevent the cynical manipulation of monetary policy for
short-term political objectives by any future government. So we set about studying the literature on
central banking, and examining the relationship between governments and central banks in other parts
of the world.
The 1989 Act
What emerged from this study was the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989, which became law on
1 February 1990. It was based on six principles:
•  Monetary policy does affect the inflation rate, but can not successfully be used to engineer a
sustainably higher rate of economic growth or a sustainably higher level of employment. This
principle  was  absolutely  fundamental,  and  of  course  was  totally  at  variance  with  the
assumption underlying previous legislation. It was at variance also with much of the post-war
orthodoxy, which assumed that there was an enduring trade-off between inflation on the one
hand  and  employment  and  growth  on  the  other,  that  countries  could  choose  to  have  low
inflation with high unemployment or, more likely, could choose to have a bit more inflation in
the  interests  of  getting  a  bit  more  growth.  (This  view  had  been  deeply  entrenched  in  New
Zealand, perhaps because the economist whose name is often, unfairly, associated with this
belief, Bill Phillips, was New Zealand’s best known economist.) But it was clear well before
our  legislation  was  passed  that  there  is  no  such  enduring  trade-off,  that,  in  the  jargon,  the
long-run Phillips curve is vertical. Our own experience prior to 1984 - of high inflation and
very poor growth - demonstrated the point conclusively.
•  Secondly, in these circumstances, where there is no enduring trade-off between inflation and
growth,  the  most  sensible  inflation  rate  for  monetary  policy  to  target  is  price  stability.  By
1989,  quite  a  lot  of  empirical  work  had  already  been  done  in  a  variety  of  countries  which
suggested that high inflation was damaging to economic performance, and that low inflation,
or price stability, was beneficial. We did not have the benefit of some of the recent studies of
course,  debating  the  relative  merits  of  price  stability  and  ‘low  but  positive’  inflation  rates
(often associated with the names of economists such as Paul Krugman, and Akerlof, Dickens,
and Perry). But price stability in some sense seemed the appropriate goal, and the 1989 Act
BIS Review   78/1999
2
makes the Bank responsible for using monetary policy for the single objective of ‘achieving
and maintaining stability in the general level of prices’.
•  Thirdly, in a democratic society, it is appropriate that the elected government have an explicit
role in defining what ‘price stability’ means, and the speed at which it should be achieved.
This  seemed  to  follow  from  the  fact  that,  while  there  is  no  long-term  trade-off  between
inflation  and  growth,  there  is  clearly  a  trade-off  in  the  short-term.  Hence,  the  1989  Act
required there to be a written agreement, a Policy Targets Agreement, between the Minister of
Finance and the Governor of the Bank, signed on the appointment or re-appointment of the
Governor,  giving  specific  content  to  ‘stability  in  the  general  level  of  prices’.  This  gave
government an explicit role in defining the objective of monetary policy, subject to the need
to have that objective consistent with some reasonable interpretation of the statutory objective
of ‘stability in the general level of prices’. Moreover, the Act provided that the Policy Targets
Agreement  could  be  changed  during  the  course  of  a  Governor’s  term  of  office  by  mutual
agreement of the Minister and the Governor. Indeed, where Minister and Governor can not
agree,  the  Act  provides  for  an  ‘over-ride’  whereby,  if  the  government  feels  circumstances
warrant  the  complete  abandonment  of  the  price  stability  objective,  the  Policy  Targets
Agreement can be set aside, by the unilateral decision of the government, for a period of 12
months. The first Policy Targets Agreement defined our target as inflation of between 0 and 2
per cent annually, as measured by the CPI, achieved before the end of 1992.1
•  The fourth principle on which the 1989 Act was built was based on the observed fact that,
internationally,  central  banks  which  are  independent  of  political  control  seem  to  do  a  very
much better job of keeping inflation low than do central banks which are subject to political
direction. So the Act provides that, once the Policy Targets Agreement between Minister and
Governor  has  been  signed,  the  Governor  should  be  entirely  independent  in  the  formulation
and implementation of monetary policy. The Governor has absolutely no obligation to consult
with  the  Minister,  with  the  Treasury,  or  indeed  with  the  Board  of  the  Bank.  Note  that  the
combination  of  these  two  principles  -  of  political  involvement  in  the  definition  of  the
objective of monetary policy but complete independence on how that objective is achieved -
made the New Zealand approach internationally unique at that time. We were neither to enjoy
the  complete  independence  of  the  Federal  Reserve  or  the  Bundesbank  nor  to  suffer  the
complete political subservience of the Bank of England (at that time) or of our own history. A
clear distinction was made between goal independence and instrument independence - we had
the latter but not the former.
•  But,  fifthly,  it  was  taken  as  axiomatic  that,  with  total  instrument  independence  should  go
accountability,  and  the  1989  Act  required  that  in  two  main  ways.  First,  the  Governor  was
required to provide a comprehensive report to Parliament at least six-monthly, explaining how
he  saw  the  inflation  situation  and  how  monetary  policy  would  be  conducted  to  ensure  that
 1 
It is not entirely clear where our original target of 0 to 2 per cent annual inflation came from.  It has
been said that its source was a capricious remark by the Minister of Finance who, when confronted by
journalists  wanting  to  know  whether  he  was  ‘finally  satisfied’  that  price  stability  had  been  achieved
when the CPI first fell below 10 per cent, responded that ‘No, I’m aiming at genuine price stability –
you know, something like 0 to 2 per cent’.  That may or may not be true, but it is certainly clear that
well before the 1989 legislation was passed, in early 1988, the Minister was publicly espousing a target
of 0 to 2 per cent inflation as the Reserve Bank’s only monetary policy objective.  By 1989, the Bank’s
Annual  Report  referred  to  our  objective  of  achieving  such  an  inflation  rate  no  later  than  the  end  of
1992.   By  then,  the  target  was  not  the  capricious  observation  of  the  Minister  of  Finance  but  a  well-
justified definition of price stability in a situation where we suspected measurement bias in the CPI of
about 1 per cent;  in other words, 0 to 2 per cent was regarded as ‘genuine price stability plus or minus 1
per cent’.
3
BIS Review   78/1999
price stability was maintained. (We now produce these so-called Monetary Policy Statements
four times a year, and I am examined on them on almost every occasion by the Finance and
Expenditure Committee of Parliament.) Secondly, the Act provided that the Governor can be
dismissed for all the usual reasons (bankruptcy, criminal conviction, insanity, and so on) and
for ‘inadequate performance’ in meeting the terms of the Policy Targets Agreement. The Act
does  not  provide  that  I  am  dismissed  automatically  for  the  slightest  breach  of  the  inflation
target,  but  the  threat  of  dismissal  for  breaching  the  target  certainly  focuses  the  mind!
(Incidentally,  as  already  mentioned,  the  Policy  Targets  Agreement  is  between  the  Minister
and  the  Governor,  not  between  the  Minister  and  the  Bank,  and  it  is  the  Governor  who  has
decision-making freedom not, technically, the Bank. And  that  was  quite  deliberate.  When  I
questioned the Minister on this when the legislation was being drafted, he replied ‘We can’t
fire the Bank. We can’t even realistically fire the whole Board. But we sure as hell can fire
you!’)
•  Finally,  the  1989  Act  mandated  a  very  high  level  of  transparency.  The  Act  transparently
requires that monetary policy be focused on the single objective of achieving and maintaining
stability in the general level of prices. The Act  transparently  requires  that  the  Minister  and
Governor agree a Policy Targets Agreement, and that that  Agreement immediately be made
public. The  Act  transparently  requires  that  any  change  to  the  Policy  Targets  Agreement  be
made  public  immediately,  whether  agreed  by  Minister  and  Governor  or  arising  from  the
‘over-ride provision’. The Act transparently requires the Governor to report to Parliament on
a regular basis. And it is almost impossible to overstate the importance of this transparency. It
is  this  above  all  which  prevents  the  cynical  manipulation  of  monetary  policy  for  political
ends. The Act explicitly allows the inflation target to be modified provided the government is
willing to tell the public that that is being done. The obligation to tell the public about any
change in the target effectively means that monetary policy can not be used for political ends,
because  monetary  policy  achieves  short-term  increases  in  economic  activity  largely  by
producing  surprise  inflation.  It  is  hard  to  see  what  political  gain  would  be  achieved  by  a
government which announced, in an election year, that the inflation target was to be increased
to,  say,  5  to  8  per  cent.  The  effect  on  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate  would  not  be
conducive to winning votes!
The results
So that was the framework established by the 1989 Act, and we have now completed more than one
full business cycle within that framework. Looking back from the experience of a decade, I believe it
has served us very well. It clearly makes sense to focus monetary policy on delivering price stability.
It clearly makes sense in my view to give the elected government a say in defining what price stability
should mean during the Governor’s term of office. It makes sense to make the Governor or the Bank
independent to make the technical judgements on how to deliver the agreed objective. It makes sense
to  hold  the  Bank  or  the  Governor  accountable  for  the  outcomes.  And  it  certainly  makes  sense  that
both  the  objectives  and  the  modus  operandi  of  policy  are  clearly  understood  by  the  public  and
financial markets.
It is not possible, of course, to be dogmatic about the contribution which this framework has made to
the  reduction  of  inflation  in  New  Zealand.  Many  other  countries  have  also  maintained  inflation  at
very  low  levels  during  the  1990s.  Nobody  can  be  sure  how  inflation  would  have  evolved  in  New
Zealand without the framework established by that Act. Some academic commentators have pointed
out that inflation was already falling quite strongly before the 1989 Act was enacted.
But in my own view, the framework was of major benefit in the New Zealand context, where we had
had two decades of very poor inflation performance. Yes, inflation was falling quite strongly prior to
the  1989  Act  becoming  law  on  1  February  1990,  but  of  course  the  Bank  had  been  acting  under
instructions from the Minister to focus exclusively on reducing inflation since at least 1985, and to
BIS Review   78/1999
4
focus  on  achieving  a  0  to  2  per  cent  target  since  April  1988.  We  had  also  enjoyed  complete
operational  independence  since  the  mid-1980s.  Little  wonder,  then,  that  inflation  was  falling:  de
facto, we had had an explicit inflation-targeting regime several years before the 1989 law was passed
in December of that year.
As Figure 1 above illustrates, inflation as measured by the CPI (excluding the estimated impact of our
Goods and Services Tax and of interest rates, which in New Zealand are still included in the CPI) fell
steadily in the late 1980s, and reached the inflation target by the end of 1991. The graph also shows
what until late 1997 we referred to as ‘underlying inflation’, which was short-hand for the measure of
inflation consistent with the intention of the Policy Targets Agreement (which permits us to disregard
price  shocks  arising  from  certain  changes  in  indirect  taxation,  significant  changes  in  the  terms  of
trade, changes in mortgage rates, and so on). That measure of inflation remained consistently within
the then 0 to 2 per cent target from 1991 until June 1995, despite economic growth in 1993-95 which,
by New Zealand standards, was exceptionally high. We exceeded the inflation target by 0.2 per cent
in the year to June 1995, in part because of a very sharp spike in the prices of fruit and vegetables,
returned  to  the  target  for  the  next  six  months,  and  then  exceeded  the  target  by  a  small  margin
throughout 1996. Our target was changed, by mutual agreement, to 0 to 3 per cent in December 1996,
and in the year to March 1999 CPI inflation excluding interest rates was slightly below the middle of
our target (at 1.0 per cent). So for more than eight years consumer price inflation has been within a
range of 0 to 3 per cent, and for most of that time it has in fact been below 2 per cent.
I believe that the  framework  established  by  the  1989  Act  has  also  played  a  useful  role  in  reducing
inflationary  expectations  in  New  Zealand.  Again,  it  is  difficult  to  prove  this  point  because  nobody
knows how inflationary expectations would have evolved in the absence of the Act. But I believe it
helped  increase  the  credibility  of  the  Bank’s  commitment  to  low  inflation  that  it  was  widely
understood that I ran a serious risk of losing my job if inflation fell outside the agreed and publicly-
recognised  inflation  target.  On  each  of  the  occasions  in  1995  and  1996  when  inflation  slightly
exceeded the 0 to 2 per cent target (and at its highest the excess was only 0.4 per cent), the Minister of
Finance formally wrote to the non-executive Directors of the Bank asking them whether they felt my
performance  under  the  terms  of  the  Policy  Targets  Agreement  had  been  adequate.  Both  the  letters
from the Minister and the replies from the Directors of the Bank were made public, and everybody
understood what was at stake.
In late 1990, not many months after the 1989 Act became law, the head of the New Zealand Council
of Trade Unions wrote an article which appeared in one of the major newspapers2. The article argued
                                                     
2 
The Dominion, 31 October 1990.
5
BIS Review   78/1999
that the Reserve Bank was focused on an undesirably narrow inflation objective, but that, as long as
that was the case, unions would need to moderate wage demands to avoid increases in unemployment.
In  the  weeks  which  followed,  he  actively,  and  with  very  considerable  courage,  campaigned  for
moderate wage settlements as a way of reducing  unemployment.  I  myself  have  little  doubt  that  the
Reserve Bank Act played a part in encouraging employers and unions to adjust their wage settlements
to levels which were quite quickly consistent with the inflation target.
The  same  sort  of  effect  on  inflationary  expectations  was  visible  in  financial  markets.  As  Figure  2
shows, in early 1986 the yield on New Zealand government New Zealand dollar 10 year bonds was
roughly  1000  basis  points  above  the  yield  on  US  Treasuries.  By  early  1990,  that  margin  had
contracted  to  about  400  basis  points.  By  early  1994,  the  yield  on  the  New  Zealand  government
securities  was  marginally  below  that  on  US  Treasuries.  In  the  last  few  years,  the  yield  on  New
Zealand 10 year bonds has typically been a little higher than on US Treasuries, but the margin looks
trivial in relation to that in the mid-1980s.
Another  of  the  interesting  by-products  of  the  inflation-targeting  regime  has,  I  believe,  been  some
stabilisation of the New Zealand dollar exchange rate. I don’t want to overstate this: the New Zealand
dollar has been through some pretty big swings in recent years. Against the US dollar, we appreciated
by nearly 40 per cent between the beginning of 1993 and the beginning of 1997; and then we lost all
of that appreciation (which means that we declined in percentage terms by nearly 30 per cent) over
the  next  18  months.  But  on  a  day-to-day  and  week-to-week  basis,  fluctuations  in  the  New  Zealand
exchange rate have been rather less than those experienced by many other floating currencies - and
this in a situation where the Reserve Bank has not intervened in the foreign exchange market for more
than 14 years (since we floated in March 1985).
Why  is  this?  I  think  it  is  because  financial  markets  understand  that,  with  a  very  explicit  inflation
target, there is a limit to how much movement we will accept in the exchange rate before we look to
see some offsetting change in interest rates. No, we do not have an exchange rate target. We have an
inflation target. But in a small open economy such as ours, no central bank with a commitment to low
inflation can be indifferent to major movements in the exchange rate.
This  is  because  the  exchange  rate  has  important  direct  and  indirect  influence  over  prices.  Most
importantly, a change in the exchange rate alters the demand for locally-produced goods and services,
thereby altering domestic inflation pressures. Of course, the difficulty for a central bank is to know
BIS Review   78/1999
6
exactly why the exchange rate changes. This has important implications for the appropriate monetary
policy  response.  Thus,  if  a  sharp  movement  in  the  exchange  rate  seems  to  be  related  to,  say,  an
adverse development in our external markets, as has been the case over much of the last two years,
then we may judge that the adverse external development will have sufficient disinflationary impact
on  the  economy  to  offset  the  inflationary  impact  of  an  exchange  rate  depreciation,  so  that  no
offsetting  increase  in  interest  rates  is  necessary.  Conversely,  if  the  exchange  rate  change  simply
reflects some shift  in  investor  preferences,  with  no  justification  in  the  real  economy,  then  inflation
pressures will have changed, and some adjustment in monetary policy will normally be appropriate.
A fourth contribution of the framework established by the 1989 Act was, I think it is fair to say, an
improvement  in  fiscal  policy.  Again,  I  don’t  want  to  overstate  this  point:  there  were  a  number  of
factors driving an improvement in New Zealand’s previously rather poor record of fiscal performance,
including some very determined Ministers of Finance. But the monetary policy framework played a
useful  part.  This  first  became  apparent  in  1990  when  the  then-Government  introduced  an
expansionary  Budget  not  long  before  the  general  election  that  year.  We  judged  that  that  degree  of
fiscal  stimulus  would  require  us  to  tighten  monetary  policy  somewhat  if  inflation  (then  running  at
over 5 per cent) was to be brought down to the 0 to 2 per cent target by 1992; so we did. Immediately,
an editorial in  New  Zealand’s  largest  daily  paper  noted  that  the  Budget  had  ‘rekindled  inflationary
expectations. The (Reserve Bank) was bound to lift interest rates…. Electors are frequently bribed to
their  ultimate  cost.  This  time  the  independence  of  responsible  monetary  control  quickly  exposes  a
fiscal fraud.’3  The main Opposition party campaigned in the election on a commitment to get interest
rates reduced, not by leaning on the central bank but by ‘giving monetary policy some mates’ through
tighter fiscal policy and deregulation of the labour market.
Five years later, with several years of fiscal surplus behind it, the Government undertook to reduce
income taxes subject to several conditions, one of which was that the Reserve Bank was satisfied that
such tax cuts would not require a significant tightening of monetary policy.
To me, this is a good illustration of the benefit of having the precise specification of the objective of
monetary  policy  a  matter  for  formal  and  public  agreement  between  Government  and  Bank.  The
Government makes a public commitment to the agreed inflation objective. It implicitly accepts that, if
its  fiscal  policy  increases  inflationary  pressures,  the  Bank  will  need  to  tighten  monetary  policy  to
ensure that the agreed objective is met. The Bank is protected from political pressure to ease monetary
policy as long as the inflation rate is, and looks likely to remain, above the bottom of the inflation
target range.
In  contrast  to  these  positive  benefits  from  the  1989  Act,  some  people  have  noted  that  in  the  early
1990s New Zealand also saw quite a strong increase in unemployment and a downturn in output, and
have suggested that the Reserve Bank must accept the blame for that.
I know of no cases internationally where inflation has been reduced from a relatively high level to a
very  low  level  without  some  temporary  adverse  impact  on  employment  and  output,  and  New
Zealand’s  experience  was  no  different.  Indeed,  I  have  often  acknowledged  that  the  process  of
reducing  inflation  from  a  high  level  to  a  low  level  almost  certainly  had  the  effect  of  temporarily
reducing employment and output. But I certainly am not willing to accept that the process of reducing
inflation was the only factor in reducing employment and output in New Zealand in the early 1990s,
since a great many other policies had also been changed at about that time. While most of those other
policy  changes  were  highly  desirable  in  the  interests  of  the  long-term  growth  of  the  New  Zealand
economy - reductions in protection against imports, reductions in subsidies for exports, privatisation
and rationalisation of many heavily over-staffed government trading operations, for example - many
of them also had adverse short-term impacts on employment and output. For this reason, attempts to
 3  New Zealand Herald editorial, 3 August 1990.
7
BIS Review   78/1999
calculate  the  ‘sacrifice  ratio’  involved  in  reducing  inflation  in  New  Zealand  are  almost  inevitably
doomed to failure.
What  we  know  is  that  employment  and  output  both  fell  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s.  What  we
acknowledge is that the process of reducing inflation was a part of the reason for that. What we do not
accept  is  that  monetary  policy  was  the  only  factor  in  that  outcome.  Moreover,  as  theory  suggested
would be the case, once wage- and price-setting behaviour adjusted to the new, low, level of inflation,
employment and output both recovered quite quickly, with unemployment declining from almost 11
per cent in 1991 to 6 per cent in 1996. In other words, the increase in unemployment was a result of
the process of reducing inflation from a high level to a low level, not a result of maintaining inflation
at a low level. While unemployment has recently risen to over 7 per cent of the work-force, it remains
well below its 1992 peak, and well below that in most of the countries of Europe, notwithstanding the
impact  on  production  and  exports  of  the  Asian  crisis  and  two  successive  years  of  drought.  We  are
confident that, provided inflation expectations remain broadly consistent with the inflation target, low
inflation can be maintained without any ongoing cost in terms of employment or output.
Interestingly,  a  recent  paper  produced  by  the  IMF4  suggests  that  inflation-targeting  countries  as  a
group  have  recently  improved  their  rate  of  economic  growth  compared  to  countries  which  are  not
inflation-targeters.  Certainly,  New  Zealand’s  growth  performance  relative  to  other  OECD  countries
has been markedly better in the 1990s than in the previous two decades, although given all the other
economic  reforms  which  took  place  in  New  Zealand  in  the  late  1980s  and  early  1990s  it  would
certainly  be  inappropriate  to  attribute  that  improved  growth  performance  primarily  to  the  inflation
targeting regime.
As an aside, it is perhaps worth stressing what has come as something of a surprise to some people in
New  Zealand  and  that  is  that  our  inflation  range  has  both  a  top  and  a  bottom.  One  of  our  central
banking colleagues once said to me that he thought that any fool could get inflation below 2 per cent
by simply keeping monetary policy tight at all times. I agreed. But that is assuredly not the way we
see inflation targeting, and of course it is not the way our inflation target is specified. Our obligation,
currently, is to keep inflation below 3 per cent and above zero. I would not expect to be dismissed the
instant inflation fell below zero, any more than I was dismissed when there was a small breach of the
top of the target. Indeed, the Policy Targets Agreement recognises that there may be quite legitimate
reasons  why  inflation  may,  on  occasions,  move  outside  the  0  to  3  per  cent  target  range.  But  there
would  certainly  be  questions  asked  if  inflation  fell  below  zero,  and  I  would  need  to  have  a  good
explanation  of  that  outcome.  We  began  easing  monetary  policy  in  December  1996  –  and  eased
aggressively throughout 1998 - precisely because we take the bottom of the target as seriously as we
take the top. 
 4  Brooks, Ray, ‘Inflation and Monetary Policy Reform’, in Australia:  Benefiting from Economic Reform,
1998.
BIS Review   78/1999
8
The formulation of monetary policy
Let me talk briefly about the actual achievement of the agreed inflation target, about the formulation
of  monetary  policy.  Does  an  inflation-targeting  framework  help  in  the  actual  delivery  of  price
stability? I think it does, in three ways.
First, having an explicit inflation target is useful in anchoring inflation expectations and thus affecting
wage- and price-setting behaviour. I have already mentioned that in the discussion of the results of the
adoption of the new framework. We in the Reserve Bank devote a very considerable amount of energy
to  explaining  what  we  are  doing  and  why,  not  just  to  the  financial  markets  but  to  the  public  more
widely - groups of farmers, manufacturers, Rotarians,  teachers,  lawyers,  anybody  who  will  listen.  I
myself do more than 100 speeches all over the country in an average year, and my colleagues do a
great many also. Perhaps six or eight of these speeches will be on-the-record, and these we will post
to an extensive mailing list of Parliamentarians, business executives, school teachers, and so on. We
produce our quarterly Monetary Policy Statements, and a series of brochures and pamphlets, many of
them  written  in  question-and-answer  format,  designed  to  deal  with  the  monetary  policy  issues  of
greatest concern to the public. We have an Internet site, quite comprehensive and regularly updated,
receiving  over  20,000  hits  per  week  at  this  stage.  All  of  this  communications  work  is  designed  to
strengthen the credibility of the inflation target and thus both to increase the likelihood of achieving
the target and to minimise any social cost in doing so.
Secondly, having  an  explicit  inflation  target  provides  a  very  useful  discipline  on  the  Reserve  Bank
itself, and helps considerably in keeping our deliberations focused. I have been at the Bank for little
more than 10 years, during all of which time we have had an inflation target. But I am told by those of
my  colleagues  who  remember  the  days  before  we  had  an  explicit  inflation  target  that  prior  to  the
introduction of that target monetary policy discussions, and decisions, were very much more difficult.
Those making the decisions and expressing the opinions often had a range of spoken and unspoken
objectives in mind, some of them consistent and some of them inconsistent. Dr Mervyn King, Deputy
Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  has  reported  the  same  change  in  discussions  at  the  Bank  of
England. With a clear directive from the British Government to keep inflation as close as possible to
2.5  per  cent,  the  members  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee  focus  on  that
objective. It matters not whether the Committee members are ‘doves’ or ‘hawks’. Indeed, the terms
have  no  meaning  in  the  context  of  an  inflation  target  agreed  with  government.  The  central  bank
decision-makers are being asked to use their expertise and judgement to deliver an agreed target, not
to express a view about whether the target should be higher or lower.
Thirdly, having an explicit inflation target often goes hand in hand with public inflation forecasting,
and does so in our case. This has led Dr Lars Svensson of Sweden to suggest that central banks which
do this are effectively making their inflation forecasts into a kind of instrument of monetary policy5.
This certainly seems to be a fair characterisation of the role of our own inflation projections. Because
financial markets know that we will, if need be, adjust our Official Cash Rate whenever we judge that
monetary conditions are no longer consistent with maintaining the price stability target, markets are
constantly weighing new economic data trying to assess its implications for the inflation target, with
the  exchange  rate  and  interest  rates  adjusting  on  a  real-time  basis  with  the  inflation  objective
constantly in view.
But alas, inflation targeting does not guarantee that a central bank practising it will be able to deliver
consistently low inflation. All the debates about how to formulate monetary policy in order to deliver
the best outcomes are still relevant. Should we use monetary aggregates? Should we use Taylor rules?
 5 
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.,  ‘Inflation  forecast  targeting:   Implementing  and  monitoring  inflation  targets’,
European Economic Review, Vol. 41, 1997, pp.1111-1146.
9
BIS Review   78/1999
Should we simply adjust interest rates so that the exchange rate moves in such a way that the direct
price effects of the change in the exchange rate produce the desired effect on the domestic price level?
In our own case, we used to be rather strongly focused on the direct price effects of changes in the
exchange rate. This was early on in the disinflation process, at a time when inflation was high and
there was no ambiguity about the need to reduce it, at a time when we thought we could see a clear
relationship  between  movements  in  the  exchange  rate  and  domestic  prices,  and  at  a  time  when,  by
contrast, we found it very difficult to measure the effects of interest rate changes on the inflation rate.
This did not mean that we had an exchange rate target in the conventional sense, but rather that, after
making our best estimate of all the factors affecting prices in the domestic economy, we ‘solved’ for
the  exchange  rate  which  would  keep  inflation  within  the  target  range.  So,  for  example,  when
inflationary pressures were strong we judged that there was a need for the exchange rate to appreciate
somewhat  in  order  to  reduce  the  prices  of  imports  and  exportables.  And  vice  versa.  The  financial
markets understood this approach, and as a result the exchange rate tended to move very much in line
with the need to keep inflation on target.
In the early 1990s, this primary focus on the direct price effects of exchange rate movements got us
into  some  difficulty.  Interest  rates  were  allowed  to  fall  to  very  low  levels,  in  part  because,  as
indicated,  we  did  not  take  interest  rates  as  seriously  as  we  took  the  exchange  rate  in  the  price
formation  process.  At  least  in  part  as  a  consequence,  the  economy  accelerated  somewhat  above  a
sustainable level, and inflation pushed to, and eventually slightly above, the top of the inflation target.
We  recognised  that  we  had  to  pay  more  attention  to  the  impact  of  interest  rates,  and  this  in  turn
caused us to start looking rather further into the future, in formulating policy, than had been necessary
when  we  were  primarily  focused  on  the  direct  price  effects  of  exchange  rate  movements  (most  of
which came through into consumer prices within two to four quarters).
In recent years, we have developed what we believe to be a sophisticated model of the New Zealand
economy which seeks to answer one question: given all we know about the structure of the economy,
about the present state of the economy (and in particular the gap between actual and potential output),
about the stance of fiscal policy, about wage behaviour, about prospects for the international economy
(clearly of huge importance for a small country like New Zealand), and so on, what are the monetary
conditions required to deliver inflation to somewhere close to the middle part of our inflation target in
six to eight quarters’ time?
Nobody pretends that that is an easy question to answer, or that our model is flawless, but it seems to
us that that is the right question. Note that I referred to the ‘monetary conditions required to deliver
inflation to somewhere close to the middle part of our inflation target in six to eight quarters’ time’.
The reference to monetary conditions rather than to interest rates is a recognition that, in a small open
economy, as I have already mentioned, a central bank committed to delivering price stability has to be
concerned  with  what  is  happening  to  the  exchange  rate,  and  not  just  what  is  happening  to  interest
rates,  since  both  affect  inflation.  (Unfortunately,  too  much  of  the  academic  literature  on  monetary
policy  has  been  written  by  economists  in  the  United  States,  an  economy  where,  because  of  the
relatively small share of international trade, the exchange rate can be, and has been, largely ignored in
thinking about monetary policy issues.)
But the reference to delivering inflation to ‘somewhere close to the middle part of our inflation target
in six to eight quarters’ time’ is a recognition that what we should be mainly concerned about is not
the direct price effects of movements in the exchange rate but rather the longer  term  effects  which
arise out of the way in which changes in the exchange rate affect the demand for goods and services
produced  locally.  Thus,  for  example,  a  depreciation  in  the  exchange  rate  will  have  two  kinds  of
effects on local prices. First, it will tend to push up prices for imports and exportables as the local
currency equivalent of unchanged international prices increases. In New Zealand, these price effects
tend to come through into consumer prices within about a year. We can not entirely ignore these price
BIS Review   78/1999
10
effects because of the risk that they spill over into inflationary expectations and thus into wage- and
price-setting behaviour.
But the more enduring impact of an exchange rate depreciation is its second effect. The depreciation
makes  domestically-produced  goods  cheaper  relative  to  internationally-produced  goods,  as  already
noted. As a result, local residents tend to buy domestically-produced goods in preference to imports.
Foreigners  tend  to  buy  more  of  our  exports.  Both  factors  increase  the  demand  for  our  output  and
increase local production relative to the economy’s sustainable capacity to supply. This in  turn  has
medium-term implications for the inflation rate.
Clearly, this approach does not guarantee that we will make no mistakes. No approach can do that for
the  obvious  reason  that  monetary  policy  works  with  ‘long  and  variable  lags’  and  the  future  is
inherently unknowable. But in a world where controlling inflation by targeting monetary aggregates
has been abandoned as unworkable by many central banks - and by targeting exchange rates has been
abandoned as too dangerous by most of the rest - we believe that the direct and explicit targeting of
inflation has a great deal of merit. That does not mean, of course, that we pay no attention to monetary
aggregates, and it certainly does not mean that we pay no attention to the exchange rate. It does mean,
however, that we look at monetary aggregates and movements in the exchange rate as two of many
important influences on the inflation rate. 
How relevant is all this to developing countries?
Let  me  turn  finally  to  a  consideration  of  whether  inflation  targeting  is  relevant  to  developing
countries. I have heard a number of people argue that it is not.
First,  it  is  sometimes  suggested  that  inflation  targeting  is  inappropriate  in  a  situation  of  so-called
‘fiscal  dominance’,  a  situation,  in  other  words,  where  the  central  bank  is  primarily  concerned  with
assisting  the  government  meet  its  need  for  revenue.  Often  this  is  a  situation  where  government’s
revenue base is very poor, and as a result the government has a heavy dependence on the ‘inflation
tax’  represented  by  seigniorage  income,  or  on  central  bank  credit.  Certainly,  in  many  developing
countries  governments  do  depend  on  seigniorage  income  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  is  true  in
developed countries. A recent study found that seigniorage income averaged between 1.4 per cent and
3.0 per cent of GDP in developing countries, compared to less than 1 per cent in developed countries6.
In New Zealand’s case, seigniorage amounts to less than 0.1 per cent of GDP.
I think it must be conceded that having a high dependence on central bank credit, or on seigniorage
income,  is  a  real  constraint  on  the  introduction  of  an  inflation  targeting  regime,  or  indeed  on  the
introduction of any other rational  monetary  policy  regime.  Having  said  that,  several  countries  have
successfully introduced inflation targeting when their central banks were still in a position of ‘fiscal
dominance’, at least where that is measured by the size of seigniorage income (Chile and the Czech
Republic are good examples). So while it may be more difficult to focus monetary policy on keeping
inflation  low  where  government  has  a  high  dependence  on  the  ‘inflation  tax’,  it  clearly  is  not
impossible.  Of  course,  to  the  extent  that  monetary  policy  is  successful  in  eliminating  inflation,  the
‘inflation  tax’  is  commensurately  reduced,  and  government  needs  to  find  alternative  sources  of
revenue.
Secondly, it is sometimes suggested that in developing countries monetary policy should be used not
just  to  attain  a  specified  inflation  rate  but  to  encourage  real  economic  growth  and  to  maintain  a
competitive  real  exchange  rate.  There  is  obviously  not  the  slightest  debate  that  encouraging  real
economic growth and maintaining a competitive real exchange rate are crucially important objectives
 6  Debelle,  G.,  Masson,  P.,  Savastano.  M.,  and  Sharma,  S.,  “Inflation  targeting  as  a  framework  for
monetary policy”, IMF Economic Issues 15,  1998.
11
BIS Review   78/1999
in most, probably in all, developing countries, indeed, probably in all countries, whether developing
or  developed.  And  it  is  accepted  that  monetary  policy  can  sometimes  stimulate  demand  and  so
encourage  real  economic  activity  in  the  short-term.  Monetary  policy  can  also  influence  the  real
exchange rate in the short-term. But there is absolutely no evidence that I am aware of that monetary
policy is able to foster a higher rate of real economic growth in the long-term except by delivering
predictably  stable  prices,  or  that  monetary  policy  is  able  to  have  any  sustainable  effect  on  the  real
exchange  rate.  While  most  of  the  evidence  for  the  inability  of  monetary  policy  to  produce  a
sustainably  faster  rate  of  economic  growth,  or  a  sustainably  more  competitive  real  exchange  rate,
relates  to  the  experience  of  developed  countries,  that  evidence  is  so  overwhelming  that  those  who
argue that monetary policy can improve real growth in the long term, or maintain a competitive real
exchange rate in the long term, in developing countries need to have some pretty cogent arguments to
support their claims. I have not myself seen those arguments.
Thirdly,  it  is  sometimes  suggested  that  inflation  targeting  is  unsuitable  for  developing  countries
because it requires a sophisticated inflation forecasting ability in the central bank, or a sophisticated
financial system, or a sophisticated measure of inflation. Certainly, a good ability to forecast inflation,
a sophisticated financial system, and a robust measure of inflation are all desirable things to have. But
when New Zealand began inflation targeting in the 1980s, we had none of those things. Far-reaching
economic  restructuring  meant  that  our  econometric  models  were  of  little  use.  The  financial  system
had just been freed from an extensive network of direct controls and was anything but sophisticated.
Our best-known measure of inflation included interest rates and house prices, and indeed it still does.
Poor  tools  make  any  monetary  policy  approach  problematic,  but  it  is  not  obvious  that  inflation
targeting is more difficult than the available alternatives.
And in any event, what are the alternatives? At a conference hosted by the Swedish central bank in
Stockholm last year, papers explored three main approaches which the European Central Bank might
take to monetary policy – money aggregate targeting, exchange rate targeting, and inflation targeting.
Most people at the conference felt that the relationship between the growth in money aggregates and
inflation  was  so  unstable,  at  least  over  policy-relevant  periods,  that  for  central  banks  to  focus
exclusively on such aggregates was likely to produce a very unstable inflation rate. It was also argued
that virtually no central banks today (the Swiss National Bank being a possible exception) do focus
exclusively on money aggregates, for precisely this reason.
Most  of  those  at  the  conference  also  accepted  that  using  monetary  policy  to  maintain  a  nominal
exchange rate peg, or even a nominal exchange rate ‘zone’, was fraught with danger. Yes, exchange
rate  targeting  has  its  advantages,  perhaps  the  most  important  being  the  ability  of  a  country  with
limited monetary policy credibility to borrow the credibility of the central bank of the country whose
currency  is  ‘targeted’.  In  certain  circumstances,  and  with  strong  institutional  and  political
commitment,  that  may  be  an  optimal  policy.  But  as  the  countries  of  East  Asia  have  recently
discovered,  and  the  United  Kingdom  and  Sweden  discovered  earlier  in  the  decade,  the  risks  are
substantial.  Pegged  exchange  rates  seem  to  attract  speculation  like  bees  to  honey  –  with  often
disastrous consequences. Pegged exchange rates seem to encourage banks and corporates to borrow
overseas in foreign currency in the belief that that is a prudent and relatively inexpensive borrowing
option – with often disastrous consequences.
Most of those at the Stockholm conference appeared to feel that inflation targeting, while in no sense
a panacea, was the most sensible policy option for the European Central Bank.
Conclusion
And that is my conclusion for developing countries also. Clearly, inflation targeting is no panacea. It
is no silver bullet. It is certainly no guarantee against monetary policy error. In many respects, it is a
mistake to think of inflation targeting as some kind of new approach to monetary policy.
BIS Review   78/1999
12
Rather, the formal and public adoption of an explicit inflation target is a frank recognition of what
monetary  policy  can  and  can  not  do;  in  other  words,  it  can  influence  the  inflation  rate.  Inflation
targeting  is  a  way  of  helping  to  anchor  inflation  expectations,  and  thus  both  to  assist  in  the
achievement  of  the  inflation  target  and  to  minimise  the  inevitable  social  and  economic  cost  of
achieving it. Through the transparency which is an essential element of an inflation targeting regime,
inflation targeting helps to ensure that central bankers and governments are held to account for their
use of one of the most misused powers developed in the 20th century.
It is hardly surprising, therefore, that an increasing number  of  countries,  developed  and  developing
alike, have adopted inflation targeting over the last decade. The developed country inflation targeters
are  well  known  –  New  Zealand,  Australia,  Canada,  the  United  Kingdom,  Sweden,  and,  until  they
joined EMU, Finland and Spain. But there are now a host of developing and transitional economies
which  have  also  adopted  inflation  targeting,  including  Albania,  Botswana,  Brazil,  Chile,  the  Czech
Republic, Israel, Jamaica, Mexico, Mongolia, and Poland. Several countries in East Asia are giving
serious consideration to the adoption of an inflation targeting approach to monetary policy. While the
optimal  approach  to  monetary  policy  will  clearly  depend  to  some  degree  on  the  traditions  and
constitutional  structure  of  individual  countries,  I  believe  that  explicit  inflation  targeting  is  an
approach which is worthy of serious consideration.
13
BIS Review   78/1999
