Mr Duisenberg discusses the Eurosystem’s strategy for the euro
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, at a conference
organised by “The Economist” in Rome on 12 March 1999.
I should like to start by thanking you for the invitation to speak here on the occasion of this
conference.  It  is  only  a  little  more  than  two  months  since  the  euro  was  launched.  Today  I
should like to discuss the main challenges for monetary policy at the start of Monetary Union.
Clearly, keeping the internal value of the euro stable is the overriding task ahead of us. With
this  in  mind  I  shall  begin  by  broadly  outlining  the  objectives  and  main  elements  of  the
monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem. I shall then turn my attention to the role that can
be  played  by  fiscal  policy  and  structural  reforms  in  supporting  the  stability  of  the  euro  and
reducing  unemployment.  Finally,  I  should  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  distribution  of
responsibilities  at  different  levels  of  economic  policy-making  with  a  view  to  maintaining
stability and growth in the euro area.
Monetary policy: objectives and strategy
Let  me  turn  to  the  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem.  The  Treaty  establishing  the
European  Community  assigns  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB)  the  primary
objective  of  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  In  order  to  guide  expectations  of
future price developments and to facilitate the public’s assessment of the success of the single
monetary policy, the Governing Council of the European Central Bank (ECB) has announced
a quantitative definition of its primary objective. This clarifies how the Treaty’s mandate is
interpreted by the Eurosystem,  that  is,  by  the  ECB  and  the  11  participating  national  central
banks (NCBs).
Price  stability  has  been  defined  as  a  year-on-year  increase  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of
Consumer  Prices  (HICP)  for  the  euro  area  of  below  2%.  Price  stability  is  to  be  maintained
over the medium term. According to the most recent available data, the annual rate of inflation
of  0.8%,  measured  on  this  harmonised  basis,  is  consistent  with  this  definition  of  price
stability.
The Treaty states that the ESCB shall support the general economic policies in the European
Community only if it can do so without prejudice to the objective of price stability. The logic
of the Treaty seems clear. It is acknowledged that the best contribution monetary policy can
make to high employment and economic growth is to maintain price stability. In this context,
it is difficult to see how certain proposals  made  in  the  ongoing  public  debate,  which  might
suggest  that  the  focus  of  monetary  policy  should  be  shifted  towards  short-term  growth  or
employment objectives, can be fulfilled without violating the primary objective of maintaining
price  stability,  thus  ultimately  producing  an  overall  deterioration  in  prospects  for  economic
growth and employment.
Monetary  policy  needs  a  forward-looking,  medium-term  orientation.  It  would  be
overambitious and therefore risky to steer the economy in the short term. Fine-tuning would
more likely lead to instability than stability. A medium-term orientation takes into account the
fact  that  monetary  policy  affects  the  price  level  only  with  variable,  usually  long  and
unpredictable  time  lags.  For  example,  a  large  proportion  of  the  substantial  reduction  in
interest  rates  during  the  second  half  of  last  year  will  still  have  an  impact  on  the  euro  area
economy. To maintain price stability, we have chosen a distinct monetary policy strategy, one
1
BIS Review   29/1999
that reflects the special circumstances that exist at present as well as those likely to prevail in
the foreseeable future. It ensures as much continuity as possible with the strategies previously
pursued  by  the  NCBs.  At  the  same  time,  it  gives  due  consideration  to  the  unique  situation
which will prevail in the early years of Monetary Union. This strategy rests on two “pillars”: a
prominent  role  for  money  as  expressed  by  the  announcement  of  a  reference  value  for  the
annual growth of M3 and a broadly based assessment of the outlook for price developments,
and the risks to price stability in the euro area as a whole.
Monetary developments can provide useful information about future price developments and
thereby  act  as  an  important  compass  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  There  is  broad
consensus that, in the medium to long term, the development of the price level is a monetary
phenomenon. Consequently, the Governing Council of the ECB has announced a quantitative
reference value for M3 growth, which has been set at an annual rate of 4½%. Under normal
circumstances, substantial deviations from the reference value would tend to indicate future
risks  to  price  stability.  However,  monetary  policy  does  not  react  to  deviations  of  monetary
growth from the reference value in a “mechanistic” way. In the first instance, such deviations
will be thoroughly analysed to infer any signals which they may send about the prospects for
price developments. If this analysis points to a threat to price stability, monetary policy will
react  in  a  manner  appropriate  to  counter  this  threat,  rather  than  attempt  to  eliminate  the
deviation of monetary growth from the reference value in the short term.
Although  monetary  data  contain  information  which  is  vital  for  monetary  policy  decision-
making, monetary developments alone will clearly not constitute a complete summary of all
the economic information necessary to enable appropriate policy decisions to be taken.  The
Governing Council recognises that it is important, in parallel with the assessment of monetary
growth,  to  look  at  a  wide  range  of  financial  and  other  economic  indicators,  including
economic forecasts. This systematic analysis of all other relevant information about economic
and  financial  conditions  will  ensure  that  the  Governing  Council  is  as  well  informed  as
possible when taking monetary policy decisions.
This broadly based assessment takes into account, inter alia, the information content of wage
developments,  exchange  rates,  fiscal  indicators,  real  activity,  assets  and  commodity  prices.
Internal forecasts of economic activity and prices in the euro area can also contribute to the
success of an appropriately forward-looking monetary policy. Monitoring monetary, financial
and economic developments also helps to identify the nature of shocks hitting the economy. It
thereby contributes to the assessment of overall economic developments. On the basis of this
thorough  analysis,  the  interest  rate  will  be  set  in  a  way  that  best  serves  the  maintenance  of
price stability.
The contribution of fiscal policy to a stable euro
With regard to fiscal policies, I should like to stress the following main points of interest with
regard to a stable euro:
•  A sound conduct of fiscal policies is important for the stability of the euro.
• 
In  particular,  strict  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  by  each  Member
State is vital.
BIS Review   29/1999
2
•  The  targets  envisaged  in  the  current  stability  programmes  to  bring  down  government
deficits and debt levels represent a minimum requirement for most Member States rather
than a final aim.
Budgetary positions in the euro area as a whole have not yet been consolidated sufficiently.
Government debt as a percentage of GDP remains far too high on average and has only started
declining hesitantly in the recent past. Deficit-to-GDP ratios in a number of countries are still
closer  to  the  3%  value  set  in  the  Treaty  as  a  reference  for  excessive  deficits  than  to  the
medium-term balanced or surplus position envisaged in the Stability and Growth Pact. In case
of  a  prolonged  growth  slowdown  we  might  therefore  easily  see  deficits  reaching  excessive
levels. In addition, deficits fell very slowly in 1998, this reduction in fiscal imbalances being
the  result  of  strong  economic  growth  and  falling  interest  payments  rather  than  of  genuine
fiscal  consolidation  measures.  Structural  and  primary  balances  have  even  deteriorated.  In
addition, the progress in structural fiscal consolidation envisaged for the medium term appears
to be only moderate.
Why  should  monetary  policy-makers  be  bothered  by  such  unbalanced  budgetary  positions?
Institutional  arrangements  for  Monetary  Union  and  the  Eurosystem  have  been  fully  and
specifically  developed  so  as  to  prevent  any  direct  link  between  an  increase  in  public  sector
deficits and a monetary expansion, and thereby inflation. This is ensured by (a) assigning to
the  Eurosystem  the  primary  objective  of  price  stability,  (b)  banning  the  direct  financing  of
government  deficits  by  central  banks,  and  (c)  precluding  any  influence  by  governments  or
other institutions on monetary policy decisions. However, even in this setting, the conduct of
fiscal policies has a clear bearing on the objective of price stability. In particular, doubts about
the soundness of fiscal policy can influence the effectiveness of monetary policy instruments
and can undermine the credibility of monetary policy.
For decades – and until very recently – fiscal policies have followed a trend of ever-growing
public  sector  and  government  debt  levels.  In  Monetary  Union,  without  binding  fiscal  rules,
countries might have even less incentive to pursue prudent fiscal policies. The main reasons
are, first, that risk premia offsetting inflation and exchange rate expectations disappear on a
country-specific basis and may not be fully outweighed by default risk premia, and, second,
that in Monetary Union fiscal consolidation and its effects on financial stability partly take on
the role of a public good, the benefits of which in terms of lower interest rates can be enjoyed
by  individual  countries  even  if  they  have  not  contributed  to  its  supply.  Hence,  the  Treaty
establishing the European Community contains, for good reasons, a number of provisions on
the conduct of fiscal policies, which have been further clarified by the Stability and Growth
Pact.  However,  I  must  admit  that  the  current  position  with  regard  to  the  implementation  of
these  provisions  in  the  stability  programmes  submitted  to  the  European  Commission  by  a
number of Member States is less than fully satisfactory.
The centrepiece of the budgetary provisions to be respected by Member States is the medium-
term  objective  of  a  budgetary  position  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus.  Safeguarding  sound
government  finances  is  a  means  of  reinforcing  the  conditions  for  price  stability  and  of
promoting strong sustainable growth which is conducive to employment creation. In addition,
by  achieving  at  least  balanced  budgets  in  normal  periods  of  the  cycle,  governments  would
create a sufficient safety margin to allow full operation of automatic stabilisers in the event of
a  slowdown  in  growth  without  inflating  deficits  to  excessive  levels.  In  the  euro  area  as  a
whole we are still far from reaching this target. Substantial structural imbalances continue to
3
BIS Review   29/1999
restrict the flexibility of public sector budgets. Any significant increase in overall deficits –
for instance, as a response to a decline in real GDP growth rates – could reverse the limited
progress we have seen in recent years in reducing debt ratios across the euro area. This would
imply the risk of initiating detrimental debt dynamics. Hence, governments could contribute
most  effectively  to  supporting  stability  and  growth  in  the  euro  area  by  regaining  sufficient
flexibility in their budgets as soon as possible. However, despite the desirability of achieving
this  room  for  manoeuvre  swiftly,  a  number  of  stability  programmes  only  aim  to  attain  this
flexibility  at  a  relatively  late  date  and  on  the  assumption  that  economic  growth  will  be
sustained and interest rates low.
Apart  from  showing  slow  progress  in  restoring  budgetary  flexibility  for  the  purposes  of
automatic  stabilisation,  governments  have  paid  insufficient  attention  to  other  considerations
that  are  also  of  major  importance  in  setting  the  appropriate  medium-term  objectives  which
respect the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact. This is the case with regard to the
need to ensure a rapid decline in high debt ratios and the need to cater for the costs associated
with the ageing of the population. In particular, additional budgetary room for manoeuvre will
soon  be  required  in  order  to  address  the  substantial  financial  consequences  of  ageing
populations.  According  to  long-term  projections  and  estimates,  current  trends  in  birth  rates
and life expectancy, together with unfunded public pension and health care schemes, result in
very  high  implicit  government  liabilities  in  most  euro  area  countries.  In  many  cases  these
implicit  liabilities  appear  to  be  far  in  excess  of  official  government  debt  levels.  Preventing
these financial  burdens  from  being  shifted  onto  future  generations  of  taxpayers  and  thereby
safeguarding  sound  government  finances  would  require  substantial  surpluses  to  be  built  up
over the medium term.
The  contribution  to  lower  unemployment  made  by  structural  reforms  of  the  labour
markets
I now turn my attention to the contribution that structural reforms, particularly of  euro  area
labour markets, can play in reducing unemployment and in supporting the stability of the euro.
The high level of European unemployment is quite rightly a source of deep concern. It is of
the  utmost  importance  to  implement  policies  than  can  bring  about  a  lasting  reduction  in
unemployment. Clearly, the approaches that are most likely to have a lasting effect are those
that  address  the  root  cause  of  the  problem,  not  just  the  symptoms.  The  root  causes  of  high
unemployment in the European Union are structural rigidities in the labour market as well as
tax and public transfer policies. This view is supported by a wide body of academic literature
and was  also  a  key  finding  of  the  OECD  Jobs  Study.  It  is  obvious  that  structural  problems
require  structural  solutions.  Implementing  an  inflationary  monetary  policy  will  not  make
lasting reductions in unemployment, but will actually serve to exacerbate the problem over the
medium term. As we know, inflation distorts saving and investment decisions, raises the risk
premium  in  long-term  interest  rates  and  undermines  the  allocative  efficiency  of  the  price
mechanism. In addition, it is particularly detrimental from the perspective of social justice.
The  underlying  structural  nature  of  the  European  unemployment  problem  can  be  seen  most
strikingly if one compares developments in Europe with those in the United States over the
last three decades. In 1970 the unemployment rate in the United States, at around 4%, was at
least twice as large as that prevailing in most European economies. Since 1970 there has been
significant  cyclical  variation  in  the  unemployment  rate  in  the  United  States  but  no  upward
trend.  At  4.4%  in  January  1999,  the  unemployment  rate  in  the  United  States  is  almost  the
same as it was in 1970. In contrast, average European unemployment appears to have risen
BIS Review   29/1999
4
with each passing economic cycle. By the early 1980s the unemployment rates in the United
States  and  Europe  had  broadly  converged.  Since  then  the  unemployment  rate  in  the  United
States has been below the average for the European Union. Despite recording a measure of
decline last year, the euro area unemployment rate remained at 10.8% in December, more than
double  the  corresponding  rate  in  the  United  States.  However,  some  European  countries,
particularly those with more flexible labour markets, have managed to avoid the trend of ever-
rising  unemployment.  For  example,  the  Netherlands,  Ireland,  Portugal,  Austria  and
Luxembourg at present have unemployment rates well below the euro area average.
If  one  examines  the  duration  of  unemployment,  it  is  immediately  apparent  that  Europe’s
problem is principally one of long-term unemployment. According to OECD figures, around
half of the unemployed of the European Union have been out of work for at least a year, while
in the United States under 10% of the unemployed have been without work for this long. This
suggests  that  in  Europe  there  is  an  urgent  need  to  improve  incentives  aimed  at  getting  the
long-term unemployed back to work. It also suggests that there is little scope for a stimulus to
increase demand, but rather that structural measures should be implemented.
It has been suggested that the Eurosystem focuses too exclusively on supply, almost forgetting
demand. This is a misunderstanding. The truth is this, and I repeat: we are convinced that a
lasting cure for European unemployment can  only  be  found  by  applying  measures  affecting
supply. It is not true, however, that our monetary policy strategy neglects the demand side of
the  economy.  On  the  contrary,  our  monetary  policy  takes  into  account  all  monetary  and
economic developments, including demand shocks, when decisions are taken on the monetary
stance which best serves the maintenance of  price  stability.  One  might  rightly  argue  that  in
this way we do not actively respond to short-term changes in GDP. There is a good reason for
this:  it  would  be  overambitious.  We  cannot  steer  demand  precisely,  especially  in  the  short
term. Therefore, we focus on creating the appropriate conditions for non-inflationary growth
of  demand  in  the  medium  term.  With  money  supply  growing  at  almost  5%  and  with  real
interest rates well below historical averages, monetary policy is delivering in practice what I
have  just  explained  in  theory.  It  goes  without  saying  that  we  will  continue  to  monitor  all
developments  to  determine  the  appropriate  policy  stance  in  the  meetings  of  the  Governing
Council.
There are many good examples of what can be done – and is currently being done in some
euro  area  countries  –  in  terms  of  structural  reforms.  First,  there  are  “active  labour  market
measures” which provide programmes of education, training and work experience targeted at
the long-term unemployed; second, reforms to the tax and benefit systems which ensure that
people  are  significantly  better  off  in  work  than  out  of  it;  and  third,  there  are  measures  to
ensure that low-productivity workers are not forced out of the labour market. To this end, the
burden  of  taxes  and  non-wage  labour  costs  could  be  reduced  for  low-paid  workers.  In
addition, minimum wage schemes and wage agreements reached by collective bargaining need
to take account of the need to preserve jobs for low-productivity workers by reducing labour
costs.
The need for structural reform of the European labour markets is widely recognised and some
progress is already being made. At the meeting of the European Council held in Luxembourg
in November 1997 it was decided to adopt “guidelines for employment” at the EU level every
year. Each Member State has undertaken to draw up a national action plan for employment
based  on  these  EU  guidelines.  Although  of  themselves  guidelines  will  not  reduce
unemployment,  if  one  looks  at  the  national  action  plans  for  1998  one  can  find  many  good
5
BIS Review   29/1999
examples of policy measures that are aimed at increasing labour market flexibility. However,
progress appears rather slow and uneven across Europe and it is important that we redouble
our efforts in this area.
I recognise that structural reforms are not always easy to implement. The benefits are often
enjoyed in the medium term, while short-term costs for some groups may mean that reforms
are vigorously opposed by interest groups. Although there is a common objective of reducing
unemployment,  there  is  no  common  programme  of  reforms  that  will  work  in  all  countries.
While it is possible to learn from the experience of others, each Member State will wish to
develop workable policies that reflect its own particular circumstances. Although the path of
structural reform is not always an easy one, it is the only way in which we can achieve the
lasting reductions in unemployment that are so urgently required. I should wish to add that,
contrary to competitive devaluations, such reforms, as well as wage moderation, are no zero-
sum  game.  They  contribute  to  net  increases  in  average  employment  in  an  international
perspective. They should thus not be criticised as “wage or social dumping”.
Monetary policy and other policy areas
In line with its clear mandate enshrined in the Treaty establishing the European Community,
and for sound economic reasons, the ECB has to decide which monetary stance best serves the
maintenance of price stability over the medium term  and  then  act  accordingly.  At  the  same
time, the Treaty also emphasises the need for sound fiscal policies. This clear separation of
responsibilities is both efficient and transparent. It takes account of the substantial empirical
evidence and practical experience, according to which monetary policy makes its best possible
contribution  to  the  achievement  of  other  goals  by  focusing  on  the  primary  objective  of
maintaining price stability over the medium term. This clear division of responsibilities is a
sound  basis  for  the  exchange  of  views  and  information  about  monetary,  financial  and
economic matters between various political authorities in the euro area and the Eurosystem.
The  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy  does  not  foresee  any  mechanistic  reaction  to
specific variables, indices or forecasts. This also applies to fiscal developments, regardless of
whether  they  are  actual,  planned  or  promised.  Clearly,  we  will  always  have  to  analyse
thoroughly  whether  fiscal  developments  have  any  impact  on  the  outlook  for  price  stability.
However, as already emphasised, we will also assess the information provided by the broad
monetary aggregate and all other indicators relevant for price stability.
The  clear  distribution  of  responsibilities  between  monetary  and  government  authorities
enhances  the  credibility  of  monetary  and  economic  policies  in  Europe.  The  “policy  mix”
resulting from monetary and fiscal policies will be an outcome of these policies rather than
our initial objective. This assignment of responsibilities increases transparency and facilitates
accountability.  Under  normal  circumstances  the  joint  interaction  of  all  policies  would  be
optimal provided that the basic allocation of instruments and objectives is respected and that
policy-makers focus on their main objective. The Eurosystem is always ready to engage in an
open  exchange  of  views  and  information  with  policy-makers.  Moreover,  the  public  and
governments are kept well informed about the ECB’s objective and strategy.
Monetary  policy  alone  –  however  well  designed  and  implemented  –  cannot  solve  Europe’s
economic  problems.  National  fiscal  authorities  can  make  a  significant  contribution  to  the
establishment of favourable conditions for sustained economic growth and high employment
in the  medium  to  long  term  by  conducting  sound  budgetary  policies.  Appropriate  structural
BIS Review   29/1999
6
reforms implemented by national governments that improve the flexibility and efficiency of
labour and goods markets are of utmost importance. An increase in the flexibility of labour
and goods markets would certainly also help to lessen the impact of shocks, regardless of their
nature.  Moreover,  continued  wage  moderation  in  both  the  public  and  private  sectors  would
contribute to the reduction of the unacceptably high level of unemployment in many parts of
the euro area.
If policy-makers take their responsibilities seriously and respect the assignment of instruments
and objectives as laid down in the Treaty establishing the European Community, this will be
the  best  contribution  that  they  can  make  to  establishing  a  solid  foundation  for  sustained
stability and growth in the euro area.
7
BIS Review   29/1999
