Mr Duisenberg’s opening statement at the press conference held on 22 December 1998
Introductory statement by the President of the European Central Bank, Dr W  F Duisenberg, at the
press conference held in Frankfurt on 22/12/98
Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are here today to report on the outcome of today’s
meeting of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank at which we took the opportunity to
finalise a number of issues of a rather technical or legal nature ahead of the forthcoming Changeover
Weekend.
Let  me  first  turn  to  the  Governing  Council’s  discussion  on  recent  economic,  monetary  and
financial  developments  and  the  decisions  that  the  Governing  Council  has  taken  today  in  the
field of monetary policy.
On 1 January 1999 the ESCB  will  assume  responsibility  for  defining  and  implementing  the  single
monetary  policy  of  the  euro  area.  The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  deemed  it  appropriate  to
announce  in  advance  the  interest  rates  that  will  apply  to  the  monetary  policy  instruments  of  the
ESCB as from the start of Stage Three. This should eliminate any remaining uncertainties about the
monetary  policy  stance  of  the  ESCB  and  contribute  to  a  smooth  changeover  to  Stage  Three  of
Economic and Monetary Union.
As you have already been informed, the following decisions were taken:
•  First,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  conduct  the  first  main  refinancing  operation  of  the
ESCB as a fixed rate tender and to set the level of the interest rate for this operation at 3%, in
line with the key central bank rates prevailing at the end of Stage Two. This operation will be
initiated  on  4  January  1999,  the  allotment  decision  will  be  taken  on  5  January,  and  the
settlement  will  take  place  on  7  January.  The  first  longer-term  refinancing  operation  will  be
announced  on  12  January.  The  Governing  Council  has  already  decided  that  it  will  be
conducted through the single variable rate auction procedure.
•  Second, with respect to the interest rates on the ESCB’s standing facilities, which are designed
to  form  a  corridor  for  movements  in  short-term  money  market  rates, the  Governing  Council
decided that the interest rate for the marginal lending facility will be set at a level of 4.50% and
the  interest  rate  for  the  deposit  facility  at  a  level  of  2%.  These  are  the  rates  of  the  ESCB’s
standing facilities at the start of Stage Three, i.e. 1 January 1999.
•  Third, however, as a transitory measure, between 4 January and 21 January, the interest rate
for  the  marginal  lending  facility  will  be  set  at  a  level  of  3.25%  and  the  interest  rate  for  the
deposit  facility  at  a  level  of  2.75%.  This  exceptional  narrow  corridor,  of  50  basis  points,
between the marginal lending facility and the deposit facility aims at smoothing the adaptation
of  market  participants  to  the  integrated  euro  area  money  market  during  the  initial  days  of
Monetary Union. The maintenance of such a narrow corridor is not desirable beyond the short
term,  since  it  would  hamper  the  development  of  an  efficient  euro  area  money  market.
Therefore, the Governing Council intends to terminate this measure following its meeting on
21 January 1999. In summary, let me provide the following explanations for these decisions. I
will start with issues related to the narrow corridor; thereafter, I will comment on the level of
the interest rates.
With  respect  to  the  interest  rates  on  the  ESCB’s  standing  facilities,  which  are  designed  to  form  a
corridor  for  movements  in  short-term money  market  rates,  the  Governing  Council  had  to  consider
two aspects. First, it needed to signal clearly its monetary policy intentions. These were expressed by
setting the rate for the marginal lending facility at 4.50% and the rate for the deposit facility at 2%
BIS Review  1/1999
– 2 –
for  the  start  of  Stage  Three.  Hence,  the  corridor  for  movements  in  short-term  interest  rates  is
asymmetric  towards  the  upper  boundary.  Determining  these  rates  was  also  necessary  in  order  to
provide  successors  to  the  official  national  central  bank  rates  previously  used  as  reference  rates  in
certain legislation and contracts in some Member States. Second, however, the Governing Council
also had to consider the possibility that market participants may need some time to get used to the
new  environment  for  monetary  policy.  In  principle,  cross-country  deviations  of  short-term  interest
rates will not  exist  in  Stage  Three,  as  intra  euro area  arbitrage  should  be expected  to  prevent  this.
However, the many novelties related to the changeover make it difficult to foresee whether the euro
area money market will indeed work in a fully integrated way from the very first day of Stage Three.
For  this  reason,  the  Governing  Council  has  decided  to  use  a  relatively  narrow  corridor  of  interest
rates on the standing facilities of the ESCB in the first three weeks of Stage Three as an automatic
device to reduce the maximum range of fluctuations in the overnight interest rate. Accordingly, we
have temporarily designed an exceptional corridor of only 50 basis points, with the interest rate for
the marginal lending facility at 3.25% and the interest rate for the deposit facility at 2.75% which we
intend to terminate on 21 January 1999.
Concerning the decision to set the level of the interest rate for the first main refinancing operation of
the ESCB at 3%, it may be recalled that on 3 December 1998, in a coordinated decision, all national
central banks participating in the single monetary policy lowered their key interest rates to 3% (with
the exception of the Banca d’Italia, which reduced the discount rate to 3.5%). As explained by the
ECB at that time, this joint reduction had to be seen as a de facto decision on the level of interest
rates  with  which  the  ESCB  will  start  Stage  Three  and  which  it  intended  to  maintain  for  the
foreseeable future. It was based on the common assessment that these interest rate reductions are in
line with maintaining price stability in the euro area over the medium term. In this connection, it is to
be pointed out that a rate of 3% is very low by historical standards. This should be seen as a clear
indication  that  the  ESCB  does  not  want  to  give  any  signal  for  a  further  easing  in  the  foreseeable
future. At today’s meeting, taking account of the latest monetary, financial and economic data, the
Governing Council confirmed these views. At this juncture, there are no signs to suggest that current
rates  of  increase  in  the  HICP  of  around  1%  would  either  decelerate  significantly  or,  conversely,
accelerate to levels which are inconsistent with the definition of price stability provided by the ESCB
in October 1998.
Let me provide you with a more detailed record of our assessment.
The information coming from the data on monetary aggregates signals a relatively smooth path for
M3 growth in 1998, compatible with continued price stability.  In  particular, the  latest  three-month
moving average annual growth rate of M3 stood at around 4.5%. This was exactly in line with the
reference value set by the Governing Council at its last meeting.
With  respect  to  the  other  pillar  of  the  ESCB’s  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  broadly  based
assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price  developments  and  risks  to  price  stability,  various  indicators
confirm  the  assessment  of  developments  in  monetary  data.  The  further  reduction  of  long-term
interest  rates  by  almost  20  basis  points  since  the  end  of  November  to  a  level  of  3.9%  on  21
December, as well as the downward shift in the yield curve, can be regarded as a sign that markets
expect  the  environment  of  price  stability  to  continue.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  Governing
Council,  it  is  an  encouraging  signal  that  financial  market  participants  are  apparently  prepared  to
attribute a credibility bonus to our stability-oriented monetary policy shortly before its official start.
At the current juncture, the outlook for the euro area economy is still very much influenced by the
uncertainties  surrounding  the  evolution  of  the  world  economy  in  1999.  These  uncertainties  have
negatively affected indicators of industrial confidence in the euro area and have fuelled expectations
of a slowdown in  economic  activity  in  the  short  term.  Very  recently,  a  first  estimate  of real  GDP
BIS Review 1/1999
– 3 –
growth in the euro area in the third quarter of 1998 has been released by EUROSTAT, suggesting a
growth rate of 2.4% against the third quarter of 1997. This would be around one-half of a percentage
point lower than the average growth rate of 3% in the first half of 1998, compared with the first half
of  1997.  Other  indicators  of  real  activity  were  mixed  up  to  November.  While  order  books  and
capacity utilisation point to a less optimistic assessment of growth prospects, consumer confidence
remained high and retail sales continued to increase at a broadly stable pace up to September, i.e. the
latest  month  for  which  data  are  available.  Also,  the  decline  in  unemployment,  after  pausing  in  the
summer months, resumed, with the rate of unemployment decreasing from  10.9%  in  September  to
10.8%  in  October.  The  factors  underpinning  the  currently  low  increases  in  the  HICP  continued  to
include falling energy prices, downward movements in producer prices, subdued wage growth and
slight decreases in unit labour costs. On balance, the overall environment described above does not
point to significant upward or downward pressure on prices in the short term, as also reflected in all
available forecasts for 1999.
Nevertheless,  factors  contributing  to  risks  to  price  stability  on  both  sides  need  to  be  taken  into
account.  On  the  one  hand,  downward  risks  relate  to  the  global  environment  and  potential
repercussions on the euro area, for example via import prices and further pressure on producer prices.
These developments will be monitored closely. On the other hand, unexpected upward pressure on
wages and a relaxation of the fiscal stance would clearly alter the general environment. Therefore, we
will also carefully monitor the outcome of ongoing wage rounds, the plans for fiscal policy in 1999
and over the medium term, as well as their implementation towards compliance with the Stability and
Growth Pact.
In  conclusion,  the  actual  situation,  characterised  by  monetary  growth  compatible  with  continued
price  stability  and  the  absence  of  immediate  upward  or  downward  pressure  on  prices,  justifies
maintaining  the  current  monetary  policy  stance,  with  an  ECB  interest  rate  of  3%  for  the  main
refinancing facility. As we indicated in the ECB press release of 3 December 1998, the intention was
also to maintain this rate “for the foreseeable future”. Indeed, monetary policy in Stage Three starts
with interest rates which are very low by historical standards. Let me now give the floor to the Vice-
President to report on various aspects of the final preparatory work for Stage Three of Economic
and Monetary Union.
1 
Preparations for the changeover to the single currency
On 11  December  1998  the  ECB issued  a  press  release  on  the  practical  issues  relating  to  the
forthcoming  Changeover  Weekend  as  a  follow-up  to  the  information  provided  in  the  press
release issued on 3 November 1998. At its meeting today, the Governing Council took stock of
the state of the preparations of the ECB and of the national central banks and took note of the
very  detailed  planning  which  has  been  coordinated  by  the  special  Changeover  Weekend
Committee  which  the  Governing  Council  set  up  in  November.  The  Governing  Council  also
took  note  of  the  outcome  of  the  recent  “dress  rehearsal”,  which  had  simulated  the  full
operational activity of the ESCB using normal systems and procedures and, if they were to fail,
contingency procedures.
In line with the announcement made in the Joint Communiqué issued on 2 May 1998 – by the
Ministers of the Member States adopting the euro as their single currency, the Governors of the
central banks of those Member States, the European Commission and the European Monetary
Institute – the Governing Council reconfirmed today that appropriate market techniques would
be used to ensure that on 31 December 1998 the market exchange rates, recorded during the
teleconference  held  between  11am  and  11.30am  CET  and  used  for  calculating  the  daily
exchange  rates  of  the  official  ECU  will  be  equal  to  the  ERM  bilateral  central  rates.  These
bilateral central rates were published in the Joint Communiqué in the form of a parity grid.
BIS Review 1/1999
– 4 –
The ECB has also been involved in the testing of the procedures to be applied to the fixing of
the irrevocable euro conversion rates so as to minimise the likelihood that technical problems
might arise on 31 December 1998. As part of the process of fixing these rates, the Governing
Council  –  in  consultation  with  the  General  Council  of  the  ECB  –  will  adopt  by  special
teleconference  its  formal  Opinion  on  a  proposal  from  the  European  Commission,  which  the
ECB President will deliver personally to the specially convened session of the Council of the
European  Union in  Brussels  in the early  afternoon  of  31  December 1998.  The  ECB  and  the
NCBs  will  contribute  to  the  efforts  to  publicise  the  information  on  the  irrevocable  euro
conversion  rates  by  publishing  them  on  their  respective  websites.  Contemporaneously,  the
ECB  will  send  a  S.W.I.F.T.  broadcast  message  to  the  worldwide  banking  community  to
confirm the rates of the eleven currencies against the euro.
The Governing Council agreed that, as of 1 January 1999, the ECB will fully change over to
the euro. As a consequence, the staff of the ECB will be remunerated in euro with effect from
that date.
2 
EONIA
The Governing Council took stock of the final preparations being made for the calculation of
the Euro OverNight Indexed Average interest rate – to be more simply known as EONIA. This
will be calculated on the basis of data supplied by a panel of banks in the European Union.
The EONIA will be published each day, starting on Monday 4 January 1999.
3 
The authority of the ECB concerning the issuance of national banknotes
With the start of Stage Three, banknotes and coins denominated in the national currencies of
the  eleven  participating  Member  States  will  become  subdivisions  of  the  euro  from  then
onwards. Although euro  banknotes  and coins  will  not  be  put  into  circulation  until  1 January
2002, from 1 January 1999 the right to authorise the issue of national banknotes – and the right
to approve the volume of national coins to be issued – will belong to the Governing Council of
the ECB.
With regard to the issue of national banknotes during the three years until euro banknotes are
put  into  circulation,  the  Governing  Council  agreed  today  to  develop  a  set  of  common
procedures by the spring of 1999 to be followed by the six participating national central banks
when requesting authorisation to issue national banknotes. Similarly, on  an  annual  basis,  the
national central banks will submit estimates to the ECB of the volume of national coins to be
issued.
4 
Logistics of the 2002 cash changeover
In  connection  with  the  preparations  for  the  2002  cash  changeover,  the  Governing  Council
addressed the issue of “front-loading”, i.e. the distribution of euro banknotes and coins prior to
1 January 2002 to certain target groups. A final decision will be taken in the first week of 1999.
5 
1998 Annual Report and the ECB’s first Monthly Bulletin
The Governing Council agreed that the 1998 Annual Report covering the first six months of
the life of the ECB and the transition from the EMI will be released to the media on Thursday
15 April 1999. It was also agreed to release the ECB’s first Monthly Bulletin on Tuesday 19
January 1999.
BIS Review 1/1999
– 5 –
6 
Swap agreements with the Federal Reserve System and Norges Bank
The Governing Council took the opportunity of the forthcoming introduction of the euro on 1
January 1999 to review and adjust existing swap agreements between euro area central banks
on  the  one  hand  and  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  Norges  Bank  on  the  other.  First,  the
Governing Council jointly agreed with the Federal Reserve System that the existing bilateral
agreements of six euro area national central banks – the central banks of Belgium, Germany,
France, Italy, the Netherlands and Austria – with the Federal Reserve System will be allowed
to lapse as they expire. Second, the current swap agreements between euro area national central
banks  and  Norges  Bank  will  be  replaced  by  a  new  swap  agreement  between  the  ECB  and
Norges Bank amounting to euro 1,535 million as from 1 January 1999.
7 
ECB budget for 1999
The Governing Council approved the ECB’s budget for 1999, which gives the ECB the green
light to recruit around 150 additional staff (both permanent and temporary) needed to support
the new operational activities which the ECB will take on from 1 January 1999. This will bring
the ECB’s permanent staff to around 700, with nearly 50 limited contract staff.
 BIS Review 1/1999
