Mr Hartmann outlines the Bundesbank’s preparation for the Year 2000
Address by Mr Wendelin Hartmann, a member of the Directorate of the Deutsche Bundesbank and
Chairman  of  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems,  at  a  press  conference  in
Frankfurt/Main on 18 June 1999.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Last weekend, a global Year 2000 test of the major international payment and settlement systems took
place. On the initiative of the New York Clearing House (NYCH) nearly 500 internationally operating
credit  institutions  from  20  countries  participated  in  the  test,  for  which  they  had  34  systems  in
America, Europe, Asia and Australia at their disposal (more detailed information is contained in the
Internet excerpts from NYCH which you have before you).
The  Year  2000  readiness  of  payment  systems  is  of  paramount  importance  to  the  financial  sector.
Every day, these global financial routes handle payments amounting to more than US$ 1,500 billion
for foreign exchange dealings alone. Disruptions to these systems impede the orderly flow of financial
capital and may spread to all areas of the economy — both nationally and internationally — in the
form of chain reactions. An orderly monetary policy and supply of money to the economy may thus be
crucially impaired. For the central banks, it is therefore a major concern that payment systems are able
to operate properly in the Year 2000.
For  the  organisation  of  this  worldwide  test,  the  Bundesbank  assumed  a  coordinating  role  for  the
German banking industry with the New York Clearing House. It initially provided for an exchange of
information  with  the  credit  institutions  taking  part  in  the  test.  Nationally,  the  Bundesbank,  as  the
system operator, made both of its major large-value payment systems for the German and European
market “Electronic Access Frankfurt” (EAF) and “Electronic Counter” (ELS) available for the test.
For an EU-wide settlement, we also incorporated the national TARGET component into the test. The
test took place under Year 2000 conditions. The simulation was of the exchange of payments for the
first two business days following the changeover to the Year 2000, i.e. January 3 and 4, 2000.
Thirty-six credit institutions from all areas of the German banking industry, the  private,  public  and
cooperative  sectors,  used  this  opportunity  to  demonstrate  their  Year  2000  readiness  in  a  test  under
realistic conditions. The institutions:
• 
submitted  payments  to  the  Electronic  Counter,  settled  payments  through  Electronic  Access  in
Frankfurt,
executed payments via TARGET to Belgium, France, Italy and the United Kingdom and received
payments from those countries,
instructed  their  correspondents  in  Australia,  Belgium,  Brazil,  Canada,  France,  Italy,  Japan,
Singapore, the United Kingdom and the United States to execute payments in those countries,
received payment instructions from those countries and
• 
•  booked  the  incoming  payments  in  their  own  accounts,  or  passed  on  the  amounts  as  domestic
  follow-up payments via EAF and ELS to the beneficiary credit institutions.
The credit institutions participating in the test are to be regarded as the main players in payments in
Germany. They cover around 70% of the market (in EAF, as much as 90%) in national large-value
payments, and a good 80% of the market in cross-border payments.
The Bundesbank’s payment systems worked without a hitch and the credit institutions participating in
the test in Germany reported that their tests had been conducted successfully.
We are therefore able to say with a clear conscience that payments in Germany are ready for the Year
2000.
1
BIS Review   72/1999
this test was a one-off event, and
is also non-repeatable because of its scale.
At a teleconference involving the European system operators and the New York Clearing House, it
was likewise reported that the tests had been conducted successfully. The initiator of the test, the New
York Clearing House, expressly pointed out that:
• 
• 
Despite all the satisfaction about the fact that the tests went extremely well, it must still be noted that
this  worldwide  test  was  a  unique  and  very  demanding  feat  which  demanded  considerable
organisational  and  technical  input;  this  was  also  true  of  the  German  banking  industry.  This  can  be
illustrated  by  a  single  and,  on  the  whole,  rather  marginal  figure:  on  each  of  the  test  days
approximately 100 persons were on duty at the Bundesbank alone.
In saying that, however, the Global Street Test was only one milestone — albeit a very important and
highly visible one — in our entire Year 2000 project. In the German banking industry alone, the test
was preceded by extensive internal testing on the part of all participants, by interbank interface and
processing tests, and by a preliminary national test from May 31 to June 2, 1999. These confirmed the
functional  viability  and  robustness  of  the  Bundesbank’s  systems  and  their  Year  2000-compliant
connection to customer systems. As far as German large-value payments are  concerned,  the  Global
Street  Test  concludes  an  intensive  and  successful  sequence  of  testing  and  does  no  more  than
document  the  fact  that  preparations  were  running  smoothly  and  on  schedule  in  “Finanzplatz
Germany”, or Germany as a financial centre.
Above and beyond the procedures in large-value payments, the Year 2000 problem naturally impinges
on all the other business areas in which the central banks are involved. I would therefore like to use
this opportunity to give you a brief overview of our Year 2000 Project.
The Bundesbank is giving top priority this year to the Year 2000 problem and took steps at an early
stage to ensure the Year 2000 compliance of its in-house procedures and systems. For example, for
some years now we have been paying attention to Year 2000 compliance not only in  the  design  of
new procedures but also when modifying and updating existing ones. The introduction of the euro on
January 1,  1999  gave  us  a  special  advantage.  This  meant  that  a  large  number  of  systems  and
applications were completely redesigned and put into operation by that date, with due consideration
naturally being given to Year 2000 requirements. This gave us extra time to come to grips with the
much broader Year 2000 problem.
In 1997, the Bundesbank established a working group for the Year 2000 problem. This working group
initially drew up an  inventory  of  all  the  affected  systems  and  procedures.  Any  required  adjustment
measures  were  initiated.  We  contacted  the  suppliers  and  manufacturers  and  awarded  the  necessary
conversion contracts.
Current  activities  are  geared  to  the  deadline  of  July  1,  1999,  which  was  set  by  the  Bundesbank’s
management  for  completing  the  Year  2000  readiness  of  all  the  affected  systems.  An  earlier  date
would not have been possible on account of the priority of carrying out conversion work for  Stage
Three of European Monetary Union. Preparations are running on schedule.
Preparation  work  in  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  is  also  running  full  steam  ahead.  A
committee of senior representatives of the 15 national central banks and the European Central Bank,
who are experts in computer technology, is coordinating the steps which are needed to make systems
and applications throughout the ESCB — especially those used for refinancing and payments in the
EMU  —  ready  for  the  Year  2000.  At  present,  the  systems  and  applications  between  the  national
central  banks  and  the  ECB  are  undergoing  intensive  testing  in  order  to  make  certain  that  the
processing of data is Year 2000 compliant.
BIS Review   72/1999
2
Despite  all  the  efforts  which  are  being  undertaken  at  our  level,  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  the
ability of the entire banking industry to function depends on an adequate supply of basic amenities
such as electricity, gas, water and telecommunications services. Hence, our preparations must not be
confined to testing our own systems and applications. Precautionary and supporting measures have to
be conceived and developed to prevent potential disruptions during the millennium date change.
The  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  already  decided  early  this  year  that  the
TARGET system will be closed on December 31, 1999. This measure will enhance the security of the
changeover to the Year 2000 since, as a result, all end-of-day and end-of-year work can be performed
for all systems on that date and the backing-up of data can be concluded before midnight. The closing
of the TARGET system means that the Bundesbank’s counters will likewise be closed on December
31, 1999.
Even  with  the  most  careful  preparation  of  the  systems  for  the  millennium  date  change,  isolated
problems cannot be ruled out. For that reason, particularly great importance will be attached to the
subject  of  “contingency  planning”  in  the  time  that  remains.  At  present,  the  details  of  the
Bundesbank’s contingency plans are being finalised, with priority being assigned to the central bank’s
core  procedures.  What  is  important,  if  it  comes  to  it,  is  that  the  basic  operations  in  the  individual
business areas of the central bank are safeguarded by appropriate measures.
The question — one that is raised very frequently in this connection — about an adequate supply of
currency  was  taken  up  and  investigated  by  the  Bundesbank  at  an  early  stage.  This  produced  the
conclusion that the German reserve holdings, relative to the currency in circulation, are completely
adequate — also by international standards. No bottlenecks are to be expected, even in the event of a
much  higher,  unforeseen  demand  for  currency.  Any  refinancing  facilities  that  are  required  will  be
available  on  an  adequate  scale  in  the  form  of  the  standing  facility  (formerly:  lombard  loan).  The
pledged collateral needed for this purpose is entirely sufficient.
Furthermore,  intensive  work  is  being  undertaken  on  national  and  international  communication
networks in order to guarantee the necessary exchange of information between the market players and
the central banks as well as the supervisory authorities during the first few days of the Year 2000. On
this point, too, the European central banks can draw on a wealth of experience in connection with the
changeover to the euro, since a network of this kind was already employed successfully at the turn of
last year.
The information channels that have already been set up will be used for the changeover from 1999 to
2000. Owing to its position, the Bundesbank has already been involved for some considerable time in
a  wide  variety  of  discussion  forums  dealing  with  the  Year  2000  problem.  Nationally,  it  maintains
close contact with the German banking industry through the Year 2000 Forum of the Central Credit
Committee.  It  is  also  represented  in  the  expert  group  at  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Economics  and
Technology.
In addition, the Bundesbank is cooperating closely with the Federal Banking Supervisory Authority
on Y2K issues. In May 1998, for example, a questionnaire on the progress of conversion work was
sent  to  a  total  of  3,851  institutions,  computer  centres  and  selected  stockbrokers  and  subsequently
analysed by the Federal Banking Supervisory Office in cooperation with the Bundesbank. Above and
beyond  that,  the  banking  supervisory  authorities  maintain  a  permanent  dialogue  with  the  major
internationally  operating  institutions.  Because  of  their  key  position  in  payments,  the  Land  Central
Banks  and  the  computer  centres  of  the  savings  bank  sector  as  well  as  the  central  institutions  and
computer centres of the cooperative banking sector are included in these discussions.
Internationally,  the  Bundesbank  cooperates  in  the  committees  set  up  at  the  Bank  for  International
Settlements. I would like to highlight the Bundesbank’s participation in the Joint Year 2000 Council.
With the backing of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the Committee on Payment and
3
BIS Review   72/1999
Settlement Systems (CPSS), and the area of securities and insurance, represented by the International
Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  and  the  International  Association  of  Insurance
Supervisors (IAIS), the aim of this body is to  improve  the  exchange  of  information  on  Y2K  issues
worldwide.  Various  publications  have  dealt  with  key  topics,  most  recently  the  necessity  of
maintaining contingency plans. An active dialogue with the supervisory authorities takes place at the
conferences initiated by the Joint Year 2000 Council. Preparations are under way for a further round
table  under  the  aegis  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  at  the  beginning  of  July.  This
discussion,  to  which  200  guests  from  around  the  world  are  expected,  will  focus  on  the  subject  of
contingency planning.
In summary, it can be said that, in the time which remains, the Bundesbank, being aware of its special
position and duties, will take all  the  measures  that  are  needed  to  ensure  that  its  systems  undergo  a
smooth transition from 1999 to 2000. In its national and international cooperation, the Bundesbank is
making a major contribution to promoting preparatory work in the public and private sectors.
The Federal Banking Supervisory Office has announced just recently that the present stage of Year
2000  readiness  achieved  by  the  German  credit  institutions  meets  the  expectations  of  the  banking
supervisory authorities and that, according to the information currently available, there is no reason to
fear that the transition from 1999 to 2000 will cause any major disruptions in institutions’ operations.
The  Bundesbank  sees  this  press  conference  as  an  appropriate  opportunity  to  present  the  relevant
information  on  its  own  Year  2000  preparations  and  the  status  of  work  in  “Finanzplatz  Germany”.
Furthermore,  the  Bundesbank  uses  its  regularly  updated  website  (http://www.bundesbank.de;  “Year
2000” button) to report on the progress of the work being undertaken.
BIS Review   72/1999
4
