Mr Sabirin discusses recent developments in the Indonesian economy
Presentation by Dr Syahril Sabirin, Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the Banque de France, Paris  in
March 1999.
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.
It is a great pleasure for me to be here today at the kind invitation of the Banque de France, and to
have an opportunity to share with you the most recent developments in the Indonesian economy. The
financial and economic crisis experienced by Indonesia since July 1997 was indeed very dramatic and
traumatic. But the many steps we have taken have reversed the situation and established conditions
for stabilization and a return to economic growth. We have launched and continue to implement an
economic recovery program, designed not only to reverse the situation, but also to establish a stronger
foundation for sustainable growth in the future.
Let me begin by giving you a brief description of some of the factors which demonstrate that progress
has indeed been made and which, as a result, should allow you to make a more positive assessment of
the Indonesian economy. First, the value of Indonesia’s currency, the rupiah, is the clearest indicator
suggesting that the worst of the crisis is believed to be over. As you may know, from a pre-crisis level
of around Rp 2,430 per US$ in early July 1997, the rupiah weakened to reach a low of just under Rp
17,000 in June 1998. This represents a loss of about 85% of the rupiah’s value at its worst point. No
economy  could  survive  such  a  hard  blow  without  serious  harmful  repercussions.  One  of  our  first
priorities has therefore been to strengthen and stabilize the value of the rupiah. As a result, the sharp
volatility of the rupiah during early 1998 gradually waned due to actions deterring speculative attacks.
The monetary authority’s strict discipline and support from the IMF and other international financial
institutions played a very important role, pushing up the rate to  a  range  of  Rp  7,500–8,000  at  end-
1998.  Despite  the  more  recent  weakening  of  the  currency  associated  with  the  rumors  on  China’s
devaluation, the Brazilian devaluation, and some scattered domestic problems, the rupiah has shown
its  resilience,  signifying  the  improved  confidence  on  Indonesian  economic  performance  and
prospects. From mid-October 1998, the rupiah has moved upward and downward within a range of
only  around  13%.  Indeed,  the  bank  restructuring  program,  the  details  and  the  implementation  of
which  were  announced  about  a  week  ago,  was  the  latest  piece  of  economic  recovery  program  that
contributed to the improved confidence.
Now, let me turn to the macroeconomic indicators. GDP suffered a sharp decline in the aftermath of
the fall in the rupiah’s value. Indonesia’s gross domestic product, which had grown by over 7% per
annum for over a decade until 1997, grew by only 4.9% in 1997 and then contracted by about 14% in
1998.  This  contraction  was  due  primarily  to  a  sharp  decline  in  production,  private  investment  and
lower household consumption due to the steep depreciation of the rupiah and high interest rates that
had to be introduced to stop the free fall of our currency. We are confident, however, that the rapid
fall in GDP growth has now been checked. For 1999 the economy will still post a negative growth
around 2% to 3% year on year, and the economy is estimated to have some positive growth in 2000.
Another important indicator, inflation, shows an even more positive trend. During its worst point in
early 1998 Indonesia’s inflation rate reached almost 13% in one particular month alone, a dramatic
rise from the 1997 level of 10.3% for the whole year. In response, we adopted a tight monetary policy,
and work in a very tight discipline to adhere to the preset targets of monetary aggregates on a day-to-
day  basis.  These  efforts,  together  with  the  policy  actions  to  secure  the  supply  of  basic  necessities,
have been rewarded. The monthly inflation rate started to decline to a more ‘normal’ level in the last
quarter of 1998. We even recorded a negative inflation rate of 0.3% in October.
I should also attribute the increased confidence in Bank Indonesia’s anti-inflation policy to the much
improved transparency in the conduct of our monetary policy. Beginning the second quarter of 1998
we regularly announce, on a weekly basis, the crucial monetary aggregate data and how they compare
1
BIS Review   34/1999
to  the  preset  targets.  These  data,  as  well  as  much  other  information,  are  available  to  everybody  to
access through our website.
In  June  1998  we  recognized  the  concerns  of  foreign  lenders  to  the  banking  system  by  agreeing  to
allow  these  foreign  banks  the  opportunity  to  exchange  loans  to  Indonesian  state  and  private  banks
which had already matured or were to mature prior to 1999 into new short- and medium-term loans
guaranteed  by  Bank  Indonesia.  This  measure  demonstrated  immediately  to  foreign  lenders  that  the
guarantee put in place was operative and the Government’s determination to tackle this problem.
At  the  same  time,  we  recognized  that  the  trade  finance  arrears  that  had  been  built  up  by  some
Indonesian  banks  during  the  currency  and  financial  turmoil  were  prejudicing  current  access  by
Indonesian entities to trade financing across the entire economy. We agreed to settle these arrears and
have paid the due amount. Most recently, in December 1998, we cleared additional arrears. This was,
we believe, an important signal to the international banking community. In addition, for those banks
that agreed to maintain their trade financing activities in Indonesia, we agreed to guarantee all new
trade finance facilities for a year after we received confirmation of these banks’ commitment.
Turning again briefly to the corporate sector which had been reluctant to enter discussions with its
creditors, we also agreed in June 1998 to set up an agency, the Indonesian Debt Restructuring Agency
or  INDRA,  to  provide  foreign  exchange  protection  to  those  borrowers  that  had  renegotiated  their
debts with their creditors. Strengthening these borrowers by reducing their residual foreign exchange
risk improves their creditworthiness, thereby creating an incentive to complete a restructuring. These
efforts  were  followed  by  the  Jakarta  Initiative  in  September  1998  which  aimed  at  setting  the  right
framework and incentives for bilateral debtor/creditor negotiations.
These measures combined, and the real money that has been paid to foreign creditors, in particular by
Bank Indonesia, show our real determination to resolve the current situation. Indeed our support has
been  proven  with  the  expenditure  of  very  large  sums  of  our  scarce  foreign  exchange  resources
reflecting the high priority we give this subject. I would urge you, therefore, not to adopt a reflexive
reduction in your activities in Indonesia. Instead, please do focus on the systems in place now and the
opportunities open to you within our new strengthened framework.
Another  very  important  point  I  would  like  to  mention  here  is  the  high  levels  of  capital-backing
required in some jurisdictions on new lending to Indonesia. We believe these levels of provisions are
excessive and that they constitute a great hindrance to a resumption of activity in our economy.
Let me also take this opportunity to share with you some developments in our banking restructuring
program. It is not a secret that the pre-crisis Indonesian financial system was unhealthily fragile and
vulnerable to external shocks. We certainly underestimated the vulnerability of our domestic banking
system  to  a  crisis  in  the  corporate  sector  and  its  potential  to  paralyze  the  banking  sector;  we  also
probably  underestimated  the  riskiness  of  many  loans  in  the  banks’  portfolios.  For  our  economy  to
recover,  we  had  to  create  a  strongly  capitalized  and  well  managed  banking  sector  in  line  with
international standards. This is our objective. To reach it we have first to address the current situation;
that is very low capital base and excessive number of institutions which have not been able to institute
the  necessary  reforms  and  improvements  to  their  financial  conditions,  management  and  operational
systems.
Clearly,  the  banking  sector  has  been  one  of  the  most  seriously  affected  segments  of  the  economy
during the crisis. The effects were transmitted primarily through the following ways.
(i) 
The  sharp  depreciation  of  the  rupiah  suddenly  blew  up  the  rupiah  value  of  banks’  liabilities
denominated in foreign currencies and put the banks with short position in serious problems;
(ii)  The economic crisis put banks’ customers (debtors) in problems which depressed the value of
banks’ assets; and
BIS Review   34/1999
2
(iii)  The tight monetary policy to stabilize inflation and exchange rates, and the concomitant high
interest rates, resulted in negative spreads for the banks.
All the factors I cited earlier  imply  depletions  of  banks’  capital  base.  And  the  longer  the  problems
remain,  the  sharper  the  depletion  of  banks’  capital  will  be.  Indeed,  the  results  of  the  due  diligence
being run on the banks in 1998 show how deep the impact of the crisis on the banking sector has been.
We fully realize that: (a) the recapitalization program is likely to be costly; (b) the recovery of the
economy relies upon the recovery of the banking system, and thus on the  recapitalization  program;
and (c) the failure of the recapitalization program would amount to the very costly delays to economic
recovery;  then  the  recapitalization  program  would  have  to  be  designed  and  implemented  very
carefully to assure its success. It is for this purpose that our bank recapitalization program carries the
following characteristics.
(i) 
The  estimates  of  recapitalization  needs  are  done  very  realistically,  or  even  conservatively
through the due diligence process conducted by international auditing firms on each and every
bank.  The  conservativeness  of  the  estimate  would  provide  some  cushion  to  the  changing
environment during the process of recapitalization.
(ii)  The  criteria  for  the  banks  to  be  eligible  to  participate  in  the  Government-supported
recapitalization program are made very clear and transparent.
(iii)  The  process  of  eligibility  evaluation  is  conducted  by  four  layers  of  committees,  each  layer
works  independently  of  the  others,  and  the  meetings  of  the  committees  are  attended  by
observers  from  international  financial  institutions.  This  will  assure  the  intensity  of  the
evaluation and add transparency to the whole process.
(iv)  Among  those  to  be  evaluated  by  the  committees,  aside  from  the  workability  of  the  business
plans, the ‘fit and proper’ of the management and the controlling owners of the banks is a very
important and determining aspect. This process will leave out bad managers as well as bad and
improper controlling owners from the post-restructuring banking sector of Indonesia.
It has been on the basis of the principles I cited earlier that we run our bank recapitalization program
to recapitalize those banks that we believe have a viable future together with the decision to liquidate
those banks that were not viable. Following an  assessment  by  international  auditors  of  the  banking
sector, we have classified each bank into one of three categories. So-called category A banks have a
capital adequacy ratio of 4% or more. Category B banks are those with a capital adequacy ratio of less
than 4% and more than minus 25%. Category C banks are the residual.
On 13 March 1999 the Government took a decisive step towards restructuring the private domestic
system and bringing it back to financial health: 38 banks – all 17 private category  C  banks  and  21
category  B  banks  –  have  been  closed  as  they  were  considered  deeply  insolvent  and  as  having  no
prospect  of  regaining  financial  viability.  Seven  large  category  B  banks  with  extensive  branch
networks have been taken over by the Government in the public interest to minimize disruption to the
payments  system.  These  seven  banks  will  be  restructured  speedily  to  improve  their  financial
performance  and  prepared  for  later  privatization.  Nine  category  B  banks  have  been  determined  as
eligible for recapitalisation by the Government to bring them to the minimum capital requirements.
Several  committees  and  international  consulting  firms  have  assessed  the  better  financial  positions,
quality of management and future prospects of these nine banks. Their owners have, however, until
April 21, 1999 to inject at least 20% of the banks’ capital requirements, the Government providing the
remaining  capital  in  the  form  of  bonds.  Finally,  73  category  A  banks  have  met  Bank  Indonesia’s
minimum capital adequacy standards and can compete without any public financial assistance. These
category  A  banks  will  be  reviewed  regularly  to  ensure  they  remain  in  good  financial  health  and
continue to observe all rules and regulations, focusing on three main criteria: their business plans, the
‘fit and proper’ test of their owners, and the nature of any capital injection.
3
BIS Review   34/1999
With  regard  to  the  state  banks,  all  regional  development  banks  will  be  recapitalized  by  the
Government such that they have a capital adequacy ratio of at least 4%. Mergers between the seven
existing state banks will allow us to create some stronger and healthier banks. For instance, four out
of the seven state banks will be merged to create Bank Mandiri, which is expected to comprise 30%
of  banking  system  deposits  in  Indonesia.  As  the  restructuring  of  the  state  banks  takes  place,  the
Government will inject additional capital needed by the banks on a step-by-step basis.
The cost of the bank restructuring program will be significant. However, every effort will be taken to
minimize this cost and in particular to recover loans from recalcitrant debtors. In terms of the interest
cost to the Government in 1999/2000, it is estimated at a total of Rp 34 trillion or Euro 3.5 billion. Of
this amount we believe around Rp 16 trillion will be recoverable from sales of assets pledged to IBRA
by the owners of the banks.
I should like to stress that it is not the intention of the Government to stay forever and dominate the
banking  sector.  The  Government’s  involvement  in  the  capitalization  of  the  banking  sector  is  only
temporary to help the sector recover from the deep problems it is currently experiencing. In three to
five  years’  time  the  government’s  share  in  the  private  banks  will  be  divested,  and  these  banks  are
expected to be pure privately owned banks once again. Nor is the intention of the Government to be
involved in the day-to-day operation of the banks during the three- to five-year period. We only need
to  make  sure  that  the  banks  are  run  properly  and  efficiently.  And  the  mechanism  of  the
recapitalization program has been designed such as to assure that these ideas are materialized.
I can also report to you today that we will continue our efforts in the future to improve the security of
our  financial  system  further.  We  will  implement  organizational  and  cultural  change  in  the  way  we
manage bank supervision. We will also review the workings of the amended bankruptcy law and make
alterations to ensure that the law works as intended to allow both domestic and international creditors
to gain security over the assets of debtors in default. I look forward to reporting our progress in these
matters to you in future meetings.
Ladies and gentlemen, I hope that I have given you a balanced picture of the current situation in the
Indonesian economy, banking system, and of the treatment of the broader financial obligations of the
Indonesian private sector.
BIS Review   34/1999
4
