Bank of Japan’s May report of recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 20 May 1999.
The Bank’s View2
Japan’s economy, at present, has stopped deteriorating, but clear signs of recovery have not
been observed yet.
With regard to final demand, business fixed investment has been on a downward trend, and
recovery  in  private  consumption  continues  to  be  weak  on  the  whole.  Net  exports  (exports
minus imports) are leveling off. Meanwhile, housing investment has been recovering. Public
works seem to be increasing rapidly against the background of the large increase in orders in
early spring.
Reflecting  such  developments  in  final  demand  and  continued  progress  in  inventory
adjustment, industrial production has stopped decreasing. The deterioration in corporate and
consumer  sentiment  seems  to  have  ceased  due  to  this  economic  situation  as  well  as  the
improvements in the financial environment, including the subsidence of the public’s anxiety
about  the  stability  of  Japan’s  financial  system  and  the  recovery  in  stock  prices.  However,
corporate  profits  remain  weak,  and  employment  and  household  income  conditions  are
deteriorating  as  the  unemployment  rate  has  been  marking  a  historical  high.  Conditions  in
corporate finance continue to improve, but firms’ concern about the availability of funds in
the future has not completely disappeared yet.
As for the outlook, with the progress in inventory adjustment gradually paving the way for a
recovery in production, the government’s economic measures and the monetary easing by the
Bank will continue to underpin the economy. Improvements in the financial environment are
also  expected  to  exert  positive  effects  on  the  economy  gradually.  With  respect  to  corporate
activities, however, firms have started taking steps toward full-scale restructuring, facing the
continued  decline  in  profits.  Although  such  corporate  restructuring  is  expected  to  improve
productivity,  it  may,  in  the  short  run,  reduce  fixed  investment  and  discourage  household
expenditure through the resulting deterioration in employment and income conditions. Under
such  circumstances,  it  is  still  difficult  to  expect  an  immediate  self-sustained  recovery  in
private demand. Overall economic developments require careful monitoring in consideration
of  the  above  points.  It  is  also  important  to  promote  structural  reform,  while  preparing  an
environment that facilitates such reform, in order to assure the economy’s sustained growth in
the medium term.
With  regard  to  prices,  reflecting  the  large  output  gap,  domestic  wholesale  prices  are  on  a
downtrend,  and  corporate  service  prices  are  weakening.  Import  prices  are  rising  due  to  the
bottoming  out  of  international  commodity  prices  such  as  crude  oil  prices.  Consumer  prices
remain weak. In relation to price developments in the future, distinct narrowing in the output
gap  is  still  unlikely  for  the  time  being  even  though  the  economy  has  stopped  deteriorating.
                                                     
1 
2 
This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary
Policy Meeting was held on May 18, 1999.
The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board
at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on May 18 as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review   58/1999
Furthermore, the decline in wages is likely to continue exerting downward pressure on prices.
Under such circumstances, prices are expected to remain weak.
In the financial markets, the overnight call rate has stayed at nearly zero, and confidence about
the  availability  of  liquidity  is  growing  among  many  financial  institutions.  Interest  rates  on
term instruments are declining further, reflecting the market’s view that monetary easing will
continue for some time. Moreover, the Japan premium has almost disappeared.
Long-term interest rates, on the whole, have declined against the background of no clear signs
of  economic  recovery  and  the  decline  in  term  interest  rates.  Stock  prices  have  been  firm
reacting to the further rise in U.S. stock prices since March.
The amount outstanding of funds in the call money market has been gradually decreasing. To
date, this has not led to any difficulty in funds settlement, but close attention should be paid to
future market developments.
With  regard  to  corporate  finance,  credit  demand  for  economic  activities  such  as  fixed
investment  remains  weak.  Firms’  moves  to  increase  their  on-hand  liquidity  in  the  face  of
difficult fund-raising conditions are settling down. As a result, credit demand in the private
sector has weakened further.
Private  banks  have  basically  retained  their  cautious  lending  attitude.  However,  they  are  no
longer constrained by severe fund-raising conditions and insufficient capital base. Under these
circumstances, major banks have started to extend loans more actively than before, especially
for  projects  involving  relatively  small  credit  risks,  and  their  lending  stance  is  gradually
becoming positive.
As a result of these developments, credit conditions, which tightened previously, have eased
somewhat.
The  situation  continues  to  warrant  careful  monitoring  on  the  extent  to  which  private  banks
will ease their lending stance, and how this change will affect firms’ propensity to invest.
BIS Review   58/1999
2
