Mr Duisenberg outlines the future development of the financial sector in the euro area
Speech by Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, at the XXIVth IOSCO
Annual Conference in Lisbon on 25 May 1999.
Introduction
The euro area constitutes a large economy, of a size comparable to that of the United States. That
fact alone places the euro and the euro area financial system firmly “centre stage” in the global
economy. Consequently, it is essential for the euro area financial system to be stable and efficient,
not only for the benefit of the euro area economy itself, but also for the world economy.
The introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999 had a profound impact on financial systems both
within  and  outside  the  euro  area.  Part  of  this  impact  was  immediately  evident  in  the  rapid
integration of money markets and the replacement of national currencies by the euro in foreign
exchange markets. The fact that the changeover to the euro progressed smoothly is a reassuring
indication that the euro area financial system is able to remain stable during times of structural
change.
However, a further part of the impact on financial systems – most likely the greater part – will be
experienced over a longer period of time. The euro is likely to become one of the major factors
reshaping  both  the  domestic  financial  system  of  the  euro  area  and  the  global  financial  system.
This process should lead to a more efficient allocation of finance within the global economy, but
it will also call for the ability to adjust to structural changes in order for stable financial systems
to be maintained.
Today,  I  should  like  to  outline  the  likely  future  development  of  the  financial  sector  and  of  the
financial markets in the euro area as envisaged by the European Central Bank (ECB). To this end,
I shall first briefly discuss the impact of the introduction of the euro on domestic money markets.
I shall then turn my attention to likely developments in the financial markets and in the banking
system, before concluding with some remarks on how these likely developments might affect the
stability and efficiency of the financial system in the euro area.
Impact of the introduction of the euro on money markets
Until the end of 1998 the various money markets of the euro area still displayed a certain number
of  distinctive  features.  However,  following  the  changeover  to  the  euro  they  were  integrated
swiftly and smoothly at the beginning of January 1999.
A highly competitive single money market has already emerged in the euro area, as banks were
well prepared for the changeover to the euro and the TARGET system has provided an efficient
means  of  making  cross-border  payments.  In  particular,  transaction  volumes  in  money  markets
rapidly reached high levels while typical bid/ask spreads decreased almost  immediately  to  very
low levels. This indicates the depth and high degree of liquidity that the euro money market has
already achieved. A feature of the current stage of the development of the  euro  money  market,
which is particularly worthy of note, is that differences in overnight interest rate spreads mainly
reflect  differences  in  the  credit  standing  of  banks  rather  than  that  of  the  country  in  which  the
transaction takes place.
1
BIS Review   63/1999
These structural developments are, of course, positive. For the Eurosystem (i.e. the ECB and the
national central banks of the 11 countries participating in the euro area) the existence of a deep
and liquid money market enhances the efficiency of monetary policy operations. In this respect, I
should like to draw your attention to the “market friendliness” of the framework applied by the
Eurosystem to the conduct of monetary policy operations. By this I mean that the framework is
based on tenders in which markets decide who receives the liquidity. The standing facilities are
open and recourse to the marginal lending facility is not subject to scrutiny. In addition, the list of
eligible collateral is extensive.
Prospects for the development of financial markets in the euro area
Looking now at the financial markets from a broader perspective, it is important to remember that
the financial markets of the euro area began the process of integration before the start of Stage
Three of Economic and Monetary Union. An indication of the pace of integration before January
1999 is provided in particular by the evolution of spreads between yields on the bonds issued by
the various central governments of the euro area. These spreads narrowed continuously from mid-
1995  onwards  and  their  volatility  was  also  noticeably  reduced  during  this  period.  Factors
contributing  to  this  favourable  pattern  included  increased  convergence  towards  low  rates  of
inflation  across  the  euro  area  during  Stage  Two,  the  gradual  reduction  and  finally  the
disappearance  of  exchange  rate  risks,  the  commitment  of  governments  towards  improving  the
sustainability of public finances, and the increase in the depth and liquidity of government bond
markets.
As I have already said on a previous occasion, I believe that the interest rate markets of the euro
area will increasingly provide an accurate reflection of the differences in credit quality between
various issuers as well as differences in liquidity between bonds, while divergences purely related
to the location of market participants within the euro area will become less and less relevant.
It seems highly likely that the capital markets of the euro area will become even deeper and more
liquid over time, and hence more efficient. The number of market participants is likely to increase
as the cost of financial market transactions is lowered, and the sophistication of position-taking
activities is likely to increase further as market participants equip themselves with more refined
methods of adjusting their portfolio exposures.
One  particular  area  of  the  capital  market  in  which  the  markets  in  euro  area  countries  have
traditionally been a lot less active than in the United States is the corporate bond and commercial
paper  market.  However,  there  are  good  reasons  to  expect  that  corporate  bond  and  commercial
paper issuance in the euro area will gather pace in the future. During the first few months of this
year we have already seen a fair amount of activity in this field.
For large companies in particular, it makes sense from the point of view of efficiency to have all
the  methods  of  financing  at  their  disposal,  namely  bond  and  paper  financing,  bank  loans  and
equity  financing.  Indeed,  since  the  credit  ratings  of  many  large  companies  are  better  than  the
credit ratings of most banks, this should lead to savings on the cost of capital for the corporate
sector. The introduction of the euro should provide sufficient depth and liquidity for the corporate
debt market that would guarantee competitive pricing.
On  the  demand  side,  the  reduced  borrowing  of  the  public  sector  will  leave  more  room  for  the
private sector to issue debt securities. As you know, the amount of public debt in the euro area is
still  high,  and  we  trust  that  governments  will  keep  their  commitment  to  bring  it  down  to  more
sustainable levels as agreed in the Stability and Growth Pact. In addition, the euro area has to save
BIS Review   63/1999
2
in order to be able to take care of its future pension payments, and a part of these savings is likely
to be invested in corporate debt securities. An increase in global demand for euro-denominated
debt  securities  is  also  expected  as  the  euro  becomes  a  major  reserve  currency.  Moreover,  the
demand for higher-risk euro-denominated debt securities is likely to increase, particularly as the
current low level of sovereign yields increases incentives to search for higher yields.
Turning to equity markets, and first to  the  institutional  set-up  of  stock  exchanges,  an  evolution
towards  more  integration  and  greater  market  efficiency  is  already  apparent.  As  consolidation
within  the  financial  services  sector  has  increased  the  size  and  geographical  reach  of
intermediaries and fund management institutions, they seem to be pressing for market-places to
become  more  concentrated  in  order  both  to  reduce  costs  and  to  enhance  liquidity.  In  addition,
some companies have recently announced that they are reviewing their listing practices with the
aim of reducing costs by cutting back on the number of exchanges in which they are listed.
However, this development towards greater concentration does not necessarily mean that trading
is  concentrated  only  in  a  few  exchanges.  A  possible  pattern  of  development  could  also  be  for
different stock exchanges to concentrate on specific types of companies (“blue-chips”, specialised
industries, small companies and new companies, for example). In any case, the physical location
of  stock  exchanges  is  becoming  less  relevant  as  screen-based  trading  with  remote  access  is
becoming more widely used.
With  regard  to  investor  behaviour,  an  increasing  number  of  equity  market  investors  already
appear to be taking positions on the equity market of the euro area from a sectoral rather than a
national  perspective.  Area-wide  equity  indices  have  been  made  available  by  various  market
participants, thus providing investors with opportunities to monitor area-wide equity positions as
well as, in some instances, positions in area-wide industrial sectors.
The fact that the euro area (and EU) equity markets are becoming more integrated, more liquid
and deeper is good for market efficiency, and a more efficient allocation of capital should mean
that equity financing becomes more readily available for companies.
I should also like to mention that a prudent, harmonised regulatory framework, on the one hand,
and harmonised market practices, on the other, are key factors guaranteeing a favourable outcome
for these structural changes. In these areas a lot of work is under way, and much has still to be
achieved  in  order  to  pave  the  way  for  truly  integrated  financial  markets.  Harmonisation  in,  for
example,  repurchase  agreements,  national  company  laws  including  bankruptcy  laws,  and  other
aspects  of  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework,  would  enhance  legal  clarity  and  certainty  and
thereby improve the efficiency and stability of the financial markets.
Indeed,  the  European  Commission  recently  published  an  Action  Plan  containing  priorities  and
timetables for measures aimed at improving the single market for financial services. In the Action
Plan,  measures  are  proposed  to  advance  the  harmonisation  of  the  legal  framework  and  market
information, as well as to facilitate investors’ operations throughout the single market.
In  this  respect,  I  should  also  like  to  pay  tribute  to  the  International  Organization  of  Securities
Commissions (IOSCO) for its efforts. Although I have focused mainly on the financial system of
the  euro  area,  we  can  clearly  see  that  the  euro  area  financial  system  is  an  integral  part  of  the
global financial system. With this  in  mind,  I  should  like  to  express  my  support  for  the  aims  of
IOSCO  to  promote  high  standards  of  regulation  in  order  to  maintain  just,  efficient  and  sound
markets.
3
BIS Review   63/1999
Prospects for the development of banking systems in the euro area
Turning now to likely developments in the banking system, it is important to note that the euro
area  financial  systems  in  general  and  the  banking  sector  in  particular  have,  until  now,  been
relatively national and fragmented with little cross-border retail activity. However, it is envisaged
that the euro will add weight to a number of fundamental factors that are increasing the pressure
for structural change. With these structural changes I mean not only consolidation, which seems
inevitable,  but  also  increased  cross-border  co-operation  and  mergers.  In  short,  the  euro  area
banking  sector  is  expected  in  the  future  to  look  and  behave  more  like  the  banking  sector  of  a
single economy.
In  addition  to  and  reinforced  by  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  other  factors  that  are  leading  to
changes in the financial landscape include technological development, globalisation and changes
in  what  consumers  and  firms  expect  from  the  financial  system  and  financial  service  providers.
These factors are reshaping the business of banking as well as the financial system as a whole.
Economies  of  scale  and  scope  may  have  been  changing  in  different  areas  of  banking  and  even
taking  different  directions.  For  example,  the  rapid  development  of  information  technology  has
made  the  collection  and  processing  of  information  considerably  cheaper,  but  at  the  same  time
technological investments are taking a larger share of banks’ resources. Therefore, economies of
scale in some aspects of the collection of information may have been reduced, but at the same the
time investments in more sophisticated technology have increased economies of scale and scope
in some areas of banking. While I do not wish to go into detail on this matter, the general picture
that emerges is that the banking industry has to be in a position to adjust to a new situation and
take these factors into consideration.
Indeed, in the course of the last few months, a number of bank mergers in the euro area, including
mergers  between  relatively  large  institutions,  have  been  announced  or  are  being  contemplated.
Such  “high-profile”  mergers  are  likely  to  contribute  to  an  acceleration  of  the  pace  of  both  the
consolidation and integration of the banking systems of the euro area.
However,  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  recent  pattern  of  consolidation  represents  part  of  a
longer-term trend in the European banking industry, as is highlighted by the large decline in the
number  of  credit  institutions  in  the  euro  area  countries  over  the  past  decade  or  so.  In  the  mid-
1980s  there  were  more  than  11,000  credit  institutions  in  the  euro  area  countries;  today  they
number around 8,000. This sharp decline in the number of credit institutions is mainly the result
of  mergers  among  savings  and  co-operative  banks,  which  epitomise  what  one  may  call
“consolidating” or “defensive” mergers – mainly aimed at cutting costs and diversifying risks but
also at reaching a size of own funds compatible with a regulation that has been agreed at the EU
level.
So  far,  this  consolidation  process  has  taken  place  mainly  within  national  boundaries,  with  the
possible exception of the Benelux and Nordic countries. The preference for domestic mergers (as
opposed to cross-border mergers) may be explained by the fact that the relevant market for retail
services  remains  national  rather  than  pan-European.  Furthermore,  the  scope  for  cost-cutting
appears to be larger if the merging institutions have overlapping operations. The fact that cultural
“proximity”, notably in the corporate style of governance and management, is traditionally seen
as a key factor in the success of mergers may also have played a role. However, from my own
professional  experience  of  running  a  truly  pan-European  bank,  I  could  add  that  professional
identity is a much stronger force for unity than national identity is a force for separation.
Conclusion
BIS Review   63/1999
4
I have outlined the likely pattern of evolution that we envisage for the euro area financial system.
Summing up the various elements, we see a pattern which leads towards a financial system that
should  perform  its  functions  more  efficiently  using  the  advantages  available  to  the  financial
system of a large economy. A large financial system can be more readily versatile, i.e.  provide
investors and those in need of financing with a full range of options to choose from according to
their requirements.
What does all of this mean for financial stability in the euro area?
First of all, I should like to remind you that the financial system of the euro area showed a high
degree  of  stability  during  last  year’s  period  of  financial  turbulence  as  well  as  during  the  rather
dramatic structural shift connected to the changeover to the euro. In the former case, it is true that
there was a significant spillover effect for the euro area markets, but they recovered quickly and
without suffering any lasting damage. There was no disruption to any of the basic functions of the
financial system, and public confidence in it remained strong throughout.
Second, the foreseen structural changes require, as I mentioned earlier, the need for adjustment to
be  taken  seriously  by  all  participants  in  the  financial  system.  This  adjustment  appears  to  have
intensified recently: there has been an increase in merger activity, an establishment of alliances
and an introduction of new products and services, often based on modern information technology.
The process of structural change contains risks, but if these risks are identified early and analysed
carefully,  they  do  not  present  a  threat  to  financial  stability.  After  all,  we  are  talking  about
decision-making  and  planning  by  people  who  are  dealing  with  risks  every  day  at  the  highest
professional  level.  In  this  regard,  the  smooth  changeover  of  the  financial  system  to  the  euro
demonstrates the virtues of efficient and careful forward planning.
Third,  I  do  not  view  efficiency  and  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  being  contradictory.  In
many  ways  these  qualities  actually  support  each  other  by  laying  a  firm  foundation  for  the
financial  system.  An  inefficient  financial  system,  in  addition  to  being  costly  to  society,  can  be
more vulnerable to shocks.
At the ECB, we play our part in the evolution of the euro area financial system by providing it
with stable monetary conditions. By creating an environment of price stability, we allow private
sector agents to focus their attention on the questions that are most relevant to their activities and
to  take  advantage  of  the  benefits  of  this  stable  environment,  such  as  the  lengthening  of  their
planning horizons.
5
BIS Review   63/1999
