Mr Mboweni speaks on the role of the
South African Reserve Bank in developing the economy
Speech given by Mr Tito Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank at the Western Cape
Exporter of the year awards dinner on 1 September 1999.
 Many central bank governors fight a constant battle against public misconceptions about the central
bank’s role in the economy. After only a short period in the job, I have realised that I, too, will have
my work cut out for me in explaining the South African Reserve Bank’s responsibilities.
As I discovered last week when I took part in a phone-in programme on SABC radio, there are people
who mistakenly believe the Bank can provide them with personal loans, or loans for their businesses. I
had to explain that I am not a personal banker with a limitless cheque book.
I  was  also  worried  to  find  that  some  of  the  callers  did  not  have  a  good  understanding  of  the
relationship between interest rates and inflation. Once again, I realised the need for education and for
continued emphasis on the Bank’s main task – the achievement and maintenance of financial stability.
There might be people who are getting bored with my message. But I think it is well worth repeating,
as even people with a good understanding of the economy sometimes expect us to be miracle-workers
who will bring new life to the economy.
When I was invited to speak here tonight, my hosts asked me to talk about the role of the central bank
in developing the economy, with a particular focus on exports. As was highlighted in the Governor’s
Address last week, the central bank’s main contribution to economic development and export growth
is to achieve price stability.
That must come as a disappointment to those exporters here tonight who hoped I would say something
about the rand’s exchange rate against the currencies of SA’s major trading partners.
The best that I can do on the topic of the exchange rate is to recount a story about the euro, which has
recovered somewhat from its weakness against the dollar. Please bear in mind that I tell the story with
my tongue firmly in my cheek.
Research  published  last  week  by  4Cast,  a  London-based  economic  consultancy,  suggests  that  an
inverse  relationship  has  developed  between  the  performance  of  the  euro  and  the  frequency  of
statements by European Central Bank officials about the currency. The periods during which central
bank  officials  kept  quiet  about the  euro coincided  with  relative  stability  or  appreciation  of  the  euro
against the dollar. The researchers were worried that when the ECB officials return from their summer
holidays and start talking again, the currency could resume its slide to parity with the dollar.
I know there are people who might try to read some deeper meaning into that story. I tell this story
simply to illustrate that I believe “less is more” when it comes to comments on the rand.
The only comment I will make is to reaffirm that we will not set targets, formal or informal, for the
exchange rate. As you know, we have started making preparations for implementing inflation targeting
as our monetary policy framework. We believe the inflation targeting route is incompatible with trying
to  force  the  currency  into  a  straightjacket.  And,  in  any  case,  fixed  exchange  rates  are  globally
becoming  a  thing  of  the  past  as  more  and  more  countries  move  towards  flexible  exchange  rate
systems.
In the Governor’s Address last week, we outlined our approach to inflation targeting and we reported
on the organisational changes being made to the monetary policy decision-making process.
We  also  noted  that  the  South  African  economy  had  recovered  remarkably  well  from  the  effects  of
financial  turbulence  in  Asia  and  Russia.  Many  tentative  signs  of  a  return  to  financial  stability  had
appeared in the economy.
1
BIS Review 92/1999
This  was  again  confirmed  by  July’s  money  supply  and  bank  credit  figures  which  became  available
yesterday. These figures show that for the first time since 1993, total bank credit extension increased
at a rate of below 10%. This is good news indeed.
The  markets  have  by  now  digested  last  week’s  Address.  We  have  noted  that  analysts  and
commentators  welcomed  the  decision  to  formalise  monetary  policy  decisions  by  establishing  a
Monetary Policy Committee, or MPC, which  will  comprise the  governor, the deputy  governors  and
senior bank officials.
However, market participants are apparently disappointed by our decision not to publish the minutes
of the MPC meetings.
There are costs and benefits for the Reserve Bank to publish the minutes of internal meetings. In the
interests of greater policy transparency, we will issue brief statements to the public at regular intervals
to  provide  information  on  overall  economic  conditions  and  the  monetary  policy  stance.  These
statements will usually follow MPC meetings, which will take place every six weeks.
Frequent and predictable communication with the financial markets is not the only way in which we
hope  to  achieve  better  public  understanding  of  monetary  policy.  Regular  reporting  to  Parliament’s
finance  portfolio  committee  meetings,  which  are  open  to  the  media  and  the  public,  is  another
important component of getting our message across. That is why I was pleased to accept the portfolio
committee’s  invitation  to  brief  its  members  in  Parliament  and  take  questions  on  the  Governor’s
Address later this month.
The  release  last  week  of  the  Governor’s  Address  and  the  Annual  Economic  Report  was  a  good
opportunity to take stock of the economy after a particularly difficult time.
As exporters, you will know that global demand for South Africa’s exports suffered a severe setback
in the second half of last year as a result of the turmoil in international financial markets.
As  a  result  of  the  crisis  in  Asia,  the  share  of  South  African  exports  destined  for  Asian  countries,
including Japan, declined from more than 21% of total exports in the third quarter of 1997 to about
15% in the fourth quarter of last year. African economies were also experiencing hard times, and the
contribution of exports to Africa fell slightly to below 14% of total exports over the same period.
South African exporters did, to some extent, offset the effects of the recession in these economies by
redirecting trade flows to markets less affected by the crisis. Exports to the United States, for example,
increased by about 30% in rand terms between 1997 and 1998.
But the effects of the global crisis and continued buoyancy in imports were such that the annualised
current  account  deficit  swelled  to  2.6%  of  gross  domestic  product  in  the  second  half  of  last  year.
Although the deficit was not large by international standards, it nevertheless raised concerns that the
level of spending, especially on public sector capital formation, could not be sustained.
Last year’s tightening in monetary policy, and the improvement in international economic conditions
as the turmoil in financial markets subsided, caused a marked recovery in the current account this year.
The improvement in the current account reflected a revival in international demand for South African
exports and a significant contraction in local demand for imports.
Export volumes rebounded satisfactorily in the first quarter of this year, but lost some momentum in
the second quarter, when the current account slipped into deficit again.
It seems that the current account may remain in deficit for the remainder of the year, although exports
should  still  benefit  from  the  lagged  effects  of  the  rand’s  depreciation,  the  resurgence  of  foreign
demand and an increase in international commodity prices.
As  the  lagged  effects  of  interest  rate  cuts  continue  feeding  through  to  economic  activity  and  the
recovery gains momentum, the demand for imports can be expected to strengthen. The turnaround in
the inventory cycle, which appears to have begun in the second quarter of this year, will heighten local
demand for imports.
BIS Review 92/1999
2
The deficit on the current account should be financed comfortably by net capital inflows. Barring any
unforeseen shocks on the international front, the South African economy has entered a period of more
rapid growth coupled with a fairly comfortable balance of payments situation.
But the expected increase in the economic growth rate from last year’s paltry half-a-percent will fall
far short of the levels needed to make inroads into South Africa’s high unemployment rate. Many of
our  people  remain  poverty-stricken,  living  below  the  breadline  in  makeshift  shacks  that  do  little  to
keep out the winter cold. To them, the concept of financial stability might be remote, but the only way
in which their lot can be improved on a sustainable basis is if the Reserve Bank does not deviate from
its course.
Globalisation of financial markets means that countries that are out of step with the rest of the world
will  be  punished  swiftly  and  severely.  For  our  part,  we  must  continue  policies  and  programmes  to
contain inflation. We must also maintain sound and efficient financial institutions and markets.
In other words, the main thrust of monetary policy has to be the maintenance of financial stability –
that  is,  stability  of  prices,  financial  institutions  and  financial  markets.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  every
time you invite me to occasions such as these, expect to hear the same thing.
Thank you.
3
BIS Review 92/1999
