Mr Duisenberg comments on the past and future of European integration:
a central banker’s perspective
The  1999  Per  Jacobsson  Lecture  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central
Bank, held in Washington DC on 26 September 1999.
 Introduction
1.
I feel honoured to have been invited to give this year’s prestigious Per Jacobsson lecture before such a
distinguished  audience.  The  euro  was  launched  successfully  almost  nine  months  ago.  This  was  a
historic  moment,  with  11  countries  voluntarily  relinquishing  sovereignty  over  monetary  policy.
Technically  the  changeover  proceeded  remarkably  smoothly.  Former  national  money  markets  were
rapidly integrated, in no small measure due to the smooth functioning of TARGET, the new European
payment  system  which,  generally  speaking,  worked  well  from  the  outset.  The  euro  is  traded  on  all
international financial markets. Moreover, the euro has been introduced in a climate of prevailing price
stability  in  the  euro  area.  This  is  the  result  of  a  process  of  convergence  in  which  there  has  been  a
general decrease in European inflation rates over recent years, from – in the case of some countries –
significantly higher levels in previous years.
The introduction of the euro is neither an isolated nor a purely economic event. It is another, yet very
important, step in the  process  of  European  integration.  The  process began  more  than  half  a  century
ago. The creation of the euro is not the end of that process either. Today, I should like to briefly look
back, but mainly look ahead. My perspective is that of a central banker. The nature of this perspective
will become clear in the course of my lecture.
Dealing  with  European  integration  and  with  the  new  European  single  currency  is  particularly
appropriate  in  the  context  of  this  lecture  series.  Per  Jacobsson  has  spent  his  professional  career
pursuing sound money. This is the very same challenge that faces us: making the euro a sound – that is
to say stable – currency.
The history of European integration
2.
Let  me  first  deal  briefly  with  the  history  of  European  integration.  This  process  has  been  strongly
driven by political motives. The main underlying aim was to avoid a recurrence in the future of the
wars which devastated 20th century Europe. To that end, central Europe’s largest country, Germany,
should be firmly embedded in a European structure. As Thomas Mann has aptly put it: “a European
Germany,  rather  than  a  German  Europe”.  Without  a  common  European  framework,  tensions  could
arise again between Germany and other countries, France in particular. European integration should
serve the objective of creating a peaceful, stable and prosperous Europe. The unification of Germany
almost a decade ago, and the removal of the iron curtain have placed Germany even further, as it were,
in  the  heart  of  Europe.  These  fundamental  changes  make  clear  that  the  motives  for  European
integration are no less valid today than 50 years ago.
The  main  vehicle  for  European  integration  has  been  economic  integration,  via  the  coal  and  steel
industry,  from  establishing  a  customs  union,  the  European  Monetary  System,  to  the  Single  Market
programme and the introduction of the euro. “Trade, do not fight” or perhaps better “Trade and you
will not fight” was the basic philosophy. Given this background, it is striking that economists all too
often assess the costs and benefits of European integration in purely economic terms and in a rather
static context. This is clearly too narrow an approach.
Nonetheless, the economics of European integration are important. The political objectives can only be
met if economic integration is successful and placed on a sound economic footing. This is also where
the role of the central banker comes in. He or she should not and does not decide on the steps to be
1
BIS Review 102/1999
taken in the integration process. That is in the realm of politics and is also market-driven. The central
banker advises and points out the conditions which have to be met for certain steps to be taken safely.
The  reverse  is  also  true:  the  central  banker  and  central  banks  are  for  their  part  influenced  by  the
integration process, and the greater the level of integration in the monetary field, the greater the impact
upon them. The central bank and the central banker are operating in an environment, which is affected
by the ongoing integration process. This has to be taken into account. Moreover, the question arises as
to whether a single monetary policy ultimately calls for further integration in other areas.
In retrospect, it can be concluded that, thus far, the European integration process has, on balance, been
successful. In our part of Europe we have experienced peace since the process was initiated and we
have seen a continuous growth in earnings and wealth. The further process of gradual integration has
now culminated in the emergence of a single currency.
There  is  no  room,  however,  for  complacency.  Looking  back,  let  me  also  draw  some  more  specific
conclusions:
1. 
The integration process has been marked by ups and downs, often in step with the course of
the business cycle or in connection with major shocks, such as German unification. The road
has been long and winding, sometimes bumpy.
2. 
3. 
4. 
Long ago European integration reached the point of no return. There is no alternative but to
continue  down  the  path  of  integration.  Economic  integration  has  generated  its  own
dynamics. It is no longer completely dependent on political initiatives to propel it forward.
Overall,  however,  the  political  component  of  the  European  integration  process  is  still
essential and should not be forgotten.
Politicians should clarify the objectives of the European integration process, explaining them
to  European  citizens  and  pointing  out  the  steps  envisaged  in  the  years  ahead.  The  role  of
central bankers is to be critical, yet at the same time constructive. They should indicate the
economic  consequences  and  the  risks  of  certain  steps,  stipulating  under  which  conditions
certain steps can safely be taken. It is better to take a step later, but successfully, than to take
it  prematurely  and  then  fail  and  fall  back  further.  Such  a  role  will  not  always  make  the
central banker popular. He or she will often be perceived as stepping firmly on the brakes.
Nonetheless, I am convinced that it is the best service he or she can provide in furthering the
progress  of  the  integration  process.  It  may  sound  paradoxical,  but  by  continuously
emphasising  the  importance  of  fulfilling  the  convergence  criteria,  central  bankers  have
contributed  to  making  possible  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  It  has  perhaps  already  been
forgotten by some, but this event was not considered very likely by  many observers,  even
close to the date on which it actually happened.
European integration is an ongoing process. It will continue. What does the future hold in store? Let
me now turn to this issue.
3.
The future of European integration
Introduction
3.1
European  integration  is  a  task  of  great  magnitude,  and  will  remain  so  in  the  next  century.  It  offers
many opportunities. It faces many challenges. I would classify these challenges in three categories and
look at them from the perspective of the central banker:
1. 
2. 
3. 
How to cope with the accession of new countries to the EU and the euro area.
How to make the euro and Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) a success.
How to develop the role of Europe, the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Eurosystem
(i.e.  the  ECB  and the eleven  national  central  banks  of  the  EU  Member  States  which  have
adopted the euro) in the world.
BIS Review 102/1999
2
I shall now discuss these challenges in turn.
How to make the euro and EMU a success
3.2
In the first category, I would make a distinction between what central bankers can do or what is within
their control, or what they can influence on the one hand, and what the outside world should do or is
likely to do with an impact on the central bank world, on the other.
3.2.1
The role of central bankers
The most important task and challenge for the Eurosystem is to build up a track record of actual price
stability in the euro area. Action speaks louder than words. Showing in practice that we are capable of
providing stable prices is what really counts. We have to ensure that European citizens are confident
that the euro is a currency, which can sustain its value over time, and that the ECB is an institution
which they can trust. The ECB should be perceived as an institution that says what it does and does
what it says.
The  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  should  develop  into  truly  European  institutions.  They  should  always
take  their  decisions  and  conduct  their  analyses  from  a  euro  area-wide  perspective.  Although  some
good progress has been made in this regard, there is still room for further improvement.  Additional
efforts will also be required in finalising the process of setting up and consolidating the ECB and the
Eurosystem.  For  instance,  the  ECB  began  life  with  a  staff  of  around  400  persons,  which  in  the
meantime has grown to more than 700. It is likely to grow further in the years ahead, but it has to be
recognised that there are limits to the pace at which the organisation can be expanded. It is fair to say
that at the moment the ECB is capable of fulfilling its tasks, but that the pressure of work in  many
areas is still simply too high. As will become clear later in this lecture, some new tasks will have to be
taken up in the years ahead, while others need to be enhanced. While expanding, it has to be ensured
that the ECB remains an efficient organisation. What is more, the role of the ECB, as the central bank
representing the second largest economic area of the world with a population of 300 million people,
has  to  be  shaped  and  elaborated  further.  Setting  up  the  ECB  is  a  fascinating  process.  It  is  like  the
European  integration  process  itself,  but  on  a  micro  scale  and  under  very  great  pressure  of  time.  In
some respects, the process of establishing and consolidating the ECB and the Eurosystem could serve
as an example for the European integration process in a wider sense.
The Eurosystem will have to  explain time  and  again  what  monetary  policy  can and  cannot  do.  Our
mandate  of  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  in  the  medium  term  has  to  be  emphasised
continuously. Our medium-term orientation should be underlined. It is not in the power of a central
bank to deliver price stability on a short-term basis. We cannot and should not respond to every twist
and turn in economic data. The Eurosystem’s stance is not an “activist” one.
The  more  successful  we  are  at  maintaining  price  stability,  the  more  important  it  may  become  to
communicate  the  benefits  of  price  stability.  The  memories  of  periods  of  high  inflation  with  its
damaging consequences may fade. It cannot be taken for granted that the reason for the independence
of the ECB is widely known. Having such knowledge widely distributed is crucial for the maintenance
of  price  stability  in  the  longer  term.  No  central  bank,  however  independent  on  paper,  can  maintain
price stability in the longer term in practice if not supported in the execution of its mandate and in its
independence by a large part of the population. This is certainly the case for a new and young central
bank  which  has  the  task  of  conducting  monetary  policy  for  an  area  consisting  of  eleven  different
countries, with populations from different cultural, economic and historical backgrounds.
The euro is not and cannot be a cure for all European problems. The introduction of the euro will not
in itself solve the unemployment problem. Monetary policy is neither the cause nor the solution of the
unemployment problem. Structural reforms are needed to attack it. Fortunately, this insight is gaining
broader  support.  The  challenge  now  is  to  translate  it  into  sustained  action.  Carrying  out  structural
reforms is politically difficult, since they may be painful in the short term and only bear fruit over a
longer  time  scale.  However, it is encouraging  to  note that  those  countries  which  have  implemented
structural reforms have indeed been more effective in coping with the unemployment problem.
3
BIS Review 102/1999
I shall continue to focus on the unemployment problem. Unemployment is a waste of resources, leaves
human  potential  unused,  is  a  source  of  frustration  and  ultimately  undermines  the  stability  of  our
societies.  In  a  narrower  vein,  the  existence  of  a  high  level  of  unemployment  may  also  hamper  the
conduct of monetary policy. It can all too easily lead to calls for an expansionary monetary policy as a
solution  to  a  problem  which  monetary  policy  cannot  solve.  The  central  bank  could  become  the
scapegoat  for  failure  to  take  action  in  areas  where  action  on  the  part  of  others  is  what  is  in  fact
required.  Making  markets  more  adaptable  is  also  necessary  for  making  EMU  work.  Only  flexible
markets will be able to cope with the asymmetric shocks which can sometimes affect any monetary
union.  The  policies  needed  to  make  EMU  work  are,  at  the  same  time,  essential  to  reducing
unemployment. A single currency does not call for uniform wage developments or uniform economic
or social policies in general. On the contrary – where national or regional economic developments are
different,  this  should  be  reflected  in  different  policy  responses  and  wage  developments.  Moreover,
different reactions to similar problems make it possible to learn from each other.
The existence of a single currency and 11 fiscal authorities is a unique phenomenon. This  can  only
work if the Member States strictly apply the Stability and Growth Pact, which calls for the reduction
of government deficits to close to balance or to create a surplus in the medium term. In this way, room
is  created  for  letting  the  automatic  stabilisers  work  in  response  to  both  asymmetric  and  symmetric
shocks. Such a fiscal policy is required not only for EMU. It has its own merits. The ageing of the
population calls for such a policy line independently of EMU. The need for fiscal consolidation is not
just the result of creating the euro, but would be a key element in any sound fiscal policy in the euro
area. It remains to be seen whether the Stability and Growth Pact goes far enough in compensating for
the  absence  of  one  fiscal  authority  in  the  European  Union.  We  should  be  ready  to  learn  from
experience and adapt our institutional framework if and when the need arises. This applies, of course,
in  a  more  general  sense.  EMU  has  been  well  prepared,  but  actually  playing  the  game  is  always
different from preparing the game plan, important as this may be. A good game plan is necessary, but
not sufficient to win the game. While it is as yet unknown whether the Stability and Growth Pact will
be the last word on fiscal policies in the euro area, it is certain that a failure to adhere strictly to the
Pact would be a recipe for all manner of problems.
The Eurosystem has adopted a monetary policy strategy which is tailored to the unique conditions of
introducing a new currency. Our two-pillar strategy, with its emphasis on monetary developments and
a broadly based outlook for price stability, takes into account that economic behaviour may change as
a result of the introduction of the euro itself. In other words, it takes into account that the start of EMU
constitutes  a  structural  break.  This  already  indicates  that  after  some  time  our  experience  with
conducting monetary policy within this framework will have to be carefully evaluated. Over time our
strategy may evolve, perhaps in the direction of greater emphasis on one of the pillars. However, this
has  to  be  a  cautious  process,  since  one  of  the  main  functions  of  a  monetary  policy  strategy  is  to
provide a tool for clearly communicating monetary policy preparation and decisions. Thus, you cannot
change your monetary policy strategy as you would change suits. Continuity must be a feature of any
monetary policy strategy.
Although the primary task of the ECB and the Eurosystem is to conduct monetary policy, there are
also other tasks. It is only natural that up to now we have very much focused on our primary task, and
there is thus ample scope for further reflection upon and implementation of these other tasks. In this
context I am referring to the task and role of the ECB in maintaining financial stability. All modern
central banks are active in this area. They are involved in legislative processes relating to the financial
sector  and  play  a  role  in  designing  the  market  structure,  in  surveying  the  financial  markets  and  in
monitoring key players in the financial sector. The ECB is already involved in the first two areas. It
has an advisory role in respect of legislation concerning the financial sector. With regard to the market
structure, an active role is being played in the context of payment and securities settlement systems.
The other two roles could be developed further in the years to come.
The  European  financial  markets,  especially  those  for  longer-term  instruments,  are  not  yet  fully
integrated. There is not, as yet, a completely single market for financial services. Pan-European banks
are not yet a dominant feature of the European financial landscape. However, the situation is clearly
dynamic. The introduction of the euro did not trigger this process, but is certainly giving it a boost.
BIS Review 102/1999
4
Mergers and restructuring are taking place, albeit on an as yet predominantly national level. However,
this may, and probably will, change. The European Commission is taking many initiatives to further
enhance the single market for financial services. These initiatives are highly welcome. Financial sector
issues  will  tend,  more  and  more,  to  become  European  issues.  It  is  hard  to  predict  the  pace  of  this
process,  but  its  direction  is  clear.  This  conclusion  underlines  the  importance  of  the  ECB’s  further
strengthening  its  ability  to  deal  with  matters  relating  to  financial  stability.  Banking  supervision  is  a
national responsibility, although intensive international cooperation does exist, inter alia – though not
exclusively – at a European level. Given the current European financial landscape, the decentralised
structure  of  banking  supervision  in  Europe  can  be  defended.  However,  in  the  years  to  come  the
question of whether the adequacy of this framework is undermined by developments in the financial
sector  will  have  to be  closely  monitored  and analysed.  It  is  reassuring  that  the  Treaty  on  European
Union contains a provision which enables the Council of Ministers to further enhance the role of the
ECB in the field of banking supervision.
In the relatively near future the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins will be on the agenda.
This is another important step in the process of introducing the euro, albeit not so much for economic
reasons. The decisive step was of course taken this year through the irrevocable fixing of exchange
rates, but it is the step to be taken in early 2002 which will make the euro visible and the significance
thereof should not be underestimated. The introduction of the banknotes and coins will offer a further
opportunity for informing European citizens about the euro and EMU in general.
Open  communication  with  many  parties  –  from  the  economics  professor  to  the  members  of  the
European  Parliament  and  ordinary  European  citizens  –  is  high  on  the  agenda  of  the  ECB  and  the
Eurosystem. Our wish is to be open, transparent and, as far as possible, predictable. This is basically
the case for three reasons. First, a central bank which is understood will be more effective. Second, in
a democratic society the other side of the coin of central bank independence is that the central bank
should be accountable for its actions in fulfilling its mandate. Third, a clear framework for external
communication will structure and discipline internal debates. Our aim is to be predictable but let me
make  one  thing  quite  clear:  ultimately,  it  is  achieving  our  objective  of  price  stability  which  is  of
overriding importance. In other words – although we will try to avoid such a situation – we shall not
refrain from surprising the markets by taking an unexpected measure if we firmly believe that this is
necessary.  It  has  to  be  kept  in  mind  that  monetary  policy  is  different  from  mechanics:  it  always
involves  judgement.  If  that  were  not  the  case,  a  good  personal  computer  would  be  a  better  central
banker than an ordinary human being.
An important starting-point for our communication policy is that the Governing Council of the ECB is
a  collegiate  body  where  decisions  are  taken  from  a  euro  area-wide  perspective.  What  we  wish  to
communicate  are  the  decisions  of  that  body,  not  those  of  individuals.  This  does  not  rule  out  also
presenting the arguments for and against a certain decision. That is what we do in substance. Every
month  the  Vice-President  and  I  hold  a  press  conference  immediately  after  the  meeting  of  the
Governing Council. In an introductory statement I explain our decisions and on what basis we have
taken them. This is followed by a question and answer session with a large number of journalists. Both
the  introductory  statement  and  the  questions  and  answers  are  published  on  our  Website,  almost
without delay. I believe this arrangement is both a unique and – from our perspective  –  demanding
one. In addition, we publish a Monthly Bulletin in all 11 official languages of the European Union. We
publish  an  Annual  Report  and  there  are  many  speeches,  interviews  and  publications.  At  quarterly
intervals I appear at a hearing before the European Parliament. Nobody should doubt our intention to
be open and transparent. Unfortunately, the debate on this issue has often focused on our practice of
not publishing the minutes of Governing Council meetings. In substance my introductory statements
are  not  so  different  from  what  other  central  banks  would  call  minutes.  And  they  are  published
immediately. As to the substance of what we publish, two issues remain. First, we do not reveal voting
records for several reasons. As I said, the Governing Council is a collegiate body. What is relevant are
the final decisions of that body and the underlying arguments, not the individual positions. Publishing
individual  positions  can  easily  distract  from  what  is  really  important.  What  is  of  paramount
importance  in  the  European  context  is  that  members  of  the  Governing  Council  do  not  represent  a
particular  country  or  their  national  central  bank  and  that  decisions  should  always  be  based  on  euro
5
BIS Review 102/1999
area-wide considerations. This is a new principle and everything should be done to ensure that it  is
adhered  to.  Publishing  voting  records  could  easily  lead  to  placing  monetary  policy  debates  in  a
national context and even to putting pressure on individual Council members.
The second issue is that, for the time being, we do not publish our economic forecasts, including our
inflation forecast. Again we have several reasons for not yet doing so. It is crucial that our monetary
policy  strategy  be  well  understood.  Publishing  inflation  forecasts  could  easily  be  interpreted  as  the
ECB following a strategy of direct inflation targeting. This is not the case. Inflation forecasts have no
exclusive  role  in  our  monetary  policy  discussions  and  decisions.  They  are  among  many  other
indicators which  we  analyse in  the  context  of  the  second pillar  of  our strategy.  Publishing  inflation
forecasts could make them become self-fulfilling prophecies. This may hamper monetary policy where
forecast inflation is incompatible with maintaining price stability. Finally, due to the structural break
which the introduction of the euro constitutes, some time will be required to obtain estimates which
are  sufficiently  reliable  for  publication.  At  the  same  time,  I  would  acknowledge  that,  if  presented
clearly  within  the  context  of  our  strategy,  forecasts  may  also  enhance  our  transparency.  Thus  we
should indeed consider publishing forecasts at some point in the future.
In  our  external  communications  we  aim  to  speak  with  one  voice.  The  collegiate  character  of  the
Governing  Council  underpins  this  principle  and  facilitates  the  process  of  ensuring  that  monetary
policy decisions are transparent. This is not always easy and here we are clearly in a learning phase.
This is the case on a more general level too. Communication is more an art than a science. We will
certainly try to learn from experience. Verbal discipline and transparency are not contradictions: they
should be two sides of the same coin. We aim to be predictable. This will be easier if we can predict
how the media will interpret and publish our communications. This is not yet always the case.
Communication should not be a one-way street. The ECB must also take note of and be sensitive to its
environment in order to be effective in its own policies. Let me therefore now turn to the issue of our
wider environment.
3.2.2
The environment
Monetary policy cannot be conducted in isolation. The ECB cannot operate on an island. It needs a
strong European foundation. This is an issue which touches upon much more than just the framework
for  monetary  policy  or  even  for  EMU.  In  the  longer  term  having  a  single  currency  means  that
ultimately we are sitting in the same boat. It is inevitable that sometimes the single monetary policy
will not be perfectly tailored to a certain region or even to a certain country. This is the  case in  all
monetary  unions.  Optimal  currency  areas  do  exist  in  textbooks,  but  not  in  practice.  Thus,  for  a
monetary union to be viable, the absence of perfectly tailored policies will have to be accepted. This
may sometimes require a feeling of belonging together – social cohesion if you like. I believe this may
be even more fundamental than the discussion on the establishment of political union, which is often a
poorly  defined  concept.  Increasing  political  integration  and  creating  or  changing  joint  political
institutions may help to foster social cohesion but, like the ECB, these institutions cannot operate in a
vacuum. They also require a certain amount of social cohesion. Moving solely on the political front
may not be enough and it may not be the first or even most important thing to be accomplished.
Fostering this process of enhancing social cohesion is not a simple task. It is not something which can
or should be imposed from above, but it can, to a certain extent, be guided. It is a process which must
be both evolutionary and spontaneous. Its pace cannot be forced. This would be counterproductive. In
the end it is a matter of clarifying and further  developing  elements  of  a  common  European culture.
This implies articulating and emphasising the many things which Europeans already have in common,
but also building up more common experiences. Such experiences can serve to cement intra-European
relations. Having a single currency will automatically contribute to this process, not only because of
the  common  banknotes  and coins,  but  also because it  will  mean  dealing  with  identical  issues  in  all
European countries. There are many other areas in addition to politics and economics where this can
be done, such as the sciences, the arts, the press, television and so on. We should try to develop debate
on European issues at a European level. I attach great importance to explaining our monetary policies
at the hearings in the European Parliament. Monetary policy is conducted from a European perspective
and  should  therefore  primarily  be  explained  at  a  European  level.  More  attention  should  be  paid  to
BIS Review 102/1999
6
European  issues.  The  objectives  of  European  integration  should  be  explained  more  often  and  more
clearly.
The  fear that  Europe is  something  abstract, remote  and  threatening  to local  culture  should  be  taken
seriously.  However,  I  do  not  believe  that  there  necessarily  has  to  be  a  contradiction  between
preserving local culture and at the same time further developing a common European culture. On the
contrary, they can complement and enrich one another. It is necessary and inevitable that an increasing
number of issues be decided at a European level. Quite apart from issues relating to the euro, other
issues  such  as  those  relating  to  the  environment,  crime,  defence  and  migration  can  no  longer  be
considered to be purely national issues. In deciding on what should and should not be discussed on a
European  level,  the  principle  of  subsidiarity  should  continue  to  play  a  guiding  role.  What  can  be
decided at a lower level should be decided at a lower level.
I  do  not  close  my  eyes  to  the  existence  of  substantial  obstacles  to  further  integration  in  this  broad
sense. Perhaps the fact that the European Union has 11 official languages is the most important one. In
a sense it also poses a dilemma in our communications policy. On the one hand, it is very important to
reach all European citizens in their own language; on the other, should we not encourage a situation in
which as many Europeans as possible also speak one common language? Could our education systems
not make this happen? This cannot, of course, be accomplished overnight, but should we not at least
try to make the issue less sensitive than it still is?
History is in some respects another barrier. There is no alternative but to recognise this and work to
overcome it. I believe this lies at the heart of the European integration process. European integration
has been, is and will continue to be, a step-by-step process. It will certainly suffer setbacks at times,
but on balance it is contributing to peace, stability and prosperity.
What  often  strikes  me  is  the  negative,  gloomy  attitude  of  many  Europeans  towards  European
integration.  This  project  deserves  a  different  attitude.  We  should  see  Europe  as  an  opportunity,  a
positive challenge, rather than as a threat or a cost. European integration is a unique and fascinating
process and I wish that this were more strongly reflected in the attitude of many towards it. We also
need the energy which is born of such an attitude to deal with the challenge posed by the accession of
new countries to the European Union and the euro area. Let me now turn to that issue and deal with it
from the perspective of the ECB.
Coping with the accession of new countries to the EU and the euro area
3.3
Four  countries  of  the  European  Union  have  not  yet  adopted  the  euro.  They  may  well  join  in  the
medium term. A  greater challenge is the potential accession of still more  countries to the  European
Union  and  ultimately  the  euro  area.  Negotiations  are  currently  being  conducted  with  six  countries.
Negotiations with another six candidates may start soon. The so-called Copenhagen criteria must be
fulfilled for EU membership. They read as follows:
• 
stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law, human rights and respect for
and protection of minorities (political criteria);
  the  existence  of  a  functioning  market  economy  as  well  as  the  capacity  to  cope  with
competitive pressure and market forces within the European Union (economic criteria); and
the  ability  to  take  on  the  obligations  of  membership  including  adherence  to  the  aims  of
political, economic and monetary union (acquis communautaire criteria).
Accession is a political decision, but it is clear that the entry of new members into the EU will have
consequences for the ECB and the Eurosystem. The three steps of accession to the EU, becoming a
member of the exchange rate system ERM II and adopting the euro should be seen as a continuum.
This autumn, EMU issues will be on the agenda for negotiations. It is only natural that the Eurosystem
will become more involved in this process in the future both in its advisory role and because of the
implications  for  its  own  tasks  and  objectives.  The  Eurosystem  should  be  involved  in  the  accession
process and in other forms of cooperation with the applicant countries on all issues falling within its
exclusive  or  shared  areas  of  competence:  monetary  policy,  exchange  rate  policy,  payment  systems,
7
BIS Review 102/1999
financial  stability  and  the  impact  of  enlargement  on  the  Eurosystem  itself.  Currently  we  are  in  the
process of defining our position. Let me briefly outline some preliminary observations.
The Eurosystem needs to have an open and positive attitude towards the prospect of the accession of
new EU Member States, as well as their subsequent participation in ERM II and adoption of the euro.
The  Eurosystem  should  be  prepared  to  advise  these  countries  in  pursuing  appropriate  structural
reforms and stability-oriented policies in line with accession and convergence criteria. The Eurosystem
should  stand  ready  to  provide  technical  assistance  to  accession  countries.  The  accession  process
implies  a  significant  body  of  preparatory  work  on  the  part  of  the  central  banks  of  the  applicant
countries. This work may be facilitated by external technical assistance.
Equal  treatment  should  be  a  key  feature  of  the  accession  process.  Objective  and  uniform  criteria
should apply both to accession, and to participation in ERM II and adoption of the euro. These criteria,
related to each step of the process, should be implemented in a strict and effective manner, in order to
provide  the  countries  concerned  with  the  external  constraints  necessary  to  bring  their  economies  in
line with the respective standards and the final goal of EMU, while also avoiding any discrimination.
Against  the  background  of  different  starting-points  and  degrees  of  economic  transition,  and  the
difficulty of ascertaining the lead time for further headway towards real and nominal convergence, a
plurality  of  approaches  should  be  feasible  without  compromising  equality  of  treatment.  This  may
apply, in particular, to the timing of EU accession, ERM II membership, monetary policies (including
exchange  rate  strategies)  before  EU  accession  and  the  development  of  sound  financial  market
infrastructures.
In  accordance  with  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community,  the  Eurosystem  will  always
focus on the maintenance of price stability in the euro area. Hence, our involvement in the accession
process,  including  technical  assistance,  and  any  arrangement  or  other  forms  of  cooperation  with
accession  countries  must  be  without  prejudice  to  the  Eurosystem’s  independence  and  its  primary
objective.  The  process  for  ultimately  adopting  the  euro  is  clearly  stipulated  in  the  Treaty.  The
convergence criteria play an important role in this respect.
Institutional  adjustments  of  the  Eurosystem  required  by  enlargement  should  preserve  the  efficient
functioning of the Eurosystem and its ability to maintain price stability in an enlarged euro area. In the
case  of  previous  enlargements,  the  entry  of  new  Member  States  often  brought  about  so-called
“arithmetical adjustments” to the composition of the EU institutions, which entered into force with the
ratification of the Accession Agreements. However, an enlargement by as many as 12 new countries
may require more substantial adjustments. This  is  one of the reasons  why  a  new  Intergovernmental
Conference will be convened on enlargement-related issues by the end of this year. In this regard, as
provided for in the Treaty on European Union, the Eurosystem would stand ready to take part in any
initiative  taken  by  the  competent  EU  institutions  on  issues  falling  within  its  competence.  Such
institutional adjustments should be without prejudice to the fundamental features of the Statute of the
ESCB, namely the Eurosystem’s mandate and its independence.
Let me now turn to the role of Europe, the ECB and the Eurosystem in the world economy.
The role for Europe, the ECB and the Eurosystem in the world economy
3.4
The  euro  is  the  currency  of  an  economic  area  with  a  population  of  nearly  300  million  people  and
one-sixth of the world’s gross domestic product. Both numbers will increase as new countries enter
Monetary  Union.  After  the  US  dollar,  but  ahead  of  the  Japanese  yen,  the  euro  is  the  second  most
widely used currency on a world-wide scale. Given these facts, it is stating the obvious to say that the
euro and the Eurosystem are bound to play an important role in the world economy.
With regard to the international role of the euro, the Eurosystem has adopted a neutral stance. We shall
neither  hinder  nor  actively  promote  this  role,  but  leave  its  development  to  market  forces.  To  put  it
another way, there is and shall be no policy of challenging the position of the dollar, nor that of any
other currency. Of course, to the extent that the Eurosystem is successful in maintaining price stability
it will almost at the same time automatically foster the euro’s international role. The euro already has
an important international role. This role is likely to grow over time. The pace of this process cannot
BIS Review 102/1999
8
be  precisely  predicted.  If  history  is  any  guide,  it  may  well  be  a  rather  gradual  process,  although  I
would not rule out that this time it may well evolve faster than history would suggest.
The  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem  clearly  rules  out  any  implicit  or  explicit  targets  or
target zones against third currencies, such as the US dollar and the Japanese yen, without the consent
of  the  Eurosystem  itself.  The  pursuit  of  an  exchange  rate  target  could  easily  compromise  the
achievement  of  price  stability  and  thereby  also  have  a  negative  impact  on  real  economic
developments.  The  fact  that  we  do  not  have  an  exchange  rate  target  does  not  imply  that  we  are
indifferent to exchange rate developments or that we will neglect them. On the contrary, the effective
exchange rate of the euro is monitored as a potentially important indicator for monetary policy.
The ECB and the Eurosystem stand ready to contribute to the international exchange of information
and views on economic policy issues. In fact we already play our role in many international fora and
meetings, such as the G7, the G10, the OECD, the BIS and the IMF. The ECB has obtained observer
status at the IMF and is to become a shareholder of the BIS. The best contribution the Eurosystem can
make to international stability is to maintain price stability in the euro area. Attempts at international
policy  coordination  beyond 
indicated  could  easily  become
counterproductive, compromising both the Eurosystem’s mandate and international financial stability
itself. The Eurosystem’s role on the international scene will tend to expand and develop over time, in
step with its growing experience and the gradual evolution of the ECB’s organisation. In the context of
international cooperation, the Eurosystem and the ECB will also play an increasing role in providing
technical assistance in their fields of competence.
that  I  have 
the  scope 
just 
Since the number of parties in the international arena should fall as a result of the  establishment  of
EMU and the Eurosystem, cooperation at an international level should potentially become easier than
in  the  past.  However,  arriving  at  this  situation  may  take  some  time.  From  a  more  general  point  of
view,  Europe  should  aim  at  becoming  a  stronger  partner  in  international  cooperation  and,  as  far  as
possible,  at  speaking  with  one  voice.  Such  an  ideal  cannot  be  realised  overnight,  but  every  effort
possible should be made to move in this direction.
A stronger, more integrated and coherent Europe is in the interests of the world at large. To be able to
play this role on the international scene, Europe should keep an eye on the rest of the world and, in
spite of the many challenges it will face internally in the years and even decades ahead, should avoid
adopting an exclusively introspective stance.
I come to a conclusion.
Conclusion
4.
I have discussed three areas in which Europe will have to be active in the immediate and longer-term
future. They concern the euro area, the wider  Europe  and  Europe  in the  world.  Each  of these  areas
already  offers  enough  challenges  in  itself.  The  fact  that  progress  has  to  be  made  in  all  three  areas
simultaneously makes Europe’s agenda for the next century even more exciting.
Europe has the potential to meet these challenges, if it is clear about its objectives and, as in the past,
is  flexible  in  its  way  of  achieving  them.  If  Europe  is  successful,  the  lives  of  its  citizens  will  be
improved,  and  it  will  be  a  stable  and  stabilising  factor  in  the  world.  Success  will  not  come
automatically. It will require substantial efforts and the will of many people and institutions in many
areas. However, these efforts, if successful, will be amply rewarded.
9
BIS Review 102/1999
