Mr. Duisenberg reports at a press conference on the outcome of the meeting of the Governing
Council of the ECB.
Introductory  statement  by  the  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Mr.  Wim  Duisenberg,  in
Frankfurt on 8 April 1999.
__________________________________________________________________________________
Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are here today to report  on  the  outcome  of  today’s
meeting of the Governing Council.
Let  me  start  with  the  Governing  Council’s  discussion  of  recent  economic  developments  and  the
decisions  that  the  Governing  Council  has  taken  today  in  the  field  of  monetary  policy.  After  an  in-
depth  review  of  recent  monetary,  financial  and  economic  developments,  the  Governing  Council
decided that the interest rate for the ECB’s main refinancing operations will, from next week on, be
set at 2.50%. In addition, the interest rate on the marginal lending facility will be lowered to 3.50%
and the interest rate on the deposit facility to 1.50% with effect from tomorrow.
Let me report in some more detail on the reasons for which the Governing Council, in the context of
the ECB’s monetary policy strategy, deemed it appropriate to lower interest rates.
As regards monetary developments in the euro area, the acceleration of monetary aggregates seen in
January 1999 was partly reversed in February. The 12-month growth rate of M3 declined from 5.6%
in  January  to  5.2%  in  February.  This  largely  reflected  a  slowdown  in  the  high  pace  of  growth  of
overnight  deposits,  presumably  reflecting  the  unwinding  of  the  influence  of  some  special  factors
related  to  the  start  of  Stage  Three  and  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  As  the  February  figures  were
somewhat  higher  than  those  observed  in  late  1998,  the  three-month  moving  average  of  M3  growth
covering the period from December 1998 to February 1999 still increased by 0.2 percentage point to
5.1%.  The  Governing  Council  does  not  regard  current  monetary  trends  as  constituting  a  signal  of
future  inflationary  pressures,  taking  into  account  that  the  rate  of  growth  of  M3  is  still  close  to  the
reference value of 4½% and considering that it may to some extent mirror the specific environment
related to the start of Stage Three.
The Governing Council noted that the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) rates of increase
for the euro area have now been below 1% for several months, and even though some increases are
likely  to  be  seen  in  coming  months  owing  to  the  reversal  of  energy  price  trends,  the  more  lasting
effect on the outlook for future prices comes from the economic environment. Indeed, reflecting the
economic environment, many projections for future consumer price increases  in  the  euro  area  have
been  revised  downwards.  In  our  current  assessment  of  the  situation,  it  appears  unlikely  that  HICP
increases will be out of line with the Eurosystem’s definition of price stability.
With  regard  to  financial  indicators,  both  bond  and  foreign  exchange  markets  were  lately  under  the
influence of global factors. After having risen somewhat in February 1999, in tandem with US bond
yields,  during  March  euro  area  government  bond  yields  remained  broadly  unchanged.  At  the  same
time the US dollar strengthened further in recent weeks in the light of international developments.
When looking in some more detail at the evolution of the world economy, positive signs relate to the
continuously  strong  growth  of  the  US  economy,  the  gradual  recovery  in  some  Asian  countries  and
indications of a stabilisation in Latin America. However, there is no noticeable evidence as yet of a
turnaround in Japan.
In the euro area, overall growth prospects worsened towards the end of last year, as reported when we
met  in  early  March.  In  the  meantime,  official  data  confirm  that  real  GDP  growth  in  the  euro  area
weakened in the fourth quarter of 1998, when compared with the previous quarter. The weakness is
particularly  apparent  in  the  manufacturing  sector,  where  confidence  deteriorated  further.  Partial
information covering a substantial part of the euro area appears to confirm this picture. Most recent
data on total employment in the euro area point to a certain deceleration in net job creation in the last
quarter of 1998.
As regards the latest available data on the HICP, the annual increase in consumer prices has remained
unchanged  at  0.8%  over  several  months  up  to  February  1999.  Underlying  this  stable  rate  of  price
increases have been offsetting developments at the level  of  services  and  goods  prices.  In  February,
services price increases moderated further slightly, mainly owing to downward adjustments in prices
1
BIS Review 39/1999
in  the  telecommunication  area.  At  the  same  time,  goods  prices  contributed  slightly  more  to  overall
HICP increases than before, due both to price developments for unprocessed food and a deceleration
in the fall in energy prices. It may be worth noting that goods prices may continue to move upwards
temporarily,  in  particular  as  oil  prices  increased  strongly  from  mid-February  onwards.  Such
movements  reflect  the  higher  volatility  of  price  changes  of  some  categories  of  goods,  in  particular
imported oil and other commodities.
The interest rate decision has been taken in a forward-looking perspective, focusing on the medium-
term trends in inflation and the compatibility of these trends with the Eurosystem’s definition of price
stability. In the view of the Governing Council, monetary growth is - at the current juncture - not a
risk for future price stability.
The  decision  taken  today  keeps  monetary  policy  on  a  longer-term  stability-oriented  course  and,  by
doing so, contributes to creating an economic environment in which the considerable growth potential
of the euro area could be exploited. Those responsible for other policy areas are urged now even more
to take the necessary steps to improve longer-term growth prospects for the euro area through strictly
and  decisively  adhering  to  the  aims  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  through  convincing
structural reforms in the economy.
I should now like to inform you about some of the other matters considered today.
The Governing Council examined the outcome of a test run of the production of euro banknotes. This
so-called  zero  production  run  involved  the  printing  works  of  the  participating  countries.  The  main
purposes of this test were, first, to check the compliance of the test banknotes against the technical
specifications  and,  second,  to  prove  that  all  printing  works  are  in  a  position  to  produce  the  euro
banknotes to the same high quality standards. The result of this test was positive, as only some minor
technical  specifications  need  to  be  modified  slightly.  The  printing  works  will  now  start  their  final
preparations for the commencement of the mass production of the euro banknotes.
The Governing Council also decided to establish an Analysis Centre for Counterfeit Euro Banknotes.
As is already indicated by its name, the main purpose of this Analysis Centre will be to technically
analyse  and  classify  new  types  of  printed  counterfeits,  and  to  store  the  related  technical  data  in  a
database. The Analysis Centre will be located at the ECB in Frankfurt.
We are now at your disposal should you have any questions.
Transcript  of  the  questions  asked  and  the  answers  given  by  Dr.  Willem  F.  Duisenberg,
President of the ECB, and Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the ECB
Question: I would be very interested if you had anything to say about the exchange rate of the euro, if
the central bankers of Europe seem comfortable with it. It seems that the strategy of the ECB is now,
in light of today’s actions, a double strategy to re-invigorate the European economy. On the one hand,
you got the exports boosted by the euro and, on the other hand, you got an interest rate cut to lubricate
the economy as well.
Duisenberg: First of all, as far as the exchange rate of the euro is concerned, I always like to take a
slightly longer term perspective than is normally done in articles and considerations about it. I would
like to point out that, if you look at the rate of the euro, and look back to what we - in our jargon - call
the  synthetic  euro,  the  euro  that  you  can  calculate  before  the  euro  was  in  existence,  then  you  can
observe that the rate of the euro to the dollar has been more or less stable at around a level of USD
1.08 to USD 1.10 from the middle of 1997 until early September 1998. In the middle of September it
started to rise to reach a level of 1.16 at the end of the year, and that was the level at which we entered
the euro era. After 1 January it gradually declined  again  in  a  few  weeks  to  a  level  of  around  USD
1.08. So, we have no reason at all to be dissatisfied with that level. It is about the level at which the
euro had stood for more than a year. And now - to take a very short outlook, between 6.15 and 6.30
today - the euro rose from USD 1.08 to USD 1.0865. I hope that answers your question.
Question: I have a question concerning your inflation target. Can we draw the conclusion that from
now we have some kind of informal bottom on your inflation target?
Duisenberg: No, you cannot draw this conclusion. We are sticking to our definition of price stability
which says that we regard price stability as being an increase in the rate of inflation of below 2%. And
BIS Review  39/1999
2
what I said today is that the present situation and the prospects for the increase in the rate of inflation
are such that they seem, for as far as we can look forward, also to remain well below that ceiling of
2%. So, inflation is not a danger, which enabled us to, let me say, to pay more attention to the second
area of objectives of the European Central Bank - that is to support the general economic policies of
the European Community.
Question: In your meeting today, could you describe what the mood was of the meeting and whether
there  was  much  debate  about  your  move  and  much  debate  about  the  level  of  the  move  and  also,
whether it was an unanimous vote in the end.
Duisenberg:  The  mood  was  good.  We  had  a  very  long  and,  I  must  say,  very  interesting  discussion
today. There were a few who were not very inclined to do something about the rate - but here I talk
about a very few - and a very large majority was inclined to do something and supported the proposal
as we put it before the Council. And so, we had a very good discussion. For the final decision, I am
afraid  I  have  to  tell  you  that  we  did  not  take  a  vote.  But  we  know  all  the  different  views  and  so,
finally, I could conclude as follows: the Governing Council decides that the main refinancing rate will
be lowered from 3% to 2.5%.
Question:  You  said  there  were  no  monetary  risks  of  inflation  at  the  moment.  Can  we  infer  from
today’s decision that there were monetary risks of deflation or is it purely a growth-oriented decision
that you have taken today?
Duisenberg: No, we also see no risks of deflation emerging. We see that inflation has now remained,
on a euro area-wide basis, constant at a rate of 0.8% four months in a row up to now. We see some
risks on the upside, i.e. mainly the impact of rising energy prices, but that is by definition, as it was
when  it  was  on  the  downside,  a  temporary  factor.  We  see  some  risks  deriving  from  some  wage
settlements here and there in Europe, those are the upside risks. We see some downside risks from a
rather  subdued  outlook  for  general  economic  development  in  the  entire  euro  area.  But  as  such,  the
main thing is that we do not see the situation of price stability in which we entered the euro area, and
which prevails until this moment, would be  in  any  way  endangered  in  the  future.  That  gave  us  the
leeway to take the measure I have just announced.
Question (translation): Mr. President, would you say you have admitted today that you are pursuing a
business cycle-oriented monetary policy, which would constitute a change in model, compared with
the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  which  has  always  maintained  that  it  does  not  pursue  a  business  cycle-
oriented monetary policy, but rather that “we have a monetary target or a potential-oriented monetary
policy,  which  is  geared  to  the  medium  term”.  Are  you  not  facing  the  danger  that  such  an  obvious
relaxation of your monetary policy could, instead of stimulating reform in other areas of fiscal, tax
and labour market policy, reduce pressure for such reforms?
Duisenberg:  With  the  greatest  emphasis  I  am  capable  of,  I  want  to  deny  that  we  have  in  any  way
switched our strategy or our approach to monetary policy. It is not a cyclically inspired policy. May I
quote  from  my  statement  again;  the  interest  rate  decision  “has  been  taken  in  a  forward-looking
perspective focusing on the medium-term trends in inflation and the compatibility of these trends with
the  Eurosystem’s  definition  of  price  stability.”  That  is  something  totally  different  from  a
“konjunkturgetriebene Politik”.
Question  (translation):  Mr.  Duisenberg,  this  interest  rate  move  has  turned  out  to  be  unexpectedly
large. Do you believe that you are now at the limit which you can justify in terms of stability policy
and how long will this interest rate remain in place if economic activity in the euro zone does indeed
pick up in the second half of the year?
Duisenberg: This is something we have, of course, considered in depth. We wanted the move to be as
convincing  as  possible  and  we  were  afraid  that  a  smaller  move  would  only  have  led  to  further
expectations  for  the  future,  that  this  would  only  be  a  first  step  in  a  series.  We  have  by  all  means
possible tried to avoid that impression. In very parochial words, I am inclined to say - and I cannot say
“do not quote me” here, I realise that - but I am inclined to say that we moved from 3% to 2.5% which
is maybe a slightly, unexpectedly large fall, but I would like to add, and now you be sure: this is it.
3
BIS Review  39 /1999
Question:  Mr.  Duisenberg,  I  just  want  to  ask  if  you  could  elaborate  a  little  bit  on  the  convincing
structural reforms that you said you would like to see from euro zone governments and also if you feel
that  by  cutting  the  rates  in  such  a  large  step  that  you  actually  reduce  the  pressure  on  these
governments to make these reforms?
Duisenberg: We hope that the contrary will emerge over time. Convincing structural reforms relate to
the  following:  We,  and  most  other  observers,  are  very  convinced  that  the  phenomenon  of  an
unacceptably high rate of unemployment across the euro area, but particularly in the larger countries
in the euro area, is due to structural factors and to inflexibility in markets for labour and in markets
for goods and services and that monetary policy is neither the cause of that structural unemployment
nor is it the solution to it. The solution to that problem has to be found in measures of a convincingly
reformist  nature  in  the  labour  and  in  the  goods  markets  and  we  do  hope  that  taking  the  monetary
policy  stance  we  have  taken  today  will  in  the  ensuing  months  increasingly  focus  the  attention  of
policy-makers  and  the  public  on  the  real  causes  of  the  unemployment  problem,  because  it  will
demonstrably become clear that monetary policy is not the answer to solve those problems.
Question: Do you feel completely certain that this interest rate cut represents no danger of inflation to
any part of the euro zone, I am thinking, in particular, of smaller, more dynamic economies, such as
the  Irish  one.  And  secondly,  is  it  fair  to  conclude  that  the  opposition  to  a  rate  cut  came  from  the
representatives of those countries?
Duisenberg: I will not allude to any opposition by anyone in the Governing Council. We do believe
that  this  rate  cut,  otherwise  we  would  not  have  done  it,  will  not  pose  any  additional  threat  of
inflationary pressures arising either in small or in large countries.
Question (translation): President Duisenberg, with regard to risks and side-effects. First question: will
you keep the interest rate at 2.5% even if a recession occurs? Have we understood you correctly in
this respect? Second, is it indeed so that too much capital flowing to the United States at high interest
rates flows could become a problem for the external stability of the euro? I mean, the higher interest
rates in the United States indicate that, at the moment, still more capital will be flowing to the United
States.  Third  question:  did  you  intend  to  increase  the  pressure  on  lenders,  i.e.  also  on  the  banks,
because  your  impression  was  that,  in  the  light  of  the  official  rate  of  3%,  they  were  not  answering
borrowers’ demands for cheaper loans?
Duisenberg: I am not going to speculate about a potential recession if we do not see one coming. We
see a slowdown in economic development., We do not see, or do not yet see, a recession to be on our
hands. So I will not speculate about what we would do if there really were a recession. We will cross
that bridge when we come to it or, as my mother used to say: if the skies fall down, all the birds are
dead. Interest rates in the United States are higher, but you have to realise that the United States is in a
totally different phase of the cycle than we are and whether that will in any way induce capital flows
to move differently from what they are moving today remains to be seen. And the third part of your
question was, have we in any way made the conclusion that the banks, when the rate was 3 %, were
not giving in enough to the demand for credit. No, on the contrary, as you know, the development of
credit  to  the  private  sector  has  been  quite  buoyant  over  the  past  few  months,  although  its  bias  of
increase has come down somewhat. The last time I was here, I reported that credit to the private sector
was growing at an annual rate of nearly 10%; the latest figure we have now is that it has come down
to  a  rate  of  slightly  over  9%.  But  then,  when  you  analyse  that  credit  to  the  private  sector  and  its
development, it is also very clear that those high rates of growth are particularly present in the smaller
countries  of  Europe  and  not  too  much  in  the  larger  countries,  although  there  is  quite  a  difference
between the various countries. So, in itself, that rate of growth of credit, which is already moderating
somewhat, is not a cause of inflationary concern for us, and neither is the move today any inducement
to the banks to be more forthcoming in giving credit. They are already quite forthcoming.
Question (translation): Mr. Duisenberg, the situation in Europe at the moment, especially this latest
interest rate move by the ECB, now reminds me somewhat of Japan. You reduce interest rates time
and again, yet on the other hand, no progress is being made in the areas of politics and restructuring in
BIS Review  39/1999
4
Europe.  In  December,  although  I  cannot  quote  you  directly,  you  stated,  much  in  the  same  way  as
today,  that  following  the  cut  in  interest  rates  the  situation  with  regard  to  interest  rates  in  Europe
would be settled. It is now the beginning of April and we see obviously a further cut in interest rates.
Is  there  not  the  danger,  Mr.  Duisenberg,  that  this  process  is  about  to  begin  again  and  that,  after  a
certain period, owing to a lack of willingness in Europe and in Germany, in particular, to bring about
structural reforms, the whole rigmarole will begin once more and you will be forced, yet again, to cut
interest rates?
Duisenberg: Well, we do not see that danger arising from the level which we now have reached. We
hope that our call -  as  I  expressed  it  today  -  to  governments  to  pursue  a  reform-oriented  policy,  to
adopt  structural  reform  measures  in  all  markets,  that  that  policy  will  get  a  new  incentive  from  the
measures we have taken today. If they do not do that - and it will take time, I admit that before you
can pursue and effect policies like I have in mind - if they do not do that, then indeed monetary policy
is no alternative.
Question  (translation):  Those  who  are  not  au  fait  with  the  intricacies  of  monetary  policy,  by  that  I
mean Joe Soap , the man on the street, could get the impression that Oskar Lafontaine was right in
making his demands. Has your decision anything to do with his resignation or could it be interpreted
in another way, as a welcoming gift for the new Federal Minister of Finance in Bonn?
Duisenberg: The interest rates which we have established today are valid for the entire euro area and
they  have  been  founded  on  considerations  related  to  the  entire  euro  area  and  not  to  any  particular
country or finance minister.
Question: Mr. President, it sounds like you are meeting the governments halfway here with this rate
cut. Especially the German government was calling for the rate cut to help with the unemployment
problem. Now you are saying: here is your rate cut, fix the unemployment problem. Is that part of the
decision to cut rates?
Duisenberg: No, it is not part of the decision, but I do not have that much difficulty with your words.
Question (translation): President Duisenberg, as yet, people do not have euro money in their hands.
What is your message for Europeans in general with this interest rate cut?
Duisenberg: Well, I had ”Eurogeld in der Hand” today. It looked quite good, as I told you. And my
message to the people who will have euro money in their hands in two years time and who are already
in the process today of getting used to it, more and more, as everybody can notice who travels around
across  Europe,  the  message  I  have  is  that,  today’s  measures  should  increase  the  confidence  of  the
people, of the “Otto Normalverbraucher” in the institution that manages their money, in the European
Central Bank as the guardian of their values.
Question: Until now we did not speak of Kosovo, we have war here at our doors, was this war - the
possible impact on economy or the psychological impact on Europe - part of your decision or part of
your concerns?
Duisenberg: No, it was not. It neither induced nor deterred us from taking the decisions we have taken
today. Of course, we are fully aware of the dramatic turmoil that is taking place in Europe, and it does
not leave us untouched, by no means, but we have also noted with gratitude that all this turmoil has so
far not had any impact at all on the financial markets or exchange rates.
5
BIS Review  39 /1999
