Mr Duisenberg reports on monetary policy in the euro area
Speech  by  the  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  at  the  New
Year’s reception organised by the Deutsche Börse, at the Chamber of Commerce and Industry,
Frankfurt/Main, on 25/1/99.
Thank you for the invitation to speak at this New Year’s reception. 1999 is a special year: the
year  in  which  the  euro  was  launched,  and  the  year  in  which  it  will  have  to  become  a  stable
currency. This is the challenge which lies ahead.
The introduction of the euro was a very happy event for all involved. The euro is present on all
major financial markets around the globe. Currency trading in euro has commenced and for three
weeks now shares have been denominated in euro on most European stock exchanges. Although
not yet embodied in the physical form of new banknotes and coins, there is no doubt that the new
currency is set to play an important role, both in the euro area and beyond.
The  euro  is  a  symbol  of  the  achievements  of  Europeans  in  the  pursuit  of  common  goals.  It  is
unprecedented in European history. After years of intensive preparations and successful efforts
towards convergence, the single monetary policy for the entire euro area is being determined by
the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB).  The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  which  comprises  the
Governors  of  the  11  national  central  banks  of  the  participating  Member  States  plus  the  six
members of the Executive Board of the ECB, has assumed this responsibility and is in charge of
monetary  policy  decisions  for  the  euro  area.  Decisions  by  the  Governing  Council  will  be
implemented  via  the  Eurosystem  -  that  is,  the  ECB  and  the  11  participating  national  central
banks (NCBs).
Indeed, the introduction of the euro marks the culmination of much successful preparatory work
over a period of many years. This has been reflected in the very positive and confident way in
which  financial  markets  have  received  the  euro  in  the  first  three  weeks  of  Monetary  Union.
Moreover,  the  enormous  technical  and  logistical  challenges  posed  during  the  changeover
weekend at the start of the year have been surmounted.
Monetary Union offers a unique opportunity to establish and maintain price stability within the
euro area. It promises a credible and lasting environment of price stability for almost 300 million
people.  Price  stability  is  at  the  core  of  the  “stability  culture”  that  we  are  seeking  to  establish
throughout Europe. By fulfilling the unequivocal commitment of the Governing Council of the
ECB  to  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area,  we  shall  ensure  that  the  single  monetary
policy contributes as much as possible to economic welfare in the broadest sense.
At  the  same  time,  national  fiscal  authorities  and  general  economic  policies  also  have  to
demonstrate their commitment to the creation of this stability culture in Europe. In this context,
the Stability and Growth Pact is a crucial element. Its aim is to foster the pursuit of disciplined
and sustainable fiscal policies in the euro area. In so doing, it can make a significant contribution
to  the  establishment  of  favourable  conditions  for  sustained  economic  growth  and  high
employment in the medium to long term. It would be counterproductive if national fiscal policies
started  to  discontinue  their  efforts  in  the  light  of  the  achievement  of  Monetary  Union  and  the
currently positive price outlook. I am not fully convinced that consolidation efforts are currently
being undertaken with sufficient determination in all participating Member States.
Monetary  policy  alone  -  however  well  designed  and  implemented  -  cannot  solve  Europe’s
economic problems. Appropriate structural reforms implemented by national governments are of
the utmost importance. Much progress is required in this broad area. Moreover, continued wage
BIS Review   9/1999
– 2 –
moderation  in  both  the  public  and  private  sectors  would  contribute  to  the  reduction  of  the
unacceptably high level of unemployment in many parts of the euro area.
Unemployment in the euro area is largely structural in origin. Implementing too lax a monetary
policy will not solve this  problem,  but  rather  exacerbate  it  over  the  medium  term,  as  inflation
distorts investment and savings decisions, raises the risk premium in long-term interest rates and
undermines  the  allocative  efficiency  of  the  price  mechanism.  Only  effective  structural  policies
that  improve  the  flexibility  and  efficiency  of  labour  and  goods  markets  can  reduce
unemployment in a successful and lasting manner. I appreciate that such reforms are not always
easy, not least because the benefits which they yield occur mainly in the medium to long term.
However,  they  are  unavoidable.  In  those  euro  area  Member  States  that  have  taken  up  the
challenge of structural reform, unemployment has fallen significantly. Other euro area Member
States should and must take note: structural reform throughout the euro area is fundamental to
the  success  of  Monetary  Union  and  to  improving  Europe’s  economic  performance.  In  this
respect,  we  may  also  be  able  to  learn  something  by  looking  at  the  reasons  behind  strong
employment  growth  and  low  unemployment  in  some  of  the  Member  States  of  the  European
Union and in the United States, in particular regarding the flexibility of labour markets and the
incentives to create and accept new jobs.
Today, I shall describe the main features of the stability-oriented monetary policy strategy of the
Eurosystem which underlie our single monetary policy. Against this background, I shall briefly
explain  the  recent  monetary  policy  decisions  adopted  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB.
Finally, I shall summarise how we currently see the outlook for maintaining price stability in the
euro area.
I. The stability-oriented monetary policy strategy
The  Treaty  on  European  Union,  commonly  referred  to  as  the  “Maastricht  Treaty”,  assigns  the
European System of Central Banks (ESCB) the primary objective of maintaining price stability
in  the  euro  area.  In  order  to  steer  expectations  of  future  price  developments,  the  Governing
Council has announced a quantitative definition of its primary objective. This clarifies how the
Treaty’s  mandate  is  interpreted  by  the  Governing  Council  and  gives  the  public  clear  guidance
concerning its assessment of the success of the single monetary policy.
Price stability is to be maintained over the medium term. According to the published definition,
price stability has been defined as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer
Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%. Neither would deflation - that is, a persistent fall in
the price level - be consistent with price stability. The annual rate of inflation in the most recent
available data of around 1%, measured on this harmonised basis, is consistent with the definition
of  price  stability.  The  Eurosystem  has  therefore  enjoyed  the  good  fortune  to  assume  authority
over  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  in  an  environment  of  price  stability,  owing  to  the
successful process of disinflation and convergence achieved within Europe over the past decade.
Monetary policy needs a forward-looking, medium-term orientation. This takes into account the
fact  that  monetary  policy  affects  the  price  level  only  with  variable,  usually  long  and
unpredictable time lags. It is not able to control all short-term movements in the price level. To
maintain price stability, we have chosen a distinct monetary policy strategy, one that reflects the
special  circumstances  that  exist  at  present  as  well  as  those  likely  to  prevail  in  the  foreseeable
future. The chosen strategy ensures as much continuity as possible with the former strategies of
the NCBs. At the same time, it gives due consideration to the unique situation which will prevail
in the early years of Monetary Union.
BIS Review   9/1999
– 3 –
The  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy  rests  on  two  “pillars”.  The  first  pillar  is  a
prominent role for money. This is deemed to be important on account of the essentially monetary
origins of inflation over the longer term. The second pillar of the monetary policy strategy is a
broadly based assessment of the outlook for price developments and the risks to price stability in
the euro area as a whole. The Governing Council recognises that it is important, in parallel with
the  assessment  of  monetary  growth,  to  look  at  a  wide  range  of  financial  and  other  economic
indicators,  including  economic  forecasts.  This  systematic  analysis  of  all  other  relevant
information about economic and financial conditions will ensure that the Governing Council is
as well-informed as possible when taking monetary policy decisions.
Monetary  developments  can  reveal  useful  information  about  future  price  developments  and
thereby  offer  an  important  compass  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Therefore,  it  is
absolutely  essential  for  any  central  bank  entrusted  with  the  task  of  keeping  prices  stable  to
analyse and monitor the developments of monetary aggregates closely.
Consequently, the Governing Council of the ECB has announced a quantitative reference value
for broad monetary growth as measured by M3, which should, under normal circumstances, give
some indication of future inflationary pressure. The choice of M3 as an aggregate is supported by
empirical  evidence  regarding  the  long-run  stability  and  leading  indicator  properties  of  this
aggregate. Moreover, conceptual arguments pointed to the considerable importance of including
in the monetary aggregate those assets which have a high degree of substitutability with narrower
definitions of money. Therefore, in addition to currency in circulation and deposits, repos, units
or shares of money market funds and money market paper as well as short-term debt securities,
all of which are close substitutes for more traditional bank deposits, have also been included in
this definition.
The first reference value for M3 growth has been set at an annual rate of 4½%. This reference
value is consistent with the maintenance of price stability over the medium term, while allowing
for sustainable output growth and the trend decline in the velocity of circulation of M3. In setting
the  reference  value  for  monetary  growth,  the  Governing  Council  has  taken  account  of  various
factors and emphasised its medium-term orientation. First, the Governing Council is committed
to  maintaining  price  stability  according  to  the  definition  enshrined  in  the  Treaty  on  European
Union.  This  requires  increases  in  the  HICP  for  the  euro  area  of  “below  2%”.  Second,  the
Governing Council takes the view that a figure in the range of 2% to 2½% per annum for the
trend  growth  in  real  GDP  in  the  euro  area  appears  to  be  reasonable.  Third,  the  uncertainties
concerning short-term developments in velocity linked to the start of Stage Three have led the
Governing Council to assume that the medium-term trend decline in velocity lies approximately
within a range of ½% to 1% each year. This range reflects historical experience over the past 20
years.
Substantial or prolonged deviations of current monetary growth from the reference value should,
under normal circumstances, signal risks to price stability in the medium term. Monetary policy
does not react to deviations of monetary growth from the reference value in a “mechanistic” way.
In the first instance, such deviations will be thoroughly analysed to infer any signals which they
may offer about the prospects for price developments. If the deviation points to a threat to price
stability,  monetary  policy  will  react  in  a  manner  appropriate  to  counter  this  threat,  rather  than
attempt to eliminate the deviation of monetary growth from the reference value in the short term.
Although monetary data contain information which is vital for monetary policy decision-making,
monetary  developments  alone  will  not  constitute  a  complete  summary  of  all  the  economic
BIS Review   9/1999
– 4 –
information  necessary  to  take  appropriate  policy  decisions.  There  is  a  clear  need  for  the
Governing Council to look at a wide range of other economic and financial indicators.
At  the  same  time,  relying  on  a  single  forecast  that  attempts  to  summarise  all  the  information
available from a wide range of indicators would be misguided. The Governing Council does not
react  mechanistically  to  a  single  variable  -  whether  this  be  a  forecast,  the  exchange  rate,  unit
labour costs or fiscal indicators - but rather takes into account the complete picture offered by all
available  and  meaningful  leading  indicators  of  future  inflation.  In  this  context,  the  Governing
Council  analyses  the  economic  reasons  behind  the  projected  risks  to  price  stability.  The
appropriate monetary policy response to a threat to price stability will depend on the nature of the
threat. The Governing Council can only understand the nature of the risk if it is presented with a
full  set  of  data.  From  these,  it  can  attempt  to  identify  the  nature  of  the  disturbance  to  price
stability.  Having  identified  the  threat,  an  appropriate  policy  response  can  be  selected  and
implemented.
Internal forecasts of economic activity and inflation in the euro area can also contribute to the
success of an appropriately forward-looking monetary policy. However, the Eurosystem should
not be judged on, or held accountable for, the accuracy of its internal forecasts. Thus, publication
of the forecasts cannot contribute to accountability. Rather, its performance in maintaining price
stability in the medium term should be used by the public to judge the success of the Eurosystem.
Allow me to say a few words on certain proposals made in the recent public debate, which may
be  deemed  to  suggest  that  the  focus  of  monetary  policy  should  be  shifted  towards  objectives
other  than  price  stability.  Indeed,  some  recent  suggestions  seem  to  imply  that  the  Eurosystem
should react more or less automatically to exchange rate movements or other specific variables
such as unit labour costs.
The  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  stance  is  not  one  of  benign  neglect  with  respect  to  the
exchange rate. The Eurosystem’s stability-oriented monetary  policy  strategy  takes  into  account
the external value of the euro as one, potentially important, determinant of the outlook for price
stability.  Obviously,  if  a  strong  and  abrupt  appreciation  of  the  euro  were  to  occur,  this  would
lead,  all  other  things  being  equal,  to  downward  pressures  on  price  developments.  In  such  a
situation, there would be a stronger reason for lowering  the  ECB’s  interest  rates,  which  might
then, in turn, help to counteract part of the prior exchange rate movement.
However, monetary policy reactions to the exchange rate, or to any other variable, can never be
mechanistic or automatic. According to its stability-oriented strategy, the Eurosystem always has
to analyse carefully a wide set of indicators, the nature of any disturbances and their implications
for the overall outlook for price developments in the medium term. In any case, it must be borne
in  mind  that  the  Treaty  on  European  Union  also  requires  the  single  exchange  rate  policy  to
respect the primary objective of price stability. Thus, the ECB cannot commit itself in advance to
any specific reaction with respect to the exchange rate.
I am sure you would agree with me that it would not necessarily be  appropriate  to  tighten  the
monetary policy stance simply because the euro had depreciated, if, at the same time, we were in
a  recession  with  increasing  downward  pressures  on  prices.  As  such  mechanistic  reactions  to
exchange  rate  developments  could  easily  endanger  price  stability  and  destabilise  economic
developments  in  the  euro  area,  we  deliberately  excluded  any  kind  of  exchange  rate  targets  or
target zones from our strategy.
BIS Review   9/1999
– 5 –
In line with its clear mandate enshrined in the Treaty, and for sound economic reasons, the ECB
has  to  decide  which  monetary  stance  best  serves  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the
medium term and then act accordingly. At the same time, the Treaty also emphasises the need for
sound fiscal policies. This clear separation of responsibilities is both efficient and transparent.
The Eurosystem is open, transparent and, above all, accountable for its performance. As part of
its  communication  strategy,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  regularly  informs  the  public
about  changes  in  its  assessment  of  the  monetary,  economic  and  financial  situation  in  the  euro
area and about specific monetary policy decisions. The Governing Council meets every fortnight.
The first meeting in every month is immediately followed by a press conference and the release
of  the  President’s  Introductory  Statement,  which  is  a  summary  of  the  conclusions  of  the
Governing  Council  with  regard  to  its  assessment  of  monetary,  financial  and  other  economic
developments. This is similar to what other central banks call minutes. We are convinced  that
this very prompt delivery of information serves the interests of the public in an optimal way. I do
not  think  that  many  central  banks  publish  their  minutes  only  a  few  hours  after  the  meeting  of
their  governing  body.  I  am  also  convinced  that  it  is  in  the  public  interest  for  the  view  of  the
whole  Governing  Council  to  be  presented,  rather  than  the  views  of  individual  members.
Moreover, the ECB has just published its first edition of the Monthly Bulletin, and will publish
an  Annual  Report.  We  shall  also  explain  our  policies  on  a  regular  basis  in  speeches  and
interviews, also making a presentation to the European Parliament at least four times a year.
II. Recent monetary policy decisions and operations
Co-operation  among  European  national  central  banks  has  always  been  close  and,  among
participants in Stage Three, it has become increasingly so in recent years and months. The co-
ordinated reduction of the key interest rates by all central banks of the euro area  in  December
1998  clearly  demonstrated  that  Monetary  Union  had  begun  de  facto  before  the  start  of  Stage
Three. This co-ordinated measure contributed to the stabilisation of market expectations.
The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  announced  that  the  new  level  of  the  euro  area-wide  key
interest rate of 3% would prevail “for the foreseeable future”. In other words, in the absence of
further disturbances to the economy or the emergence of new and unanticipated threats to price
stability, this level of  interest  rate  is  considered  to  be  consistent  with  the  primary  objective  of
maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  Our  announcement  helped  to  resolve  some
uncertainty at a time when the practical, technical and logistical tasks required by the changeover
weekend were uppermost in our minds and in those of market participants.
The first main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem were successfully settled. While paying
due attention to the uncertainties related to the phasing-in of the new system, the decisions were
taken  on  the  basis  of  the  liquidity  conditions  prevailing  in  the  euro  area  money  market  as  a
whole. In addition to the refinancing operations, the Eurosystem offers standing facilities, which
can be accessed by credit institutions via the NCBs. The deposit and marginal lending facilities
constitute, in normal circumstances, the upper and lower bound for the overnight market interest
rate.
As  a  transitional  measure,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  had  narrowed  the  corridor
established by the interest rates on the Eurosystem’s standing facilities from 4 January until 21
January 1999. The intention was to facilitate the necessary adjustments to the new institutional
environment resulting from the transition to Stage Three.
BIS Review   9/1999
– 6 –
At its last meeting, the Governing Council of the ECB confirmed its earlier  assessment  of  the
outlook for price stability. The Governing Council therefore decided that for the next two main
refinancing  operations  the  same  conditions  will  apply  as  for  the  three  main  refinancing
operations settled earlier this month. This means they will be fixed rate tenders conducted at an
interest rate of 3.0%
Furthermore,  the  Governing  Council  confirmed  that  it  did  not  see  a  need  for  continuing  the
application of the narrow interest rate corridor beyond the date of 21 January 1999. It was thus
decided to revert to the interest rates on the Eurosystem’s two standing facilities, which it had set
for the start of Stage Three. It set the marginal lending rate at a level of 4.5% and the deposit rate
at 2.0% with effect from 22 January 1999. This decision has to be seen against the background of
the experience with the functioning of the euro area-wide money market since the beginning of
the year. Difficulties of some market participants with the functioning of the area-wide money
market have diminished substantially over time. As a consequence, overall, the integration of the
euro  area  money  market  has  therefore  reached  a  satisfactory  state  only  three  weeks  after  its
creation.
The first regular longer-term refinancing operation, which was conducted using parallel tenders
with three different maturities of one, two and three months, was also settled successfully on 14
January 1999. It was conducted as a standard variable rate tender, using the single rate allotment
procedure.  In  contrast  to  the  main  refinancing  operations,  these  longer-term  market  operations
are  not  aimed  at  signalling  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  stance.  The  ECB  announces
standard allotment volumes in advance. Therefore, interest rates from these operations are to be
seen as indicators of market conditions.
III. Regular assessment of monetary, financial and economic conditions
Finally,  I  should  like  to  report  on  the  Governing  Council’s  regular  assessment  of  monetary,
financial and economic conditions. We consider the current monetary trend for the euro area to
be compatible with continued price stability in the euro area. The 12-month growth rate of the
broad monetary aggregate M3 decreased from 5.0% in October 1998 to 4.5% in November 1998.
The  three-month  moving  average  of  M3  (covering  the  months  September  to  November  1998)
stood at 4.7%, i.e. very close to the reference value of 4½% per annum.
With  respect  to  the  broadly  based  outlook  for  price  developments  and  risks  to  price  stability,
financial market developments may be seen as indicating a favourable assessment of the recent
monetary policy decisions of the Eurosystem, signalling that financial market participants expect
the environment of price stability to continue. In this connection, I could mention the fall in long-
term interest rates at the start of 1999 to new historical lows and the fact that the yield curve has
shifted downwards.
Indeed, conditions for investment at the start of Monetary Union are favourable. This relates, in
particular, to the currently prevailing low interest rate level, which significantly reduces the costs
of financing for investors. Economic growth in the euro area has become more broadly based, as
is reflected in private consumption and investment.
At the present juncture, the outlook for the euro area economy is still very much influenced by
the uncertainties surrounding the evolution of the world economy in 1999. These uncertainties
have  adversely  affected  indicators  of  industrial  confidence  in  the  euro  area  and  have  fuelled
expectations  of  a  slowdown  in  economic  activity  in  the  short  term.  In  part,  the  deteriorating
external environment, which has its origins in the Asian and Russian financial crises,  places  a
BIS Review   9/1999
– 7 –
high  burden  on  overall  growth  prospects.  The  picture,  however,  is  mixed.  Order  books  and
capacity utilisation point to a less optimistic outlook, while retail sales and the recent pattern in
employment  and  unemployment  suggest  more  favourable  trends.  Consumer  confidence  also
remained high until late 1998. In general, this pattern of mixed evidence appears to characterise
the  economic  situation  in  the  euro  area  around  the  turn  of  the  year,  and  we  shall  continue  to
monitor developments carefully.
I  should  also  like  to  emphasise  that  the  Governing  Council  carries  out  a  forward-looking
assessment  of  inflationary  pressures  and  carefully  assesses  risks  to  price  stability,  whatever
direction  these  may  take.  With  respect  to  the  latest  data  on  the  HICP,  the  annual  increase  for
November 1998 showed a further slowdown to 0.9%, compared with 1.0% in the two previous
months. This development was in line with previous trends. It was mainly due to lower annual
percentage changes in the prices of food and a further reduction in energy prices. A significant
contribution  was  also  made  by  moderate  wage  increases.  In  combination  with  high  overall
productivity gains throughout the whole economy, a reduction in unit labour costs was reported.
On balance, the described overall economic environment and all available forecasts for 1999 do
not point to significant upward or downward pressure on price developments in the short term.
Nevertheless, factors contributing to risks to price stability on both sides need to be taken into
account.  On  the  one  hand,  downward  risks  relate  to  the  global  environment  and  potential
repercussions on the euro area, for example via import prices and further pressure on producer
prices. These developments will be monitored closely. On the other, unexpected upward pressure
on  wages  and  a  relaxation  of  the  fiscal  stance  would  clearly  alter  the  general  environment.
Therefore, we shall also carefully  monitor  the  outcome  of  ongoing  wage  rounds,  the  plans  for
fiscal policy in 1999 and over the medium term, as well as the implementation of such plans in
compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact.
In summary, the current situation, which is characterised by monetary  growth  compatible  with
continued price stability and the absence of immediate upward or downward pressure on price
developments, justifies maintaining the current monetary policy stance, with an ECB interest rate
of 3% for the main refinancing facility. Indeed, monetary policy in Stage Three started with very
low interest rates by historical standards.
 BIS Review   9/1999
