Mr Gjedrem focuses on the issue of financial stability:
experiences and challenges
Speech given by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of the Central Bank of Norway, at the annual meeting
of  the  Norwegian  Savings  Banks  Association,  held  in  Sandefjord  on  21  October  1999.    (Shortened
version)
Introduction
1.
Every day around NOK150–200 billion change hands through the banks’ accounts in Norges Bank. In
the course of a week, payments corresponding to our gross national product for an entire year have
passed  through  Norges  Bank’s  settlement  system.  These  payments  involve  all  types  of  transaction,
from a 10 kroner ice cream purchase to securities transactions where a single transaction may involve
billions of kroner.
The  banks  play  a  pivotal  role  in  the  payment  system.  Deposits  are  now  the  predominant  means  of
payment.  Payment  settlement is the  banks’  most  important function  besides  channelling  funds  from
savers to borrowers.
In other countries, securities markets are of growing importance. They are taking over an increasing
share of banks’ credit intermediation. This may also occur in Norway. Securities are also increasingly
serving as collateral in payment settlement.
These  three  elements  -  payment  and  settlement  systems,  banks  and  other  financial  institutions,  and
securities  markets  -  make  up  the  financial  system.  Every  day  we  experience  how  dependent  a
developed economy is on the smooth functioning of this system, i.e. on financial stability.
The  volume  of  foreign  payments  is  substantial  and  on  the  rise.  Banks  and  securities  markets  are
becoming  ever  more  closely  integrated.  For  better  or  for  worse,  we  are  increasingly  exposed  to
developments in other countries.
The banking crisis taught us how costly financial crises can be. We brought the crisis on ourselves.
Many other countries have experienced similar problems. The root of the crises can be traced back to
overly  zealous financial  market  participants  with  reduced  risk  awareness. The  authorities’  role is  to
prevent crises in the financial system and - if they still occur - handle them with a view to reducing the
adverse effects and the likelihood of their recurring. In view of the globalisation of financial markets,
international cooperation in this area is crucial.
The financial system is also important with regard to Norges Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. By
setting  the  terms  for  banks’  deposits/loans  in the central  bank,  Norges  Bank  influences  the  level  of
interest rates. Monetary policy is also dependent on financial stability. However, monetary policy is
not the topic today. I will focus on the issue of financial stability.
What is financial stability?
2.
Financial stability is the absence of financial crises. The root of a crisis is that exuberance, optimism
and greed take precedence over risk and return considerations when investment decisions are taken.
The price of financial assets and property rises. Bank loans and household and corporate debt increase.
As a  result,  all  agents become  more  vulnerable if the  situation  is  perceived  as taking  a  turn for the
worse. This may in turn trigger a plunge in property and equity prices.
A stable financial system features solid cushions that reduce the risk of problems spreading from one
institution or market to other institutions or markets, or across borders. This risk constitutes a systemic
risk, i.e. the risk of failure of the financial system.
1
BIS Review 124/1999
Disturbances that may develop into a systemic risk  can  be transmitted through  financial institutions
and  financial  markets.  Stable institutions  are  solid  institutions in  which  there  is  general  confidence,
whereas stable markets are markets where there are no “excessive” price variations.
The banks are in a special position. They transform short-term deposits into long-term loans. They are
responsible for payment settlements, and bank deposits serve as a means of payment. The volume of
amounts outstanding in the interbank market is sizeable. As a result, problems in one bank may rapidly
spread  to  other  banks.  The  financial  strength  of  banks  is  thus  important  for  financial  stability.  The
more capital a bank has the larger the losses it can absorb. The risk of contagion is thus reduced. A
bank’s  capital  adequacy  ratio  is  not  the  only  variable  that  must  be  taken  into  account.  A  bank’s
earnings provide an indication of the bank’s future financial position. Another important factor is the
size of a bank’s loss provisions.
Financial unrest spreads through payment and settlement systems. These  systems  can  also  be  at the
origin of risk. This occurs when banks credit customers before they have received settlement from the
payer bank. The settlement of currency transactions is associated with a similar type of risk because
settlement often occurs in different countries at different times. The latter risk is referred to as Herstatt
risk, named after the German Bankhaus Hertsatt that closed in 1974. This occurred after the closing of
the  German  settlement  system,  but  before  the  matching  settlement  was  finalised  in  the  US.  Other
banks  that  had  settled  the  German  mark  portion  of  the  transaction  with  Bankhaus  Hertsatt  were
running a loss because Bankhaus had not settled the dollar portion of the transaction in the US before
it closed. The payment and settlement system must thus be designed to reduce settlement risk.
It is out of concern for financial stability that financial markets in general and banks in particular are
regulated and monitored to a further extent than other industries. A bank failure will as a rule have
more far-reaching consequences than a business failure in other industries. Both the contagion effects
and  the  consequences  for  the  real  economy  are  greater.  In  most  countries,  the  authorities  have
introduced  measures  to  restrain  banks  from  taking  excessive  risks  in  their  quest  for  profit.  Another
important consideration reflected in regulations is the need for consumer protection.
Regulations can distort competition and weaken market discipline. For instance a bank’s creditor may
choose not to assess the risk assumed by the bank because of the safety net established for banks. A
bank may thus seek to increase the expected return by taking on higher risk without having to pay for
this in the form of higher borrowing costs. Market discipline is weakened when operators are sheltered
from  taking  the  full  consequences  of  their  own  actions.  This  is  referred  to  as  moral  hazard.  The
authorities  must  regularly  undertake  a  critical  review  of  regulations  to  determine  whether  they  are
formulated with a view to achieving the overriding objectives at minimum cost.
Work on crisis prevention since the banking crisis
3.
The lessons drawn from earlier banking crises are the primary means of preventing new crises. The
debt crisis in the 1920s was at the root of the caution that continued to be exercised many years later.
Operators  are  still  cautious  as  a  result  of  the  banking  crisis  in  the  1990s.  The  memory  of  earlier
experiences fades over time. It is imperative to establish framework conditions that deter borrowers
and lenders from taking excessive risk. The central framework conditions include effective legislation
and regulations, a robust payment and settlement system, and effective supervision of institutions and
markets.
The capital adequacy regulations are more stringent today than when the banking crisis erupted. Sound
capital  adequacy  strengthens  banks’  capacity  to  bear  unanticipated  losses.  The  size  of  the  banks’
capital base also sets limits for lending growth. The capital adequacy requirements are being revised.
This will also have implications for Norway.
The  new  Bank  Guarantee  Act  is  another  important  change  to  regulations.  The  Act  provides  for  a
deposit guarantee. The guarantee is limited to a maximum of NOK 2m per depositor per bank. This
represents a tightening for savings banks in relation to earlier statutory rules. For commercial banks
this provides clarification in relation to the practice that was chosen during the banking crisis when all
BIS Review 124/1999
2
deposits were covered even if they were not covered by a formal guarantee. In relation to rules in other
countries, the deposit guarantee in Norway is very generous.
During the banking crisis, subordinated loan capital was not written down in the crisis banks, although
the banks’ guarantee funds and later the state had to provide support to ensure continued operations.
Subordinated loan capital did not function as a buffer as intended. Under the new Bank Guarantee Act,
this capital can, subject to certain criteria, be drawn on while the bank is still operating. This increases
the real buffer capital. It also means that banks with insufficient capital, and banks that take excessive
risk, have to pay more for subordinated loan capital. This boosts market discipline.
The risk of problems in one institution or a market segment spreading to other institutions or markets
through the payment system is substantially reduced. A large share of interbank transactions is settled
continuously  during  the  day  through  Norges  Bank’s  settlement  system.  The  largest  interbank
payments are settled individually and continuously on a gross basis. This reduces the risk of crediting
an account without the payment due being transferred. Before the settlement is finalised, Norges Bank
verifies whether the banks have sufficient funds in their accounts in Norges Bank. The introduction of
collateral requirements for banks’ loans has lowered the risk assumed by Norges Bank.
Supervision has been substantially strengthened since the banking crisis. The Banking, Insurance and
Securities  Commission’s  resources  have  been  increased.  Greater  emphasis  is  placed  on  on-site
supervision.  The  methodology  for  document-based  supervision  has  been  improved.  Internal  control
routines have been enhanced. International surveillance cooperation has also been strengthened.
In  addition,  the  authorities  have  become  more  aware  of  the  importance  of  monitoring  the  financial
system.  The  aim  is  to identify  emerging  tensions  and  possible  sources  of  system  failure at an  early
stage.
Prevention work in Norges Bank
4.
The work undertaken by Norges Bank to maintain financial stability can be divided into three areas of
activity:
• 
• 
• 
work to reduce the risk in payment systems and increase their robustness; and
assess the effects of monetary policy and economic policy in general.
continuous monitoring of factors that affect financial stability;
Surveillance
Surveillance primarily consists of analyses of the relationship between macroeconomic developments
and the financial strength of financial institutions.
Norges Bank’s analyses are presented in semi-annual reports on financial stability, called “Financial
Sector  Outlook”.  Experience  shows  that  effective  surveillance  requires  more  than  monitoring  the
earnings and capital adequacy of banks and other financial institutions. Developments in other markets
must also be monitored. Analysing the interaction between real variables and financial variables has
been assigned high priority. In Financial Sector Outlook we evaluate how an array of factors affect the
robustness of the financial sector.
The Report includes an assessment of the outlook for  the  financial sector.  If  Norges  Bank  is  of the
view that the situation requires the use of instruments others than those available to Norges Bank, this
should  be  clearly  indicated.  Financial  Sector  Outlook  is  thus  submitted  to  and  discussed  with  the
Ministry of Finance and the Banking, Insurance and Securities Commission. The report is made public
and published in our quarterly report Economic Bulletin.
The  analysis  of  financial  institutions  concentrates  on  the  situation  in  the  banking  sector  and  main
groups of institutions as it is Norges Bank’s responsibility to ensure the stability of the system, and not
individual institutions. From a macroeconomic perspective, however, it may be appropriate to monitor
3
BIS Review 124/1999
developments  in  the  largest  institutions  as  this  could  deepen  our  understanding  of  macroeconomic
developments and the main trends in the financial sector.
Norges Bank’s surveillance work is carried out in close cooperation with the Banking, Insurance and
Securities  Commission,  which  supervises  individual  institutions.  The  Banking,  Insurance  and
Securities Commission also produces reports on a regular basis with assessments of the outlook for the
financial industry.
I would like to highlight three structural features that have contributed to changing the risk outlook for
the Norwegian financial system.
First:  there  are  now  a  larger  number  of  financial  groups,  which  comprise  banks,  insurance  and
mortgage companies, etc. The size of these entities has increased the risk of negative systemic effects
if problems should occur in  one  of them.  On  the  other  hand,  size  increases  the  scope for spreading
risk.
Second:  the  number  of  foreign  financial  institutions  in  Norway  has  increased.  They  will  normally
operate in several markets and engage in a broader range of activities. They may thus be more resilient
to a recession or a crisis situation in Norway than banks whose activity is confined solely to Norway.
The risk of contagion to other institutions is thereby reduced.
Third:  globalisation  of  financial  markets  means  that  events  outside  Norway  feed  through  to  the
Norwegian economy faster and with greater force.
Payment system
As  mentioned,  several  measures  have  been  introduced  to  strengthen  the  payment  and  settlement
system. At the same time, the volume of payments has increased sharply. The risk of problems in the
banking sector spreading through the payment system has not been eliminated. A high-priority task of
Norges  Bank  is  to  identify  risks  and,  together  with  the  industry,  contribute  to  more  secure  and
effective systems. It has also become increasingly important for our settlement systems to have good
international links.
Interdependence of financial and monetary stability
The objective of monetary stability - which in Norway means exchange rate stability and low inflation
- and the objective of financial stability are interdependent. High - and thereby in practice varying -
inflation and unstable exchange rates can threaten financial stability through several channels.
First,  it  is  more  difficult  to  assess  the  risk  of  an  investment  project.  Inflation  makes  it  difficult  to
differentiate between a change in prices for a good or service and a change in the overall price level. It
makes it more difficult to determine the discount rate to be applied.
Second, fluctuations in the inflation rate are often accompanied by interest rate variations. A sharp rise
in interest rates can also result in substantial losses on financial assets such as bonds and equity. Loans
that have been granted against collateral in the form of such assets are even more exposed to losses.
When rising inflation and inflationary expectations necessitate a tightening of monetary policy a crisis
often ensues. In several countries the financial system has been on the verge of collapse during such a
period  of  adjustment.  This  was  the  case  in  the  US  in  the  early  1980s  and  in  the  Nordic  countries
around 1990.
Financial stability primarily contributes to price and exchange rate stability by facilitating the use of
monetary  policy  instruments.  Unstable  institutions  and  markets  constrain  the  use  of  interest  rates
because tighter liquidity and higher interest rates may increase the uncertainty concerning the stability
of the financial system.
Asset prices are an important linkage between monetary and financial stability. A surge in  property
prices with a risk of a subsequent fall threaten to undermine banks’ collateral.
BIS Review 124/1999
4
Crisis management
5.
Analyses  of  the  Norwegian  banking  crisis  provide  a  positive  assessment  of  how  the  crisis  was
managed. The IMF relies to a large extent on the solutions applied to the banking crises in the Nordic
countries as a model for its proposals for resolving the current banking crises in Asia.
The  division  of  banking  crisis  management  into  three  elements  has  gained  general  acceptance  in
Norway. The first element is that the banks’ earnings and capital shall serve as the first line of defence.
This limits moral hazard. The second line of defence is the collective guarantee system for the banking
industry.  The  third  line  consists  of  government  resources  that  will  be  made  available  should  the
collective guarantee schemes fail to resolve the crisis. Liquidity support from Norges Bank is part of
the third-line defence.
I would like to underscore the importance of the conditions that were attached to the capital injected
by the government. The banks’ share capital was written down to zero. A change in management was
required and the banks’ operations were subject to  strict criteria. The approach  was  transparent  and
won broad political support.
The Bank Guarantee Act  provides  the  private  guarantee funds  with  a  remit  that extends far  beyond
paying guarantee amounts. It also provides for support measures to ensure that a member is able to
honour its obligations and continue operations, and if necessary to transfer its activity to another bank.
A very important part of the decisions concerning solutions to a financial crisis in a bank is taken by
the guarantee funds. At least five of the board’s seven members must approve such support measures.
Five  of  the  board  members  are  appointed  by  the  general  meeting  of  the  member  banks,  while  the
Banking, Insurance and Securities Commission and Norges Bank each appoints one member. Support
measures require the approval of a majority of the members appointed from the member banks.
The decision to widen the remit of the guarantee funds was based on the experience of the Norwegian
banking  crisis.  Supplying  capital  from  the  guarantee  funds  proved  to  be  a  “cheaper”  and  more
effective means of resolving the crisis than referring the solvency problems directly to the authorities.
The  government  shall  provide  capital  support  when  financial  problems  in  financial  institutions
threaten  financial  stability.  How  this  is  to  be  done  must  be  assessed  when  such  a  situation  arises.
During the banking  crisis,  the  government  injected  capital  through  the  Government  Bank  Insurance
Fund. It has been announced that the Fund is to be discontinued. Generally, developments since 1992
have reduced the need for government intervention in the event of new crises in the financial system.
• 
• 
• 
The  establishment  of  foreign  banks  in  Norway  and  increased  foreign  borrowing  by
Norwegians in foreign banks has improved the distribution of risk.
The banks’ guarantee funds accumulate a higher level of capital.
The banks have more equity capital than earlier.
In  any  event,  the  question  of  whether  and  when  government  support  is  to  be  provided  should  be
unclear, and the conditions triggering support should be very strict.
Norges Bank’s liquidity support
6.
Ultimately, it is only the central bank that can secure the liquidity in the financial system,  which  is
why it is called the lender of last resort. The classic example of a liquidity crisis is a situation where
there is a rupture of confidence in the banking system. Depositors panic and shift funds to more liquid
assets,  primarily  cash.  The  conventional  formulation  of  the  role  of  lender  of  last  resort  is  that  the
central bank shall supply ample liquidity during the crisis - at a penalty rate - to illiquid but solvent
institutions. In the Norges Bank Act this role is anchored in our responsibility for effective payment
systems and our duty to exercise the traditional functions of a central bank.
5
BIS Review 124/1999
What instruments are available to Norges Bank?
This raises three questions:
• 
• 
• 
These questions are highly interdependent.
When is financial stability in jeopardy?
How does one determine whether an illiquid institution is solvent or not?
Norges Bank can use several instruments in the event of a liquidity crisis. If a crisis affects the whole
financial system,  we  can  change  interest  rates  and supply large  volumes  of liquidity  to the  banking
system. Interest rate cuts of a total of 75 basis points in the US in the autumn of 1998 are an example
of  this  type  of  liquidity  supply.  If  there  is  no  solvency  crisis,  the  banks  should  be  able  to  provide
collateral for the liquidity provided. Thereby, the central bank does not have to increase its exposure
and moral hazard, as defined earlier, is limited.
A  monetary  policy  that  focuses  on  the  preconditions  for  exchange  rate  stability  will  also  promote
financial stability. By avoiding abrupt changes in interest rates and not setting interest rates at a level
that creates inflation or at a level so high that this leads to a deflationary recession, one can prevent the
onset or deepening of debt problems that may contribute to instability in the financial sector.
Should liquidity problems in one institution or only a few institutions occur, Norges Bank may provide
loans on special terms. In the event of liquidity problems the question of whether an institution is also
facing  solvency  problems  arises.  In  practice,  it  is  difficult  to  determine  whether  an  institution  is
insolvent or only illiquid. The basic principle  must  be  that  Norges  Bank  shall not  provide solvency
support. Solvency problems should be solved by injecting private equity capital and by the guarantee
funds. Norges Bank’s liquidity loans are normally extended against collateral.
An important question is whether an illiquid bank is so large and important that it could represent a
threat to financial stability if it is not provided with support. Banks that believe the authorities consider
them to be too big to fail may assume excessive risk and their creditors may supply them with credit at
a  cost  that  is  too  low.  For  instance,  if  banks  believe  that  the  central  bank  will  solve  any  liquidity
problem, this will weaken their efforts to prevent such problems from arising - and if they occur, from
solving  problems  in  the  interbank  market.  The  use  of  credit  on  special  terms  in  situations  where
financial  stability  is  not  threatened  is  associated  with  indirect  costs.  The  situation  must  thus  be
carefully examined before loans on special terms are granted.
If  it  is  widely  known  and  recognised  that  if  an  institution’s  problems  are  confined  to  liquidity,  it
should be possible for the institution to raise loans in the market. A problem bank’s creditors - often
other banks - will in such a situation make their own assessment of the bank’s solvency. In principle, it
is not a foregone conclusion that the central bank and other authorities would be in a better position to
evaluate an institution’s solvency than its own creditors.
Implicit insurance schemes, which are in fact what loans on special terms are, may impair the effective
functioning of markets and lead to excessive risk-taking among banks. It may take a long time before
the costs  come  into  evidence.  In  a  crisis  situation it is important to  take  into  account  the  long-term
benefits of not providing support such as better functioning markets and more appropriate risk-taking.
If the banking system has access to a large supply of unsecured credit from the central bank or other
authorities,  this  may  create  problems  in  a  crisis.  The  authorities  will  naturally  have  to  place
considerable  emphasis  on  their  own  creditor  position  and  thus  reduce  the  emphasis  placed  on  the
considerations mentioned above. There is also a risk that the banks and guarantee funds will exploit
this creditor relationship to reduce their own contribution to resolving a crisis.
This problem is of less concern in Norway today than during the banking crisis. First, Norges Bank’s
loans to banks are almost negligible. Second, collateral requirements apply to all the standard lending
facilities.
The role of lender of last resort is not clearly defined. The central bank shall ensure financial stability,
but in order to ensure that institutions do not take support for granted, there must be uncertainty as to
what type of situation would trigger the role of lender of last resort and the instruments that would be
BIS Review 124/1999
6
used.  This  is  often  referred  to  as  constructive  ambiguity.  In  his  annual  address  in  1988  the  then
governor of the central bank formulated the role as follows:
“However,  should  financial  institutions  find  themselves  in  a  position  that  could  affect  general
confidence in the credit market, Norges Bank - cognisant of its responsibility as the central bank - is
prepared to take such measures as are necessary to bolster market confidence in our financial system.”
During  the  banking  crisis  the  division  of  responsibility  between  the  government  authorities  and
Norges Bank was clarified. If “necessary measures” prove to be solvency support, the guarantee funds,
and as a last resort the government, shall provide such support. Norges Bank will of course play an
active role in any situation where financial stability may be threatened. This role must be exercised in
close  cooperation  with  the  Banking,  Insurance  and  Securities  Commission  and  the  Ministry  of
Finance.
The current situation
7.
Before I sum up, I would like to make some brief comments on today’s risk outlook.
During the turbulence in the autumn of 1998, investors fled to liquid and safe investments. The interest
rate  differential  between safe  and risky  instruments  widened  markedly.  The  difference  is  still  wide.
This reflects uncertainty among investors.
The increase in interest rates in Norway in the autumn of 1998 led to a contraction in credit growth
that was far too high at the time, particularly in the corporate sector. Investment started to fall. Even if
debt servicing costs increased in the short run, the risk of even higher debt in the future was reduced.
Interest rates have subsequently declined.
The financial position of households is solid, and as a group they will be able to bear higher interest
rates. If households reduce saving because house prices rise, their vulnerability may increase. Some
indicators show that house prices are in real terms at the peak level recorded in the 1980s.
Bank losses have been unusually low for several years. We expect losses to return to a normal level in
the period ahead as a result  of  weaker  cyclical trends.  We  have  also seen  an expansion  in credit  to
“weak” enterprises. So far, we have not noted an increase in losses or non-performing loans. Nor have
the  banks  increased  loss  provisions.  The  increase  in  long-term  debt  in  high-risk  enterprises  would
indicate, however, that loss provisions should be increased in the near future.
Over the last few years, banks have accumulated substantial short-term external debt. Although this
debt has gradually been converted into more long-term debt, there is a liquidity risk associated with
the  debt. When  banks  encountered  problems  with  refinancing  their  foreign  debt  during  the  banking
crisis, Norges Bank intervened with support. As Norges Bank has done on previous occasions, I would
warn the banks against assuming that this will again be the case if similar problems should recur.
There is some fear in financial markets that a liquidity shortage may occur around the year 2000 in
connection with the Y2K problem. This is reflected in money market rates.
Norges Bank’s instruments are effective in terms of rapidly supplying large quantities of liquidity if
this should prove necessary. The central bank will supply sufficient liquidity to the money market in
connection with the year 2000, as we normally do throughout the year. Should it prove necessary to
depart from the collateral requirement, a risk premium will be applied.
Conclusion
8.
To sum up and conclude: Norges Bank places emphasis on promoting financial stability. As a result of
the  banking  crisis,  Norges  Bank  has  strengthened  its  surveillance  of  the  financial  sector.  In
cooperation  with  other  public  authorities  in  Norway  and  internationally,  we  will  contribute  to
developing  framework  conditions  for  financial  institutions  and  financial  markets  that  reduce  the
likelihood of future crises. A priority task is to enhance the resilience of the payment and settlement
system in the face of a crisis situation.
7
BIS Review 124/1999
It  is  still  likely  that  financial  crises  will  recur.  In  the  last  20  years,  three  quarters  of  IMF  member
countries have experienced a banking crisis. Not even a perfectly healthy macroeconomic policy and
the development of an effective supervisory system constitute a guarantee against crises if the banks
fail to exercise sound banking. Herd mentality and over-optimism that are rapidly reversed seem to be
a recurrent phenomenon. Systems and contingency schemes are therefore required to handle crises in
order  to  limit  the  adverse  effects  and  reduce  the  risk  of  recurrence.  The  most  important  preventive
measure  is  to promote  sound  banking.  Subject  to  the  statutory  rules  applying,  the  responsibility  for
sound banking primarily rests with the banks themselves.
BIS Review 124/1999
8
