Mr King speaks about interest rates, policy and the UK economy
Speech given by Mr Mervyn King, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the Scottish Council
Development and Industry, held in Edinburgh on 11 October 1999.
 Introduction
1.
Twelve months or so ago, interest rates were 7½%; now they are 5¼%. Twelve weeks ago they were
only 5%. So why do interest rates sometimes go down and sometimes go up? And why, in particular,
did  interest  rates  rise  in  September?  At  one  level,  the  answer  to  these  questions  is  straightforward:
interest rates move – whether up or down – in order to keep inflation on track to hit the target of 2½%.
But, at a deeper level, why should monetary policy aim at a target for inflation rather than at growth
and employment? Most people in this audience today belong to the “inflation generation”. You will
have lived through a time in which inflation was a fact of life. For much of UK history prices were
relatively stable. But during the 1960s inflation started to rise. In the 1970s inflation averaged no less
than  13%  a  year  with  a  peak  of  over  27%  in  August  1975.  During  the  following  decade  inflation
averaged  7%  a  year,  and  it  has  fallen  to  around  4%  in  the  1990s.  Between  June  1997  –  when  the
Monetary Policy Committee met for the first time – and August 1999 RPIX inflation averaged 2.6%.
During that period, inflation has ranged from a low of 2.1% to a high of 3.2%. The experience of the
past decade has been that low and stable inflation has gone hand in hand with more stable growth of
output and employment. Total output in the economy has now increased for 28 consecutive quarters –
an unprecedented period  of  positive  growth.  And  unemployment,  as  measured  by  the  Labour  Force
Survey, has fallen from a peak of 10.7% in 1993 to its current rate of 5.9%, the lowest level for nearly
twenty years. The current outlook is for continued growth with low inflation.
If Britain is to retain this degree of macroeconomic stability, then there will be periods when interest
rates will rise and periods when they will fall. For some commentators, interest rates can never be too
low. But for too long there has been a view that interest rates should rise only when necessary, and
should be lowered whenever possible. That asymmetric response was a recipe for instability.
The current monetary policy regime has been designed to lock in the greater stability of both inflation
and  output.  There  are  three  key  elements  in  the  regime.  First,  there  is  a  clear  and  unambiguous
objective for monetary policy – an inflation target of 2½% – set by the Government. Second, decisions
on interest rates are taken each month by the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) comprised of nine
individuals  with  expertise  in  monetary  policy  –  five  executive  members  of  the  Bank  and  four
non-executives – who operate on the basis of one person, one vote. There is, therefore, an appropriate
division  between  the  objectives  of  monetary  policy,  which  are  set  by  the  democratically  elected
government,  and  the  implementation  of  those  objectives,  which  is  delegated  to  a  group  chosen  for
their expertise. The third, and crucial, component of the regime is that the monetary policy process is
characterised  by  a  high  degree  of  transparency  and  openness.  Minutes  of  the  MPC  meetings  are
published within two weeks and the Bank’s quarterly Inflation Reports contain the Committee’s views
on the outlook for inflation and output. It is important that the Monetary Policy Committee explain its
decisions,  not  least  to  make  future  decisions  as  predictable  as  possible  in  the  light  of  the  evolving
economic data.
Of course, it is always easier to explain policy when the decisions are popular. We have to redouble
our efforts when decisions are less popular, and so I am delighted to have an opportunity this evening
to explain and to listen. I shall leave plenty of time for questions because one of the purposes of visits
such as these is to see things from your perspective. As Rabbie Burns wrote,
“O wad some Pow’r the giftie gie us
To see oursels as others see us!”
1
BIS Review 111/1999
The real test of the MPC is whether it aims continuously to meet the inflation target. For that reason,
the Monetary Policy Committee must be setting a policy for all seasons. Some of you may say that it is
all very well to set a policy for all seasons, but what about a policy for all regions, or parts of the UK?
Many  critics  disapproved  of  the  recent  increase  in  interest  rates.  Indeed,  the  Scottish  Council
Development and Industry (SCDI) itself described the decision as “disappointing”. It also described
the rise as “premature”; we would describe it as pre-emptive: prompt action to head off inflationary
pressures in the future and so lower the level at which interest rates might otherwise need to be set.
The  SCDI  said  that  “Scottish  business  is  regaining  confidence  after  a  tough  period,  but  this
announcement  [of  a  rate  rise]  will  dent  that  confidence”.  Yes,  it  has  been  tough  –  indeed  remains
tough – for some industries, especially agriculture, tourism and parts of manufacturing. But there has
not  been  an  overall recession.  GDP  growth in the  UK,  over  the  previous  twelve  months,  reached  a
trough of 1.3% in the first quarter of this year, and has been rising since then. With the new quarterly
data,  published  by  the  Scottish  Executive,  it  looks  as  though  in  the  year  to  Q1  output  growth  in
Scotland  was  higher  than  in  the  UK  as  a  whole.  The  latest  surveys  show  business  confidence
continuing to rise. And most welcome of all, unemployment has continued to fall in Scotland, as in
most parts of the UK.
Nevertheless, the high level of sterling has undoubtedly caused serious problems for many sectors of
the economy. As a result, some critics have argued that, with sterling at its present level, the burden of
containing  inflation  should  fall  more  on  fiscal  policy.  By  raising  taxes  or  cutting  expenditure  this
would, it is argued, enable the Monetary Policy Committee to lower interest rates, thus bringing down
the pound. There is, it is alleged, a failure of coordination between monetary and fiscal policy. This
argument deserves a reasoned answer.
So tonight I want to answer two questions. First, why did the MPC feel it necessary to raise interest
rates in September, at a time when inflation was a little below target and might fall further in the next
few months? Second, is there adequate coordination between monetary and fiscal policy under the new
arrangements?
Setting interest rates to meet the inflation target
2.
What a difference a year makes. Last October, bankers, especially in the United States, were talking
about  the  worst  financial  crisis  of  their  adult  lifetimes.  Reports  from  the  Bank’s  regional  Agents
indicated  that  business  sentiment  had  deteriorated  sharply,  and  the  CBI  October  Industrial  Trends
Survey showed that optimism about business conditions among manufacturers fell to its lowest level
since 1980. The possibility of a recession was widely discussed. The MPC responded to the change in
sentiment  and  to  worsening  conditions  in  the  world  economy.  It  reduced  interest  rates  by
2½ percentage points between October 1998 and June 1999. There has been a marked turn around in
sentiment during this year. Confidence measures have returned to their pre-October 1998 levels.
This volatility in sentiment, is not reflected in the statistics on economic growth. The latest estimates
of output for the UK show that over the past two years, output growth has been steady and close to
trend with the exception of two quarters (1998 Q4 and 1999 Q1) during which a run down in stocks
temporarily reduced growth. In part this stability was the result of pre-emptive monetary policy which,
by  reacting  to  the  forward-looking  information  in  surveys  and  other  data,  was  able  to  offset  the
volatility in confidence feeding through to the real economy.
For sometime now, the high level of sterling together with falling world commodity and food prices
have restrained retail price inflation. The prices of imports into the UK fell by 15% in the past four
years. It is inevitable that this favourable impact on inflation can be only temporary. Only a further
sharp rise in sterling, and further falls in commodity prices, could maintain these rates of decline of
import prices and their benign effect on retail price inflation. And we see that these effects are now
coming to an end. Import prices are beginning to rise, partly because of the recent rise in oil prices, but
also because the rate of decline in other prices is slowing with sterling no longer appreciating as fast as
it was.
BIS Review 111/1999
2
It was possible to allow domestic spending in the economy to grow rapidly in recent years because the
appreciation of sterling led to weak net trade. In real terms, the deficit in trade of goods and services
has deteriorated sharply. But just as the one-off effects of lower import prices will not continue to hold
down retail price inflation, so the rapid growth of domestic spending is itself unsustainable. In 1998
the increasing trade deficit reduced output growth by more than 2%. So modest output growth in the
economy  as  a  whole  was  consistent  with  rapid  final  domestic  demand  –  that  is  spending  by
households,  governments  and  business  on  consumption  and  investment.  But  the  pace  at  which  the
trade position is deteriorating is itself now moderating, and final domestic demand grew at 4½% in the
first half of 1999. So, even without any improvement in the trade deficit, the growth of final domestic
demand will have to moderate to prevent GDP growth rising above trend and putting pressure on the
supply  capacity  of  the  UK  economy.  Indeed,  if  the  trade  deficit  is  to  be  reduced,  then  domestic
demand growth will have to fall below the growth of total output for a while.
So by the time of the September MPC meeting much had changed from earlier in the year. New data
showed that final domestic demand was growing faster than expected. The data on the housing market
–  for  the  UK  as  a  whole  not  just  the  South  East  –  as  well  as  credit  indicated  that  the  strong
consumption  growth  over  the  past  year  might  persist.  And  house  prices,  I  should  add,  enter  our
decisions,  because  of  their  implications  for  future  consumption, not because  we  are  trying  to  target
house  or  indeed  any  other  asset  prices.  Unemployment  was  still  falling:  the  Labour  Force  Survey
measure of unemployment had reached its lowest rate since the series started, while the claimant count
had fallen to its lowest level since 1980. The Bank’s regional Agents had also noted tightness for both
the skilled and unskilled. Oil prices had risen sharply during the year. These factors led a majority of
the Committee to vote for a modest rise in interest rates of twenty-five basis points in order to keep
inflation on track to meet the 2½% target.
The task now is to continue looking ahead. To do this the MPC has to assess the prospective balance
between demand and supply in the economy as a whole. That requires an analysis of both demand and
supply  developments.  The  interesting  feature  of  recent  quarters  has  been  the  combination  of  strong
demand growth and a tight labour market, on the one hand, with weak wage and price pressures, on
the other. So the MPC monitors monetary data as well as signs of tightness in both labour and product
markets in order to detect early warning signs of inflationary pressures.
The MPC needs as much timely and accurate information as possible. Official statistics and surveys
provide  an  excellent  starting  point.  But  they  often  need  to  be  complemented  by  more  timely  and
focussed  information  on  particular  aspects  of  the  economy.  So  the  Bank  has  a  network  of  twelve
Agencies, which gather economic intelligence from all parts of the United Kingdom – from Cornwall
to the Highlands, and from County Tyrone to the Norfolk Broads. The  task  of these  Agencies  is  to
provide information on the state of the local economy. In total, the Agents have around 7,000 business
contacts  covering  all  sectors  of  the  economy  from  farming  to  finance  and  textiles  to  tourism.  Our
Scottish Agent, Janet Bulloch, who is with us tonight, is well known to many of you. I would like to
thank those of you who give your valuable time to see Janet and her team. She and her staff see some
500  business  contacts  a  year,  and  report  the  information  gathered  directly  to  the  Monetary  Policy
Committee. In addition, members of the MPC themselves make regular visits to different parts of the
country to listen and learn. And I shall be doing that during my visit to Scotland.
So whatever the critics may think, we are not short of information. Of course, whenever interest rates
rise it is always said that the rise might be appropriate for certain parts of the country, but is wrong for
some  sectors  of  the  economy,  some  regions  or  even  some  companies.  The  UK  economy,  we  are
reminded, is not homogeneous. Of course it isn’t, and a good job too. But policy can never be set with
the interests of one sector, or one region, let alone one company in mind. And it isn’t. I can assure you
that policy is not set with the South East of England in mind. But equally, it is not set either in the sole
interest of the North East of England or Scotland. It is set for the United Kingdom as a whole.
Some  have  argued  that  if  monetary  policy  has  but  a  single  instrument,  namely  the  national  interest
rate,  then  would  it  not  be  sensible  to  use  other  policies  to  reduce  imbalances  in  the  economy?  In
particular,  it  has  been  suggested  that  fiscal  policy  should  complement  monetary  policy  in  bringing
demand into line with supply.
3
BIS Review 111/1999
Coordination between monetary and fiscal policy
3.
An occasional criticism of the new arrangements is that they impede proper coordination of monetary
and fiscal policy. Two main reasons are usually advanced. First, the monetary and fiscal authorities
may  have  conflicting  objectives  which  they  are  free  to  pursue.  Second,  even  if  they  have  the  same
objectives  they  may  be  uncertain  of  each  other’s  intentions.  Neither  concern  is,  I  believe,
well-founded. The first stems from a line of academic thinking which assumes that the central bank
attaches more importance to the control of inflation than the Government, which in turn gives greater
weight  to  output  and  employment.  Hence  when  setting  interest  rates  and  fiscal  policy,  the  two
authorities could be pulling in opposite directions, and, realising this, might pull harder to offset the
actions  of  the  other,  resulting  in  a  distorted  policy  mix.  Although  such  an  outcome  is  possible  in
principle elsewhere, this problem does not arise in the UK. The reason is simple. The Chancellor sets
the objectives for both fiscal and monetary policy. It is the Chancellor who sets the inflation target and
then delegates the responsibility to achieving that to the Monetary Policy Committee. So no conflict
arises.
Nor  are  the  two  authorities  unaware  of  what  the  other  is  doing.  A  Treasury  representative  attends
meetings of the MPC, and one of his duties is to brief the Committee on fiscal policy developments.
This may take the form of advance notice of the overall fiscal stance to be announced in the Budget.
Equally, he reports back to the Chancellor on the monetary policy decisions of the MPC. This clear,
open and systematic line of communication works, if anything, better than the old practice where the
markets would speculate on whether the government might “reward itself” by an interest rate cut if the
Budget was well received.
But there is a further weakness in the proposition that monetary and fiscal policy are in some sense
alternative  instruments  for  influencing  movements  in  aggregate  demand  over  the  cycle.  There  is  a
natural  monthly  cycle  to  monetary  policy.  Many  of  the  relevant  economic  statistics  are  available
monthly. But the natural cycle for fiscal policy is annual rather than monthly. It is costly to change
taxes and government spending frequently. Changes in tax rates can distort the choices of the private
sector and lead to a misallocation of resources. To raise and lower public spending at short notice can
disrupt the provision of public services. And there are inevitable legislative and administrative lags in
implementing quickly changes in tax rates and government spending. Tax rates and public expenditure
should  reflect  long-run  priorities  of  the  elected  government,  and  are  not  well  suited  to  frequent
changes. Since the MPC first met in June 1997, it has raised interest rates on six occasions, lowered
them  on  seven  occasions  and  left  them  unchanged  sixteen  times.  It  would  make  no  sense  for  a
government to try to change tax rates with that frequency.
For  these  reasons,  fiscal  policy  is  set  so  that  the  public  finances  follow  a  sustainable  medium-term
path.  This  commitment  to  budgetary  prudence  is  enshrined  into  the  net  debt  rule  and  the  rule  that
public  borrowing  should  finance  investment  and  not  current  expenditure.  In  Hamlet,  the  advice  of
Polonius to his son was, “neither a borrower nor a lender be”. If we update Shakespeare’s dictum to
“neither a borrower nor a lender be over the economic cycle except to finance public investment”, then
you have the spirit of the government’s fiscal policy rules, if not the same elegance of language. So
fiscal  policy  is  set  on  an  annual  basis  to  maintain  a  sustainable  path  for  the  public  finances  in  the
medium-term. Monetary policy is set month-by-month to meet the inflation target. It is no part of the
government’s responsibility to make life easier for the MPC by manipulating fiscal policy to manage
the  economic  cycle.  What  matters  to  the  MPC  is  the  overall  fiscal  stance,  and  that  it  remains  on  a
sustainable  basis.  Decisions  on  that  are  made  once  a  year  in  the  Spring  Budget.  In  the  UK,
coordination between monetary and fiscal policy works well.
Conclusions
4.
In conclusion, therefore, I do not offer any simple solutions to the imbalances between different parts
of  the  British  economy.  Fiscal  policy  is  not  an  alternative  to  the  month-by-month  determination  of
monetary policy. And interest rates cannot target both inflation and asset prices, whether the exchange
rate or share prices or house prices. Nor should they. Interest rates must focus on the economy-wide
inflation target. But macroeconomic stability benefits all sectors of the economy. That stability, upon
BIS Review 111/1999
4
which  the  aspirations  of  parliamentarians,  both  at  Westminster  and  in  Edinburgh,  depend,  is
fundamental to the future prosperity of the United Kingdom. And to maintain stability, interest rates
will  sometimes  go  down  and  sometimes  go  up.  For  a  quarter  of  a  century,  my  generation  –  the
inflation generation – suffered from the instability created by high and unpredictable inflation. To the
next generation, I would like the Prime Minister, whoever he or she is at that point, to be able to say,
“You’ve  never  had  it  so  stable,  not  just  for  one  year,  or  two  years,  or  even  three,  but  for  a  whole
generation.”
It is well known that many, if not most, of the great British economists were Scottish. One of the few
English economists to rival the Scots was John Maynard Keynes. His view was that, “If economists
could manage to get themselves thought of as humble, competent people, on a level with dentists, that
would be splendid!”. So perhaps the fate of the MPC is, rather like dentists, to perform an important
service  but one  which  does  not  make  people  happy.  Regular  monitoring  and  early  treatment,  while
rarely  pleasurable,  prevent  more  unpleasant  symptoms  later.  So  it  is  with  a  pre-emptive  monetary
policy. As we said in our press release in September, an early move in interest rates “could lower the
level at which interest rates might otherwise need to be set”. That is why we raised interest rates last
month and why the MPC is committed to the consistent pursuit of a symmetric inflation target.
But that is not all. The new monetary policy regime is probably the most transparent and open in the
world. We are committed to explaining our policy – both to improve the efficiency of monetary policy
itself  and  also  to  build  up  support  for  what  we  are  doing.  Try  going  onto  the  Bank  of  England’s
website  –  the  address  is  www.bankofengland.co.uk  –  and  you  will  find  there  the  minutes  of  our
meetings,  as  well  as  the  Inflation  Report,  available  to  everyone.  You  will  even  find  a  copy  of  this
speech. You may not always agree with our decisions, but I do hope you will understand the reasons
for them.
Since the MPC was set up, there is, I think, a better understanding of what we are trying to achieve.
Most of those who disagree with particular interest  rate  decisions  accept  that it does  make  sense to
have  an  inflation target.  Some  might  wish  that  we  interpret  the  inflation  target  in  a  way  that  better
serves the interest  of their  own sector  of the economy,  but  that  would  be to court  popularity  in the
short term at the expense of achieving low and stable inflation in the long term. We are committed to a
dialogue, and that includes a dialogue with the people of Scotland. I cannot claim that we shall always
do what some of you would like us to. But I can promise that we shall explain and we shall listen. And
we shall remember those words of Rabbie Burns,
O wad some Pow’r the giftie gie us
To see oursels as others see us!
It wad frae mony a blunder free us,
And foolish notion.
Some of you may still feel that the MPC’s decision to raise interest rates was a “foolish notion”. But I
can assure you that our mission to explain will continue, and that we shall take the case for stability to
every part of the country in order “to see oursels as others see us”.
5
BIS Review 111/1999
