Mr Mboweni discusses e-money and
its impact on the central bank’s operations
Address by Mr Tito Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Sun Microsystems
Conference 1999, held in Vodaworld, Midrand on 11 October 1999.
 Introduction
1.
Electronic  commerce,  or  e-commerce,  is  the  catch-all  phrase  for  many  advances  in  technology
centered on the Internet and heralds fundamental changes for the world economy. The expansion of
the Internet on a global basis, has made it an ideal means to conduct commerce. In South Africa, as in
the rest of the world, the Internet is being used more and more to advertise and sell goods and services.
The Internet has brought about a need not only for micro payments, e.g. a small payment of perhaps
only a few cents for viewing a specific piece of information, but also growing interest in developing
more reliable and secure methods of payment for large commercial transactions.
E-commerce and, perhaps more important from the Reserve Bank’s point of view, electronic money
will probably have significant implications for most persons  and institutions. This  evening,  I  would
like to concentrate only on  two  aspects,  namely  a  comparison  between electronic  payment  methods
and the current conventional payment instruments, such as currency and credit cards, and the possible
effect that e-money may have on the operations of the Reserve Bank.
The development of e-commerce
2.
The Internet, and its application to e-commerce is turning many industries inside out. Some firms have
tried  to  only  partially  adopt  the  new  e-commerce  technologies,  but  are  increasingly  realising  the
importance of making e-commerce a seamless, integral part of their business plans. South Africa has
begun to reach the stage where the previous wholesale financial markets structures are beginning to
change  as  the  Internet  spreads  through  them.  Retail  investors,  empowered  by  the  web,  are  fast
becoming much more proactive. Certain financial institutions face the prospect of traditional revenue
streams  contracting  or  disappearing  altogether  as  the  Internet  brings  transparency  and  efficiency  to
once closed areas. The financial world is taking e-commerce seriously, but no one knows exactly how
or  how  quickly  these  new  technologies  will  change  the  business  landscape.  However,  one  thing  is
certain – e-commerce will speed up the process of globalisation and will lay bare the weaknesses in
any institution.
Central banks worldwide are considering their positions with regard to electronic commerce, Internet
banking and electronic money applications. There are a number of electronic money products which
are  either  in  the  process  of  being  developed  or  are  already  available  for  electronic  payments  and
banking and which are, or could be, activated through ATMs, telephonic devices, personal computers,
intelligent cards and card-reading devices.
Most central banks are specifically considering the impact these products and e-commerce will have
on their functions, and the regulatory and operational requirements which are necessitated. In South
Africa, several major banks have already launched Internet banking services and all the major banking
groups are investigating, or developing, multi-purpose smart cards using microchip technology which
enable electronic “purse” facilities.
Although  these  new  payment  technologies  are  still  in  various  stages  of  development,  the  South
African  Reserve  Bank,  as  other  central  banks  around the  world,  has  a  direct  interest  in  anticipating
their  likely  policy  implications.  Emerging  electronic  money  products  may  require  regulatory
adjustment or intervention which will arise from: the need to limit the systemic and other risks which
may  threaten the stability  of,  and confidence in, the  National  Payment  System;  the  need  to  provide
1
BIS Review 109/1999
consumers with adequate protection from unfair practices, fraud and financial loss; the need to ensure
the  central  bank’s  ability  to  conduct  monetary  policy;  and  the  need  to  assist  law  enforcement
authorities in the prevention of criminal activity.
While these products are still being developed, the Bank is reluctant to impose regulation that could
hamper the introduction of innovative and promising technologies. At this  stage,  the  Bank  is  of the
view that it should rather concentrate on understanding the emerging technologies and the issues they
represent. Opportunities which these new technologies offer should also be investigated and exploited
to  the  benefit  of  the  country  as  a  whole,  i.e.  how  the  emerging  technologies  can  be  used  to  make
financial  services  more  accessible  to  those  in  the  low  income,  unbanked  and  rural  communities  in
South  Africa;  and  how  the  emerging  technologies  can  be  used  for  cash  displacement  and  to  solve
problems such as the cost of cash handling and robberies.
The characteristics of electronic payments
3.
Basically  two  methods  of  making  payments  can  be  distinguished.  The  first  is  the  account  transfer
system. In this system customers issue instructions to banks to debit the account of the person making
a payment and to credit the account of the person receiving the payment. Payment methods which fall
into the  account  transfer  category  include cheques,  debit  cards,  credit  cards  and  telephone  banking.
Depending  on  the  type  of  technology  that  is  used,  these  payments  can  in  some  cases  be  finalised
immediately after they have been made, for  example  debit  card  transactions.  Other  account  transfer
payments, notably cheques, are conditional, and will only be finalised with a delay.
The second method of payments is the direct transfer or token system. In this system money or a form
of money is established, which can be directly handed from one person to another, with or without the
direct involvement of any bank in the transaction. These forms of money are purchased from an issuer,
who  ultimately  carries  the  obligation  to  redeem  them.  The  transaction  is  final  at  the  point  when  it
occurs, and is not dependent on the operation of some underlying settlement system. Cash is the most
widespread  example  of  a  token  system,  but  in  fact  there  are  a  number  of  other  examples,  such  as
multiple-trip train and bus tickets.
In determining whether electronically stored monetary value is “money”, it is worth reflecting on the
main attributes of currency, i.e. the notes and coins issued by the Reserve Bank. Currency is a standard
product and is therefore easily recognised and identified. It is risk-free, in the sense that the Reserve
Bank stands fully behind it. It is fully negotiable. Possession of currency is sufficient to  establish a
right  of  use,  and  it  can  be  simply  handed  to  someone  else  in  order  to  make  a  payment.  Usage  is
anonymous and not directly traceable. It is convenient and efficient for making small payments. It is
valid for payment in all places and circumstances, and its status can only be questioned where forgery
is suspected.
Payments made by means of currency are definite. They are final and irrevocable at the point when
they  are  made,  and  are  not  dependent  on  the  operation  of  any  clearing  or  settlement  arrangements.
These attributes collectively imply that currency is generally accepted. However, it is not in all cases
the  preferred  method  of  payment,  particularly  for  higher  value  transactions,  since  use  of  currency
involves  handling,  storage  and  security  costs  which  may  not  arise  to  the  same  extent  with  other
methods.
Payment  by  means  of  certain  electronic  methods  score  well  on  some  aspects  and  poorly  on  others.
However, the relative importance of these various attributes is very dependent on the type of payment
being made. Cash can be very convenient in some situations, but a real nuisance in others – and the
same is true for other technologies. Probably the key conclusion is that different payment technologies
are  not  inherently  inferior  or  superior  to  one  another.  Rather,  each  one  of  them  has  an  appropriate
place as, indeed, the current happy coexistence of a number of overlapping or competing alternatives
clearly indicates.
Stored value cards and other new forms of payment will result in some substitution, but the nature and
extent  of  this  substitution  will  depend  on  a  number  of  factors.  People  will  tend  to  prefer  to  use
payment technologies which are cheaper, more convenient, and less risky than available alternatives.
BIS Review 109/1999
2
Many will  probably  prefer  methods  which  can  be  used  for  multiple  purposes, rather than  having  to
utilise a variety of methods to meet different needs. The level of acceptance of particular payments by
retailers,  merchants  and  other  suppliers  will  obviously  have  an  important  influence  on  the
implementation of new approaches. Exactly how these influences will develop remains to be seen.
From  the  Reserve  Bank’s  point  of  view  stored  value  cards  or  the  account  transfer  system  is  only
important as a means of payment, but has no direct bearing on monetary policy.  In contrast to this,
e-money  may  have  important  implications  for  monetary  policy.  That  is  why  the  Reserve  Bank  has
decided  to  impose  certain  rules  and  regulations  on  e-money  products  in  terms  of  its  function  as
overseer  of  the  National  Payment  System.  Before  considering  the  possible  monetary  policy
implications  of  e-money,  I  want  to  briefly  describe  the  criteria that  will  be  used  in  deciding  on  the
introduction of e-money in the National Payment System.
E-money and the National Payment System
4.
In  the  National  Payment  System,  e-money  is  defined  as  electronically  stored  monetary  value  on  a
technical  device,  either  card-based  or  network-based,  that  functions  as  a  prepaid  bearer  instrument,
which can be widely used for making payments to undertakings other than the issuer, with or without
involving bank accounts in the transaction.
In  introducing  e-money  into  the  National  Payment  System,  it  must  firstly  fulfil  certain  legal
requirements in which the rights and obligations of the respective participants must be clearly defined
and  disclosed.  Any  proposed  e-money  scheme  will  accordingly  only  be  introduced  in  the  National
Payment System if it does not contravene the South African Reserve Bank Act, The Banks Act and
The National Payment System Act.
Secondly, in order to protect the integrity of the National Payment System, the South African Reserve
Bank,  in  its  role  as  overseer  of  this  system,  will  require  insight  into  risk-related  information.  The
South African Reserve Bank reserves the right to  prescribe risk  management  and  security  measures
prior to implementation of a scheme.
Thirdly,  the  Bank  will  require  that  mechanisms  are  available  to  measure  and  control  the  supply  of
rand-denominated  money.  This  is  necessary  because  e-money  could  potentially  affect  the  Reserve
Bank’s ability to manage the money supply effectively.
Fourthly, only banks are permitted to issue e-money. Primary and intermediary issuers of electronic
value  will  therefore  be  subject  to  regulation  and  supervision  by  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank.
Although  single  purpose  schemes  will  generally  fall  outside  the  definition  of  electronic  money,  the
South African Reserve Bank will determine whether multi-purpose schemes fall within the definition
or not.
Lastly, issuers will be obliged to redeem electronic money value in central bank money, at par, upon
request. The  management  of  the  underlying  float  and  redemption  of  electronic  money  value  by  the
issuer to the holder must be clearly defined.
E-money and monetary policy issues
5.
The Reserve Bank’s main interest in e-money is in three areas, i.e. the effect that it may have on the
formulation of monetary policy, the issue of banknotes and coins and on the soundness of the financial
system.
The formulation of monetary policy
(a)
E-money  can  be  considered as  another innovation  in  a  series  of  new  financial  arrangements.  These
new  arrangements  have  all  required  some  adjustments  in  the  formulation  of  monetary  policy,  and
e-money is not likely to be an exception to the rule. As already indicated,  the  collection  of  data  on
e-money is regarded as essential because the issue of e-money will affect the calculation of the money
3
BIS Review 109/1999
supply,  an  important  indicator  in  the  formulation  of  monetary  policy  in  any  monetary  policy
framework.  The  development  of  e-money  will  therefore  require  a  redefinition  of  the  monetary
aggregates to include this form of money.
It is at this stage difficult to determine what the effect of e-money will be on the value of the money
supply.  To  the  extent  that  e-money  replaces  the  existing  banknotes  and  coins  on  a  one-for-one
relationship,  the  redefinition  of  the  monetary  aggregates  would  leave  the  demand  for  money
unchanged. However, to the extent that e-money allows people to economise in their overall holdings
of currency, it could lead to a decline in the monetary aggregates. Similar deductions can also be made
on  the  likely  effect  of  e-money  on  deposits  included  in  the  monetary  aggregates.  The  large  scale
introduction of e-money may also influence the velocity of circulation of money, which will have to
be  taken  into  consideration  by  the  monetary  authorities  in  the  formulation  of  monetary  policy.
Nevertheless, the monetary aggregates should continue to be able to play much the same role as they
currently play in monetary policy formulation, despite some difficulties that may be experienced in the
transition period.
Currency issue
(b)
The Reserve Bank Act gives the Bank the sole right to issue banknotes and coins in South Africa. The
provision  of  currency  by  the  Reserve  Bank  under  a  statutory  monopoly  is  seen  as  a  useful  public
service  which  provides  a  basis  on  which  other  payment  arrangements  and  contracts  must  rest.  The
Bank’s  role  is  to  facilitate  and  encourage  overall  payment  system  efficiency  by  continuing  to  offer
currency  as  just  one  payment  technology  amongst  several.  Alternative  payment  technologies  and
innovations are freely allowed within this framework, and users are allowed to choose freely amongst
the competing technologies.
At  this  stage,  there  is  no  intention  that  the  Reserve  Bank  should  itself  issue  stored  value  cards,  or
provide other forms of electronic money to the public. However, the possibility that this might happen
at some point in the future cannot be completely ruled out. If electronic developments proceed to the
point  where  payment  using  currency  becomes  inefficient  and  costly,  then  it  could  prove  to  be
necessary to convert our paper and metal currency issue into electronic form.
Electronic  payment  developments  (and  any  erosion  of  the  currency  issue  that  may  result)  do  not
appear  to  pose  any  threat  to  the  Reserve  Bank’s  ability  to  implement  monetary  policy  in  the
foreseeable future. Even if they did pose such a threat, the appropriate response would probably not be
to  seek  to  control  or  prevent  such  developments.  It  would  generally  be  much  better  to  adapt  the
monetary policy operational procedures to the realities of the market place.
Prudential issues
(c)
The issue of e-money could be a risky business, because the monetary amount stored on a card or on a
network is only as good as the bank or other organisation which has the ultimate ability to pay on that
obligation. This may not be a serious concern in the case of low-value balances. However, it becomes
much more serious with higher-value balances. Such problems do, of course, not arise in the issuing of
banknotes and coins. These currency liabilities form part of the Reserve Bank’s overall liabilities and a
guarantee is provided to the bearer that they will be replaced with currency of an equal value.
The  issue  of  e-money  will  also  increase  the  risk  of  counterfeiting.  Depending  on  the  technical
characteristics of each system, counterfeiting could take place by physical reproduction of cards, by
manufacture of a “re-loading mechanism” which could be fraudulently used to add new balances to
authentic  cards,  or  by  “hacking”  into  the  payments  systems  themselves.  With  some  technologies,  it
might be difficult or impossible for the recipient of an electronic payment, or even for an issuer, to
detect  an  electronic  counterfeit.  Telephone  card  fraud  alone  for  example  cost  Telkom  more  than
R13 million  in  the  three  financial  years  ending  August  1999.  By  contrast,  counterfeit  currency  can
usually  be  detected  by  a  recipient  and  the  Reserve  Bank  as  issuer  scrutinises  banknotes  and  coins
carefully to  prevent counterfeiting.  Sophisticated security  features  will  reduce  the  risk  of  successful
electronic counterfeiting, but with the lucrative possible returns it will be difficult to rule them out.
BIS Review 109/1999
4
Issuers will therefore have to take great care to ensure that the dangers of counterfeiting is minimised,
and they should be vigilant in monitoring their systems and operations so that counterfeiting is quickly
detected.  Even  more  important  is  that  when  South  African  residents  get  involved  in  payment
arrangements which are effectively domiciled outside South Africa, they need to understand who it is
that  they  are  dealing  with,  where  the  counterparties  are  legally  located,  whether  they  have  an
appropriate  standing,  and  what  potential  risks  they  may  face  –  either  by  holding  balances  within  a
system,  or  by  using  those  balances  in  a  transaction.  This  information  may  not  always  be  readily
available or may be difficult to evaluate.
Both  the  holders  of  new  forms  of  electronic  money,  and  the  issuers,  face  potential  risks  in  certain
circumstances.  Some  of  these  are  reasonably  easy  to  understand  and  evaluate,  and  may  not  be  any
more  serious  than  the  risks  which  exist  at  present,  such  as  losing  your  wallet.  However,  the  risk
characteristics of schemes involving elements such as multiple issuers, many members, many business
organisations, multiple jurisdictions, delay or complexity in any settlement arrangements, or lack  of
any audit trails are most certainly not all straightforward.
Conclusion
6.
The introduction of e-money and for that matter all forms of e-commerce will accordingly create new
problems  for  the  business  community,  but  will  also  create  new  opportunities  for  a  more  efficient
payment system. The Reserve Bank is not too concerned about these new developments at this stage.
Customer  needs  are  likely  to  be  best  met  through  effective  competition,  and  this  will  require  that
genuine choices amongst alternative products are available. Fast and efficient means of pricing trades,
handling client relationships and redesigning distribution structures are being enabled by the Internet.
More  widespread  uses  of  these  new  methods  will  create  opportunities  for  financial  innovations.
However,  the  Bank  will  be  watching  these  new  developments  carefully,  in  order  to  ensure  that  the
integrity of South Africa’s financial system is always maintained.
5
BIS Review 109/1999
