Bank of Japan’s November report of
recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication 15 November 1999.
 The Bank’s view2
Japan’s economy, which had stopped deteriorating, is currently turning to improve, with exports and
production increasing. However, clear signs of a self-sustained recovery in private demand have not
yet been observed.
With regard to final demand, business fixed investment has been on a downward trend, although the
pace of its decline is slowing. Recovery in private consumption continues to be weak through lack of
notable improvements in employment and income conditions. Housing investment has recently peaked
out, and public investment seems to have stopped rising. Meanwhile, net exports (real exports minus
real imports) have increased further due to an upturn in overseas economies.
Reflecting  such  developments  in  final  demand  and  continued  progress  in  inventory  adjustment,
industrial  production  is  increasing.  Additionally,  corporate  profits  have  started  picking  up.  In  this
situation, corporate sentiment continues  to  improve.  Regarding  the employment  condition, there  are
some indicators that suggest a slowdown of the  decrease  in  the  number  of employees. The  positive
developments  in  corporate  profits and  sentiment,  however, have  not necessarily  stimulated business
activities, because firms still strongly feel that they have excess capacity and employees and that they
should  reduce  their  debts  to  restore  financial  soundness.  In  addition,  efforts  by  firms  to  reduce
personnel expenses have prolonged the severity of households’ income conditions.
As  for  the  outlook,  improvements  in  the  overall  financial  environment  partly  due  to  the  monetary
easing  by  the  Bank,  along  with  a  series  of  economic  measures  taken  by  the  government  including
those announced recently, are expected to continue underpinning the economy. Moreover, the positive
impact on domestic production of the recovery of overseas economies, especially of Asian economies,
is  likely  to  continue  for  some  time.  By  contrast,  it  is  highly  probable  that  housing  investment  will
remain flat for the time being. In addition, under cautious sales outlook, firms are expected to continue
corporate  restructuring  to  improve  their  profitability.  Such  restructuring  is  unavoidable  to  enhance
medium-term growth of the corporate sector and thereby that of the overall economy. In the short run,
however,  it  reduces  fixed  investment,  and  also  delays  an  improvement  in  employment  and  income
conditions,  thereby  discouraging  household  expenditure.  Moreover,  it  seems  that  the  recent
appreciation of the yen will have an adverse effect on corporate profits in the near term. Under such
circumstances,  it is  still  difficult to  expect  an  immediate  self-sustained  recovery  in  private  demand,
even though an upturn in economic activities, such as production, is expected to give favorable effects
to  corporate  and  household  income  gradually.  Consequently,  economic  developments  still  require
careful monitoring, although the economy is turning to improve. Further, it is important to  promote
structural reform in order to encourage a recovery in private demand.
With regard to prices, import prices are increasing somewhat due to the rise to date in international
commodity  prices,  such  as  crude  oil  prices.  Domestic  wholesale  prices,  notwithstanding  the  fall  in
prices of electric machinery, are flat due to an increase in prices of some products closely related to
1 This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting was
held on 12 November 1999.
2 The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on 12 November as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review 126/1999
international commodities, such as those of petroleum products. Consumer prices remain unchanged.
Corporate  service  prices  are  still  falling  slowly.  As  regards  the  movements  of  overall  prices  in  the
future, they are likely to be flat despite the continued fall in prices of some goods and services, as the
rise in crude oil prices to date will continue to be passed on to prices of other products for a while.
However, substantial narrowing in the output gap led by a recovery in private demand is unlikely for
the time being, and wages continue to follow a declining trend. Thus, downward pressure on prices is
expected to remain.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate has stayed at nearly zero, and financial institutions have
been confident about the availability of overnight funds. The amount outstanding of funds in the call
money market has remained generally stable since the middle of June.
As for interest rates on term instruments, short-term rates maturing before the year-end have remained
at a historically low level. Meanwhile, rates maturing beyond  the  year-end  are rising  due to  market
participants’ concern over the Year 2000 problem.
The Japan premium has continued to be nearly zero for short-term transactions, but there remains a
small premium for transactions maturing beyond the year-end.
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  rose  to  around  1.9  per  cent  in  late  October.  They  declined
somewhat thereafter and are presently moving between 1.7 and 1.8 per cent again. The yield spread
between  private  bonds  (bank  debentures  and  corporate  bonds)  and  government  bonds  once  stopped
contracting.  However,  there  has  recently  been  a  conspicuous  narrowing  in  the  spread,  primarily
between private bonds with relatively low credit ratings and government bonds.
Stock prices, after having declined in October against the background of the weak tone in U.S. stock
prices,  rebounded  reacting  to  the  recovery  in  U.S.  stock  prices,  and  are  currently  moving  around
18,000-18,500 yen.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen has recently been traded at around 104-107 yen to the U.S.
dollar.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks have basically retained their cautious lending attitude.
However,  constraint  that had  been  caused  by  severe  fund-raising  conditions  and  insufficient  capital
base has eased  considerably.  Under these  circumstances,  major  banks  are  gradually  becoming  more
active in extending loans, while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved.
However, credit demand for economic activities such as business fixed investment remains weak. In
addition, some firms have been trying to reduce debts using their on-hand liquidity. As a result, credit
demand in the private sector has continued to be basically stagnant, and thus private banks’ lending
has remained sluggish. Corporate bond issuance has been steady. Meanwhile, CP issuance has been
increasing with the year-end approaching.
The year-to-year growth rate of money stock (M2+CDs) has declined to 3.0-3.5 per cent mainly due to
the weakness in credit demand in the private sector.
In this financial environment, credit conditions have eased somewhat.
The following continue to warrant careful monitoring: how actively investors will take risks; how far
private banks will ease their lending stance; and how these changes will affect economic activities.
BIS Review 126/1999
2
