Mr Bäckström discusses the Swedish economy in the 21st century
Speech given by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board
of  Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Swedish  Shareholders
Association, held in Gothenburg on 22 November 1999.
 First  a  word  of  thanks  for  the  invitation  to  Gothenburg  to  discuss  the  Swedish  economy  in  the
21st century.
A week or so ago the Riksbank raised the repo rate from 2.90% to 3.25%. The decision was based on
the  assessment  of  inflation  prospects  we  had  presented  in  the  October  Inflation  Report  and  our
analysis  of  economic  statistics  that  had  subsequently  become  available.  By  raising  the  instrumental
rate now, we aim to contribute to the continuation of a favourable economic trend, with stable prices
and  sustainable  growth.  We  made  the increase somewhat  larger  than  was  expected  so  as to  be  in  a
position to leave the repo rate unchanged for the rest  of  this  year,  given  that  the  Swedish economy
follows the path predicted by the Riksbank.
Under these circumstances there is no point in dwelling on current monetary policy and its conditions.
Instead  I  shall  be  considering  a  couple  of  matters  to  do  with  growth  conditions  for  the  Swedish
economy in the longer run. This has a topical flavour on the threshold of a new millennium, perhaps
particularly so at a time when so much discussion refers to the so-called new economy.
Just  why  should  the  Riksbank  be  at  all  concerned  with  the  debate  about  the  new  economy  and  the
conditions  for  long-term  growth?  Monetary  policy’s  concern  surely  lies  in  influencing  the
development of aggregate demand in order to keep inflation in check.
The reason is that fluctuations in the rate of inflation stem mainly from demand’s deviations from the
trend rate of growth. The Riksbank therefore has to form an opinion about  the  economy’s  potential
growth  rate.  We  also  need  to  know  how  the  growth  trend  changes  over  time.  A  dilemma  here,
however, is that the growth path cannot be observed directly.
The fundamental factors behind an economy’s  trend  rate  of  growth  include  population  changes,  the
capital stock, technology and the efficiency of resource utilisation.
In the United States, recent innovations in telecommunications and computerisation have contributed
to higher gains in productivity. The far-reaching effects that the new information technology is having
on production and distribution processes have improved the conditions for growth.
A period of high investment growth is needed if information technology is to generate tangible effects.
The new investment transforms the capital stock; new technology replaces outmoded practices and the
labour required for each unit of capital equipment decreases. Unprofitable units or firms are closed and
new facilities are established. Productivity rises in the economy as a whole.
High  productivity  growth  makes  it  possible  to  maintain  business  profits  and  keep  price  increases
down. The transformation process generates a positive spiral; the introduction of the new technology
results in widespread rationalisation and greater efficiency. The resultant increase in the trend rate of
growth for a longer or shorter period means that the economy can expand more rapidly than before
without boosting inflation.
This is the process that is often being referred to today as “the new economy”. I do not find the term
particularly  apt  but  if  it  can  serve  as  a  simple  aid  to  understanding  what  the  new  information
technology can bring about, I have no objection to using it here.
A  similar  economic  transformation  is  not  yet  discernible  in  Sweden  nor,  for  that  matter,  in  other
countries in Europe. So the growth path has not been adjusted upwards as it has in the United States.
The rate of investment both in Europe as a whole and in Sweden has been appreciably lower than in
1
BIS Review 129/1999
the  United  States  for  the  past  four  to  six  years.  It  may  be  asked  why  the  new  technology  is  being
introduced so quickly on the other side of the Atlantic and so much more slowly here.
First I should say that this is a very knotty question. Economics has no precise methods that tell us
when a technical breakthrough is likely to show up in higher economic growth. Basically, however,
the process is bound up with the growth climate in general. There is no exact definition of the growth
climate but it does include the degree of macroeconomic stability, how the education system performs,
the construction of the tax system, the legal framework and so on. So there are numerous factors to
consider.
It is also important to realise that adjustments to the new technology do not occur automatically. The
new  facilities  will  not  necessarily  be  utilised  in  such  a  way  that  the  effects  suddenly  show  up  in
general economic development.
A proper transformation presupposes that the right driving forces are in place and that other important
requirements  have  already  been  met.  Otherwise  the  so-called  new  economy  may  mean  difficulties
rather than opportunities.
A  lack  of  adaptability  can  result  instead  in  the  economy  being  weaker  and  more  susceptible  to
inflation. In other words, if the global economy faces Sweden with stronger international competition
and demands for change and the necessary renewal of the capital stock and production facilities does
not happen, our economy will be liable to lag behind.
I should like to consider two factors that I believe will be significant for Sweden’s growth path after
the turn of the millennium, namely wage formation and a functional financial system. Of course there
are other factors of importance for the future growth path, such as the construction of taxes and how
the education system performs. They obviously have to be discussed as well.
I have chosen to consider wage formation because wages make up approximately 70% of total costs in
the economy, which makes them a major determinant of the profit level; profits in turn are important
for  the  development  of  investment.  The  functioning  of  the  financial  system  has  a  bearing  on  the
possibility of financing new investment at a reasonable cost. As I see it, expected corporate profits and
access to reasonable investment financing are vital for a process of transformation.
Wage formation
Let  us  now  take  a  look  at  a  period  when  wage  formation  was  one  factor  behind  a  less  successful
transformation of the Swedish economy.
When  the  industrialised  economies  began  to  recover  after  World  War  Two  and  international
competition increased, partly because trade barriers were dismantled, it became increasingly necessary
for Swedish firms to adjust their product range. The requirements resembled those that now seem to
lie in the not too distant future.
For  much  of  that  period  the  level  of  Swedish  wage  costs  rose  rapidly.  This  meant  that  corporate
profitability was under pressure both from the increased international competition and for rising wage
costs.
To cope with this pressure, firms tried to cut production costs by means of rationalisation rather than
by investing in new products. With diminishing profits, they lacked the new investment stimulus and
the  rapid  renewal  of  the  capital  stock  that  the  pressure  for  change  called  for.  During  a  period  of
transformation, rationalisation is not enough; new developments are equally important.
At first, most things still went well. The 1960s was a fantastic decade for growth. In time, however,
the  strategy  proved  to  be  defensive  and  stagnation  set  in  in  the  1970s.  There  are  limits  to  growth
through rationalisation. Without renewal, growth normally slows sooner or later. Compared with other
countries, the trend rate of growth in Sweden did indeed turn downwards.
In an attempt to maintain growth in the traditional industries, economic policy responded with a series
of devaluations. Each devaluation was invariably said to be the final one but the cycle of rising wage
BIS Review 129/1999
2
costs and a devaluation was still repeated again and again. The aim of compensating for the lack of
change  in  Sweden’s  corporate  sector,  which  stemmed  from  the  1960s,  simply  did  not  work.  If
anything, the devaluations meant that the problems persisted and were accentuated.
With  the  lack  of  investment  in  new  products  and  the  dependence  on  an  increasingly  outmoded
structure  of  production,  the  entire  nation’s  material  standard  had  to  be  adjusted.  For  many  years,
growth in Sweden was weaker than in the world around us.
This  example  shows  how  a  “new  economy”  at  that  time  posed  problems  for  the  Swedish  economy
rather  than  opportunities.  The  lack  of  change,  because  wage  formation  did  not  function  properly,
resulted  in  an  economy  that  was  weaker  and  more  susceptible  to  inflation.  The  period  clearly
illustrates how globalisation, increased competition and new technology can lead to lower growth and
higher inflation if changes are not made sufficiently quickly. If the economy is under pressure from
strong competition as well as poorly functioning wage formation, economic renewal may lag behind.
It is therefore gratifying that the labour market organisations seem to be increasingly in favour of the
inflation target policy. Many representatives of trade unions and employers express a strong ambition
and  determination  to  arrive  at  wage  increases  that  are  commensurate  with  the  macroeconomic
situation. This is all to the good.
But the fact remains that even in recent years, the rate of wage increases in Sweden has been higher
than in major competitor countries and also above the macroeconomic potential. Real wage increases
in excess of productivity growth enlarge the wage share and reduce the gross profit share. That is what
is happening now in Sweden. Bit by bit, at least a part of the increased profit margin that resulted from
the krona’s fall in the autumn of 1992 is being eroded.
This is a difference from the United States. There the economy has entered what might be described as
a good spiral, where higher productivity increases and comparatively moderate wage increases have
generated profits that help to drive new investment in advanced technology.
In such a process, unduly high wage increases can bring the changes to a halt, as happened in Sweden
in the late-1960s and early-1970s. Present economic assessments do not generally suggest that a break
is  imminent  in  the  path  of  Swedish  wage  formation.  So  will  this  have  a  negative  impact  on  the
propensity of firms to invest in the new technology?
The financial system
This brings me to the significance of the  financial system  and  access for  corporate  financing  in the
transitional  phase.  Are  there  differences  between  Europe  and  the  United  States  that  may  have  a
bearing on the pace with which new technology is introduced? And what part does EMU play in this
context?
One important factor in the process of industrialisation in the late nineteenth century, when Sweden
was transformed from poor country into a wealthy nation with almost the world’s highest growth rate,
was  the  contemporary  development  of  the  financial  system.  Banks  were  established  and  financial
know-how grew when interest controls had been abolished. As a result, inventions could be exploited
and investment in the nascent industries could be financed.
A  mounting  body  of  research  findings  published  in  the  1990s  indicates  that  economic  growth  in
various  countries  is  appreciably  affected  by  how 
the  more
highly-developed  the  financial  system,  the  greater  the  stimulus  to  economic  growth.  An  accessible
banking  system  and  efficient  financial  markets  contribute  to  the  development  of  investment  and
thereby to the economy’s growth trend.
the  financial  system  works: 
One conceivable reason why the US economy is being transformed more rapidly than is the case with
Sweden and, even more so, the European Community, is the efficiency with which the US financial
system  works.  Corporate  financing  may  well  be  facilitated  by  the  breadth  and  liquidity  of  diverse
financial markets.
3
BIS Review 129/1999
With  the  rapid  development  of  information  technology,  moreover,  a  new  type  of  company  has
emerged.  It  differs  from  the  traditional  pattern  in  that  its  operations  involve  highly  mobile  human
capital. The financing of these companies accordingly imposes different requirements in markets for
risk capital and loans.
The  US  markets  for  risk  capital  appear  to  be  more  highly  developed  and  more  focused  on  the
financing of high-risk projects than seems to be the case in Europe, where bank loans predominate and
a larger proportion of financing goes to reliable, established firms.
With the advent of the euro, the financial system in Europe may become more developed and, like its
counterpart across the Atlantic, offer more alternative forms of financing. With a single currency in the
euro area,  the  capital  markets  will  gradually  become  more  liquid  and  thereby  more  efficient.  There
will  probably  be  more  corporate  financing  with  bonds  and  equity,  forms  of  financing  that  are  less
common at present in Europe than in the United States. Signs of this are already evident.
There is reason to make a deeper analysis of the financial system’s contribution to the changes that are
needed  in  the  Swedish  economy.  The  introduction  of  a  single  currency  may  come  to  play  a  more
important  part  in  this  transformation  in  that  it  influences  the  development  of  Europe’s  financial
system. This is an argument in the discussion about EMU that I have not encountered hitherto.
Conclusion
Sweden  has  already  come  a  long  way  in  utilising  information  technology.  In  order  to  reap  the  full
benefit of this and go on enjoying the combination of high growth and low inflation, it is essential that
the right driving forces and conditions are in  place.  It  is important  that these  matters are discussed,
particularly as one cannot expect the economy to transform itself automatically.
We  have  made  good  progress  in  recent  years  by  establishing  macroeconomic  stability,  with  sound
government finances and stable prices. Efficient wage formation and a financial system that functions
properly are other important pieces. The fact that I have concentrated on these two factors this evening
should obviously not be taken to imply that they are all that is needed to complete the puzzle.
BIS Review 129/1999
4
