Mr Macfarlane comments on monetary policy in Australia
Notes  by  Mr I J Macfarlane,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  for  a  talk  to  Australian
Business Economists on 11 November 1999.
 I will say a few words on monetary policy tonight, but they are not intended to be very profound. This
is partly because I have recently held forth on the subject in the Chris Higgins Lecture. You will also
be aware that we have made a change to monetary policy, issued an accompanying press release, and
also issued our regular half-yearly report within the past week or so. With so many public statements
in such a short time, we should have got our point of view over to everyone by now. So my comments
tonight are not intended to point to any new direction in monetary policy - they are meant only as an
elaboration on a couple of points in what we have already said.
We have just been through an exercise in which monetary policy was tightened for the first time in
five years. History shows that interest rates have to go up as often as they go down, but although we
all know this, Australia has had particular difficulty in handling these rises in the past. Not that the
problem has been confined to Australia, many others have had the same experience. Tightenings have
tended to be delayed for too long, and when they have finally occurred, they have often  been  quite
abrupt and accompanied by heated political argument. This was certainly the pattern in the 1970s and
1980s,  although  we  made  a  big  step  forward  in  the  1994  tightening  as  I  emphasised  in  my  recent
lecture.
On this occasion, I would maintain that the tightening was neither delayed nor abrupt, and it certainly
took few people by surprise. But more importantly, the response to it by the economic community and
by politicians was extremely civilised. Although some people expressed disagreement, I detected no
heat or acrimony in their words. In the political sphere, the comments made by the Government, the
Opposition and others showed that we have gone a long way down the path of depoliticising monetary
policy.  This  is  a  very  welcome  development,  and  although  there  were  a  number  of  steps  along  the
path, the most important one was the joint signing of the Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy
in 1996.
Those who disagreed with our decision to tighten tended to point out that there were few signs that the
economy  was  overheating,  that  inflation  was  not  threatening  to  exceed  the  target  over  the  forecast
horizon, and that wages growth was not heading up (as in 1994). As a description of the economy, that
assessment was essentially correct, and we have no desire to dispute it. But the implication for policy
which was drawn from this assessment was not, in our view, correct. In our view, it reflected a rather
dated approach to the application of monetary policy.
The traditional view is that you only begin to tighten monetary policy when things have become, or
clearly  will  become,  overheated  or,  in  other  words,  out  of  control.  The  tightening  in  those
circumstances is a sign that something has gone wrong and is, in effect, an admission of policy failure.
Hence, the ample scope it provides for criticism, particularly in the political arena. The unusual aspect
of the recent tightening is that it occurred before things had become, or were about to become, out of
control. If it is successful, it will mean that they do not get out of control in the foreseeable future.
That is what is meant by the term “pre-emptive”.
But  clearly  we  could  not  have  just  picked  any  period  when  the  economy  was  performing  well  and
chosen to tighten monetary policy and claimed it was done in order to be pre-emptive. There had to be
good reasons why it was now - in the final quarter of 1999 - that we made this decision. Although we
have explained this in our Semi-Annual Statement, I would like to spell out a couple of aspects of this
in the time remaining tonight.
1
BIS Review 125/1999
The international aspect
1.
Although it is only a year ago,  most  of  us  have  forgotten  how  gloomy  the  prospects  seemed  in  the
second  half  of  1998.  This  was  the  time  when  the  Asian  problems  had  spread  via  Russia  and  Latin
America to Wall Street itself. If you look back at the press release which accompanied our easing of
monetary policy in December 1998, you will see it referred to the expectation by official and private
forecasters that 1999 would be a worse year than 1998.
As we now know, the world did not turn out that way - 1999 has turned out to be a stronger year than
1998, and both official and private forecasters are now expecting 2000 to be stronger again. I do not
wish  to  quibble  with  this  assessment.  I  merely  wish  to  record  that  from  about  the  middle  of  1999,
markets around the world began to recognise that the accommodative  stance  of  monetary  policy  by
major central  banks  that  had been  so  appropriate  for  1998  and early  1999  was  starting  to  look  less
appropriate  as  1999  progressed  and  strengthened.  This  reassessment  happened  first  in  the  United
States and was soon followed in other English-speaking countries and then in Europe.
As usual, the markets were quicker off the mark to raise market interest rates than they needed to be,
but they were broadly correct. Since mid-year, we have seen the United States, the United Kingdom,
Australia and the ECB tighten monetary policy. I suspect there will be a few more countries to come
in the not too distant future.
Domestic events
2.
Just as the weakness of the world economy did not come to pass, a similar expectation of weakness in
Australia failed to materialise. Real GDP in Australia again grew by over 4% in the 12 months to the
June  quarter  and  will  probably  still  be  showing  a  similar  rate  in  the  12 months  to  the  September
quarter. This measure may slip for a time as we drop off some of the high quarterly growth rates from
our calculations, but we think growth will remain robust over the next 12 months.
Similarly, the quite lengthy period during which inflation was undershooting our target seems to have
come to an end. The CPI inflation rate would already be a bit over 2% apart from the Government’s
reduction in the Health Rebate Levy. Although some of this result has been due to rises in oil prices,
measures of underlying or core inflation, which are largely unaffected by oil prices, have also risen by
about 2% over the past 12 months.
Thus, the period where the Australian economy was experiencing a contractionary impact from abroad
and where the outlook was for weaker growth and sub-2% inflation has now well and truly passed.
The  monetary  policy  that  was  appropriate  for  that  period  is  no  longer  appropriate  to  the  new
circumstances  that  we  face.  That  is  the  main  reason  behind  the  tightening  of  monetary  policy  we
undertook after our November Board Meeting.
This move was what the flexible inflation targeting framework suggests should happen. There is some
confusion,  however,  on  this  point  and  so  it  is  worth  spending  some  time  to  clarify  it.  Some
interpretations  of the target  imply  that  the  Bank  is  not  supposed  to  contemplate  any  rise  in  interest
rates  until  the  upper  end  of  the  target  is  threatened.  This  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  the  most
expansionary  setting  reached  during  the  downward  phase  of  the  interest  rate  cycle  should  be
maintained until such time as a move to a clearly restrictive setting is required, and only then should a
move be made. (That virtually guarantees that such moves will be large.) It is as though policy has to
operate only with settings of maximum “go”, and heavy braking.
This is  a reading  of  the  framework  we  do  not  share.  There  is  a  range  of  settings  of  the  instrument
between “maximum go” and “heavy braking”. Most of the time we would expect interest rates to be in
that range.
Let us look at two possible situations where monetary policy should be changed:
• 
The  first  is  when  inflation  is  above  the  target.  In  this  situation,  the  inflation  targeting
framework would say to raise interest rates to a setting which would bring inflation back to
the target. But once the higher rates had done their job, they should be gradually reduced to
BIS Review 125/1999
2
 more normal levels. This is what happened in 1996. We did not wait until our forecast had
inflation falling below 2% before we started to ease.
The second is when inflation is below the target. In this case, the framework would call for a
setting of interest rates which would, over time, allow inflation to go back up to the target.
Once it is clear that such a setting had done its job, the framework calls for it to be replaced
by  one  more  likely  to  keep  inflation  at  the  target.  The  framework  does  not  envisage  the
policy setting being maintained until something goes wrong.
Now some may object that all this smacks of fine tuning. I agree that we should not delude ourselves
that the economy can be precisely controlled so that inflation stays within or close to the band, even
when there are no external shocks. The point remains, however, that even if the process is not precise,
the  instrument  does  not  remain  at  its  most  extreme  setting  once  that  is  no  longer  needed.  As  the
outlook changes, and as the balance of risks shifts, it is appropriate also for the policy instrument to
shift.
What about the GST?
3.
Some  people  have  not  been  convinced  by  the  arguments  I  have  used  above.  Some  still  cannot
understand why you would tighten unless the economy was overheating, and assume that there must
be a hidden agenda. Others are keen to play the old game of trying to find a political dimension to
monetary policy. This has led some people to say that the real reason is our fear of the inflationary
effects of the GST, but that we are too diplomatic to say so. I am sorry to disappoint the proponents of
this view, but that is not the case.
• 
If the GST was the reason for tightening monetary policy, why have the Fed, the Bank of
England  and  the  ECB  tightened  monetary  policy?  I  am  not  aware  of  the  forthcoming
introduction of a GST in any of these countries.
  Our starting point has always been that the imposition of the GST should not have an effect
on wages because wage earners will gain more from  the  accompanying  fall in income  tax
rates than they will lose from the introduction of the GST. The net effect of the tax changes
will be to increase the disposable income of wage earners by more than the increase in their
expenditure, as is evidenced by the fact that the package involves a cost to the Budget.
Monetary  policy  is  based  on  a  view  that  inflation  will  be  within  the  target  immediately
before the GST is introduced and that it will be back within the target a year later. This view,
in turn, is based on the assumption that there will be no second round effects due to higher
wage outcomes as outlined above. If we started to observe behaviour that indicates that this
assumption was not correct, then monetary policy would act upon it. We  are  not  acting  at
present  on  the  expectation  that  this  assumption  will  be  violated - we  are  acting  in  the
expectation that it will hold.
The need for a long expansion
4.
We have made a point of saying that the recent monetary policy tightening is designed to increase the
length  of  the  expansion.  Again,  this  may  not  be  universally  accepted,  as  many  people  associate
tightenings with the end of expansions.
Our position may seem the wrong way round to those who have a more traditional view of monetary
policy, but I want to make a few points of clarification:
• 
First, this is not a new position on our part. We did not wait until we already had the runs on
the board before specifying our aim was to have a long expansion. Before I took up this job
in  early  September  1996,  I  was  asked  by  the  Parliamentary  Committee  why  you  would
tighten in an expansion, and my reply was as follows:
3
BIS Review 125/1999
“In the long run, if you want to have a good performance on growth and a good performance
on employment, the best thing you can do is to pursue policies that extend the length of the
recovery. In the past, we have sometimes had the problem of very strong expansions and a
build-up  of  very  big  inflationary  pressures  followed  by  sharp  contractions.  In  the  sharp
contraction  unemployment  goes  up  very  quickly.  The  way  that  monetary  policy  can
contribute  to  a  better  outcome  is  not  to  have  a  short  sharp  expansion  which  generates
inflationary pressures, but to have a long slow one. To have a long slow one, it means that
you occasionally have to be pre-emptive, at the first signs of things getting out of control you
have to squeeze down.”
Please  excuse  the  inelegant  phrasing - it  was  an  “off  the  cuff”  reply  to  a  question  from  a
Committee member. But at least it shows that we have been consistent on this point since at
least mid-1996.
The second point is that if you have a very long expansion, it seems reasonable to me that it
will include a number of phases of monetary policy. It is not as though, in order to get the
expansion,  you  continuously  ease  monetary  policy  and  then  as  soon  as  you  tighten  it,  it
brings the expansion to an end and you then experience a recession. It seems far more likely
now that a long expansion will include perhaps two or three phases of tightening and easing,
as monetary policy seeks to extend the length of the expansion. And, of course, if it is a low
inflation expansion, as it would have to be to in order to be a long one, the tightenings and
easings of monetary policy may then take place over a relatively small range of interest rate
settings.
 Concluding remarks
5.
I was going to conclude by saying a few things about communicating with the public, or what is now
known  as  transparency.  But  the  more  I  think  about  this,  the  more  complicated  it  gets.  So  the  one
thought I will conclude with is this. Sometimes it is possible to be reasonably direct when talking to
the public, as I believe we have been over the past few weeks. That is because we had a clear view
about what needed to be done. But more often than not, you find yourself in a grey area where there is
not a strong case to do something, where all incoming data have to be evaluated on their merits and
policy  options  weighed  up.  In  such  situations,  you  cannot  give  views  about  the  direction  of  policy
- you cannot say more than you honestly believe - and that will often disappoint people looking for a
clear guide to future action.
BIS Review 125/1999
4
