Mr Repse gives a short speech on
monetary policy in Latvia and exchange rate strategies
Speech  given  by  Mr Einars Repse,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Latvia,  at  the  ECB  Seminar  on  the
Accession Process, held in Helsinki on 11 November 1999.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
Accession to the European Union (EU) is a strategic aim of Latvia, and we see joining the European
Monetary  Union (EMU)  as  an  integral  part  of  this  process.  We  strongly  hope  that  the  European
Council  will accept the  Commission’s  recommendations  and  a  decision  will  be  made  to  commence
accession negotiations with Latvia in year 2000. The Bank of Latvia will be well prepared for these
negotiations,  as  we  have  already  established  our  status  and  policies  with  a  perspective  of  future
membership in the EU.
The Bank of Latvia enjoys a high degree of independence, fully compatible with the requirements of
the  EMU.  Price  stability  is  clearly  defined  as  the  main  objective  of  the  Bank  of  Latvia,  and  its
monetary  policy  instruments  and  procedures  largely  correspond  to  the  monetary  policy  framework
used  within  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks.  And  we  are  implementing  a  very  conservative
monetary policy, which, as we believe, is in line with the policy principles of the European Central
Bank (ECB).
Since 1993, Latvia has been using the exchange rate based stabilisation programme. In February 1994,
the  Bank  of  Latvia  pegged  the  national  currency  to  the  SDR  basket.  We  based  our  decision  on  the
belief that a fixed exchange rate regime, if it is durable and credible, reduces uncertainty, eliminates
currency  risk  and  provides  businesses  with  a  sound  basis  for  planning  and  pricing.  It  fosters
investment  and  international  trade,  which  are  of  a  particular  importance  for  the  restructuring  of  a
small, open economy like Latvia.
The Bank of Latvia has indeed ensured that the exchange rate arrangement is credible and durable, and
the  Latvian  economy  has  benefited  from  the  stability.  Inflation  has  declined  to  a  level  consistently
below 3%, there has been considerable growth in exports, especially to the EU countries, and it has
contributed  to  the  strong  GDP  growth  over  the  last  years.  The  achieved  macroeconomic  stability
allows  us  to  set  the  target  of  fulfilling  the  nominal  convergence  criteria  at  the  time  of  Latvia’s
accession to the EU.
Pegging  the  national  currency  to  the  SDR  rather  than  to  a  single  currency,  the  Bank  of  Latvia  has
made the lats fluctuate less against any individual currency than it would otherwise. Furthermore, the
structure of Latvian foreign trade by settlement currencies largely corresponds to the composition of
the SDR basket, thus providing extra rationale for the current peg.
To sustain the current exchange rate  regime,  the  Bank  of  Latvia  intervenes in the foreign  exchange
market by selling or buying the national currency at a predetermined exchange rate, thus acting in a
close analogy with the currency board arrangement. We are also in line with another important feature
of the currency board: Latvia’s monetary base is permanently covered by Bank of Latvia’s net foreign
reserves  at  more  than 100%.  At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  of  Latvia  is  not  bound  by  the  legal  and
institutional restrictions of the currency board arrangements. As a full-fledged central bank we flexibly
manage liquidity in the banking system by steering short-term interest rates. The current exchange rate
arrangement  has  allowed  us  to  develop  the  full  set  of  market-based  monetary  instruments  and
operational practices.
In our opinion, the present exchange rate regime is the best option for Latvia on our way towards the
membership in the  EU  and  the EMU. Therefore  we  intend  to  maintain  the  existing  peg  to the  SDR
until the accession to the EU.
1
BIS Review 125/1999
We are aware of the currency stability requirement as set out in the Maastricht Treaty and the Protocol
on  the  convergence  criteria.  It  is  our  understanding  that  the  current  interpretation  of  said  criterion
prescribes mandatory participation of the new Member States, including those with a fixed exchange
rate  regime,  in  the  ERM II  before  the  eventual  adoption  of  the  euro.  This  requirement  does  not
represent any difficulty for Latvia. Due to its peg to the SDR, exchange rate fluctuations of the lats
against the ECU (and later against the euro) have not exceeded 10% in either direction for the last six
years.  In  effect,  we  are  already  observing  the  required  fluctuation  margins  without  a  formal
participation in the Exchange Rate Mechanism. The Bank of Latvia is strongly committed to ensure
stability of the national currency also in the future, so formal participation in the ERM II will hardly
affect our daily operations.
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  we  highly  appreciate  the  opportunity  provided  by  the  ECB  to
exchange opinions on the challenges the candidate countries will be facing in the coming years. We
look  forward  to  increased  cooperation  with  the  Eurosystem  and  individual  central  banks  of  the
EU countries.
BIS Review 125/1999
2
