Mr Clementi comments on the systemic aspects of the Basel proposals
Speech  given  by  Mr  David  Clementi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  a  Financial
Services Authority Conference, held in London on 2 December 1999.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am delighted to be given this opportunity to address you today. I must first express my admiration
for  the  pro-active  and  thorough  way  that  the  FSA  is  seeking  views  from  the  industry  on  these
important proposals. I know that as well as this conference, their efforts have encompassed briefing
sessions, circulars to banks, advisory group meetings, and a dedicated website. There will no doubt be
a  few  focus  groups  springing  up  in  due  course!  The  Bank  of  England  is  in  turn  holding  regular
meetings with the main trade bodies, while various of the Basel Committees involved in developing
the proposals have conducted surveys and received presentations from banks and others. I hope that, at
the  end  of  the  process,  if  differences  of  opinion  remain  between  the  authorities  and  the  banking
industry, this will be the result of rational divergence between our different perspectives, and certainly
not through any failure of communication.
I intend to direct my comments to the systemic aspects of the Basel proposals. The Bank has a close
interest in this subject and I will start by outlining the relationship between the design of the regulatory
system and the Bank’s core purposes. In promoting the stability and efficiency of the financial system,
we favour capital charges based on more sensitive risk measures. Some argue that such measures are
procyclical and  add to the  vulnerability  of  the  system  as  a  whole.  I  will  deal  with  this issue  before
going on to discuss some features of the new proposals. In particular I will consider the pros and cons
of more complex rules, the use of internal ratings and the measurement of operational risks. I will end
by looking beyond the current proposals at potential new chapters for the Basel Accord, including the
harmonisation  of  provisioning  policies  and  the  development  of  capital  charges  for  financial
conglomerates.
The role of the Bank of England in financial stability
As  many  of  you  may  know,  the  Bank  of  England  has  three  core  purposes:  first,  to  maintain  the
integrity and value of the currency, generally referred to as our monetary policy objective; second, to
maintain the stability of the financial system, both domestic and international; and third, to ensure the
effectiveness of the UK’s financial services. The Bank’s monetary policy role is well known through
the  minutes  of  Monetary  Policy  Committee  meetings  and  the  quarterly  publication  of  the  Inflation
Report.  But  a  similar  transparency  is  pursued  in  relation  to  financial  stability  with  the  publication
semi-annually of the Financial Stability Review.
Our interest in the regulatory architecture most obviously stems from  this second  objective.  Clearly
regulation of financial market participants  is not the only  means  of  ensuring  such  stability:  a stable
macroeconomic environment, which is what our monetary policy objective is about, is a major factor
in  avoiding  financial system  dislocations,  while the  robustness  of the  market  infrastructure,  such  as
payment and settlement systems, is also crucial.
The design of the regulatory framework also has implications for the third objective, the effectiveness
of UK financial services. There is a widespread view that greater stability can only be bought at the
cost of reduced competition, meaning that these two objectives have to be weighed up against each
other  and  trade-offs  made.  I  would  suggest  an  alternative  point  of  view,  which  is  that  these  two
objectives are often fundamentally aligned. An effective financial system is one in which funds flow to
1
BIS Review 132/1999
the most productive projects, productivity being measured on the basis of long-term rewards and after
an appropriate discount for risk. But this is also a stable financial system. Put another way, short-term
stability of a sort can be bought through over-regulation or protectionism. But in the longer term, the
likely result is an unprofitable industry focused on regulatory arbitrage rather than its prime business,
with little instinct or incentive for assessing risks and rewards. It is noteworthy that there are numerous
examples  of  financial  systems  in  emerging  markets  which  have  exhibited  both  fragility  and
inefficiency.
At the Bank of England we do still consider that the stability of the financial system depends crucially
on  the stability  of  the  banking  system.  Banks  are  at the  heart  of  the  payments  system,  they  are  the
principal source of funds for many businesses, and they are an important savings medium for a large
part  of  the  population.  The  regulatory  framework  in  turn  affects  the  behaviour  of  banks,  making  it
essential  to  get  it  right.  It  needs  to  create  both  the  right  incentives,  and  establish  the  right  level  of
buffer  -  in  the  form  of  capital  -  to  protect  the  system.  We  fully  support  the  Basel  Committee’s
objective of updating the 1988 Accord to make it more comprehensive and risk sensitive. And  as  a
member  of  the  Basel  Committee,  the  Bank  is  working  alongside  the  FSA  to  ensure  that  these
objectives are delivered.
Importance of risk sensitive capital charges
I am aware that some commentators have questioned the aim of making the system reflect risk in a
more  differentiated  way.  One  argument  is  that  this  will  make  capital  charges  procyclical,  so  that
economic  downturns  or  external  shocks  are  amplified  by  the  regulatory  demand  for  higher  capital.
There  is  a  concern  that  the  consequences  could  be  particularly  severe  in  the  case  of  lending  to
emerging markets, where rating changes have sometimes lagged the onset of crises.
This  is  certainly  a  risk,  and  one  which  we  have  to  take  seriously.  Clearly  there  could  be
macroeconomic implications, both domestically and internationally, possibly on a systemic scale. We
are not sure, however, that the answer lies in making the framework less sensitive to risk, perhaps by
smoothing  over  bad  news  in  some  form,  for  example  by  ignoring  or  delaying  recognition  of  rating
changes. This would involve the same dangers that I recall from the days of hidden reserves in UK
banks, when the knowledge that unwelcome events could be hidden from view led occasionally to a
lack  of  rigorous  risk  assessment  in  business  decisions.  In  fact,  part  of  the  underlying  problem  of
procyclicality is that risks are not recognised early enough, in time to allow lenders to exert a more
gradual and beneficial discipline on borrowers. The capital framework - and, equally important, bank
provisioning policies - need therefore to be as forward looking and dynamic as possible. Since ratings
- whether external or internal - are influential in provisioning and will in the future be influential in
capital, they in turn have to be more forward looking. This is why in the sovereign context we place
particular emphasis on the importance of countries adhering to  international  transparency  standards.
No rating can be reliable without adequate information on the economic and financial situation of the
country.  The  Basel  paper  does  of  course  propose  that  compliance  with  the  IMF’s  Special  Data
Dissemination Standard is a pre-condition of a lower risk weight.
More generally, we have concluded that making the capital requirements more risk sensitive will help
ensure that borrowers are charged a more appropriate  price  for  their  debt, and limit  the  build  up  of
unsustainable  volumes  of  debt.  This  seems  to  us  a  better  system  than  the  current,  extremely
risk-insensitive  framework  of  risk  weights,  where  in  the  sovereign  context  nothing  short  of  a
rescheduling results in any change in capital requirements for exposures to OECD sovereigns, while
for non-OECD sovereigns the charges are completely invariant. It is worth noting here that a similar
kind of argument applies in the context of public disclosure by banks, which is also one of the key
planks of the proposed new Accord. There is a risk that in some circumstances there are drawbacks
associated  with  this,  since  disclosure  could  make  a  troubled  bank’s  position  worse  at  a  difficult
moment. But overall, we think the likely behavioural changes induced by greater transparency offer
more benefits than risks. By this I mean that the prospect of having to disclose more about positions to
the market will reduce banks’ willingness to take on highly risky positions in the first place.
BIS Review 132/1999
2
Benefits and drawbacks of complexity
A number of other commentators have questioned the effectiveness of introducing greater complexity
into  the  Basel  rules,  on  the  grounds  that  the  framework  will  always  be  inadequate  to  cope  with
innovation  and  arbitrage.  It  is  certainly  clear  that  a  minimum  capital  framework,  however
sophisticated, cannot on its own capture the full range of risks in a banking organisation. This has been
recognised  by  the  Basel  Committee;  it  is  the  reason  why  the  Consultative  paper  introduces  the
supervisory review process for individual banks under Pillar 2 of the framework, as a complement to
the minimum capital standard laid down in Pillar 1. It is equally  clear  that supervisors,  even  armed
with  powers  to  review  the  individual  capital  adequacy  of  banks  under  Pillar  2,  may  under  some
circumstances  be  less  effective  than  the  market  at  disciplining  risk  taking,  which  again  is  why  the
Basel Committee is emphasising the importance of enhanced public disclosure under Pillar 3 of the
Accord.  But  to  my  mind  there  is  very  considerable  scope  for  improving  the  risk-sensitivity  of  the
minimum capital standard before the benefits of this begin to be outweighed by the costs of greater
complexity.  Indeed,  greater  risk  sensitivity  ought  in  some  respects  to  mean  more  simplicity  in  the
capital framework, achieved by aligning capital with a common underlying concept of risk, such as
internal  or  external  ratings.  Internal  ratings  indeed  offer  a  very  significant  opportunity  to  bring
regulatory measures of capital more into line with the economic measures established by industry best
practice:  in the absence of this,  arbitrage  of  the  system  through  securitisation  and  other  means  will
remain  a  problem.  The  current  review  also  offers  the  opportunity  to  iron  out  some  of  the  existing,
fairly arbitrary, quirks of the current Accord. For example, by identifying the common characteristics
and residual risks underlying various types of credit risk mitigation techniques - collateral, guarantees,
netting, and credit derivatives - it is hoped that a more uniform and consistent treatment can be applied
to these instruments in place of the various, somewhat ad hoc, treatments that have grown up to date.
There is perhaps one caveat that should be attached to the aim of introducing greater risk sensitivity.
This is that it often entails much greater reliance on the judgement and competence of the supervisors.
This  can  be  seen  in  the  evolution  of  the  Basel  Accord  to  encompass  banks’  internal  market  risk
models, if approved by supervisors, and in the new proposals to allow some banks’ internal ratings to
be used for credit risk capital. It is also evident in the emphasis on individual supervisory judgement in
Pillar 2 of the consultative paper. We believe this is the right direction to follow in the case of G10
banks and supervisors. It is, however, more questionable whether such a system is easily exportable
outside  the  G10,  in  particular  to  some  emerging  markets.  Indeed,  even  amongst  the  G10,  some
supervisors (such as the US) are actively contemplating drawing a two or more tier distinction in the
capital  rules  applied  to  banks,  depending  on  the  level  of  complexity  of  the  organisation.  I  entirely
agree  with  Howard  Davies  that  it  is  essential  that  the  Basel  framework,  if  it  is  to  remain  a  global
standard, continues to encompass a menu of options which accommodate different needs.
I also do not wish to gloss over the fact that there are some very knotty areas in the proposals that have
to be tackled before the Basel Committee can deliver on its objectives of greater risk sensitivity and
comprehensiveness. The  FSA  is  today  going  to  tackle four  of  the  most  difficult,  namely  credit  risk
mitigation, operational risk, internal ratings, and interest rate risk in the banking book. I would like to
take this opportunity to make a few observations on those areas that are of particular interest to us.
Use of internal credit ratings
The Bank has, as some of you may know, been devoting considerable thought to development of the
internal ratings based approach to setting capital for credit risk. This is in part because we have been
able to utilise the expertise we have built up in the course of our work on credit risk modelling, on
which the Bank and the FSA held a joint conference last year. But more importantly, it is also because
we consider this part of the Basel proposals to be of the utmost importance to achieving a balanced
and stable framework. In particular, the availability of this approach is a very important safety valve
for the market pressures and distortions that could otherwise arise from the use of external ratings. I
mean no disrespect to the existing well-known rating agencies - indeed quite the contrary - when I say
that the last thing the regulators  would  want to see is a  mushrooming  of  untried  rating  agencies all
clamouring for “recognition” from supervisors. We have no wish to see the supervisory net extended,
3
BIS Review 132/1999
by way of quasi-regulation, to rating agencies; nor do we wish to substitute regulatory judgements for
the very satisfactory investor discipline that currently operates in the ratings arena.
I note that the EU Commission’s consultative paper on reforming the EU framework goes further than
the Basel Committee’s and talks of designing an internal ratings based approach that could potentially
be used by all banks,  not just large  sophisticated  ones.  This  makes  some  sound  sense,  since,  to  my
mind, banks should seriously question what value-added they are bringing to the credit intermediation
process  if  they  do  not  have  a  reasonably  systematic  mechanism  for  assessing  and  pricing  borrower
risk. There are indeed various ways that an internal ratings based approach could be designed, with
varying  degrees  of  sophistication  depending  for instance  on  the  number  of  “buckets”  that  are  used,
whether  maturity  is  incorporated  as  an  additional  dimension,  and  whether  the  bank’s  own  internal
estimates of loss-given-default are recognised, as well as simple default probability. We do not at this
stage have a strong view as to where along this spectrum of complexity the internal ratings approach
should be pitched. Several options need to be explored, including the possibility of offering a choice of
approaches  to  supervisors,  or  an  evolutionary  framework  whereby  the  system  could  develop  in
sophistication over time. In principle, we would certainly like to see a system that a reasonably large
number  of  banks  could  sensibly  aspire  to.  There  are  only  two  caveats  that  I  would  make.  First,  of
course, there are the implications for supervisory resources if a very large population of banks have to
have their internal ratings systems approved. And secondly, even a simple framework has to observe
certain  minimum  requirements.  This  means  the  ability  to  relate  an  internal  rating  to  a  quantifiable
concept,  such  as  loss-given-default  or  default  probability;  the  ability  to  demonstrate  that  this
relationship is historically valid, or - in the likely absence of long runs of data - at least plausible; and
third, as I said before, a forward-looking dimension to the rating. Whilst the Bank of England is doing
its  best  -  I  hope  with  some  success  -  to  help  the  economy  avoid  the  booms  and  busts  of  previous
decades, banking is likely to remain a cyclical industry, and to my mind it would be simply imprudent
to base ratings and capital on a borrower’s position at the top of an economic cycle.
Operational risk
Use of internal ratings will of course raise many of the sorts of difficulties for testing and validation
that  were  identified  for  credit  risk  modelling.  However,  we  are  at  least  talking  about  a  reasonably
well-defined  type  of  risk  and  one  which  is  quantifiable  in  statistical  terms.  We  are  in  much  more
difficult territory when it comes to operational risk. The term operational risk covers a wide range of
types  and  sources  of  risk,  and  banks’  data  bases  of  loss  are  generally  patchy.  There  are  numerous
questions not only about the appropriate design of the charge, but also about the appropriate level. It is
clear that some types of operational risk, such as fraud, can result in huge spikes of loss, as we saw in
the case of Barings and Morgan Grenfell. Even though we are concerned with protecting the system, I
feel it would be inappropriate to expect most banks to hold an additional cushion of capital to cover
these  sorts  of  very  rare  events:  it  would  either  be  grossly  excessive  for  most  of  the  time,  or
alternatively seriously inadequate if a major problem arose. So the focus here must be on systems and
controls, and on using variable target capital ratios under Pillar 2 to encourage improvements in these.
Moreover, the appropriate level of capital will depend in part on how far we think operational losses
are correlated with other types of loss which are already covered by capital. Probably there are some
types  of  operational  loss  -  processing  errors,  settlement  delays  -  which  do  not  exhibit  a  high
correlation  with  either  credit  or  market  risk.  But  in  practice,  there  is  clear  evidence  that  credit  or
market  losses  put  pressure  on  the  firm,  which  can  push  managers  into  fraud  or  result  in
operationally-risky  cost  cutting.  There  have  certainly  been  occasions  when  operational  losses  have
only been revealed because of a market downturn or similar event. As I heard it graphically expressed
the  other  day:  “It  is  only  when  the  tide  goes  out  that  you  discover  who  is  not  wearing  a  bathing
costume”!
I am optimistic that, over time, operational risk will become more measurable and that, as was the case
for market risk models, a consensus on methods of quantifying it will emerge. The Basel Committee’s
framework will certainly have to be flexible in the face of this evolution. However, we should also not
lose sight of the fact that the Committee’s announced aim is not just coverage of operational risks, but
“other”  risks  more  generally.  Episodes  of  market  turmoil  over  the  past  couple  of  years  have
BIS Review 132/1999
4
demonstrated just how wide is the range of risks that are not currently explicitly covered by regulatory
capital;  I  would  include  under  this  heading  market  liquidity  risk,  individual  bank  liquidity  risk,
correlation risk between credit and market risks, and legal and reputational risk. These types of risk
can certainly produce systemic disruptions. My expectation would be that, even with further advances
on measuring operational and credit risk, most banks will want to carry a chunk of fairly undefined
capital to cover rainy day events.
Future challenges
Finally,  before  I  close,  I  would  also  like  to  stress  that  many  challenges  will  remain  for  the  Basel
Committee  even  after  it  has  completed  its  current  review  of  the  Capital  Accord.  I  have  referred  at
various points to bank provisioning policies. This has traditionally been an area where internationally
there has been little attempt at harmonisation (except at the  level  of  very  broad  principles).  But  the
systematic  use  of  internal  ratings  by  possibly  quite  a  large  part  of  the  banking  population  will  arm
supervisors  with  valuable  information  about  expected  losses,  and  ought  to  focus  attention  on  the
adequacy  of  provisions  to  cover  such  losses.  Indeed,  more  generally,  the  whole  question  of  the
appropriate accounting valuation framework for the banking book may have to be re-examined in the
light of any recommendations that come from the Joint Working Group of accounting standard setters
that is currently looking at accounting for financial instruments.
Also  looking  to  the  future,  the  issue  of  recognising  full  scale  portfolio  credit  risk  modelling  will
inevitably resurface. The resulting recognition  of  diversification effects could  result  in  quite  a large
reduction of capital for well-diversified banks - who are also of course in many cases the largest, most
systemically significant banks. At this point we will have to think very hard about what level of capital
we really feel comfortable with in our systemic organisations, and in particular whether an individual
firm’s capital requirement ought to reflect the systemic externalities it poses.
And finally, with the rapid growth of banking sector M&A, and conglomerisation across businesses,
there is undoubtedly more work to be done on the appropriate regulatory framework for mixed-activity
firms.
In  short,  I  believe  there  will  be  many  future  opportunities  like  today’s,  in  which  we  invite  the
constructive input of industry participants.
5
BIS Review 132/1999
