Mr Noyer sheds some light on the international role of the euro
Speech  presented  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  before  the
Monetary  Commission  of  the  European  League  for  Economic  Cooperation,  held  in  Kronberg,  on
26 November 1999.
 Introduction
First of all, I should like to thank the Monetary Commission of the European League for Economic
Cooperation for inviting me to address such a distinguished audience and to shed some light on trends,
advantages and risks, or rather challenges, with respect to the international role of the euro.
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) marks a historic step in the European integration process as
sovereign states have replaced their national currencies with a common currency and transferred their
monetary policy competencies to a newly established supranational institution. European integration,
in the monetary sphere as well as in a number of other fields, is a process that has been under way for
several decades now and will continue well into the future.
EMU  and  the  single  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  are  completing  the  single  market  for  goods,
services,  people  and  capital  in  Europe,  with  a  view  to  enhancing  the  welfare  of  citizens  within  the
European Union. Moreover, the introduction of the euro and its prospectively increasing international
role  are  likely  to  have  far-reaching  consequences  for  the  world  economy  and  the  international
monetary  system.  Against  this  background,  the  ECB  shares  with  other  policymakers  in  Europe  a
particular responsibility in setting the right conditions for sustainable and non-inflationary growth in
the euro area so as to contribute to the long-term economic welfare of the world economy.
Today, I shall first concentrate on a few trends of the euro as an international currency, even though
available  statistical  evidence  only  allows  preliminary  conclusions.  Then,  I  shall  discuss  the  main
factors that may influence the international dimension of the euro in the future. Finally, I will turn to
the consequences, in terms  of  advantages  and  possible  challenges,  that a  greater  use  of  the  euro  by
international agents might bring about, both for the euro area itself and in the international context. As
a general remark, it must be emphasised that the Eurosystem is taking a neutral stance regarding the
international  role  of  its  currency.  This  means  that  we  neither  hinder  nor  actively  promote  the
international  use  of  the  euro,  leaving  future  developments  to  be  determined  primarily  by  market
forces.
The euro as an international currency
1.
By  definition,  a  currency  acquires  an  international  dimension  to  the  extent  that  private  economic
agents and official institutions use it outside its own jurisdiction. As in the domestic framework, in the
international  context  economic  agents  need  an  instrument  which  fulfils  the  three  basic  functions  of
money,  namely  that  of a  unit  of  account,  a  medium  of  exchange  and  a  store  of  value.  Therefore,  a
currency  can  be  characterised  as  international  if  it  is  used,  first,  for  pricing  goods  and  services  in
international  trade  and  commodity  markets;  second,  as  a  vehicle  for  commercial  and  financial
transactions in the trading of goods or of currencies in the foreign exchange markets; and third, as a
store  of  value  for  investment  and  financing  purposes.  There  are  even  extreme  cases,  for  example
hyperinflation,  where  domestic  economic  agents  may  completely  lose  confidence  in  the  currency
issued  in  the  jurisdiction  in  which  they  operate  and  resort  instead  to  an  international  currency  to
perform the internal functions of money.
1
BIS Review 131/1999
Along the same lines, an international currency can be  used  as  a reference in the  official  sector  for
pegging  the  domestic  currency,  as  a  tool  for  foreign  exchange  intervention  purposes  and  as  an
instrument for holding official reserves.
Even though all of the uses I have just mentioned are in part interdependent, this does not necessarily
imply  that  the  internationalisation  of  the  euro  will  proceed  at  the  same  pace  in  all  its  different
functions. Two main conditions are necessary for a currency to acquire international status: low risk
and large size. While the euro has the potential to meet these two conditions, network externalities and
economies  of  scale  tend  to  create  inertia  underpinning  the  current  predominance  of  the  US  dollar.
These effects, linked to the size factor, are greater for the unit of account and the medium of exchange
functions of money than for its function as a store of value. Instead, for this function, the risk factor
actually encourages diversification and therefore provides scope for the euro to grow more rapidly as
an international currency.
On the basis of available information, it has turned out that the euro is today the second most widely
used  currency  internationally,  after  the  US  dollar  and  ahead  of  the  Japanese  yen.  This  is  in  part  a
reflection of the significant international role already played in the past by some of the euro’s legacy
currencies, primarily the Deutsche Mark. It is also related to the economic and financial weight of the
euro area in the world economy. Euro area GDP amounts to almost EUR5,800  billion,  representing
over 15% of world GDP once differences in price levels across countries are taken into account. The
United States, with a GDP of EUR7,600 billion, account for close to 21% of the world GDP. The GDP
of Japan, the third largest economy in the world, is much smaller, at EUR3,400 billion and a share of
7% in world GDP. The size of financial markets reflects the same relative positions, even though – in
this case – the fact must be borne in mind that the structure of the financial system of the euro area
differs from that in the United States. Thus, the stock market capitalisation of the euro area amounted
to 63% of GDP at the end of 1998, far below the level prevailing in the United States at 155% of GDP.
On the other hand, the higher level of domestic credit, 130% of GDP in the euro area, compared with
81%  of  GDP  in  the  United  States,  indicates  that  bank  financing  is  more  important  in  the  former
economic area than in the latter.
Until now, international market participants seem to have received the euro quite well after its launch
at the beginning of this year, even though it might be too early to come to a meaningful assessment. In
particular,  it  is  difficult  to  judge  the  extent  to  which  one-off  factors,  such  as  the  postponement  of
issues after the launch of the euro or the desire to establish benchmark status, contributed to the strong
rise of the euro in international bond financing.
However, in the first three quarters of this year, the share of euro-denominated announced issues of
international debt securities and money market instruments has been consistently higher than that of
the euro’s legacy currencies in the same period of 1998, as these shares amounted to 36% and 24%,
respectively.
The shares of the three key currencies in terms of amounts outstanding are relatively less affected by
recent developments  even though  the  nature  of this indicator is less  forward-looking.  At  the  end  of
September 1999, 46% of all outstanding international short and long-term securities were denominated
in US dollar, 29% in euro and 10% in yen.
Data for international banking statistics are consistent with this ranking. At the end of June this year,
cross-border bank lending extended by reporting banks from industrialised countries was denominated
as follows: 42% in US dollar, 35% in euro and 10% in yen. These figures, however, are not  net  of
intra-euro area positions that can no longer be regarded as cross-border transactions.
In the foreign exchange markets, the last comprehensive survey on turnovers was carried out by the
Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in the spring of 1998, i.e. before the introduction of the euro.
Available  information  seems  to  indicate  that, in line  with  a contraction  of  foreign  exchange  market
turnover, trading volumes in euro against the US dollar are lower than former activity involving the
euro’s legacy currencies.
Only very limited evidence is available on the use of the euro for international commodity pricing and
trade invoicing. In the past, the euro’s legacy currencies were not as widely used in trade invoicing as
BIS Review 131/1999
2
the US dollar. In 1992, 28% of world trade was invoiced in the main euro area currencies, compared
with  48%  in  US  dollar,  which  was  a  much  larger  share  than  that  of  the  United  States’  exports  in
international trade, which amounted to only 16% last year. The US dollar is also predominant in use as
a quotation currency and inertia effects will contribute to maintaining its status in the future. However,
the size of the euro area financial market and the weight of the euro area in international trade flows,
given that 20% of all world exports originated in the euro area in 1998, may bring about over time a
greater weight of the European currency in trade invoicing patterns.
Turning to the official sector, two pieces of information are worth mentioning.
The first is related to the use of the euro as a reference currency in pegging arrangements or in the
management  of  the  exchange  rate  by  non-euro  area  countries.  Apart  from  the  exchange  rate
mechanism  ERM  II,  in  which  Denmark  and  Greece  currently  participate,  a  substantial  number  of
countries  outside  the  EU  have  unilaterally  adopted  the  euro,  or  one  of  its  legacy  currencies,  as  a
reference  currency  in  a  formal  or  informal  way.  Some  countries,  such  as  Bosnia-Herzegovina,
Bulgaria and Estonia, have established currency boards. Others maintain pegging arrangements to the
euro – as in the case of Cyprus, the Republic of Macedonia and as many as 16 African states, most of
which belonging to the CFA zone – or to currency baskets in which the euro plays a predominant role,
as in the case of Hungary, Iceland, Poland and Turkey. Some countries, such as the Czech Republic,
the  Slovak  Republic,  Slovenia  and  Romania,  have  informally  linked  the  exchange  rates  of  their
currencies to the euro.
In addition to its role as a reference currency, the euro is held for reserve management purposes by
monetary authorities outside the euro area. The latest available data published by the IMF in its annual
report provide an indication of the share of the euro in worldwide official reserves at the end of 1998,
just before its formal introduction. At that time, of the total worldwide official reserves for which a
currency  breakdown  is  available  (SDR928  billion),  17%  were  held  in  the  euro  legacy  currencies,
compared with a share of 71% for the US dollar and 6% for the yen.
Factors affecting the future international role of the euro
2.
The  international  role  of  the  euro  is  likely  to  evolve  gradually  in  the  future.  Even  the  US  dollar
required a very lengthy process to gain its present status, which took several decades and was fully
completed  only  in  the  1950s.  Growing  importance  of  the  euro  as  an  international  currency  could
develop  differently  as  EMU  represents  a  one-off  regime  shift  and  as  the  emergence  of  a  global
financial market could speed up the internationalisation of the euro.
A first prerequisite for a significant use of the euro by foreign agents is confidence in the stability of
its purchasing power in the long run. This is the primary objective of the Eurosystem. In this respect,
the value of the euro is based on domestic price stability and on the medium-term orientation of the
Eurosystem’s monetary policy.
Other factors will also play a role.
One important aspect is the possible future enlargement of the euro area. Four EU countries have, for
different reasons, not yet adopted the euro. Without elaborating on that, let me simply state that I am
confident that they may join in the coming years. If and when this happens, the economic and financial
size of the euro area would be further enhanced, providing new impetus to the international role of the
euro.
A greater challenge is the potential accession of new countries to the European Union. Negotiations
are currently being conducted with six countries. Negotiations with another six candidates will start
soon. When joining the EU, the new Member States will have to comply with all the requirements set
out in the acquis communautaire which relate to Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). Therefore,
following their accession to the EU, the new Member States will  also  –  in a  second  step  –  become
members of ERM II and will – in a third step, if and when the Maastricht convergence criteria are met
–  adopt  the  euro.  The  accession  process  entails  that,  over  time,  the  exchange  rate  and  monetary
policies of candidate countries will become increasingly focused on the euro with implications for its
international use.
3
BIS Review 131/1999
A  second  factor  relates  to  the  euro  area  financial  market.  The  acceptance  and  use  of  the  euro  by
foreign  agents  are  to  a  large  extent  determined  by  the  efficiency  and  integration  of  the  euro  area
money and capital markets. In this connection, progress has been made, especially with regard to those
sectors  of  the  financial  system  which  are  used  as  the  primary  channels  for  the  operation  and
transmission of the single monetary policy. Thus, thanks to the TARGET system, money markets are
now close to perfect integration, given that the spreads amongst euro area countries are extremely low
and reflect different credit standings of counterparties rather than market segmentation.
In  clearing,  settlement  and  trading  systems  for  securities,  integration  is  not  quite  as  complete  as  in
money  markets,  but  a  process  is  under  way  to  create  a  euro  area-wide  financial  infrastructure  by
linking existing national systems. In government bond markets, segmentation may not be eliminated
completely since, as you know, each Member State remains responsible for its own fiscal and public
debt management policy. Therefore, public bonds in the euro area will continue to be characterised by
yield spreads which reflect mainly the differences in the credit standing of sovereign national issuers
and in market liquidity conditions.
However,  the  ongoing  integration  of  financial  markets  in  the  euro  area  as  well  as  increasing
competition amongst intermediaries are likely to bring about greater liquidity, lower transaction costs
and the development of a wider array of financial products. As this process develops, the international
use of the euro is likely also to benefit from it.
I would like to mention a last aspect of the internationalisation process of the euro. This refers to the
possibility that the large size of the euro area as well as its lower trade openness, as compared with the
participating  Member  States,  might  contribute  to  reducing  the  vulnerability  of  its  economy  and
financial  markets  to  possible  external  shocks,  making  euro  area  developments  less  correlated  with
trends  prevailing  abroad.  Against  this  background,  euro-denominated  assets  would  provide
international  investors  with  an  opportunity  to  diversify  their  portfolios,  enhancing  the  risk-return
profile thanks to the pooling of not closely correlated assets.
The  development  of  the  euro  as  an  international  currency  is  not  likely  to  be  a  steady  process.  The
possible increase in the international use of the euro may not be rapid in  early  years  until  a  critical
threshold is reached attracting more and more international agents. Besides, the euro is probably going
to  develop  faster  as  an  international  store  of  value  than  as  an  international  transaction  and  pricing
instrument. Furthermore, the reaction of different international investors to the introduction of a new
currency  might  develop  at  different  paces.  In  particular,  this  might  hold  true  of  private  vis-à-vis
official investors: the former are usually inclined to pursue more dynamic investment strategies than is
customary  for  central  banks,  whose  investment  behaviour  is  more  conservative.  Therefore,  the
evolution of the euro as an official reserve currency is not likely to be as rapid as its use by the private
sector, where data on international debt security issues indicate a swift increase in the use of the euro
as an investment and financing currency.
Let me now briefly turn to the possible impact that the internationalisation of the euro might have in
areas of relevance to the Eurosystem.
Advantages and challenges of the international role of the euro
3.
A greater international use of the euro both has advantages and poses possible challenges.
Concerning the positive repercussions for the euro area economy and financial markets, I should only
mention that an increased use of the euro by international market participants is bound to add breadth
and efficiency to the euro area financial markets. Higher trading volumes imply  increased  liquidity,
which helps to enhance the efficiency of the market in terms of both lower transaction costs and asset
price developments which are better aligned with fundamentals and new information.
However, more than a source of favourable developments, I take the internationalisation of the euro
primarily as an ex-post  sign  of  the  progress  made  in creating  a  large  and  well-functioning financial
market.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  international  agents  will  increasingly  resort  to  the  euro  only  if  the
supporting financial infrastructure and capital markets are sufficiently integrated and efficient so as to
provide easy and beneficial access to non-resident as well as to domestic market participants.
BIS Review 131/1999
4
On the other hand, there are also challenges linked to an internationalisation of the euro, which have to
be given due attention.
First of all, euro assets could increasingly become affected by short-term portfolio shifts on the part of
international investors  bringing  about  volatility  and  swings  in  corresponding  asset  prices. This  does
not need to have negative implications for the euro area. For example, capital inflows linked to the role
of the euro as a “safe haven” currency may help sustain asset prices of bonds and equities. However,
even such flows of funds can pose risks if their effect goes as far as distorting asset prices. In general,
a swift withdrawal of funds by international investors might have an impact on the financial sector if
this  is  subject  to  a  sudden  and  substantial  drain  of  resources,  especially  for  those  institutions  with
possibly mismatched positions.
The internationalisation of the euro may also pose challenges to the Eurosystem’s monetary policy. A
greater external use of the euro might affect the information content of both monetary aggregates and
other indicators, which are parts of the so-called second pillar of the Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy
strategy. Concerning the first point, the increase in demand for euro banknotes, at present only in the
form  of  its  national  denominations,  would  make  the  M1  component  of  M3  more  volatile  and  less
meaningful for monetary policy purposes. Other components of M3 could also be affected if residents
move funds held with domestic Monetary Financial Institutions (MFIs) abroad or vice-versa, or if part
of the money market instruments included in M3 come to be held by non-residents. Instead, deposits
held with MFIs by non-residents are not computed as part of M3, and thus their trend does not affect
money growth even though it might alter the relationship between M3 and money demand or the price
level.  Among  the  indicators  included  in  the  second  pillar,  the  exchange  rate  is  the  indicator  most
susceptible to be influenced, even though the international use of the euro might also have an impact
on the yield curve and make the conduct of macroeconomic forecasting more complex.
Overall,  it  seems  that  none  of  the  aforementioned  factors  will  seriously  endanger  the  ability  of  the
Eurosystem  to  conduct  a  monetary  policy  geared  to  price  stability.  However,  they  impose  on  the
Eurosystem  a  greater  analytical  challenge  in  examining  current  developments  and  a  need  for  the
availability  of  accurate  and  up-to-date  information  in  the  areas  concerned.  To  the  extent  that  the
international role of the euro contributes to capital market efficiency in the euro area, the operation and
transmission of monetary policy might even be enhanced.
For the international monetary system, the introduction of the euro certainly represents one of the most
profound changes since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in the early-1970s. In the first place,
Western Europe has ceased to be the area of currency instability that it has been at times in the past
and the Eurosystem’s commitment to price stability will contribute to the stability orientation of the
euro area. As regards the process of international cooperation, the emergence of a key player with the
responsibility and the ability to take a more consistent stance at the global level than was previously
the case is bound to simplify the exchange of views and information at an international level, fostering
– whenever possible – the adoption of common initiatives. By reducing the number of key players and
by strengthening the awareness of each player to take up their respective responsibilities, the euro will
– over time – contribute to facilitating the process of international cooperation.
Conclusions
The euro acquired the status of an international currency from the time of its introduction as a result
both  of  the  characteristics  of  some  of  its  legacy  currencies  and  of  the  large  size  of  the  euro  area
economy and financial markets.
How and to what extent the international use of the euro will evolve in the future remains rather more
open. An increasing international role of the euro in the years to come can certainly be expected, even
though such a process will take time and will not affect the main international uses of the euro to the
same extent.
The internationalisation of the euro will to a large extent depend on the creation of a large, unified and
efficient capital market in the euro area. Its possible challenges appear to be manageable, in particular
those with regard to the Eurosystem’s monetary policy.
5
BIS Review 131/1999
From  an  international  perspective,  the  euro  as  a  stable  currency  opens  up  new  opportunities  for
international agents, and maintaining price stability in the euro area is also the best contribution the
Eurosystem can make to global stability.
BIS Review 131/1999
6
