Mr Bäckström presents Riksbank’s
Executive Board’s appraisal of monetary policy
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the  Board of
Directors and President of the Bank for International Settlements, given at the “Standing Committee
on Finance” on 6 October 1999.
 First a word of thanks to the Committee for the invitation to discuss the situation for monetary policy.
Today,  as  required  by  Chapter 6,  Article 4  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  (1988:1385  with
amendments), the Riksbank has presented this Committee with the year’s second written account of
monetary policy. The account is in the form of the third Inflation Report during 1999. In my opening
remarks  I  shall  briefly  summarise  the  content  of  the  Report  and  present  the  Executive  Board’s
appraisal of the present conditions for monetary policy.
Impressive economic performance
New statistics during the summer gave a picture of stronger activity than most observers had counted
on as recently as in the spring. GDP growth in the first half-year is calculated to have been 3.4%. At
the same time, inflationary pressure is currently low.
The  Swedish  economy  is  developing  impressively.  It  is  in  fact  some  decades  since  various  key
statistics for the macro economy have been as strong as this. Growth is good, inflation low and both
the  current  account  and  public  finances  are  showing  a  surplus.  Last  but  not  least,  the  economy  is
generating  more  jobs  that  we  have  been  accustomed  to  previously.  Unemployment  is  therefore
decreasing, though it is still above the levels that were customary in earlier decades.
So the situation before us today is completely different from what we experienced last autumn. During
the  past  year,  Sweden’s  economic  prospects  have  changed  considerably  in  the  eyes  of  various
observers and the Riksbank has been no exception in that respect.
Monetary policy in the past twelve months
Last  autumn  the  financial  markets  became  increasingly  turbulent  in  connection  with,  for  example,
problems arising from the hedge fund Long Term Capital Management and the suspension of Russian
debt payments. The financial crisis was expected to add to the negative real economic effects of the
Asian crisis. International observers, including the IMF and the OECD, therefore revised their global
growth and inflation forecasts downwards. The Riksbank did the same. Although growth in Sweden’s
domestic  sectors  was  relatively  good  and  the  exchange  rate  tendency  remained  weak,  the  overall
picture  did  point  to  slacker  growth  and  lower  inflation  in  the  forecast  period.  In  November  and
December the Riksbank therefore reduced the repo rate from 4.10 to 3.40%.
The early months of this year were marked by continued repercussions of the Asian crisis in the world
economy, with weaker international demand. In order to prevent this from leading to a dampening of
economic  developments  in  Sweden and  an  even  lower  rate  of  inflation,  in  February  and  March  the
Riksbank reduced the repo rate in two more steps to 2.90%.
Since then the situation has stabilised. An easing of  monetary  policy  in  many  parts  of the  world as
well as in Sweden has been an important factor behind the better tendencies in recent months and the
more positive forecasts. Even though the statistics show a stronger economic trend, inflation has been
in  line  with  the  Riksbank’s  forecasts.  For  this  reason  the  repo  rate  has  been  kept  unchanged  since
March.
1
BIS Review 108/1999
In August the 12-month rate of CPI inflation was 0.6% and inflation’s underlying rate, measured by
UNDIX, was 1.5%. It is changes in indirect taxes and subsidies, together with house mortgage interest
expenditure,  that  are  continuing  to  result  in  an  underlying  rate  of  inflation  that  is  higher  than  CPI
inflation.
Economic prospects from 1999 to 2001
We are now moving into a period of strong growth, externally as well as in Sweden.
As regards the international picture, the Riksbank judges that annual growth in the OECD area up to
the end of 2001 will amount to not quite 2.5%. It looks as though effects of the Asian crisis are now
dying away and that emerging market growth will become stronger in the next two years, above all in
the crisis-hit countries in Southeast Asia but to some extent also in Latin America and Eastern Europe.
In Japan, too, the earlier risk of negative growth has turned into cautious optimism about an upturn.
Prospects  for  the  euro  area  have  likewise improved,  with  a  recovery  in  manufacturing  and  stronger
consumer confidence. In the United States there seems to have been a further extension of the upward
phase this year and a slowdown may be softer and more cautious than anticipated earlier.
Even with stronger international growth, external price pressure is likely to be weak. For one thing,
after the Asian crisis there is still some unutilised capacity on the whole in the global economy. Other
factors are increased price competition and an expected appreciation of the krona.
Economic prospects in Sweden also look brighter. Besides the positive cyclical signals from abroad
and their expected effects on the Swedish economy, there is the stronger growth of domestic demand.
Firms as well as households are optimistic about the future. There are a number of reasons for this.
Real  wages  and  employment  are  rising  rapidly  and  public  sector  finances  are  becoming  stronger.
Fiscal policy in 2000 and 2001 is now assumed to be somewhat more expansionary. All in all, GDP
growth is judged to be 3.6% in 1999, 3.8% in 2000 and 3.0% in 2001. These assessments are based on
the technical assumption that the repo rate is kept unchanged.
The strong growth trend means that in the coming years the economy’s unutilised resources at present
will be utilised more quickly than the Riksbank envisaged earlier. Inflation is accordingly judged to
move up somewhat faster than the Riksbank assumed earlier. In the main scenario the underlying rate
of  inflation,  measured  as  UNDIX,  is  judged  to  be  1.8%  twelve  months  ahead  and  2.1%  after
twenty-four  months.  CPI  inflation  is  judged  in  turn  to  be  1.1%  after  twelve  months  and  2.0%  in
twenty-four months’ time.
Thus,  CPI  inflation  will  be  moving  closer  to  underlying  inflation.  One  reason  for  this  is  that  the
downward effect on inflation from house mortgage interest expenditure is diminishing. In other words,
just as the previous marked fall in interest rates held back CPI inflation so that it was well below the
underlying trend, so house mortgage interest expenditure is now tending to bring them closer together.
As I have pointed out before to this Committee, monetary policy ought to disregard these direct effects
of interest rates because repo rate adjustments mean that they are accentuated. It is also for this reason
that  the  Riksbank  is currently  focusing  monetary  policy  on  inflation’s  underlying  rate,  measured  as
UNDIX.
Transitory factors – changes in indirect taxes, subsidies and house mortgage interest expenditure – are
judged to have a downward CPI effect of 0.5 percentage points in one year’s time. The contribution
from interest expenditure is still negative because the process whereby house mortgage loans at high
rates are renewed at the present lower level is still in progress. As the earlier house mortgage loans had
a  long  duration,  this  process  takes  time.  In  two  years’  time,  however,  the  CPI  contribution  from
transitory factors is judged to be an upward effect of 0.1 percentage point.
The fact that so far, at least, the strong growth has not generated an acceleration of inflation that is
comparable  to  what  happened  in  earlier  upward  phases  has  started  a  discussion  of  whether  the
trade-off  between  growth  and  inflation  has  changed  in  the  1990s.  Judging  from  historical  patterns,
inflation ought not to have remained as low as it has. The relationship between growth and inflation is,
BIS Review 108/1999
2
of course, crucial in the assessment of future price trends and thereby for the formulation of monetary
policy.
It  is  not  possible  to  arrive  at  definite  assessments  in  this  field.  The  analysis  is  complicated  by,  for
example, the combination of decreased inflation expectations, uncertainty about the rate of potential
growth and the size of the output gap, and how the labour market is functioning. The Riksbank has to
be  alert  to  every  sign  that  may  support  or  contradict  the  hypothesis  of  a  lower  trade-off  between
growth and inflation. We have revised our opinion about this on several occasions in recent years and
have  done  so  again  in  the  present  Report.  In  this  we  are  not  alone.  Various  international  observers
have changed their appraisal of the corresponding trade-off in the OECD area as a whole. In Sweden’s
case  it  is  judged  that  the  low  and  stable  inflation  expectations,  increased  competition  and  EU
membership are among the factors behind a better trade-off.
In the Inflation Report, the Riksbank’s main scenario is accompanied by an analysis of likely risks.
Since the June forecast the spectrum of risks has changed somewhat; the chances of inflation being
higher than in the main scenario are now judged to be greater than the probability of a lower rate. The
increased upside risk has to do with fears that inflation will react more quickly to the rising economic
activity and that labour market shortages may be more serious and lead to a stronger development of
wages.
The assessment of an increase in upside risks is accompanied by less likelihood of a slowdown in the
global  economy.  But  there  is  still  the  risk  of  international  activity  being  dampened  appreciably  in
connection with a major correction of the high stock market prices and the financial imbalances that
have  been  a  feature  of  the  American  economy  in  recent  years.  Such  a  scenario  would  affect  price
tendencies in Sweden. The risk of financial bubbles, with serious real economic effects if they burst, is
something that the Riksbank, along with other central banks, has to heed.
Monetary policy
In the late summer, at the monetary policy meeting on 12 August, the Executive Board had already
noted  that  stronger  economic  growth  in  Sweden  and  rising  resource  utilisation  pointed  to  growing
upward pressure on prices. That in turn indicated that monetary policy might have to be given a less
expansionary  direction  in  the  future.  Two  members  of  the  Board  even  advocated  a  small  repo  rate
increase in August.
The  main  scenario  in  the  Inflation  Report  that  is  published  today  does  not  represent  a  future
development of inflation that threatens price stability. But every inflation forecast contains an element
of uncertainty and the risk spectrum also has to be considered when formulating monetary policy. The
present Report concludes that higher inflation compared with the main scenario is more probable than
lower inflation. Remember, moreover, that to be most effective, monetary policy has to focus on the
situation one to two years ahead.
This suggests that the Riksbank is moving towards a situation in which the repo rate will be raised.
Yesterday, however, the Executive Board decided in favour of an unchanged repo rate. But sooner or
later, if developments continue along the lines in the present assessment, a repo rate increase will be
called for. If some kind of international shock with a probable downward effect were to occur, or if
indications of more subdued economic activity or prices were to be observed, that would naturally be
taken into account in our future assessments.
Why a higher repo rate?
A repo rate of 2.90% is probably too low over a complete business cycle, even in an economy where
inflation expectations have settled down around the targeted rate of 2%.
Under such circumstances, the direction of monetary policy can be described as expansionary. This is
not countered by a restrictive fiscal policy. In the absence of negative shocks, that normally tends to
3
BIS Review 108/1999
generate GDP growth above the rate that is sustainable in the longer run. If such a situation is left to
continue for too long, various bottleneck problems arise that may push inflation up.
Such  a  course  of  events  has  to  be  prevented  by  the  Riksbank,  which  the  Riksdag  (Sweden’s
parliament)  has  made  accountable  for  maintaining  price  stability.  So  in  order  to  counter  an
acceleration of inflation in an upward cyclical phase, sooner or later the level of the repo rate has to be
normalised.
It is generally true to say that a repo rate increase should not be postponed unduly. If a central bank
waits  too  long,  the  increase  has  to  be  larger  in  order  to  arrest  the  overheating  and  inflationary
tendencies.  That  would  run  the  risk  of  the  next  slowdown  being  deeper  and  more  severe  than
otherwise.
A  higher  repo  rate  does  not  necessarily  impede  the  continuation  of  a  favourable  economic  trend;  it
may  even  be  required  for  a  good  and  sustained  development  of  employment  and  growth,  as  is
illustrated  by  how  the  Federal  Reserve  has  acted  in  the  United  States.  This  shows  what  a
forward-looking monetary policy can do for sustained growth. The formulation of monetary policy in
the  United  States,  with  timely  restrictive  measures,  has  contributed  to  the  American  economy  now
being in its longest post-war period of growth.
During  rapid  economic  expansion,  problems  with  bottlenecks  may  occur  temporarily  because  new
production  facilities  are  not  always  available  just  when  they  are  needed  to  cope  with  increased
demand. Experience in the 1990s suggests, however, that firms have become more flexible, both in the
utilisation of existing capital stocks and in the procurement of new technology, machinery and plant
when demand rises. This suggests that, if anything, it is not the level of unutilised capital resources
that  is  critical  at  present.  Instead,  an  analysis  of  resource  utilisation  should  probably  focus  on  the
labour market. Another reason for this is that in a price analysis at macro level, the weightiest item in
costs is wages; total wage costs are equivalent to over two-thirds of GDP.
The  level  of  unemployment  has  been  reduced  but  remains  high,  particularly  compared  with  the
post-war  period  up  to  the  early  1990s.  Seen  from  that  angle,  some  might  say  that  the  Swedish
economy has plenty of unutilised resources. Experience from other European countries has taught us,
however, that after a severe shock, as happened in the early 1990s, unemployment tends to stick at a
high level, at least for a while.
Estimates of the equilibrium level of unemployment in Sweden suggest that it moved up in the early
1990s and in terms of registered unemployment is somewhere in the interval 4.5 to 7.5%. Considering
that the rate of registered unemployment is currently inside this interval, the estimates would suggest
that the Swedish economy is now close to full capacity utilisation.
Estimates  of  equilibrium  unemployment  are  uncertain,  however,  and  it  is  important  that  the
Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  does not  unnecessarily  hamper  decreased  unemployment.  All  the  other
information about labour market tendencies has to be considered as well. A deeper analysis is needed
as a foundation for any conclusions that the economy is approaching full capacity utilisation.
When  an  economy  is  moving  closer  to  its  capacity  ceiling,  certain  statistical  phenomena  can  be
expected to occur more clearly and frequently. The same applies to anecdotal information in such a
situation. This can take the form of, for example, bottleneck problems in the labour market and signs
of difficulties in recruiting skilled labour. Other signs are an increased propensity to resort to labour
disputes, either regular strikes or wildcat behaviour. Moreover, firms may have to compromise over
job qualifications and take on less skilled personnel in order to cope with demand for their goods and
services.
Some such signs have been observed in recent months. Firms are already finding it difficult to recruit
computer  consultants,  for  instance,  as  well  as  some  other  categories  of  personnel.  The  situation  in
some  parts  of  Sweden  is  also  more  strained  than  elsewhere.  This  suggests  that  firms  will  find  it
increasingly hard to keep up with demand for their products. In other words, a situation where demand
is rising too rapidly. To date, however, the bottleneck problems are fairly limited.
BIS Review 108/1999
4
Thus, there are still no signs of more widespread shortages that might generate unsettling inflationary
impulses; but the risk spectrum has shifted. Moreover, the situation can change at short notice and the
Riksbank has to be alert to this. We must be ready to take preventive action.
In earlier upward phases, in the 1970s and 1980s, a tightening of economic policy often came too late.
The normal result was that the growth of production and employment was checked and unemployment
rose. That must not happen this time. The purpose of normalising the repo rate in time is to bring GDP
growth into line with the path for long-term growth, with a continued increase in employment and as
low a level of unemployment as the structure of the economy allows.
This is the starting point as we face the future challenges to monetary policy. That is what is meant by
price stability. It is also how we, as members of the Executive Board, perceive the task assigned to us
by the Riksdag.
5
BIS Review 108/1999
