Mr Thiessen reviews the challenges for
Canadian monetary policy in the Year 2000
Remarks by Mr Gordon Thiessen, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Greater Charlottetown Area
Chamber of Commerce, Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, on 2 November 1999.
 Monetary  policy  actions  take  a  relatively  long  time  to  affect  the  economy  and  inflation - anywhere
between 12 to 24 months. Because of this, central banks must always look ahead and must put in place
today the monetary conditions that are needed to help keep the economy on a sustainable path down
the road. By “sustainable” I mean a situation where economic growth and job creation are not at risk
from rising inflation.
It is in this forward-looking context that I would like to talk to you today about the challenges that
may face Canadian monetary policy in the Year 2000.
First, of course, is the turn of the century itself. So let me start by saying a few words about Year 2000
readiness in the Canadian financial sector.
Year 2000 preparations
As I said in Regina a little over a month ago, the Canadian financial sector  has done its  Year 2000
homework - and, I might add, done it very thoroughly. The Bank of Canada and providers of financial
services are confident that Canadians can expect “business as usual” in the financial sector as we head
into the Year 2000 and beyond.
The critical systems of financial institutions, including those systems that support automated banking
machines,  credit  and  debit  cards,  and  telephone  banking,  have  been  modified  where  necessary  and
tested.  Providers  of  infrastructure  services  to  the  financial  sector  (for  example,  electricity  and
telecommunications)  have  also  reported  that  they  are  Year  2000  ready.  And  major  Canadian
deposit-taking institutions have guaranteed the safety of their clients’ accounts and records from any
Year 2000 computer-related disruptions. The Bank of Canada has given the same guarantee to holders
of Canada Savings Bonds.
Even so, retesting of systems and contingency planning will continue right up to, and including, the
New Year’s weekend.
Right now, the Canadian financial sector is so well prepared that the major issue is no longer one of
potential technical problems. Rather, it is a matter of dealing with a possible overreaction to Year 2000
fears that could be more disruptive than the Year 2000 problem itself.
With this in mind, the Bank of Canada has built up a large inventory of banknotes. This is not because
we think that Canadians will actually experience widespread problems using means of payment other
than  cash,  such  as  credit  and  debit  cards,  over  the  New  Year’s  weekend.  Not  at  all.  Rather,  this
larger-than-normal inventory, together with the preparations made by the Bank and by private sector
institutions  that  are  responsible  for  distributing  banknotes,  is  intended  to  reassure  Canadians  that,
should some people decide to stock up on cash, the financial sector will be able to respond. By taking
these actions, and by publicizing them, we hope to ease any public concerns in this area and so reduce
the likelihood that we will actually need to use these extra banknotes.
We have also made contingency arrangements to ease potential liquidity concerns in the business and
financial sectors. Of course, the primary responsibility for contingency plans to meet possible liquidity
needs  rests  with  financial  institutions.  In  addition  to  these  private  sector  preparations,  the  Bank  of
Canada  has  set  up  a  special  liquidity  facility  to address  any  worries financial  institutions  may  have
about being hit with extraordinary demands for liquidity from their customers. And we are widening
1
BIS Review 122/1999
the  range  of  collateral  they  can  use  to  secure  loans  from  the  Bank.  We  have  also  announced
arrangements  to  prevent  any  unusual  liquidity  demands  from  putting  upward  pressures  on  money
market  interest  rates  in  Canada  around  the  end  of  the  year.  So,  there  should  be  no  reason  for  any
material Year 2000 risk premium in Canadian interest rates.
In  summary,  the  Canadian  financial  sector  is  well-prepared  for  the  century  changeover.  All
participants, including the Bank of Canada, have made contingency arrangements. Should unexpected
glitches  develop,  these  arrangements  will  provide  a  quick,  effective  response  to  minimize  any
disruptions.  More  importantly,  they  should  bolster  the  confidence  of  Canadians  in  the  financial
sector’s ability to operate normally. And this should ease Year 2000 fears and reduce the likelihood of
an overreaction.
I would like to reiterate what I have said before: when it comes to financial matters, I see no reason
why Canadians should prepare for this coming New Year’s weekend any differently than for any other
long weekend.
I would now like to turn to the economy and monetary policy.
The current economic situation
The  Canadian  economy  has  bounced  back  from  the  global  financial  crisis  of  1997–1998  and  its
negative impact on the prices of the key commodities we export. Indeed, when the numbers for the
third quarter of 1999 are out, I expect that they will show that output has expanded by over 4% since
the third quarter of 1998. And the unemployment rate has continued to fall over the past 12 months
- from 8.3% to its current level of 7.5%.
A number of factors have contributed to this economic rebound.
Commodity prices have turned around, responding to the ongoing strength in North American demand
and improved economic prospects in Europe as well as in Japan and the other Asian countries most
hurt by the financial crisis. While energy prices have shown the sharpest recovery so far, prices for
base  metals,  potatoes,  shellfish  and  forest  products,  all  of  which  are  important  in  Atlantic  Canada,
have  risen  as  well.  Still,  the  prices  for  certain  other  key  commodities,  such  as  grains  and  oilseeds,
remain soft, plagued by large global supplies and weak demand.
Another factor that has been supporting economic activity in Canada is the amazing strength of the
US economy,  our  major  export  market.  That  economy  has  had  a  remarkable  eight-year-long
expansion, marked by vigorous growth in production, strong gains in employment, and low inflation.
Inflation  has  been  held  down  by  improvements  in  productivity  as  well  as  special  factors  such  as  a
strong US dollar, low commodity prices and intense global competition.
Stronger  domestic  demand  has  also  been  instrumental  in  Canada’s  economic  pickup.  Indeed,  the
stimulus from spending by Canadian households and businesses has been growing recently in response
to high levels of confidence, rising employment and relatively low interest rates.
Behind all this, of course, has been our environment of low and stable inflation, which has helped our
economy perform well despite the global financial difficulties.
But what about the outlook for the Canadian economy over the next year? How does it shape up?
Let  me  begin  with  the  US economy.  We  currently  expect  that  growth  there  will  slow  to  a  more
sustainable  pace  next  year.  This  will  reduce  the  risk  that  US inflation  pressures  will  intensify.
Although the US market will no longer provide the same strong stimulus for our exports, we are now
beginning to see stronger economic activity in Europe and Japan that should partly offset a slowing in
US demand.
As for domestic spending in Canada, the recent momentum is likely to continue.
With respect to inflation, the total consumer price index has risen recently. But that is mainly the result
of the recent increases in world energy prices passing through to retail prices for gasoline and natural
gas. Those increases now seem to be coming to an end. There has also been upward pressure on prices
BIS Review 122/1999
2
from the effects of the earlier depreciation of the Canadian dollar. The core rate of inflation (total CPI,
excluding food, energy, and the effects of changes in indirect taxes) is currently near the middle of our
1% to 3% target range.
Overall, this is a positive economic picture as we go into 2000. But as I said earlier, monetary policy
must be forward-looking. So central bankers are always peering into the future, looking for potential
concerns. After all, it is our job to worry! And there are some rather significant risks to this positive
economic scenario to worry about.
Potential challenges for Canadian monetary policy
There are a number of challenges that the Canadian economy and monetary policy may have to face in
the coming year. Today, I would like to highlight two that are particularly important.
The first challenge concerns the implications for Canada of the ongoing strength of the US economy.
The second relates more to our own domestic situation as the Canadian economy begins to operate at
what is estimated to be full production capacity.
Let  me  start  with  the  issue  of  the  prolonged  vigorous  expansion  of  the  US economy.  This
extraordinary performance presents the US monetary authorities with the difficult task of ensuring that
it does not lead to overheating and rising inflation. The Americans have already raised interest rates
twice over the summer. What would be the implications for Canada if the US economy does not start
to slow and the US central bank has to raise interest rates further?
In  these  days  of  close  global  integration,  developments  in  the  United  States - the  world’s  largest
economy - are bound to have a major effect on national economies everywhere. This is especially true
for  Canada.  Our  proximity  and  strong  economic  ties  with  that  country  mean  that  the  state  of  the
US economy and any associated monetary policy actions will certainly affect us.
But there is no automatic rule as to how the Bank of Canada should respond if the US Federal Reserve
raised interest rates. We would have to examine carefully the strength of the economic expansion in
the United States and the associated price pressures behind such a move by the Fed. The challenge for
the Bank would be to assess the implications for our economy and for financial markets. If it looked as
though these developments would have a significant effect on Canada and lead to upward pressures on
prices  here,  our objective  of  keeping  inflation  within  the  target  range  might  be  jeopardized.  In  that
case, the Bank of Canada would certainly respond. Let me be as clear as I can on this - our current
healthy economic expansion will continue only if we sustain a low and stable inflation environment.
A more difficult scenario for Canadian monetary policy would be an actual outbreak of inflation in the
United States next year. Let me hasten to add that I think this is rather unlikely, given the past success
of the US monetary authorities in keeping inflation under control and their resolve to continue to do
so. Nonetheless, it is important that we be prepared for all contingencies. The first thing the Bank of
Canada would have to do in such a case is to ensure that the US inflation psychology did not cross our
borders. That would mean making it absolutely clear that we would strongly resist movements in the
underlying rate of inflation in Canada that risked taking it outside our target range.
Once it became evident that the US inflation rate was persistently rising relative to ours, the Canadian
dollar should start to rise in value against its US counterpart. Indeed, with such an adjustment in the
Canadian dollar, our floating exchange rate would be playing its proper role in providing an important
element of insulation for Canada from those rising US prices. And monetary policy should be ready to
encourage that process, if necessary, to prevent a spillover of inflation.
You would be right to gather from what I have said so far that the best news we can all hope for is a
“Goldilocks”  US economy - not  too  hot,  not  too  cold.  This  basically  means  an  economy  that  slows
down to a steady, sustainable pace of expansion that keeps it off the boom-and-bust roller-coaster.
The second challenge I want to talk about today is how Canadian monetary policy should operate as
our economy gets close to the full use of its production resources. Whether because of persistent US
demand for our exports or strong momentum in spending by Canadian households and businesses, we
3
BIS Review 122/1999
will  very  soon  reach  levels  of  economic  activity  that,  based  on  typical  measures  of  our  production
potential, appear to be at full capacity.
Ideally, we want to see the economy operating at a level that is as close as possible to full potential. At
this level, the economy  can  deliver a  low  and  stable rate  of  inflation - one that  is  neither rising  nor
falling persistently. And economic activity is expanding at as rapid a pace as is sustainable over time.
Unfortunately, in practice, it is very difficult to estimate precisely where this ideal operating level is.
And this gets to be even trickier after a period of business restructuring, rapid technological change,
and strong business investment in plant and equipment. This is what happened in Canada during the
1990s. And it may have raised our economy’s production capacity, although we cannot be sure by how
much.
Given the current momentum in our economy and the high levels of activity that we are seeing, and
because  of  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  conventional  estimates  of  potential  output,  monetary
policymakers must be on guard. In other words, we are at the point in the economic cycle where the
Bank  of  Canada  will  have  to  be  very  alert  to  early  warning  signs  of  accumulating  price  and  cost
pressures. And we will have to respond promptly and firmly if any such signs emerge.
The Bank will deal with this risk by closely monitoring a wide range of indicators that can help it to
assess the extent of present and future pressures on capacity and on inflation. These indicators include
unanticipated movements in current inflation, changes in expectations of future inflation, the growth
of  money  and  credit,  and  information  gathered  from  the  Bank’s  regular  contacts  with  businesses
across Canada.
In conclusion, let me say that you can be assured that the Bank is very sensitive to the increased risks
of inflation that are coming from continued buoyant growth in the United States, improved economic
prospects in Europe and Japan, and the increased momentum of domestic spending here in Canada.
In facing the various challenges that may arise over the next year, it will be crucial to ensure that the
Bank continues to deliver a trend of inflation that is inside our target range of 1% to 3%. It is only
when Canadians can count on inflation staying low and stable that our economy performs best.
BIS Review 122/1999
4
