Bank of Japan’s October report of
recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 15 October 1999.
 The Bank’s View2
Japan’s  economy  has  stopped  deteriorating,  and  exports  and  production  are  improving  at  present.
However, clear signs of a self-sustained recovery in private demand have not been observed yet.
With regard to final demand, business fixed investment has been on a downward trend. Recovery in
private  consumption  continues  to  be  weak  on  the  whole,  reflecting  the  persistent  severity  in
employment  and  income  conditions.  Housing  investment,  which  had  been  recovering,  has  recently
peaked out. Meanwhile, public works have been rising, and net exports (exports minus imports) have
continued to grow due to an increase in exports.
Reflecting  such  developments  in  final  demand  and  continued  progress  in  inventory  adjustment,
industrial  production  is  increasing.  Additionally,  corporate  profits  have  started  picking  up.  In  this
situation,  corporate  sentiment  has  continued  to  improve.  Such  positive  developments  in  corporate
profits  and  sentiment,  however,  have  not  necessarily  stimulated  business  activities,  because  firms
strongly feel that they have excess capacity and employees and that they should reduce their debts to
restore financial soundness.
As  for  the  outlook,  improvements  in  the  overall  financial  environment  partly  due  to  the  monetary
easing by the Bank, along with a series of economic measures taken by the government, are expected
to continue underpinning the economy. Moreover, the positive impact on domestic production of the
recovery of overseas economies, especially of Asian economies, is likely to continue for some time.
By  contrast,  leading  indicators  suggest  a  high  probability  of  a  moderate  decrease  in  housing
investment  in  the  near  future.  The  recent  developments  in  public  works  orders  indicate  that  public
investment is likely to stop increasing. In addition, under cautious sales plans, firms are expected to
continue corporate restructuring to improve their profitability. Although such restructuring is expected
to improve productivity, in the short run, it reduces fixed investment and also discourages household
expenditure  through  the  resulting  deterioration  in  employment  and  income  conditions.  Moreover,  it
seems that the recent appreciation of the yen will have an adverse effect on corporate profits in the
near term. Under such circumstances, it is still difficult to expect an immediate self-sustained recovery
in private demand. Overall economic developments require careful monitoring in consideration of the
above  points.  It  is  also  important  to  promote  structural  reform  in  order  to  assure  the  economy’s
sustained growth in the medium term.
With regard to prices, import prices have recently fallen slightly due to the appreciation of the yen,
despite the rise in international commodity prices such as crude oil prices. Domestic wholesale prices
are levelling off due to the progress in inventory adjustment as well as an increase in prices of some
products closely related to international commodities, such as those of petroleum products. Consumer
prices continue  to be  unchanged.  Corporate  service  prices  are  still  falling,  although  the  pace  of  the
decline is slowing. As regards the movements of overall prices in the future, they are likely to be flat,
1
2
This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting was
held on 13 October 1999.
The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on 13 October as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review 112/1999
as the rise in crude oil prices to date will continue to be passed on to prices of other products for a
while.  However,  substantial  narrowing  in  the  output  gap  led  by  a  recovery  in  private  demand  is
unlikely  for  the  time  being,  and  wages  continue  to  decline.  Thus,  downward  pressure  on  prices  is
expected to remain.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate has stayed at nearly zero, and financial institutions have
been  confident  about  the  availability  of  overnight  funds.  As  for  interest  rates  on  term  instruments,
short-term  rates  maturing  before  the  year-end  have  been  moving  at  a  historically  low  level.
Meanwhile, rates maturing beyond the year-end are relatively high due to market participants’ concern
over the Year 2000 problem.
The Japan premium has continued to be nearly zero for short-term transactions, but a small premium
has been observed for transactions maturing beyond the year-end.
Yields on long-term government bonds declined from late August to the level of around 1.6 percent.
They rose somewhat thereafter and have recently been moving between 1.7 and 1.8 percent. The yield
spread between government bonds and private bonds (bank debentures and corporate bonds) has been
stable and noticeably smaller than before.
Stock prices fell below the 17,000 yen level in late September against the background of the weak tone
in U.S. stock prices and the rapid appreciation of the yen, but subsequently rebounded reacting to the
recovery in U.S. stock prices and the restoration of stability in the foreign exchange market. The prices
are presently moving around 18,000 yen.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen surged against the U.S. dollar and reached the 103–104 yen
level in the middle of and late September, but then declined to the current level of 106—108 yen to the
dollar.
The  amount  outstanding  of  funds in  the  call  money  market  has  remained  generally  stable  since  the
middle  of  June.  To  date,  this  has  not  led  to  any  difficulty  in  funds  settlement,  but  close  attention
should be paid to future market developments.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks have basically retained their cautious lending attitude.
However,  constraint  that  had  been  caused  by  severe  fund-raising  conditions  and  insufficient  capital
base  has  eased  considerably.  Under  these  circumstances,  major  banks  have  gradually  become  more
active than before in extending loans, while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved.
However, credit demand for economic activities such as business fixed investment remains weak. In
addition, some firms have been trying to reduce debts using their on hand liquidity. As a result, credit
demand in the private sector has continued to be weak, and thus private banks’ lending has remained
sluggish. Meanwhile, issuance of corporate bonds and CP has recently been steady.
The year-to-year growth rate of money stock (M2+CDs) has declined to around 3.5 percent mainly due
to the weakness in credit demand in the private sector.
In this financial environment, credit conditions have eased somewhat.
The following continue to warrant careful monitoring: how actively investors will take risks; how far
private banks will ease their lending stance; and how these changes will affect economic activities.
BIS Review 112/1999
2
