Mr Gunnarsson touches on a number of topics including developments
in the Icelandic economy, the financial system and financial supervision
Presentation by Mr Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson, Governor and Chairman of the Board of Governors of
the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  to  the  Iceland  Finance  Forum  held  in  Íslandsbanki  HF  on  22 October
1999.
 Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I  am  honoured  to  have  the  opportunity  to  address  such  a  distinguished  gathering  of  financial
professionals and I congratulate Íslandsbanki for having brought you all together in Reykjavík. In my
talk today  I will touch on  developments  in  our economy,  developments  in the financial  system,  the
monetary  policy  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  financial  supervision  and  the  implications  of
developments in Europe.
Economic developments
A strong upswing has characterised the Icelandic economy in recent years. We are now in the fourth
year  of  more  than  5%  real  growth  of  the  economy.  In  the  early  phase  of  the  upswing,  growth  was
driven to an important extent by a strong recovery in foreign direct investment in Iceland, particularly
in the so-called power intensive industries. Later on, rising domestic consumption became the driving
force of economic growth. From the early part of the decade, inflation was very low. For a number of
years it was in fact consistently lower than the average for the OECD countries. The rapid growth of
recent years has brought the economy to full capacity, the unemployment rate has fallen below 1½%,
resulting  in  substantial  wage  pressures  in  certain  segments  of  the  market.  The  sharp  expansion  has
resulted in a rising rate of inflation. In the 12 months to the beginning of October, consumer prices
rose by 5.3%. The Central Bank issues inflation forecasts every three months. The latest forecast was
issued in July and it envisaged a 3% average rate of inflation in 1999 and a 4% inflation rate from the
beginning to the end of the year. A new forecast will be issued in the beginning of next week. The
deficit on the current account of the balance of payments has risen. In 1998 it equalled roughly 5½%
of GDP. It is expected to be lower in 1999.
During  the  upswing,  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  has  followed  a  restrictive  monetary  policy  as
reflected  among  other  things  in  the  fact  that  at  present  the  differential  between  Icelandic  and  trade
weighted foreign money market rates is well in excess of 5%. The yield on 3-month treasury bills in
the market is currently above 9%, and the so-called repo rate of the Central Bank of Iceland is 9%.
That can be compared with the repo rate of the European Central Bank of 2.5%.
Since September of last  year, the  Central  Bank  has raised its  interest rates four times,  by  a  total  of
1.8 percentage  points.  In  early  1999  it  also  levied  a  liquidity  requirement  on  Icelandic  credit
institutions.  The  requirement  is  primarily  prudential  in  nature.  It  was  among  other  things  aimed  at
reducing  the  reliance  of  domestic  credit  institutions  on  foreign  short-term  capital  to  finance  their
domestic lending activities which had risen sharply, but has subsequently diminished markedly.
Low  inflation  and  macro-economic  stability  was  only  achieved  in  the  early  part  of  this  decade.
Consequently, it is not at  all surprising  that  we  have  to  maintain  interest  rates that are  significantly
higher than among our main trading partners. The required difference is variable over time, depending
among other things on the credibility of economic policy, relative cyclical positions and so on. The
current differential is the widest since capital movements were liberalised and is of course explained to
an important extent by the very different cyclical position of the Icelandic economy from that of most
of our trading partners, not the least in Europe. It also entails the cost of maintaining an own currency,
i.e. a premium for the availability of the exchange rate as an instrument.
1
BIS Review 117/1999
In this connection, I should also note that since the opening up of the capital account of the balance of
payments,  long-term  interest  rates,  which  used  to  be  very  high  by  any  comparison,  have  been  on  a
downward  trend  despite  repeated  increases  in  short  term  rates.  This  is  not  surprising  and  reflects  a
narrowing of long term interest rate differentials between Iceland and other countries towards a much
lower level than prevailed before capital movements were liberalised.
Two years ago the fiscal budget turned into surplus. That surplus has risen and in the budget proposal
for the year 2000, which was submitted to Parliament at the beginning of this month, the envisaged
revenue  surplus  is  equal  to  2.2%  of  GDP.  In  the  view  of  the  Central  Bank,  it  is  essential  that  the
targeted  budget  surplus  be  realised.  It  is  important  for  the  credibility  of  the  overall  policy  of  the
government  and  because  it  will  have  dampening  effects  on  domestic  demand  and  thus  reduce  the
current account deficit.
The foundations of the Icelandic economy have strengthened in recent years through effective natural
resource  management  and  increased  diversification,  including  the  expansion  of  services  exports.
Iceland has made great strides in economic management as indicated by the stability and favourable
economic developments that have characterised the economy for much of this decade. Instrumental in
the  changes  that  have  taken  place  has  been  the  liberalisation,  and  I  might  say  marketisation,  of  the
economy.
In our present situation it is of paramount importance to safeguard the stability of the economy and
quickly reduce inflation again. The Central Bank will continue to pursue a monetary policy geared to
that end.
Credit rating
The  success  in  economic  management  did  not  escape  the  attention  of  the  rating  agencies.  The
Republic of Iceland was first assigned a rating by Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s in the late 1980s.
The initial long-term rating from both agencies was in the middle of the single A category. In 1996,
both agencies raised Iceland’s rating by one notch and in 1997 Moody’s raised Iceland’s rating again
and that time into the double A category, to Aa3. The short-term rating is A-1+ and P-1. Both agencies
have  assigned  ratings to  the  long-term  obligations  of  the  Republic  of  Iceland  in  domestic  currency,
Aaa  and  AA+.  The  improved  rating  demonstrated  a  welcomed  recognition  of  the  progress  made  in
Icelandic  economic  management  in  recent  years.  In  our  own  view,  the  rating  improvements  were
overdue, first because our economic performance was in quantitative terms fully compatible with that
of  countries  with  a  higher  rating  than  Iceland,  and,  secondly,  because  it  seemed  obvious  that  the
reception  of  Icelandic  borrowing  operations in  the  markets  indicated  that  financial  institutions  have
consistently assessed Icelandic risk differently from, or one might say more favourably than, the rating
agencies.
Structural changes
Other speakers at this conference will touch on structural changes in the economy, particularly in the
financial  sector.  I  only  wish  to  emphasise  that  it  is  not  an  overstatement  to  say  that  the  Icelandic
financial  system  has  undergone  radical  changes  since  the  middle  of  the  1980s.  The  market  was
deregulated, a stock exchange was established, and new institutions and financial services flourished.
Last  but  not  least,  all  restrictions  on  the  movement  of  portfolio  capital  between  Iceland  and  other
countries  were  removed  as  alluded to  earlier.  The  market  is  now  similar  to  that  in  other  developed
countries,  except  for  volume  of  course,  while  the  role  of  the  government  through  ownership  of
financial  institutions  stands  out.  The  privatisation  process  is  under  way  and  there  is  room  for
considerable  improvements  in  efficiency  in  the  financial  sector.  One  should  expect  mergers  of
individual  institutions  to  take  place  in  the  period  ahead.  Competition  among  domestic  financial
institutions is fierce.
In the rest of the economy, significant efficiency gains have been realised through privatisation of state
enterprises and mergers of companies into larger and more efficient units.
BIS Review 117/1999
2
Our experience since capital movements were fully liberalised shows us clearly that foreign exchange
flows  are  very  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  short-term  interest  rate  differential  between  Iceland  and
other countries. More generally, the volume of capital flows between Iceland and other countries has
grown substantially. It has mainly been a one-way street, though, as domestic portfolio investors have
been much more keen to  invest  abroad  than  foreign  investors to invest in  Iceland.  On  the  domestic
side, the pension funds have, since capital movements were liberalised, invested substantial amounts
in foreign securities. Foreign assets of pension funds now exceed 15% of their total assets as compared
with  virtually  nothing  only  five  years  ago.  These  assets  are  now  yielding  noticeable  returns  in  our
balance of payments.
There  are  undoubtedly  several  reasons  why  foreign  portfolio  investors  have  only  shown  limited
interest in Iceland. These include the relatively limited size and depth of the market and the fact that
securities are not yet electronically registered. This will change in a few months’ time when a central
electronic securities registry will commence operations.
Touching briefly on the stock market, equity trading in Iceland has risen very rapidly in recent years,
as  has  the  number  of  publicly  listed  companies  and  their  total  market  capitalisation.  Among  other
things, the depth of the market is increasing because of the incorporation and privatisation of public
enterprises, including  the  banks.  The  laws  and  regulations  pertaining  to the  stock  market,  including
disclosure requirements, are similar to those in other European countries.
The conduct of monetary policy
Turning  more  specifically  to  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  and  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  the
current legislation stipulates many goals for the Bank. With the liberalisation of financial markets and
the  opening  up  of  the  capital  account,  as  well  as  with  international  developments  towards  greater
independence for central banks and simplified policy targets, the main target of the Central Bank of
Iceland has gradually become that of maintaining a low rate of inflation. The Bank has  also  gained
greater independence than is strictly provided for in the current law, which it has achieved with the
tacit  approval  of  the  Government,  but  partly  in  agreements  on  specific  aspects.  In  my  view,  this  is
important for enhancing the credibility of monetary policy and the Central Bank. Credibility is very
fragile and it takes strong effort and careful policy and policy implementation to enhance and maintain
it. Another objective of the Central Bank is to monitor the stability of the financial system.
The Central Bank has been active in promoting the development of the financial system and financial
markets in Iceland and we have sought to adopt the methods of monetary management that have been
developed in other advanced industrial countries. In 1998, we modified the instruments and operating
procedures  of  the  Central  Bank  along  the  lines  that  had  been  developed  for  the  future  European
Central Bank. The Central Bank of Iceland levies a reserve requirement on credit institutions, operates
an overnight facility and offers a deposit facility. The main operating instrument of the Bank  is the
repo rate. Auctions of 14 day repo contracts are conducted once a week. By adjusting our instruments
and methods, we created a similar operating environment for Icelandic banks as those that prevail for
banks  in  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  of  Europe.  I  should  add  that  we  are  in  the  process  of
adapting  our  payments  and  settlement  systems  to  the  norms  of  our  neighbouring  countries.  This
includes, among other things, the establishment of an RTGS system for large-value payments.
I  mentioned  that the  main target  of the  Central  Bank  is  the  maintenance  of  low  inflation.  That  is  a
long-term target. Our intermediate target is a fixed exchange rate. A more appropriate description of
our exchange rate policy is to refer to it as a fixed but adjustable peg. Since 1995 we have operated
with a fluctuation band around the central rate of  plus/minus  6%.  In  practice, the  Central  Bank  has
allowed  the  exchange  rate  to  move  within  the  band  to  the  extent  that  it  deems  such  movements
consistent with its long-term goal of maintaining low inflation. Now the exchange rate is roughly 3.5%
above the central rate and has appreciated by 2.7% since the middle of June when the Central Bank
raised interest rates for the second time this year.
In our present situation, we have sought to increase the transparency of our operations by explaining
as thoroughly as we can the targets of monetary policy, our instruments, our methods, the assessments
3
BIS Review 117/1999
that  underlie our  policy  in  general and  our  individual actions  in  particular.  This  we  do  through  our
regular  publications  and  interviews  with  the  press.  This  is  important  in  order  to  broaden  the
understanding of the main principles which underlie our monetary policy and its implementation.
Financial supervision
As you may know, until the end of last year, the Central Bank was responsible for the supervision of
the operations of all financial institutions in Iceland except insurance companies. At the beginning of
1999,  the  Bank  Inspectorate  of  the  Central  Bank  and  the  Insurance  Supervision  Authority  were
merged into a new Financial Supervisory Authority which has the responsibility for supervising  the
operations  of  all  financial  institutions  in  Iceland.  The  change  was  in  a  way  modelled  on  decisions
which  had  been  taken  in  some  other  countries,  such  as  the  United  Kingdom.  The  new  supervisory
authority is governed by a three-member Board of Directors appointed by the Minister of Commerce.
One of the three members is appointed on the recommendation of the Central Bank.
Several  years  ago,  we  introduced  the  so-called  Basel  equity  ratio  standards  for  our  financial
institutions.  Being  a  signatory  to  the  European  Economic  Area  Agreement,  Iceland  was  obliged  to
adopt  European  Union  financial  market  legislation  based  on  European  Union  Directives  which  has
been done. As a result, we have created virtually the same legal environment for our financial system
as that of the European Union. Supervisory practices are also similar to those followed in the member
countries of the European Union.
The  Central  Bank  has  been  developing  its  own  methods  of  assessing  financial  market  stability  and
indicators  of  weaknesses,  focusing  more  on  the  overall  health  of  the  financial  system  than  that  of
individual institutions which falls under the Financial Supervisory Authority.
Iceland and Europe
Iceland has never applied for membership in the European Union and at present there are no plans to
do so. Iceland is, however, a member of the European Economic Area, which means that it is a part of
the single market of the European Union, entailing inter alia the free flow of goods, services, capital
and labour among the member countries. Under the European Economic Area Agreement, Iceland has
been obliged to adopt European Union legislation in many areas, as already mentioned.
The Central Bank has established close contacts with the European Central Bank in Frankfurt. Given
the  fact  that  Iceland  is  not  a  member  of  the  European  Union,  membership  in  EMU  is  out  of  the
question. Nevertheless, the establishment of EMU will affect Iceland, particularly in the longer term.
A  few  facts  may  be  mentioned:  first,  the  European  Union  is  an  important  trading  partner,  but  the
absence of Denmark, Sweden and the UK from the EMU means that only about a third of our external
trade is with EMU countries at present. Once the three countries join EMU, which we expect them to
do, the share of EMU countries in our external trade will rise to above 60%. Second, we expect that
our  economic  performance  will  be  measured  by  the  markets  against  the  criteria  developed  for  the
EMU countries. Third, we expect that a successful EMU will bring beneficial effects to Iceland in the
form  of  increased  demand  for  our  exports  and  reduced  transaction  cost  in  external  trade.  Fourth,  it
might become a greater challenge to operate our own currency. One could, for example, envisage that
a currency like ours would be increasingly subjected to pressures from international investors seeking
to diversify portfolios, adding currencies on the edge of the euro area  and closely  linked  to  it. This
could conceivably lead to increased volatility and consequent potential instability down the road.
The  immediate  effects  on  Iceland  of  the  establishment  of  the  EMU  have  not  been  significant.
However,  the  entry  of  Denmark,  the  United  Kingdom  and  Sweden  into  the  EMU  will  markedly
change our situation. As time goes by, we will have to consider our options. A review of our future
exchange rate policy will be particularly important. The possibility of Iceland at some stage joining a
larger currency area should not be precluded, particularly if the political and economic cost of staying
outside will be found to outweigh any advantage of maintaining an own currency.
BIS Review 117/1999
4
Iceland and America
Looking briefly in another direction, Iceland’s relations with the great continent in the West date back
a  thousand  years.  In  recent  decades,  we  have  had  important  trade  links  with  the  United  States.
However,  the  relative  share  of  trade  with  the  US  has  declined  significantly,  or  below  15%,  since
exports  to  the  US  peaked  at  almost  30%  of  total  exports  in  the  1970s.  Imports  from  the  US  also
declined  significantly  from  a  high  level  around  the  middle  of  the  century  to  around  10%  of  total
imports in the most recent years. The number of American tourists has also declined in relative terms.
Although the share of the US in Icelandic merchandise trade and tourism has declined, the US dollar
still plays a significant role as a vehicle currency in Icelandic trade and foreign exchange transactions.
Recent changes in the geographical pattern of trade and investment reflect the liberalisation of trade
within Europe and the increasing globalisation of the world economy. Like other developed countries,
Iceland has a most favoured nations agreement with the US and Canada. Recently, there  have  been
negotiations  between  Canada  and  the  EFTA  countries  on  a  free  trade  agreement  and  a  similar
agreement with Mexico has been discussed. If an agreement is reached the share of NAFTA countries
in trade and investment could increase.
Given Iceland’s membership in the European Economic Area and consequent tariff-free access to the
European Union, Iceland offers a unique opportunity for foreign direct investment from non-European
investors, including of course American ones.
Concluding remarks
To conclude, I would like to emphasise the importance which I attach to the liberalisation and opening
up  of the economy  in  recent  years. The  market  is  a  strict  master  and  provides  strong  discipline  for
economic  policy.  There  is  little  doubt  that  Iceland  is  today  reaping  the  benefits  of  general
liberalisation.  At  present,  we  are  also  for  the  first  time  after  the  opening  up  of  the  capital  account
facing a challenge posed by the threat of overheating in the economy. Our policies and policy tools are
being put to a test.
5
BIS Review 117/1999
