Mr Bergström elucidates the economic situation in Sweden
Speech by Mr Villy Bergström, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the HSB Finance Day,
HSB Bank, held in Stockholm on 18 November 1999.
 The prospects for the Swedish economy look better than for a very long time. We might have to go
back  several  decades  to  find  a  period  with  such  favourable  conditions  as  those  we  are  now
experiencing. It is estimated that the Swedish economy will grow by as much as 3.6% this year, and
the  Riksbank  forecasts  that  growth  will  be  slightly  higher  next  year.  Despite  the  marked  fall  in
production at the beginning of the 1990s, around 13% more is being produced now than at the end of
the 1980s when overheating was worst. Part of the income from production has been used to pay off
our foreign debt, which grew during the 1980s in a way that was unsustainable in the long term. This
has been reflected in Sweden’s financial balance with other countries, i.e. the current account balance,
which has been in surplus for a number of years and is expected to total SEK40 billion this year. After
a number of years of large deficits, central government finances are now in surplus for the second year
running. From having had the second worst central government budget balance in the whole EU at the
beginning of the 1990s, Sweden’s public finances are now among the strongest in the union. Inflation
is under 2% and inflation expectations close to target.
What is unique in the present economic situation is that almost all economic indicators point in the
right direction; we have high growth on a broad front at the same time as inflation expectations are
stably low and central government finances in order. An important factor underlying this favourable
situation is that economic policy in recent years has been carried out in a  consistent and  competent
way.
Monetary policy with the focus on price stability has played an important role although the favourable
development would not have come about without a responsible fiscal policy. While households and
wage earners have borne a large share of the burden by income-reducing cuts in central government
finances, this seems to have taken place on the basis of a general insight that sacrifices were necessary
for the time being.
However, unemployment is still high and the frequency of employment low compared with previous
successful epochs in Sweden, although there are statistical indications that the situation is improving.
Unemployment is falling and approximately 100,000 more are in work than last year. The employment
ratio has risen from 72% to 74% of the working-age population.
The great challenge for economic policy and for the social partners on the labour market is to continue
to act responsibly so that the period of good growth that our country is experiencing is not interrupted
prematurely.  In  this  way,  the  period  of  growth  can  probably  be  extended  for  several  years  and  the
employment ratio can also increase markedly then.
Difficult balance to strike for monetary policy
The Riksbank must strike a balance in monetary policy so that growth is not dampened unnecessarily
but neither becomes so strong that inflation accelerates. The difficulties lie in foreseeing the growth of
demand and its relation to inflation over a period of a couple of years to come. A change in interest
rates actually has an effect with a considerable time lag, its full impact only being felt after a couple of
years.  If  changes  in  interest  rates  come  too  late,  the  consequences  will  be  unnecessarily  large
fluctuations in growth. However, experience shows that if inflation is allowed to rise, there is a great
risk  that  the  higher  inflation  will  persist  and  that  inflation  expectations  will  be  driven  up.  The
consequence of the Riksbank’s “wait-and-see” standpoint would therefore be to imperil the credibility
that  has  been  laboriously  achieved  -  or  even  lose  it.  Considerably  greater  restraint  would  then  be
required than if inflation had been stopped in time. In order to avoid this, the Riksbank may need to
1
BIS Review 126/1999
increase  interest  rates  before  registered  inflation  shows  signs  of  increasing,  which  will  confront  us
with an educational problem. If the Riksbank wishes to safeguard growth, employment, and a high use
of resources in other respects, monetary policy must be adapted in time.
Low inflation expectations
However, as has been said, it is also important not to increase interest rates too early and thus dampen
growth unnecessarily. A difficult question that the Riksbank must take a position on in its assessment
of inflationary pressure is whether the relationship between growth and inflation has changed and, in
this case, which factors have contributed to this. A concept that has been frequently discussed during
the  past  year  is  the  “new  economy”.  Discussion  has  above  all  centred  on  the  American  economy,
which now seems to be at the end of a long period of high growth. It seems as if the USA has skipped
an entire business cycle. This was in fact also the case in the 1980s. There was an upswing in 1982 and
no downturn occurred before 1990-91. However, it is now speculated whether the new technology, IT
investments  and  computerisation  have  changed  transaction  costs,  management  functions  and
production processes so that the growth in productivity has been durably increased and that growth has
therefore been able to increase more quickly without leading to increased inflationary pressure.
The  hypothesis  about  the  new  economy  has  also  been  put  forward  with  regard  to  the  Swedish
economy. However, it will be first in ten years’ time when researchers have long and many series of
data to analyse that we make any more certain pronouncement about the actual situation.
However, we can talk in terms of a radical change in the Swedish economy in one important respect
with regard to the relationship between growth and inflation. Inflation expectations in Sweden seem to
have  stabilised  around  2%,  which  indicates  that  the  target  for  price  stability  has  attained  high
credibility.  During  the  1970s  and  1980s,  inflation  amounted  to  8%  on  average.  This  means  that
wage-earners,  landlords,  central  and  local  government  and  entrepreneurs  now  calculate  with  quite
different  nominal  price  increases  than  previously  in  their  budgets  and  their  pricing  decisions.
However, this is not an expression of a new economy but rather indicates a return to the conditions
that existed in the first two decades after the Second World War.
Developments during the Korean War clearly show the importance of low inflation expectations for
the development of the economy. The well-based expectations made it possible to restore the economy
to a rate of inflation of 3% a year after inflation had risen to 20%. The return to low inflation could
take place without any dramatic restraint and without mass unemployment.
Comparisons between this year’s wage development and wage development during the previous high
inflation  period  are  a  strong  illustration  that  high  nominal  wage  increases  do  not  have  a  positive
correlation with real wage increases. While real wage increases this year are expected to total around
3%, wage earners have periodically experienced reductions in real wages in the period 1975 to 1995
and on average only slightly over a half per cent increase. This despite the fact that the nominal wage
increases remained at 3% this year while being as much as 8% during the comparison period. Neither
should  we  forget  the  deterioration  in  living  standards  that  Swedish  wage  earners  and  the  Swedish
people experienced compared with other European countries during these years.
Sustainable improvements in productivity due to a “new economy”?
Developments in IT and biotechnology have taken place very quickly in Sweden. Telecommunications
and pharmaceuticals are hi-tech products, which are growing quickly in Swedish exports. Exports of
telecommunications products have more than doubled since 1995 and pharmaceuticals have risen by
80%. The economy is undergoing a restructuring towards these areas which releases us to some extent
from the cyclical dependence on pulp, paper, steel and engineering products which are our traditional
export goods.
However, most important perhaps are not developments in these industries per se. Although they are
growing rapidly, they are still of rather small size. The computing consultancy industry has doubled
during  the  1990s  but  still  only  accounts  for  80,000  employees,  or  around  2%  of  employment.  The
BIS Review 126/1999
2
sector  “radio,  TV  and  telecommunications  products”  is  approximately  the  same  size.  Industry  as  a
whole has recovered from under 18% of GDP in 1993 to 22% in 1998.
No, the really important effects of the new technology will probably take place outside the hi-tech and
knowledge-intensive industries. Personal computers, mobile telephones, the Internet, and other IT can
increase  productivity  within  broad  segments  of  the  Swedish  economy.  This  can  affect  trade,  office
work, distribution and storage, manufacturing production, etc. However, it is important to realise that
the introduction of new technology only takes place during a limited period and that it is probably only
during these years that a higher growth in productivity is achieved. When the changes to the new are
carried out, it is probable that productivity will develop more slowly again. This can be compared with
the  introduction  of  electricity  and  the  spread  of  electrical  motors  in  industry,  or  the  spread  of  the
internal combustion motor.
I  would  thus  like  to  warn  against  viewing  the  future  through  rose-tinted  spectacles.  It  is  true  that
productivity growth has been higher after 1994 than in the preceding 20-year period. An increase from
1.4% to 1.9% has been registered. However, the first period included  three  long  downturns  and the
second  a  broad  upswing.  We  cannot  therefore  know  whether  it  is  only  cyclical  differences  that
underlie  the  figures  or  whether  technological  changes  have  also  contributed  to  sustainable  stronger
productivity growth.
To  sum  up,  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  we  now  have  a  better  relationship  between  growth  and
inflation  due  to  inflationary  expectations  being  pushed  down.  It  is  possible  that  technical
developments have also produced productivity improvements that mean that growth for a period can
increase more quickly than previously without inflationary pressure being  created.  One factor  that  I
have  not  touched  on to  date is the effects  of  increased  competition  through  internationalisation  and
domestic deregulation. This process too can have contributed to a better relationship between inflation
and growth although it is difficult to prove that this is the case. However, I am to say the least doubtful
about a new economy in the sense of new technology leading to a sustainable increase in productivity.
Wage formation - a challenge
The  strong  upswing  the  Swedish  economy  is  now  undergoing  is  borne  up  both  by  domestic  and
international  demand.  Private  consumption  is  expanding  rapidly,  at  the  same  time  as  export  is
recovering  and  the  public  sector is  beginning  to  demand  labour  again.  In  the  present  situation,  it  is
considered  that  there  are  unused  resources  in  the  economy,  but  when  growth  increases  the  use  of
resources and inflationary pressure will naturally also increase. As has been said, the Riksbank must
assess  how  strong  growth  in  demand  can  be  permitted  without  inflationary  pressure  compelling
interest rate rises. A current theme is the discussion on changes in the relationship between growth and
inflation, which I have taken up in general terms. Another very important part in the inflation process
is  wage  formation  and  I  find  here  that  it  is  justified  to  give  prominence  to  the  risk  that  evident
imbalances between different categories of wage earners can lead to the positive development we are
now seeing being prematurely interrupted.
The collective agreements that have recently been concluded do not give any particularly great cause
for concern. Wage increases have been around 3% per year. I have no doubt about the parties’ insight
into the importance of the inflation target for wage formation in general. However, most agreements
expire next year.
It has proven during the autumn  that the  majority  of the teacher  training  places  in  the  sciences and
mathematics are vacant. This is not so strange since a person who can successfully study mathematics
and physics at university can also become a graduate engineer or industrialist scientist. Initial salaries
between  a  graduate  engineer  and  a  science  teacher  differ  by  SEK3-4,000.  Salaries  for  a  competent
engineer have no ceiling while for a teacher the top salary is not much above SEK20,000. Teachers
have not been slow to make use of the scarcity of certain categories of teachers to demand 15% more
than  all  other  groups  over  a  5-year  period,  despite  there  not  being  a  shortage  of  all  categories  of
teachers. This has naturally led to protest from the Swedish Trade Union Confederation.
3
BIS Review 126/1999
If  this  type  of  imbalance  cannot  be  dealt  with  by  the  union  organisations  and  employers  without  a
general  scramble  for  pay  increases,  the  Riksbank  will  be  confronted  by  the  unpleasant  task  of
constraining  the  economy  in  order to  prevent excessively  high  wage  increases  having  an impact  on
inflation. The low inflation policy may therefore be said to be confronted by a test: the labour market
is  improving  with  falling  unemployment  and  increasing  capacity  use  otherwise.  At  the  same  time,
there are imbalances in the sense that relative wages do not attract applicants for employment to the
areas in the  labour  market  where there  are shortages. The  challenge  is  to find  a  solution  within  the
framework  of  the  scope  for  pay  increases  created  by  the  growth  in  productivity  and  inflationary
expectations on a level with the target.
Make use of available opportunities
Sweden’s opportunities for regaining some lost ground in the prosperity league are good. Our country
has a population which has taken to new technology in the field of IT more quickly than in many other
countries; computer use is widespread at workplaces and also homes. According to a SIFO survey, 3.5
million Swedes surf the Internet - almost half of the population aged between 12 and 79. No fewer
than 2 million Swedes surf every day. Even more remarkable is the fact that almost 20% of the age
groups  between  50  and  80  are  active  on  the  Internet.  Together  with  some  other  countries,  Sweden
takes the absolutely leading position with regard to the use of IT, computers and mobile telephones.
Young new entrepreneurs are starting successful businesses within the new areas alongside giants such
as Ericsson. Pharmaceutical research and biotechnology are other areas where Sweden is well to the
fore. Sweden is investing more in research in proportion to GDP than any other country in the world.
As the conditions are now very good with regard to the immediate economic trends that I mentioned to
begin with, and as the structural changes in the Swedish business sector towards new advanced fields
of production are moving quickly, it would be a national misfortune if wage formation were to get out
of hand due to the parties not being able to deal with imbalances in relative wages.
Consequences for monetary policy?
What conclusions can be drawn regarding monetary policy? My intention with today’s speech is not to
make new statements about current monetary policy. The intention is instead to create understanding
for the balances that have to be struck and the risks that must be avoided in order for monetary policy
to make a contribution to the positive development of the Swedish economy.
The role of the interest rate for demand of goods and services and inflation can be described as follows
in a highly simplified way. A real rate of interest, which neither stimulates nor dampens demand, may
be  said  to  be  neutral.  Demand  then  increases  at  the  rate  of  capacity  growth  and  inflation  is  stable.
When capacity in the economy is not fully made use of and unemployment is high, the interest rate
may - on condition that inflation expectations are in line with the target - need to be below its neutral
position in order to stimulate demand so that it increases more quickly than capacity utilisation. In this
way,  unemployment  can  be  taken  up  in  production,  capacity  utilisation  increase  and  inflation  be
adjusted upwards to the target. In the same way, the interest rate needs to be above its neutral position,
when capacity utilisation is full and demand is tending to grow more quickly than the utilisation of
capacity. The economy then needs to be cooled down to prevent inflation exceeding the target. It is the
task of monetary policy to control short interest rates so that demand pressure is adjusted to capacity
growth to achieve the inflation target. The growth in capacity in the long-term is determined by other
factors, however, than monetary policy.
The level of the neutral interest rate varies over time. According to some theories on optimality, a very
rough rule of thumb is that the neutral real interest rate in the long term and when the economy is in
balance is near the long-term  growth of GDP. In  Germany,  real  short-term  interest  rates  have  since
1980s been around 3.3% while the corresponding rates in the USA are around 3.5%. While it is not
possible to specify a neutral level for Swedish interest rates, there is no doubt that  monetary  policy
even after last week’s increase will continue to have an expansive effect on demand.
BIS Review 126/1999
4
In  practice,  monetary  policy  decisions  are  based  on  an  overall  assessment  of  a  number  of  inflation
indicators. The interest rate reductions during the past year from 4.35% in June 1998 to 2.9% in March
this year took place with a view to stimulating demand, increase employment and increase capacity
utilisation in order in this way to bring  inflation up  to  the  goal  of  2%. The  Riksbank’s  most  recent
inflation report makes the assessment that there are unused resources in the present situation but that
the  available  resources  will  gradually  be  taken  into  use  during  the  forecast  period.  The  statistics
published thereafter give a somewhat fragmented picture but, taken as a whole, do not occasion any
change in the view of growth prospects in the economy.
The assessment of the Riksbank is now that inflation in 1 to 2 years will be marginally higher than in
the most recent inflation reports. In the light of this, the Riksbank made the assessment at its meeting
on 11 November to conduct monetary policy in a less expansive direction. The repo rate was therefore
increased by 0.35 percentage points to 3.25%.
As has been said, the difficult balance to be struck in the present situation is to adjust the instrumental
rate  at  a  rate  that  does  not  interrupt  the  upswing  in  capacity  utilisation  but  does  it  with  sufficient
foresight to avoid a drastic rise. We  do  not  want to  experience  “stop-go”  policies  again.  Let us  not
forget the late 1980s and early 1990s. That period represents a tragic failure for economic policy, a
failure that cost Sweden destruction of both physical and human capital.
Earlier  in  my  speech,  I  pointed  to  the  imbalances  in  wage  formation  that  could  lead  to  inflation
accelerating  if they  are  handled  incorrectly.  This  would  make  monetary  policy  tightening  necessary
that  would  risk  interrupting  growth  and  structural  transformation,  because  the  inflation  target  is
mandatory and will not be given up. The Riksbank has both the instrument and the political mandate
to achieve the target of 2%’s inflation. The issue then is not whether the inflation target will be met but
the consequences that achieving the inflation target will have for the rate of growth and employment in
the medium term. The Riksbank is responsible for achieving the inflation target, but responsibility for
the positive development that we can now see in front of us being sustained over a longer period, is
shared by everyone in Sweden.
5
BIS Review 126/1999
