Mr Hofmann gives a lecture on
“Ratings and the emerging new equity standards:
a symposium on the BIS proposals”
Lecture delivered by Mr Gerhard  Hofmann,  Head  of  Banking  Supervision  Department  on  behalf  of
Mr.  Edgar  Meister,  member  of  the  Directorate  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  symposium
arranged by the Center for Financial Studies and New York University, held in Frankfurt am Main on
2 December 1999.
 I
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The new Basel capital regulations in general, and the proposed prudential use of ratings in particular,
are major milestones in the history of banking supervision. I am especially pleased to see that, besides
the many banking supervisors and bankers who are taking an interest in the Basel discussion paper,
academic  economists  are  likewise  joining  in  the  debate  on  the  new  supervisory  rules  more
vociferously  than  they  did  in  the  past.  Hence  today’s  gathering  also  helps  to  foster  the  dialogue
between academics and practitioners.
II
A need to take action has arisen in the area of the Basle Capital Accord of 1988, since, on the one
hand,  the  nature,  scale  and  complexity  of  the  transactions  differ  considerably  from  the  conditions
prevailing in the late eighties while, on the other hand, the available risk-management techniques have
improved substantially in recent years. The old fixing of prudential capital by rather rough-and-ready
methods  has  led  in  some  cases  to  misallocations,  and  the  incentive  for  big  banks,  in  particular,  to
conserve  capital  (by  means,  say,  of  asset-backed  securities  transactions)  has  assumed  greater
significance. Credit derivatives and netting arrangements are likewise growing in importance.
Novel  methods  of  measuring  credit  risk  enable  differences  in  credit-worthiness  between  individual
borrowers to be quantified more accurately. As a result, the existing subjection of all enterprises to a
uniform risk weighting of 100% is too generalised. The old risk weighting scheme is to be replaced by
up-to-date  methods,  especially  ratings,  which  permit  a  more  sophisticated  and  more  precise
measurement of risk.
By these methods, the capital to be held for supervisory purposes will  approximate  more  closely  to
what is known as the “economic capital”, which every bank assesses for itself internally to cover credit
risk.
At  the  same  time,  however,  other  risks  –  such  as  interest-rate  risk  on  a  bank’s  loan  book  and
operational risk – have become a focus of interest. The objective of safeguarding the stability of the
financial system can be duly taken into account only if such risks, which have hitherto been covered
only  indirectly,  become  subject  to  capital  charges.  Whether,  and  to  what  extent,  a  capital  saving
ultimately results for the banking industry as a whole cannot be said for certain in advance; the answer
will differ anyway from one bank to another.
1
BIS Review 133/1999
III
Ladies and gentlemen, in future capital alone will be able to ensure the stability of an individual bank
and of the financial sector as a whole to a lesser extent than it could in the past. That is why the Basle
Accord rests on three well-known pillars which stand side by side with equal status:
• 
The first pillar relates to the minimum capital requirements needed for covering credit risk,
market risk and other risks.
 The  second  pillar,  known  as  the  “supervisory  review  process”,  comprises  an  enhanced
qualitative examination of the individual risk profile of a bank.
As the third pillar, supervision is to be supplemented by greater market transparency.
• 
All  three  pillars  serve  in  a  sense  (to  remain  in  the  same  picture)  to  carry  the  roof,  meaning  to
contribute  to  the  stability  of  the  global  financial  system,  also  in  the  future.  Credit  institutions  and
banking supervisors alike consider that there is a special need to preserve the “level playing field” and
prevent distortions of competition.
IV
Competitive considerations, especially as between the United States, with its capital-market-oriented
financial system, and Europe, with its banking-oriented financial system, play a major role, especially
in the recognition of external ratings.
Thus,  for  enterprises  that  take  advantage  of  the  capital  market,  an  external  rating  is  normally  an
essential condition for informing bond buyers about a firm’s credit standing. Under the credit-oriented
universal banking system, by contrast, the bank, as an intermediary, must arrive at a credit appraisal of
its  own.  The  differences  between  banking  systems  are  naturally  also  reflected  in  the  number  of
external ratings of enterprises: some 8,000 external corporate ratings in the USA compare with only
about 600 such ratings in Europe.
Even if, happily, three new private rating agencies have recently been established in Germany, it will
be  some  years  before  they  have  compiled  a  significant  number  of  corporate  ratings.  To  prevent
distortions  of  competition,  it  is  therefore  imperative  that,  as  an  alternative  to  recourse  to  external
ratings, internal bank rating systems be used, which are inherently of equal value and come into force
simultaneously.
In connection with the proposals on the external rating of countries, the question of the treatment of
public authorities below the level of the central government also arises. In the German view, the status
quo  should  be  retained,  that  is  to  say,  there  should  be  no  change  to  the  present  right  to  choose  a
supervisory  authority  for  the  risk  weighting  of  Land  and  local  governments.  The  zero-weighting  of
loans to Land and local governments would then still be possible. To my mind, it would not be fitting
for every minor municipality to have a rating of its own, if only to have an appropriate risk appraisal in
the future.
V
Quite apart from the competition argument, in the light of the above-described “rating gap” between
the United States and Europe, there are a number of substantive criticisms that can be levelled at the
prudential use of external ratings.
For instance, external ratings may prompt a bank to exercise less care in granting credit. That would be
contrary to the avowed aim of supervisors of setting the supervisory framework in such a way that the
banks themselves have every interest in improving their own risk-management techniques. In addition,
it might be objected that rating agencies are being given too much power in the context of regulating
banks, because they determine by their rating how high the capital requirements for banks should be.
BIS Review 133/1999
2
Moreover, it is feared that strong competition among the agencies might lead to a watering-down of
the results, or that enterprises requiring a rating might engage in a kind of “rating shopping”. Finally,
the  Asian  crisis  is  cited,  in  which,  it  is  claimed,  external  ratings  contributed  to  the  herd  instinct
exhibited by the banks.
I share the view which is occasionally expressed that the banks’ function of assessing risk by means of
an examination of creditworthiness is in essence not “outsourceable”, but that a risk examination of
their own, and thus made on their own responsibility, prior to the granting of credit, is fundamentally
indispensable.
As  a  result  of  the  amendments  being  prepared  in  Basel  and  Brussels,  I  expect  that  internal  rating
systems for the computation of capital will in future play the crucial role in the banking systems of
Europe. Besides that, however, external ratings in the field of capital-market transactions, e.g. in the
case of asset-backed securities constructs or corporate financing through debt securities and the like,
will likewise increase in significance.
VI
The authorisation of internal bank ratings – like that of external ratings – will be linked to qualitative
and quantitative minimum standards. A working party of the Basle Committee is currently engaged in
elaborating the framework of an “internal ratings-based approach” to the capital charges. The keystone
of  any  capital  computation  is  the  probability  of  default  exhibited  by  individual  rating  categories  to
which  borrowers  are  assigned.  The  expected  cost  of  default  sustained  by  a  bank  results  from  that
probability  of  default  and  the  expected  losses  in  the  event  of  the  insolvency  of  a  borrower.  Both
variables  (default  probability  and  expected  loss  ratios)  are  to  be  related  to  the  size  of  the  credit
granted, and should be included in the calculation of the interest charged on loans.
When the conditions for the internal rating system are fixed, the German representatives on the Basel
Committee  will  see  to  it  that  the  structures  of  our  banking  system  are  duly  taken  into  account.  In
particular, the conditions in Basel and Brussels must not be set so restrictively that small and medium-
sized  institutions  have  no  chance  from  the  outset  of  clearing  the  hurdle  erected  in  this  area  by  the
supervisory rules.
If internal ratings are recognised for a broad range of credit institutions, no drawbacks will arise with
respect to an adequate and low-cost provision of credit for the business community. That goes above
all for small and medium-sized businesses.
The proposal for an internal rating system recently put forward by the Federal Association of German
Banks  points  in  the  right  direction,  namely  at  making  internal  bank  rating  systems  comparable  by
means of default probabilities that arise on account of the division of borrowers into creditworthiness
and risk categories. In addition, that proposal provides for the inclusion of expected loss ratios in the
event of the borrower’s insolvency.
In this proposal, I see some significant common ground with the debate which is now going on in the
international arena. In the international supervisory bodies, the German representatives will argue that
internal rating systems should initially be applicable only to specific segments of the credit portfolio,
so as to make it easier for the banks to introduce this new procedure. Moreover, we will try to ensure
that  the  model  is  neutral  in  its  effect  on  competition  at  both  the  international  and,  if  possible,  the
national level.
The question of a good rating system and its credibility is being asked not only by practitioners, but
also  increasingly  by  academics.  How  far  the  fourteen  principles  for  rating  systems  drawn  up  by
Prof. Krahnen and Prof. Weber will be generally accepted is hard to tell at the moment. Personally, I
have a favourable opinion of that initiative, but the principles must still be discussed in more detail.
What  is  plain,  for  example,  is  that  external  ratings  awarded  by  rating  agencies  pursue  different
objectives – namely, a more long-term orientation towards the entire credit cycle – from internal bank
ratings. The topic of “completeness” is naturally also of great significance in the case of internal bank
3
BIS Review 133/1999
systems. I assume that “partial use” will also be possible here. To that extent, the rating would then be
incomplete.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  debate  on  a  rapprochement  of  the  prudential  to  the  economic  capital  of
banks by the deployment of management instruments of their own naturally involves uncertainties and
risks. The “self-assessment” by the banks planned for a substantial part of the risks in the computation
of the capital to be maintained in respect of the risks incurred therefore calls for a supervisory audit of
the internal bank methods used. It is at this point that the two other pillars of the new Accord come
into play. In particular, banking supervisors will be obliged – as stipulated by the second pillar of the
discussion paper (the supervisory review process) – to gain a clear idea at first hand of the instruments
used in banks’ risk controlling and risk management. That applies all the more since the market can
hardly function as an external monitoring body for internal bank ratings.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
VII
It is not only at the international level that a “level playing field” must be ensured. That is scarcely less
important  at  the  national  level  as  well.  As  you  know,  the  Basle  Accord  is  primarily  applicable  to
internationally  operating  banks.  On  the  basis  of  the  Basel  proposals,  the  same  subjects  are  being
addressed  in  Brussels,  too,  so  that  ultimately  the  entire  banking  sector  will  be  affected  by  the
regulations.  After  the  implementation  of  a  corresponding  EU  Directive,  those  provisions  will  be
binding on all credit institutions within the EU.
We advocate, firstly, that the final regulations should coincide in Brussels and in Basel, and should
come into effect at the same time. By that means, a duplication of efforts should be avoided by those
credit institutions which will have  to apply  both  sets of  regulations.  Secondly,  it is  our  aim  that, in
principle, all institutions – regardless of their size – will be able to apply the new regulations. Hence,
we welcome the efforts being made by the banking associations to assist their member institutions in
implementing internal rating systems. It would be conceivable, for instance, for certain demands of the
rating process (e.g. the collection and processing of data) to be satisfied centrally by the associations.
That  naturally  gives  rise  to  questions  of  definition  and  implementation.  Which  element  of  internal
rating can be shifted to outside bodies, such as associations? Each institution’s inherent responsibility
for its internal rating system must on no account be called into question, and internal ratings must be
fully integrated in the in-house decision-making process.
VIII
Allow  me  to  elaborate  briefly  on  a  further  important  feature  of  the  first  pillar  of  the  new  Capital
Accord. This is the area of “risk mitigation”, i.e. the use of risk-minimising methods, such as netting
arrangements, credit derivatives and the extended authorisation of collateral and guarantees.
What is the connection between risk-minimising methods and ratings?
On the one hand, there is the option of including a risk-minimising method in the internal rating itself
by rating the probability of loss (e.g. owing to collateral) correspondingly lower. On the other hand,
risk-minimising measures might make themselves felt ahead of the rating process proper, by reducing
the credit-risk position, as a yardstick for the rating, by the risk-minimising measures. Both options
are still under discussion. The second variant is likely to be easier, above all for small and medium-
sized institutions, i.e. the computation of a “net exposure” ahead of the rating.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  external  and  internal  ratings  should  not  be  viewed  in  isolation,  but  in  the
overall context of the planned new Basle Capital Accord or comparable Brussels regulations. That is
to say, especially in the context of other risks to be subjected to capital charges (interest-rate risks and
IX
BIS Review 133/1999
4
operational  risks),  and  in  the  context  of  the  other  two  pillars.  For  this  is  not  a  matter  of  individual
elements at a technically higher level, but rather a matter of making the financial markets stabler.
X
Let me therefore also say a few words on what is known as the “Supervisory Review Process”. The
review process is nothing completely new, either in international terms or in Germany. The Federal
Banking Supervisory Office can already specify “negative special conditions” and order a capital ratio
higher than 8%. Unlike conditions in the United States and United Kingdom, which have long known
more comprehensive audit operations for a bank as a whole, in Germany only specific parts of a bank
have  hitherto  been  audited  by  banking  supervisors.  As  examples,  I  may  mention  the  audits  of
commercial transactions and of market-risk models. The experience gained in the process may serve as
a basis for further deliberations.
The frequency, scale and intensity of audits depend on the size and risk content of the bank. In  my
opinion, global players therefore require more intensive supervision, since they are more significant in
terms of systemic risk.
Two  developments  are  prefigured  by  the  supervisory  review  process.  In  the  first  place,  banking
supervision  will  become  more  individual,  since  the  respective  risk  profile  of  the  bank  will  be
monitored by the supervisors. That will be as  specified  with some  individual supervisory  measures.
Secondly, the road is being traversed from a banking supervision primarily based on compliance with
quantitative  standards  to  a  qualitative  form  of  banking  supervision.  As  is  already  the  case,  the
supervisory review process may lead not only to the imposition of conditions in specific cases but also
to explicitly higher capital ratios, exceeding the present 8% limit. This option must be available as a
kind of last resort.
XI
Finally,  the  Basel  edifice  is  completed  by  a  third  pillar,  which  calls  for  more  extensive  disclosure
requirements on the part of credit institutions − requirements which are intended to make it easier for
the markets to assess risks. Enhanced market transparency is supposed to contribute to greater market
discipline. Here, too, there are again direct connections with the other pillars of the Accord.
As  far  as  the  issuing  of  disclosure  standards  is  concerned,  however,  banking  supervisors  have  no
autonomous powers of their own; hence only the legislature can take the appropriate action here. But
the  supervisors  could  elaborate  a  catalogue  of  requirements  which  might  constitute  the  basis  for
legislative measures.
XII
Ladies and Gentlemen, I have attempted  to sketch in for  you  the  outlines  of a  new,  uniform  global
supervisory standard. Let me briefly sum up the principal points once again.
1. 
More sophisticated risk appraisal and measurement, by the use of external and internal bank
rating systems and risk-mitigation techniques.
2. 
3. 
4. 
External and internal rating systems should  be  systems  of  equal  value  which, in  principle,
should  be  accessible  to  all  institutions  and,  in  my  opinion,  should  be  introduced
simultaneously.
Explicit capital charges for risks that have hitherto been included implicitly in credit risk, for
instance, interest-rate risk and other risks.
Progress  towards  a  qualitative  form  of  banking  supervision  based  on  the  individual  risk
profile of banks.
5
BIS Review 133/1999
5. 
Enhanced  market  transparency,  and  thus  a  buttressing  of  banking  supervision  by  market
discipline.
All these measures should enable supervisors and the market alike to recognise future risks at an early
stage, so as to be able to respond in timely fashion and proactively in the interests of preserving the
stability of the financial system.
The  complex  evolution  of  banking  business  and  the  concomitant  increase  in  risk  can  no  longer  be
coped  with  by  the  traditional  instruments.  The  globalisation  of  the  financial  markets  calls  for  a
departure from purely national rules and regulations, and the adoption of greater flexibility and greater
proximity  to  the  bank  on  the  part  of  supervisors,  so  as  to  foster  financial  market  stability.  Europe
cannot disregard these trends if it wants to  hold  its  own in the international  competition for  market
shares. Furthermore, European banks will have to adjust to the introduction of internal rating systems
if they do not wish to get out of touch with the United States in the field of up-to-date techniques of
credit-risk management.
Market players and others are called upon to lend a hand in shaping the definitive regulations during
the consultation phase that is now in progress and subsequently during the second such period from
autumn  2000  onwards.  Academic  economists,  in  particular,  can  likewise  help  to  answer  the  still
unresolved issues posed by the Basle Accord. We should face up to this major challenge, which is not
least an intellectual competition for the best proposals, by making a joint effort.
BIS Review 133/1999
6
