Jürgen Stark: German financial markets - meeting the challenge
Speech  by  Dr  Jürgen  Stark,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Euromoney
Conference, held in Frankfurt, on 19 September 2000.
 It was the Greek philosopher Heraclitus who said panta rhei - that everything is in flux, like a river.
No one steps into the same river twice. All things are subject to change and in constant flow. But it
makes a very big difference which river you step into - the gently flowing Main-river, for example, or
the  headwaters  of  the  Rhine-river.  As  far  as  the  financial  markets  are  concerned,  there  is  much  to
indicate  that  we  are  caught  up  in  a  raging  mountain  river  which  is  digging  a  new  bed  after  heavy
thundery rain.
During the past few years, individuals, enterprises, markets, institutions and governments have been
up against a raging current of change in the conditions under which they operate. Remaining passive
in  the  face  of  such  a  development  is  fatal.  It  is  imperative  to  take  an  active  role  in  shaping  those
conditions or, at least, to look ahead and adapt to the given circumstances.
In this situation, it is the primary task of the legislature to set the underlying statutory and regulatory
conditions which enable legal certainty, equal opportunity and competition to prevail on the markets -
not  just  nationally,  but  internationally  too.  Examples  of  this  to  be  cited  for  Germany  are  the
implementation  of  EC  directives  on  capital  market  liberalisation,  the  construction  of  an  efficient
securities trading supervision, the planned extensive reform of legislation governing stock exchange
transactions and - probably of greatest significance at the moment - the recent tax reform.
It is up to market organisers and market players to create efficient market structures and offer products
that hold out  the  promise  of sustained  profits  within  the  given  statutory  framework  in  line  with  the
pursuit  of  their  individual  business.  Instances  of  this  are  the  emergence  of  new  stock  markets  and
stock market segments, and the creation of a large number of derivative instruments.
Following the establishment of the European Central Bank (ECB), the Bundesbank is now an integral
part  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB).  The  Bundesbank  participates  in  the
performance  of  the  ESCB’s  tasks  with  the  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability,  and
arranges for the execution of domestic and international payments. Price stability and a functionally
viable financial market structure are the preconditions which permanently have to be ensured so that
there  can  be  efficiency  in  financial  transactions.  In  turn,  efficient  financial  markets  are  the
indispensable medium for a predictable and rapid transmission of monetary policy measures. Seen in
that light, monetary policy and efficient financial markets are in a symbiotic relationship.
Although  the  Bundesbank  cannot,  on  regulatory  grounds,  take  on  the  role  of  moderator  -  or  even
promoter - for the financial centre that some market players would like, it is, in fact, always ready to
give active support as an advisor and initiator. The modernisation of German debt management or the
customer-friendly ECB minimum reserve arrangements are illustrations of that. The fact that monetary
policy has been transferred to the European Central Bank allows the Bundesbank to attend more than
before to the continued strengthening of the competitiveness of the financial markets in Germany.
A  radical  transformation  is  taking  place  in  the  financial  sector,  driven  by  the  “mega  trends”  of
globalisation, deregulation, innovation and the use of new technologies. In this connection, the trend
has been strengthened by the introduction of the single currency in Europe. Securitisation was already
one of the dominant trends in the early and mid-nineties. The adoption of the euro has now brought
about  a  further  surge  in  securitisation  and  given  an  additional  boost  to  disintermediation.  For  the
German credit institutions, the euro means that they no longer have the competitive advantage of the
D-Mark, whereas for others it means that they no longer face the “D-Mark home currency” barrier to
entering  the  market.  Competition  is  becoming  more  and  more  intense  within  Europe  and  globally.
Increasingly, credit institutions not only have to withstand growing competition from other banks but
1
BIS Review 77/2000
are also competing to a greater extent with insurance enterprises, investment and pension funds as well
as online brokers - in some cases even from within their own groups.
The  response  to  such  developments  can  basically  be  either  consolidation  or  specialisation.
Consolidation - even if only at the national level - is not an easy undertaking. The past failed attempts
of  the  big  German  banks  to  merge  in  a  range  of  combinations  illustrate  how  difficult  it  is  to  bring
together  different  corporate  cultures  and  strategies.  It  may  be  that  the  favourable  tax  treatment  of
capital gains from the sale of domestic participating interests from 2002 will provide new impetus for
mergers. Another possibility is cross-border consolidation in Europe with the involvement of German
institutions.  However,  irrespective  of  the  Common  Market  and  EMU  national  interests  have  often
stood in the way of cross-border activities. It is also often argued in this context that, because of the
comparatively strong competition as a result of the density of banks’ branches, the majority of German
credit institutions are generally - but especially in retail banking - not profitable enough. To counter
such  criticism  and  create  the  conditions  for  cross-border  consolidation,  further  streamlining  of  the
branch network and the increased use of new technologies therefore seem inevitable.
The  introduction  of  the  euro  created  the  essential  precondition  for  the  development  of  a  large
supranational euro capital market. The fragmentation into national capital markets - particularly bond
markets - which was essentially due to the existence of different currencies and the resulting interest-
rate differentials, can admittedly still be felt. But, under the influence of competition, the previously
national markets are increasingly merging and gradually losing their special features. The immediate
conversion  of  government  issues  into  euro  and  the  large  degree  of  harmonisation  in  market
conventions have played a major part in the market becoming more homogeneous.
For a variety of reasons, the emergence of a completely uniform European bond market will scarcely
be possible. Despite a greater degree of coordination, the fiscal, economic and social policies of the
participating countries will, for the present, remain a national responsibility.
That is likewise true of government debt management with its significant repercussions for the capital
markets. Differences in financial standing, liquidity and issuing procedures, and the varying efficiency
with  which  the  cash,  futures  and  repo  markets  interact  in  the  individual  countries  will  ensure  yield
differentials in the case of issuers and issues in the medium term as well.
In that respect, the Federal Government is in a favourable position. Even after losing the competitive
advantage  of  the  D-Mark,  it  has  remained  the  benchmark  issuer  and  is  able  to  borrow  at  the
comparatively lowest cost. For that reason, the Federal Government - quite apart from the fundamental
legal  reservations  against  a  communitisation  of  debt  management  -  should  hardly  be  interested  in
communitised borrowing under the umbrella of a European debt agency. As experience of the German
Länderjumbos shows, its financing costs might tend to rise. What should also not be overlooked is the
fact  that  competition  among  the  individual  countries  for  the  lowest  possible  financing  costs  has  a
healthy influence on budgetary policy and the efficiency of issuing policy.
If the debt agency that is planned by the Federal Minister of Finance does come about - despite many
reservations, not least on part of the Bundesbank - I hope it will be able to maintain or even build on
the present strong position of the Federal Government as an issuer. The Bundesbank is ready to work
together  with  the  debt  agency,  to  bring  its  expertise  to  bear  and,  in  particular,  to  provide  all  the
operational  banking  services  for  it.  This  would  also  signal  to  the  markets  that  setting  up  the  debt
agency does not imply any abrupt paradigm change in debt management. That applies especially  to
any apparently politically motivated stronger short-term orientation in borrowing.
Non-government issuers, too, have successfully adapted to the new underlying conditions. Mortgage
banks regularly put “jumbo mortgage bonds” on the market, and place them successfully with foreign
investors as well. The issuers are thereby making use of the fact that institutional investors in Europe
are gearing their portfolios more and more to euro-area-wide investment. “Exporting” mortgage bonds
means that the idea of long-term fixed-rate real estate financing is also being exported. I believe this to
be a good thing since it promotes the stability of the financial system in Europe.
Despite several signs of becoming more popular, domestically issued corporate bonds continue to lead
a  somewhat  neglected  existence  in  Germany.  Above  all,  because  one-half  of  paid  interest  on
BIS Review 77/2000
2
permanent  debts  is  included  in  trade  earnings,  German  enterprises  are  prompted  to  issue  bonds
through foreign financing vehicles. Abolishing that regulation would be desirable but would probably
be realistic only in connection with the abolition or reorganisation of trade tax as such.
Overall,  the  “corporate  bonds”  sector  is  growing  sharply  in  Germany  -  as  it  is  throughout  the  euro
area. Lower government deficits - which are made possible by higher tax revenues, the auctioning of
mobile  telecommunications  licences,  privatisations  as  well  as  a  consistent  course  of  limiting
expenditure, are creating scope for corporate financing through the bond market. Institutional investors
appreciate  the  enhanced  opportunities  of  portfolio  diversification,  which  bring  with  them  not  only
higher yields but also greater risks.
There has been a clear improvement in the “share culture” in Germany over the past few years. Large,
broadly spread issues, such as those of Telekom or of t-online, have played a part in that in the same
way as the extremely successful development of the “Neuer Markt” as a new stock market segment for
young  high-growth  enterprises.  The  frequent  claim  that  German  investors  are  risk-shy  and  prefer
fixed-yield  paper  has  been  emphatically  refuted  over  the  past  few  years.  The  -  in  some  cases -
meteoric price increases on the “Neuer Markt” have, if anything, given rise to the fear of widespread
euphoria leading to a lack of discernment. The more reflective mood that has now set in is only to be
welcomed in the interests of a favourable market development in the longer term.
The  number  and  market  capitalisation  of  listed  German  public  limited  companies  have  made  great
advances in the past few years:
• 
• 
At the end of 1995, 527 enterprises achieved a market value equivalent to  ELOOLRQ
At  the  end  of  1999,  the  figure  was  already  933  enterprises  with  a  market  value  of
 billion.
Measured in terms of GDP, market capitalisation is now at 68% compared with 24% at the
end  of  1995.  This  means  that  Germany  is  still  in  a  lower  mid-table  position  among  the
industrial countries. There exists potential for further growth.
 The  European  stock  market  landscape  is  still  distinctly  fragmented  with  a  large  number  of  market
models, trading and settlement systems. Mergers and close cooperation are inevitable if one wishes to
approach the ideal of the perfect market by means of pooling liquidity and lowering transaction costs.
The Deutsche Börse AG recognised that fact at an early stage and took the lead in that development. In
the “contest of the systems” between “open outcry” and electronic trading in the futures market, it was
consistent in opting for the electronic alternative and thus decided the competition for the Bund Future
- the capital market contract which currently has the highest turnover - in its own favour.
Generally,  it  seems  that  the  triumphant progress  of  electronic trading  systems  -  whether  it  be  stock
exchange or OTC trading - is irresistible. Not being bound to a single location, transparency and low
transaction costs are major advantages.
Not all Deutsche Börse AG’s plans and projects have been realised. Who ventures much will also lose
sometimes. But who ventures nothing will never gain. As someone  said in a  recent  discussion  with
German  banks:  “There  are  no  failed  experiments.  There  are  only  experiments  with  unexpected
outcomes.”
It  is  not  just  for  monetary  policy  reasons  that  the  Bundesbank  is  interested  in  efficient  financial
markets  and  therefore  also  in  efficient  trading  and  settlement  systems.  As  the  fiscal  agent  for  the
Federal Government, the Bundesbank is also a major market player in on-the-floor bond trading in the
stock market and in Xetra bonds. The Federal Government and the Bundesbank have been following
Deutsche Börse AG’s plans for Eurex bonds as a successor system for Xetra bonds from the outset
and, a few weeks ago, decided on active participation. The Federal Government and the Bundesbank
have declared their expectation that the system will be open to a wide range  of  participants.  In  this
connection, I hope that Deutsche Börse AG soon succeeds in the intended linking of the cash, futures
and repo markets and that it can successfully hold its own in competition with other electronic bond
trading systems.
3
BIS Review 77/2000
Germany sometimes has difficulties with reforms. In a federally structured state with numerous strong
interest groups, that comes as no surprise. It is therefore all the more gratifying to state that - despite
all the criticism of specific points - a tax reform has been initiated which deserves the name. The tax
reform will bring about a crucial improvement in the conditions for economic activity in Germany. It
will  mean  a  considerable  easing  of  the  burden  on  enterprises  and  households  and  create  planning
certainty for the medium term. The fact that capital gains from sales of domestic participating interests
are  to  be  exempt  from  tax  in  the  case  of  incorporated  enterprises  will  make  the  -  in  some  cases  -
overdue  restructuring  of  German  groups  much  easier.  With  the  lowering  of  corporate  tax  rates,
Germany will in future occupy a competitive mid-table position in international terms.
What  is a  problem,  however,  is  that  the  reform  will  create  further  competitive  distortions  owing  to
retained profits being given preferential treatment over the distribution of dividends by incorporated
enterprises, and other sources of taxable income. This will weaken the steering function of the capital
markets. What will prove to be a particular drawback for the financial centre Frankfurt is the planned
tax prohibition on offsetting losses arising from share derivatives against profits from the underlying
shares. Here, a better solution should be found. Another justifiable point of criticism is the continued
failure even to make a start on simplifying the highly complex German tax system. Tax consultancy is
still going to be a growth industry in Germany.
Despite  all  the  satisfaction  about  tax  relief  measures,  we  should  not  overlook  the  fact  that  the  tax
burden will still be quite high in Germany, which means that Germany has to maintain a consistent
course  of  fiscal  consolidation.  Excluding  the  receipts  from  the  mobile telecommunications  licences,
the fiscal balance in 2000 will show only a slight improvement despite much higher tax revenues. In
the coming year, the structural deficit will increase significantly. In other words: further reductions in
expenditure are required in order to create scope for lower taxes.
Maintaining  and  enhancing  Germany’s  overall  competitiveness  -  and  certainly  not  just  the
competitiveness of its financial markets - is an ongoing task. International investors are looking to how
Germany, as Europe’s largest economy, copes with changed underlying conditions. Much has already
occurred  or  been  set  in  motion  in  Germany,  such  as  the  privatisation  of  former  public  enterprises
together  with  market  liberalisation  and  deregulation  in  such  important  areas  as  telecommunications
and the post services, or price liberalisation in electricity.
What  still  has  to  be  done  is  the  reorganisation  of  our  social  systems  in  line  with  foreseeable
demographic developments. The basic features of the statutory pension scheme reform presented by
the Federal Government would contribute to distributing the demographically induced burdens more
equally between the present and future generations of pensioners, but consideration should continue to
be  given  to  raising  the  actual  retirement  age.  The  envisaged  capital-backed  supplementary  pension
would also place the funding of old-age provision on a broader foundation.
What  is  also  needed  is  to  make  our  labour  markets  more  flexible  with  the  aim  of  reducing
unemployment, which is still very high. That would also be an essential condition for bringing down
non-wage  labour  costs  -  which  are  extremely  high  by  international  standards  -  in  a  systemically
appropriate manner.
Regrettably, the reforms that have already been implemented or are planned in Germany as well as in
other  European  countries  have  received  scant  attention  up  to  now  outside  of  Europe.  The  markets
obviously lean towards an asymmetrical view of things, with matching consequences for the external
value of the euro.
In conclusion, I would like to say a few words on our own behalf. The establishment of the ECB has
created a new level of decision-making in the monetary policy of the countries in the euro area. The
Bundesbank  is  now  part  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB).  This  means  that  the
Central Bank Council no longer has the power to decide monetary policy.
What  is  necessary  under  the  new  conditions  is  to  have  a  uniform  management  body  located  in
Frankfurt.  This  would  mean  that  the  provision  of  Bundesbank  services  to  the  regions  is  not
jeopardised.
BIS Review 77/2000
4
The independence of the ECB and of the national central banks within the ESCB is a key feature of
European monetary policy. The “denationalisation” which this achieved was desired by all of member
states  and  explicitly  recognised  by  the  signing  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  which  was  unanimously
approved  by  the second  chamber  of the  German  parliament representing  the  Länder  or  regions,  the
Bundesrat. Monetary policy can only be “denationalised”, however, if national aspects no longer play
a role in the assessment of monetary policy. That applies all the more to specific regional aspects.
The  Bundesbank  is  ready  to  adjust.  During  the  past  few  weeks  and  months,  the  President  of  the
Bundesbank has repeatedly pushed for the necessary measures of reform. As a member of the ECB
Governing  Council,  he  is  aware  of  what  kind  of  reforms  are  needed.  That  is  not  so  in  the  case  of
proposals that have recently been put forward elsewhere, which, by contrast, appear to be short of the
basic information about how the ESCB operates. Tackling the reform of the Bundesbank now with all
speed  and  setting  a  clear  course  is  something  that  undoubtedly  requires  political  courage.  The
Bundesbank’s  ability  to  reform  -  something  which  the  Bundesbank  itself  desires  -  is,  however,
indicative  of  the  “reform-ability”  of  Germany  as  a  whole.  This,  in  turn,  lies  in  the  hands  of  the
politicians. We are waiting for good and forward looking political decisions.
5
BIS Review 77/2000
