Gordon Thiessen: The Canadian economy - charting a course for the future
Remarks  by  Mr  Gordon  Thiessen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Chambre  de  commerce
régionale de Sainte-Foy, Sainte-Foy, Quebec, on 26 April 2000.
 The 1990s was a difficult period for Canada and the Canadian economy. From the beginning of the
decade, it was clear that we had to grapple with the problems that had been hampering our economic
performance  through  most  of  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Thus,  the  Bank  of  Canada  set  out  to  lower
inflation.  Canadian businesses began  to restructure  their  operations  to  become  more  productive  and
internationally  competitive.  And  governments  started  the  process  of  cutting  public  deficits  and
lowering debt burdens.
Dealing with these problems was certainly painful. And, in some cases, it took us a good part of the
decade  to  overcome  them.  But  we  have  now  made  some  crucial  improvements  to  our  economic
foundation. And as we step into the new century, we are beginning to see the benefits.
The Canadian economy has been expanding solidly  for  some  time  now.  In  fact,  if  we look  through
some  temporary  monthly  declines,  we  are  in  our  nineteenth  quarter  of  positive  growth.  This  is  the
longest uninterrupted economic expansion in Canada since the mid-1960s. And throughout, inflation
has  remained  low  and  stable.  The  advantages  of  this  expansion  are  now  showing  up  in  gains  in
employment and incomes.
This  is  all  very  heartening.  To  maximize  these  benefits,  we  must  build  on - not  be  complacent
about - our new-found economic vitality.
We must avoid the boom-bust cycles of the past. This is one issue I would like to discuss today - how
to minimize economic fluctuations. Not eliminate them altogether, that is just not possible. In today’s
globalized markets, there will still be times when Canada’s very open economy will be hit by external
shocks. And sometimes there will be surprises on the domestic side too. In the past, though, some of
our economic ups and downs were aggravated by outbreaks of inflation. The question is, what can we
do now to keep our economy moving along on a sustainable growth path?
There  is  also  the  question  of  longer-term  economic  performance.  For  example,  how  low  can  our
unemployment  rate  go  on  a  sustainable  basis?  Will  we  succeed  in  narrowing  the  gap  between  our
standard of living and that of our US neighbours? What choices should we be making today that will
improve our economic performance in the decade ahead?
This sounds like a tall order! So before I raise expectations too much, let me say that I do not have
answers for all these questions. There are, however, several important steps we can take that would
increase our chances of preserving the current economic expansion and help improve our performance
over the long run.
Let me start at the beginning - with sound economic policies.
... keep inflation low and stable
I see low and stable inflation as an essential building block of a strong economic structure.
Is this just my bias as a central banker? Perhaps, but there are good reasons for it.
Inflation carries with it costs that are more profound and widespread than is commonly  recognized.
Inflation magnifies uncertainty about the future: when prices are rising, the rate of inflation is rarely
stable  or  predictable.  Inflation  distorts  and  confuses  the  information  and  incentives  that  consumers,
entrepreneurs,  savers  and  investors  rely  on  to  make  their  economic  decisions.  And  it  causes
households and businesses to spend time and money to try to shield themselves, or to benefit, from the
1
BIS Review 37/2000
effects of rising prices by turning to speculative assets (such as real estate) and away from productive
investments. We saw a lot of this during the high-inflation days of the 1970s and 1980s. We also saw
our interest rates rise higher and higher to compensate savers for expected higher inflation and for the
risks caused by uncertainty about future inflation. And we saw economic booms turn into busts.
So  the focus  of  central  banks  on  price  stability  these  days  is  neither  accidental  nor  whimsical.  It  is
deliberate. And it has to do with reducing the toll that inflation takes on the economy and minimizing
economic  ups  and  downs.  Put  another  way,  if  the  goal  of  economic  policies  is  a  productive,
well-functioning economy, capable of creating new jobs and delivering higher standards of living over
time, then low and stable inflation is a crucial means to that end.
That is why the Bank of Canada and the Government of Canada have agreed to an explicit target for
inflation control, which currently aims to hold inflation inside a range of 1 to 3%.
There are already signs that this commitment is paying off in helping to reduce the fluctuations in our
economy. In the nine years that the inflation targets have been in place, not only has the underlying
rate of inflation been much lower than in the previous two decades, but the pace of economic activity
has been less variable from one quarter to the next.
... keep public finances under tight control
Fiscal  prudence  is  the  other  crucial  part  of  sound  economic  policies.  Why  does  tight  control  over
government budgetary positions matter so much?
As I said before, governments have made remarkable progress in recent years in reducing deficits and
bringing down the national debt relative to the size of our economy - the debt-to-GDP ratio. But this
ratio  is  still  high.  Because  of  this,  we  remain  vulnerable  to  unexpected  developments,  such  as
international financial crises, which can push up the risk premiums in our interest rates.
There is no objective economic analysis that can tell us exactly what is the right debt-to-GDP ratio to
aim  for.  But  as  long  as  our  national  debt  ratio  is  higher  than  that  of  most  other  large  industrial
countries,  we  are  at  risk  of  being  singled  out  by  investors  the  next  time  there  are  international
problems.
I  hesitate  to  make  any  comment  on  the  current  debate  about  tax  rates.  But  it  is  important  for  a
well-functioning economy to find the level of taxes and government services that would deliver the
right balance of incentives and public support programs. Finding this balance is even more important
these days. In today’s environment of rapidly changing technology, there can be increased uncertainty
and insecurity about the future; however, there can also be great rewards.
Let me now turn to this issue of technological change and to some of the other challenges we must
deal with if we are to prosper in the future.
... keep abreast of, and continue to invest in, new technology
I do not believe that anyone would disagree with the importance of keeping up with the times. We are
in the midst of a global technological and information revolution that is transcending national borders,
pushing at new frontiers every day, and transforming our economies. This is the brave new world of
microchips,  fibre  optics  and  the  internet - a  world  more  closely  connected  than  ever  before,  where
opportunities abound, competition is intense and survival is synonymous with innovation.
technological  revolution.  Canada 
As a nation, Canada is probably better positioned than most to seize the opportunities presented by this
new 
in
telecommunications, and we are well ahead of many countries in the use of personal computers and
the internet. Our colleges and universities turn out graduates that are highly skilled. And, in general,
our population is well-educated. But to make the most of potential opportunities, we must ensure that
we  keep  pace  with  the  best  in  the  global  race  to  take  full  advantage  of  accelerating  technological
change.
that  has  been  a  pioneer 
large  country 
is  a 
BIS Review 37/2000
2
To appreciate the benefits of moving quickly to exploit the full potential of new technologies, we have
only  to  look  at  the  stellar  performance  of  our  next-door  neighbour.  The  “strong  growth-high
productivity-low inflation” record of the United States over the past nine years has much to do with
the  systematic  efforts  of  US  businesses  since  the  1980s  to  restructure  their  operations  and  invest
heavily in machinery, equipment and software that embody the latest technologies. Business spending
on  machinery  and  equipment  as  a  percentage  of  that  country’s  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  rose
from 6% in 1992 to 11% last year.
Canadian  businesses  have  also  substantially  increased  their  purchases  of  machinery,  equipment  and
technology - especially since 1996. As a percentage of GDP, such investment has risen from 6% to 9%
in 1999 - which leaves us where the United States was three or four years ago.
There  is  no  doubt  that  gains  in  productivity  require  more  than  just  investments  in  technology.  The
entrepreneurial  application  of  technology  in  new  areas  and  employees  skilled  in  the  use  of  new
practices and equipment are also  key  elements  in  this  process.  But  because  we  are  going  through  a
period of major change in applied technology, the spotlight is naturally on investments in technology
and on the need to intensify our efforts on this front.
I believe that Canada has what it takes to make the most of this “new economy”.
... the importance of being globally competitive
More Canadian businesses also need to understand that globalization is irreversible - they must plan to
operate on the basis that markets of all sorts will become increasingly globalized.
Despite the problems that the World Trade Organization ran into in Seattle, the move towards freer
trade  is  inevitable  as  more  emerging-market  economies  recognize  that  opening  up  to  international
trade  and  investment  is the  best  means  of raising  productivity  and  improving  living  standards.  And
while it may not always seem to be the case, this increased openness in world trade will be good for
Canada too, especially if we are adept enough to take full advantage of it.
A freer world trade environment opens up new vistas so that our companies can increase their global
reach. Of course, it does the same for our competitors. And they will be out there, going after a bigger
slice  of  the  world  market.  The  way  to  stay  ahead  of  the  game  is  by  developing  and  maintaining  a
competitive edge.
This  means  improving  productivity  and  finding  more  efficient,  less  costly  ways,  of  delivering  the
products  that  foreign  customers  want.  And  it  goes  beyond  innovation  and  investment  in  new
technologies. It also means strengthening our educational system and making sure that the workplace
environment in Canada is ready to respond to the technological and market changes as they unfold.
... the importance of flexibility, training and development
Dealing  with  rapid  change  is  always  difficult.  When  people  are  not  certain  how  their  lives  will  be
affected by it, they tend to be fearful and resistant.
So what will be needed, to an even greater extent than ever before, is a sense of partnership between
employers and employees in developing strategies to deal with the challenges of change. In my view,
there are two important elements to such strategies: we need to foster a greater degree of flexibility in
adapting  to  change  and  we  need  to  increase  training  so  that  employees  have  the  necessary  tools  to
operate confidently with advanced technologies and to get the most out of them.
Flexibility  is important  because  job  requirements  will  change  more  frequently,  along  with  evolving
technology. We must be prepared to accept and adjust to these changes as well as to the possible need
for greater movement between jobs, employers and even regions.
When it comes to training, the main point I would like to make is that human skills are essential to
innovation. What is the sense of spending heavily on state-of-the-art technology and equipment that
ends up idle or inefficiently used because of a lack of trained personnel?
3
BIS Review 37/2000
The  partnerships  that  are  being  formed  between  industries,  on  the  one  hand,  and  colleges  and
universities,  on  the  other,  are  going  to  be  even  more  important  in  the  future.  And  I  expect  that  all
businesses, especially smaller ones, are going to have to devote more time and resources to training
staff.
... the importance of an efficient and innovative financial sector
The final item on my list today is the importance of an efficient and innovative financial sector.
There is considerable evidence that the degree of financial development can have a marked impact on
economic  growth.  A  highly  developed  financial  sector  helps  channel  savings  into  investments  and
allocates that capital more efficiently.
In  these  times  of  rapid  technological  change,  many  of  the  new  and  innovative  applications  of
technology are going to take place in small, often new start-up, companies. Financing the growth of
these companies presents a challenge for the financial sector because it requires an ability to assess the
risk involved and then put the right price on that risk. And when concentrations of risk become too
high for individual investors and lenders, the financial system must be flexible enough to allow them
to shift their risks and rebalance their loan and investment portfolios. One of the factors behind the
recent  extraordinary  performance  of the  United  States  has  been  the  flexibility  and  innovation  of  its
financial  system.  We  will  need  to  ensure  that  in  Canada  too,  the  financial  sector  responds  to  the
challenges of today’s changing financing needs.
Concluding thoughts
Let me summarize my main points today.
Canada has made remarkable progress over the last decade in strengthening its economic foundation.
Starting  from  that  firmer  base,  we  are  now  in  a  position  to  move  forward  and  reap  some  of  the
potential gains in employment and incomes from the technological revolution that is now sweeping the
world.
Monetary policy can support this process by providing a low and stable inflation environment. This
will minimize economic fluctuations and allow our economy to perform at its best. Fiscal policy can
help  by  keeping  public finances  under  control  and  continuing  to reduce  Canada’s  debt  burden.  The
right balance of taxes and government services is also important. A stable, innovative financial sector
can also help, by ensuring that financing flows efficiently to where it is needed the most.
All this will go a long way towards providing an environment in which Canadian companies can go
about their business confidently in a world of rapid change. It is the business community, however,
that  must  take  the  innovative,  and  sometimes  risky,  decisions  that  are  necessary  to  improve
productivity and competitiveness, in order to meet the challenges and realize the gains of proliferating
technologies and increasingly open world markets.
There is no reason why we in Canada cannot meet these challenges and build a better economic future
for ourselves.
BIS Review 37/2000
4
