Lee Hsien Loong: Separation of financial and
non-financial activities in Singapore
Speech by DPM Lee Hsien Loong, Chairman of the Board of Directors of The Monetary Authority of
Singapore and Deputy Prime Minister, at the Association of Banks in Singapore (ABS) dinner, held in
Singapore on 21 June 2000.
 Introduction
I last attended the ABS annual dinner two years ago. I spoke then on the need to free up our banking
sector,  and  to  allow  competition  a  greater  role  in  shaping  the  industry.  Last  year,  MAS  announced
measures to improve corporate governance and institutionalise the management of the local banks, and
the  first  phase  of  a  five-year  programme  to  liberalise  the  banking  sector.  We  sought  to  strengthen
Singapore’s banking system, provide Singaporeans with quality banking services, and further enhance
Singapore’s position as an international financial centre.
These reforms have brought about visible changes. The next step in strengthening the local banks is
now  to  separate  financial  and  non-financial  businesses  within  the  banking  groups,  and  to  further
improve corporate governance through a clearer and more transparent ownership and control structure.
Separation of financial and non-financial activities
What ought to constitute the permissible activities for a banking group is an issue which all financial
regulators have to consider carefully. If we took a purely laissez faire approach, we could leave banks
to structure themselves as their owners and management saw fit. What businesses banks chose to be
involved  in,  and  what  business  entities  chose  to  own  a  bank,  would  be  matters  for  themselves  to
decide. Over time, banks with the right configuration and mix of activities would succeed, while those
without would fail or be eliminated by the competition.
But  regulators  cannot  leave  it  entirely  to  the  market  to  sort  out  such  matters,  especially  where  the
banks involved are not peripheral players but perform key roles in deposit taking and  the  payments
system. Strong banks are important to the health of the financial system and to the entire process of
credit intermediation. Regulators cannot guarantee that individual banks will never fail, but they have
a duty to minimise the chances of a mishap and to maintain the integrity and overall stability of the
financial system.
A clear source of potential problems in this regard is the commingling of financial and non-financial
activities  within  the  same  corporate  group.  Many  regulators  regard  it  as  good  banking  and  sound
supervisory practice to require clear separation of the two.
Firstly,  separation  will  limit  the  risk  of  contagion  from  non-banking  businesses  to  the  bank.  Banks
with  significant  interests  in  non-banking  activities  are  exposed  not  just  to  credit  and  market  risks  -
which are the primary risks of their business, and which the banks should assess and manage as part of
their  core  competence.  These  banks  will  also  be  taking  on  the  business  risks  of  their  non-financial
activities.  If  their non-financial  activities  run  into trouble,  the  banks  may  feel  compelled  to  support
them beyond normal commercial considerations, to protect their own reputation. In so doing the banks
may  undermine  their  own  soundness;  yet  if  they  did  not  extend  the  rescue,  the  problems  of  the
affiliates may trigger a loss of confidence in the bank itself because of the close association.
Secondly, with banking and non-banking activities inter-meshed within a conglomerate, there will be a
strong  tendency  to  stretch  any  safety  net  intended  for  the  banking  system  also  to  cover  non-bank
operations in the group. If failure of an associated non-bank threatens the bank and systemic stability,
the regulator  or  government  may  be  forced to  rescue  both.  We  have  seen  this  happen  in  the  recent
Asian crisis. An implicit safety net for the banking system may be a necessary evil; but extending it to
1
BIS Review 53/2000
non-banks  compounds  the  problem  of  moral  hazard.  It  also  tilts  the  playing  field  against  non-bank
competitors who are not associated with banks.
Thirdly, separation minimises the risk of non arms-length transactions between banks and their non-
bank affiliates. When a bank lends to a related entity at more favourable terms than market, or invests
in  an  affiliate  in  order  to  control  it  even  though  the  investment  does  not  perform,  minority
shareholders of the bank are disadvantaged, and so are depositors.
Some  economists  have  argued  that  in  less-developed  financial  markets,  it  is  in  fact  a  rational  and
practical strategy for a group of companies sharing common ownership or cross-shareholdings to lend
to and invest in one another. Information about companies is often less than complete, and company
accounts and business plans are hard to interpret. Family networks or guanxi are then efficient ways to
establish  a  basis  of  trust  for  doing  business,  and  to  avoid  the  high  costs  of  obtaining  reliable
knowledge about the other party’s activities and finances.
the  non-transparency  of 
But 
to  serious  difficulties  and  abuses.
Cross-shareholdings  diminish  the  influence  of  minority  shareholders,  dilute  market  pressure  on  the
companies  in  the  group,  and  weaken  the  internal  discipline  to  appraise  rigorously  the  risk  of  each
investment.
this  approach  can 
lead 
The ongoing reforms in many Asian countries are as much about tightening corporate governance in
this regard as they are about re-capitalising weak banks. The way forward for banks is therefore not to
rely on family networks or guanxi. It is to strengthen their ability to assess credit risks and investment
propositions  rigorously,  on  arms-length,  commercial  considerations,  and  to  deploy  their  assets  in  a
diversified, optimal manner.
Finally, separating out non-financial activities will focus management attention on their core business
of  banking  and  finance.  The  need  to  concentrate  on  core  competencies  is  not  unique  to  banking.
Globalisation  and  technology  are  causing  many  world-class  companies  to  focus  on  their  core
competencies,  and  to  outsource  parts  of  their  value  chain  for  which  they  have  no  particular
competitive  advantage.  This  is  especially  true  for  banks,  which  are  operating  in  an  intensely
competitive  and  dynamic  environment.  They  need  to  muster  all  their  talents  and  energies  on  the
financial business, instead of dissipating them over many different businesses.
For these reasons, banks should not commingle financial and non-financial activities. However, this
does not mean that banks must refrain from engaging in venture capital or merchant banking business,
which involves taking an equity interest in a diversified portfolio of non-financial companies for some
period. It is not uncommon for the merchant banking business of well-run, international banks to take
stakes in non-financial companies for three to five years. These activities are natural extensions of the
lending business of banks. They are, however, quite different from taking long-term strategic stakes in
non-financial companies which tie a bank’s reputation to these companies.
In  addition to the separation  of  banking  and  non-banking  activities,  regulators  in  several  developed
markets  have  also  advocated  dispersed  ownership  of  banks.  Often  this  has  been  achieved  by
legislation  or  via  the  bank’s  own  memorandum  and  articles  of  association,  which  sets  limits  on
shareholdings to prevent any single shareholder or group of shareholders from dominating the bank.
The result has been a “clean” corporate structure for their banks, i.e. there are no cross-shareholdings
between banks and non-banks, and there is clear separation of ownership from management.
Practice in other countries
The US is an example of a financial system which has prohibited commingling between banking and
commerce,  and  required  dispersion  of  bank  ownership.  For  many  years  the  Glass-Steagall  Act
restricted  commercial  banks  even  from  certain  other  financial  activities,  particularly  investment
banking  and  insurance,  much  less  non-banking  business.  Now  that  Glass-Steagall  has  finally  been
repealed,  allowing  for  more  competitive  banking  institutions,  the  US  Federal  Reserve  Board  is
proposing  that  US  financial  holding  companies  should  only  undertake  a  well-defined  range  of
approved activities.
BIS Review 53/2000
2
In  the  UK,  there  is  no  legal  prohibition  on  banks  participating  in  non-financial  activities.  But  in
practice few of the banks do so. This is partly the result of stringent treatment of capital adequacy by
the  regulator  -  banks  are  required  to  deduct  from  their  regulatory  capital  dollar  for  dollar  of  any
investment they make in non-financial activities. It is also because the banks are widely held, with no
dominant shareholder who has other non-financial interests. The banks therefore have little incentive
to control non-financial companies through their investments.
Germany has had a different approach. German banks have traditionally held major long-term equity
stakes in  industrial  groups,  such as  Daimler-Benz  or  Thyssen. This arrangement  gave  the  industrial
groups long-term strategic shareholders, who could look beyond the next  quarter’s  financial  results.
But  it  has  also  frozen  the  structure  of  the  industrial  groups,  and  prevented  them  from  merging,
restructuring  and  rationalising,  as  US  companies  have  done.  It  has  made  it  harder  for  the  banks  to
deploy their assets flexibly, to maximise their own returns, and to become as spry and competitive as
US banks.
The  Germans  have  recognised  these  structural  weaknesses  and  are  taking  steps  to  rectify  them.
However,  one  major  obstacle  to  German  banks  divesting  their  industrial  holdings  has  been  the
prohibitive capital gains tax. Now a Social Democrat government has proposed tax reforms that will
remove this obstacle, and pave the way for banking and industrial conglomerates to untangle their web
of cross shareholdings.
In Asia, both South Korea and Japan relied on close association between banking and commerce in the
earlier stages  of  their  industrialisation.  South Korean  chaebols,  and  the  banks that  lent to them,  are
now  facing  painful  reforms.  Poor  lending  practices  by  Korean  banks  disguised  the  deteriorating
finances of the chaebols, and eventually nearly brought the whole system down in the Asian crisis.
In Japan, the pre-war zaibatsu system  became  the post-war  keiretsu  system.  Each  major  keiretsu  or
industrial group consists of companies linked together through a web of cross-shareholdings, including
a main bank. Keiretsu members support one another financially and in terms of direct business. The
bank in the keiretsu plays a pivotal role, facilitating the financial transactions of the group.
While the keiretsu system helped Japan to rebuild and industrialise its economy after the war, many of
the  problems  of  corporate  governance  and  unsound  banks  that  now  plague  Japan  are  rooted  in  this
structure. The prolonged crisis of the Japanese economy since 1990 has forced a fundamental rethink.
The Japanese are now gradually starting to make basic structural changes. The banks are less willing
to  lend  to  associates  without  independently  assessing  their  risks  and  charging  the  appropriate  risk
premiums.  And  both  banks  and  non-banks  within  the  group  are  no  longer  willing  to  maintain
shareholdings  in  each  other  which  yield  low  returns.  The  changes  will  enhance  transparency  and
corporate accountability. They are essential to Japan’s economic recovery, but will have far-reaching
social and cultural implications.
Existing structures of Singapore banks
In  Singapore,  the  local  banks  (other  than  DBS)  started  as  family-owned  banks  and  built  up  a
successful financial business on that basis. Over time they have merged and consolidated. Today the
founding families remain the principal shareholders, and are in several instances also involved in the
management of the bank.
Besides  banking,  the  principal  shareholders  have  also  built  up  diverse  non-banking  businesses,
especially in property. The local banks participate in these non-financial activities of the group, both
by lending and through equity ownership. The banks and non-banks in the same group have developed
significant cross-shareholdings. A mixed conglomerate structure has evolved.
The commingling of financial and non-financial activities will potentially expose Singapore banks to
the same problems that banks elsewhere have experienced. We have not run into serious problems, so
far. This is because the principal shareholders have run the banks prudently and properly. The MAS
has also been stringent in monitoring related party transactions. Strict laws govern such transactions;
3
BIS Review 53/2000
for instance,  bank  directors  are jointly  and  severally  liable  to  indemnify  the  bank  for  losses  arising
from unsecured loans to related companies.
But problems will manifest themselves only in times of stress, as the Japanese and Korean experiences
have shown. For the future, we need to restructure the banks’ participation in non-financial activities
before potential vulnerabilities become actual problems. We have the luxury of acting now while the
banks are sound; we must not delay or put off changes which are essential for their long-term well-
being.
The  banking  environment  in  Singapore  will  only  become  more  open  and  competitive,  and  less
forgiving  of  weaknesses  or  under-performance.  Banks  must  concentrate  on  their  core  competencies
and  build  strong  and  institutionalised  management  structures  to  compete  in  a  globalised  industry.
Ultimately,  their  improved  performance  will  benefit  all  depositors  and  shareholders,  and  strengthen
the financial system as a whole.
New structure
The Government has therefore decided to require the local banking groups to segregate their financial
and  non-financial  activities,  and  unwind  the  cross-shareholdings  between  the  two.  This  will  mean
changes to their present corporate structures. These measures will apply to all local banks - OCBC,
UOB and OUB, as well as DBS and KTB.
There  will  be  four  key  elements  in  the  separation  between  the  financial  and  non-financial  entities:
ownership, cross-shareholding, management, and name-sharing.
Ownership
MAS will require all the financial activities in each banking group to be grouped together, either under
the bank or under a non-operating financial holding company (FHC). The non-financial activities must
be segregated from the banking group and divested. They can be sold to third parties, or alternatively
to the principal shareholders of the bank, so that the principal shareholders own them directly, and not
through any of the entities in the financial arm of the group. MAS will regulate the bank or FHC, but it
will not regulate the non-financial activities.
Currently, all the local banks are listed, and so are many of the non-banks in the groups. The banks
and non-banks already have separate sets of shareholders. In fact, the minority shareholders, i.e. the
shareholders other than the principal shareholder, typically account for about 70% of the ownership of
the bank.
MAS will require this separation of ownership to be retained. The bank or FHC in the existing banking
groups must continue to be listed on its own. For example,, it cannot be subsumed as a 100%-owned
subsidiary  of  a  listed  top-level  holding  company,  which  owns  both  the  bank  as  well  as  the  non-
financial entities.
Having  distinct  groups  of  shareholders  for  the  financial  and  non-financial  activities  will  strengthen
market  discipline  on  the  bank,  and  facilitate  clearer  accountability  of  its  performance  to  minority
shareholders. It will help to ensure that the separation of the financial and non-financial activities is
substantive and not just pro-forma.
There  are  many  ways  for  banking  groups  to  reconfigure  their  corporate  structure.  In  the  end,  what
counts as a FHC is a matter of substance, and not of the form of the organisation chart. MAS reserves
the right to declare any company which owns a substantial share of a bank, directly or indirectly, as an
FHC. Such an FHC will be subject to MAS regulation and will not be allowed to own non-financial
activities.
BIS Review 53/2000
4
Cross-shareholding
The  financial  entities  will  not  be  allowed  to  own,  directly  or  indirectly,  the  shares  of  non-financial
firms affiliated to the same principal shareholder.
Within  the  financial  arm,  shareholdings  should  only  be  in  one  direction.  We  will  not  allow  two
companies in  the  financial  arm  to  have  mutual  shareholdings in  each  other.  For  example,  if  a  bank
takes a stake in an insurance company or securities firm, then the insurance company or securities firm
would not be allowed to hold a stake in the bank. The Companies Act already prohibits subsidiaries of
banks from owning shares in the bank. We will extend this principle to all entities below the bank or
FHC, whether or not they are subsidiaries of the bank or FHC.
Ideally, we should also disallow the non-financial entities from owning shares in the financial entities.
However,  we  do  not  start  from  a  clean  slate.  Requiring  the  banks  to  divest  themselves  of  the  non-
financial activities will already be a major structural change. Therefore, in the present exercise MAS
will allow the principal shareholders to continue owning indirect stakes in the banking groups through
the non-financial entities that they control. MAS will review this arrangement later.
Management
To avoid  conflicts  of  interest, the  management  of  the  financial  entities  should  be  separate  from  the
management  of  its  non-financial  affiliates.  There  should  be  no  sharing  of  executive  directors  and
management  staff,  such  as  the  chief  financial  officer  and  chief  operating  officer.  On  the  board  of
directors of a regulated financial entity, a majority of the directors should not be holding directorships
on the boards of the non-financial affiliates as well.
Name-sharing
Mixed  conglomerates  usually  leverage  on  common  brand  building.  Many  of  the  non-financial
affiliates of local banks share the name of their parent banks. Financial and non-financial entities alike
have built up goodwill in the brand name over the years.
But reputational and contagion risks can result from sharing of names and corporate badges between
the  bank  and  its  non-bank  affiliates.  Where  an  unregulated  entity  sharing  a  name  fails  or  falls  into
disrepute, the public may attribute its problems to the bank, causing a bank run.
MAS will therefore disallow the sharing of names and logos between the financial and non-financial
entities. We are considering amending the Banking Act, to prevent the use of names or acronyms by
companies  that  may  confuse  the  public,  or  give  the  impression  that  a  company  is  related  to  or
associated with any Singapore-incorporated bank.
Scope of permitted activities
MAS will determine the scope  of  activities  which  the  bank  or  FHC  will  be  permitted to  undertake.
Besides  financial  activities,  they  will  include  activities  which  have  clear  synergies  with  the  bank’s
financial  business.  We  will  not  have  a  fixed  list  of  permitted  activities.  Instead  we  will  exercise
flexibility to allow banks to undertake business ventures that are related to their core competencies,
such  as  e-commerce  activities  that  are  changing  the  banking  industry  worldwide.  These  include
providing payment services in support of e-commerce, and leveraging on banks’ IT competencies to
provide IT services, especially in building infrastructure and applications for B2B e-commerce.
Banks  will  also  be  allowed  to  undertake  equity  portfolio  and  venture  capital  investments.  We  will
define an equity portfolio investment to be one where the bank and its financial affiliates do not have
control  over  the  investee  company,  e.g.  by  being  the  largest  shareholder.  An  equity  portfolio
investment  should  generally  not  exceed  10%  of  the  investee  company’s  capital.  Furthermore,  each
equity portfolio investment will be subject to a single security limit of 2% of the bank’s capital funds.
We  will  amend  Section  31  of  the  Banking  Act  to  remove  the  existing  aggregate  limit  on  portfolio
5
BIS Review 53/2000
investments, and replace it with this new single security limit. We will also exclude debt instruments
from Section 31 because they are generally less risky than equities.
Venture  capital  investments  will  be  treated  separately.  MAS  is  drafting  separate  rules  to  allow  for
venture capital investments by banks, and will consult them on these guidelines soon.
The  local banks  have  significant  property  holdings. This  is  partly  because  over  the  years  the  banks
have  grown  together  with  the  property  business  of  their  principal  shareholders,  and  also  because
property has been seen as a good and safe investment in Singapore. Some of these property holdings
were acquired many years ago, and have been kept on the banks’ books at book values which are well
below their present market values. This has provided a comfortable cushion of reserves for the banks
against  uncertainties.  But  it  has  also  failed  to  reflect  the  true  cost  of  holding  these  properties  and
therefore reduced the pressure on the banks to optimise returns on assets.
Property  assets  that  earn  competitive  returns  have  their  place  as  one  component  of  the  investment
portfolio  of  the  local  banks.  MAS  will  therefore  allow  the  banks  to  hold  properties,  solely  for
investment  purposes,  and  subject  to  a  limit  aimed  at  preventing  excessive  risk  concentration.  How
much  property  a  bank  actually  holds  within  these  prudential  limits  is  for  its  management  and
shareholders to decide.
However, banks should not be engaged in developing or managing hotels or other properties, whether
directly  or  through  companies  they  control.  Banks  are  not  property  companies.  MAS  will  therefore
require banks to divest all properties held for development, and shareholdings in property development
companies beyond the portfolio investment limits.
The aggregate net book value of permitted property holdings will be subject to a revised Section 33
limit of 20% of a bank’s capital funds (reduced from the existing 40%). The 20% limit translates into
less than 5% of each of the local bank’s total assets currently. It will apply on the basis of both bank
and  group  capital.  As  with  the  present  Section  33,  properties  held  for  the  purpose  of  the  bank’s
business premises will be excluded from this limit. But whilst the present Section 33 applies only to
properties directly held by banks and their subsidiaries, the new limit will also include properties held
by companies in which the banking group has shareholding of 10% or more.
Investments made by insurance funds
Most  of  the  local  banks  have  insurance  companies  within  their  groups.  These  insurance  companies
present  a  slight  complication.  They  invest  two  separate  types  of  funds:  the  equity  in  the  company
belonging to its shareholders, and the insurance funds managed by the company but belonging to the
policyholders, For example, the life fund of life insurance companies.
Portfolio investments made using the shareholders’ funds of the insurance companies will be subject
to the same single security limit of 2% of the group’s capital funds and the limit of 10% of the investee
company’s  capital. The  portfolio  limits  for  the  banking  group  as  a  whole  will  therefore  include  the
investments using these shareholders’ funds of their insurance companies.
MAS recognises that the insurance funds are different in nature from the equity of the company or the
group  because  they  belong  to  the  policyholders  and  not  the  shareholders.  Therefore  in  principle
investments  using  the  insurance  fund  should  be  treated  separately  from  the  investments  of  the
company  and  the  group.  Nevertheless  the  insurance  fund  should  also  be  used  only  for  portfolio
investments,  and  not  for  the  purpose  of  controlling  other  companies  in  the  group,  especially  non-
financial companies, whether by itself or together with other investments by the group.
Currently,  some  banking  groups  have  used  these  insurance  funds  as  the  vehicle  for  owning  and
controlling their investee companies. For example, the bank itself may own only 5% of an  investee
company, but the insurance fund of the insurance company may own another 15%, giving a total stake
of 20%. This is not satisfactory, because it presents the same problems of contagion, non-transparency
and dilution of management focus as the bank itself investing directly in these companies.
BIS Review 53/2000
6
MAS  will  study  the  appropriate  investment  limits  of  insurance  funds  for  both  bank-related  and
independent  insurers.  The  limits  set  should  protect  the  interests  of  policyholders  through  adequate
diversification, and ensure that the investments do not amount to controlling stakes. These measures
will be developed in consultation with the industry, and are expected to be finalised by the end of the
year.
Whatever  the  precise  portfolio  investment  limits  for  the  insurance  funds,  MAS  will  take  the
governance and deployment of these insurance funds into consideration, when assessing whether the
banking group has de facto control of an investee company, and thus whether an investment meets the
portfolio investment criteria for the banking group.
Time frame and potential impact
The  separation  of  the  financial  and  non-financial  activities  will  be  a  major  change  for  the  banking
groups. There will be significant corporate restructuring and divestment of assets. We must do this in
an  orderly  manner,  over  a  reasonable  period.  There  is  no  reason  to  force  a  fire  sale,  which  would
weaken  the  banks  and  diminish  confidence,  and  would  be  against  the  interests  of  shareholders  and
depositors.
Local  banks  will  be  given  three  years  to  complete  the  restructuring  and  comply  with  the  new
requirements.  The  three  years  will  commence  from  the  passage  of  the  relevant  legislation,  which
should take place by the end of the year. MAS will work with the banks on a phasing and schedule, so
that the restructuring and divestments can take place in an orderly manner and be completed within the
three-year deadline.
Tax treatment for divestment
The  divestment  of  non-permitted  assets  will  have  significant  tax  implications.  In  order  to  avoid
uncertainty as to how IRAS will treat these transactions, and to minimise the tax impact on the banks
of  changes  which  have  been  mandated  by  MAS,  the  Government  has  decided  on  a  set  of  one-off
administrative concessions to facilitate this exercise.
All gains arising from disposals of shares and real properties which have been held for more than 10
years will be treated as non-taxable capital gains. For assets held for less than 10 years, IRAS would
look at the facts of individual cases to decide whether capital or income treatment is appropriate. The
Government  will  also  waive  stamp  duty  on  sales  of  all  shares  and  properties  where  the  gains  are
considered capital in nature.
These concessions will not apply to gains arising from the disposal of shares which have previously
been  claimed  as  trading  stock  for  tax  purposes,  or  gains  on  disposals  of  real  properties  by  banks’
property development companies. However, where income tax is payable arising from a mandated sale
of  assets  that  does  not  qualify  for  capital  gains tax  exemption,  the  Government  will  give  the  banks
three years to settle the amount.
This package will apply only to assets required to be disposed of under the restructuring exercise, and
will only cover disposals made within the three-year period allowed by MAS for the restructuring.
Conclusion
MAS  has  discussed  our  plans  with  the  local  banks.  They  agree  with  the  policy  direction  proposed.
They have suggested some modifications to the MAS proposals, which wherever possible MAS has
incorporated.
Our approach is pragmatic, not purist. Our circumstances are different from other countries. We need
to strike the right  balance, to find  the  framework  that suits  our  economy,  and  which  recognises the
historical  developments  that  have  brought  about  the  present  situation.  The  principal  shareholders
7
BIS Review 53/2000
remain a source of strength to the banks, and it is not our intention to conscribe their contributions to
the future banking business.
The  separation  of  financial  and  non-financial  activities  will  be  another  major  step  forward  in
strengthening the local banks. As one analyst wrote in March:
“The  MAS  is  expected  to  announce  soon  rules  requiring  banks  to  dispose  of  non-core  assets.  We
consider  this  to  be  very  important  -  as  part  of  re-engineering  the  banks  into  more  profitable  and
competitive entities would be to require them to concentrate on their core business rather than act as
conglomerates with low-yielding assets”.1
I urge all the banks to continue to upgrade their capabilities and build up their management teams, in
order to prepare themselves for the new opportunities and challenges arising from the rapid changes of
technology  and  the  market.  MAS  will  continue  to  work  with  the  local  banks  to  foster  closer
cooperation and strengthen the culture of openness as we liberalise the banking industry.
1
“Singapore Banks: Impact of Sale of Non-Core Assets”, Theme Piece by Warburg Dillon Read Global Equity Research, 17 March 2000.
BIS Review 53/2000
8
