Mr Macfarlane: Opening address to the
Euromoney Australasian Capital Markets Forum
Opening address by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Euromoney
Australasian Capital Markets Forum, held in Sydney on 14 March 2000.
 I would like to start by thanking Mr Brady for his introductory remarks, and to say that, in our view,
Euromoney  made  a  very  sensible  choice  in  scheduling  a  Capital  Markets  Forum  in  Sydney.  It
recognises the significance and growth potential of our capital  markets,  and  the  generally  improved
prospects for this region. I see a very impressive list of speakers and participants before me and I am
sure there will be a lot of fruitful discussion over the next two days.
The timing of the Conference is interesting in that it comes at a time when we can safely say that the
Asian crisis  is  behind  us  and  that,  with a  couple of exceptions, the outlook  for  this  region  is  good.
Perhaps  it  was  Australia’s  success  in  withstanding  the  contractionary  effects  of  this  crisis  that
encouraged  Euromoney  to  hold  its  Conference  here  at  this  time.  Whether  that  is  the  case  or  not,  I
would like to take the Asian crisis and its spillover to other emerging markets as the starting point for
my comments this morning.
I do not wish to go over the macro-economic issues because I have already done this before. I would
instead  like  to  ask  what  did  we  learn  from  this  crisis  that  was  of  immediate  relevance  to  capital
markets? What are the implications for developed economies such as Australia?
My answer to the first question is that we learnt that, for a country to play in the international financial
market place, it needs a very sound financial infrastructure. I do not wish to suggest that it was the
lack of this which caused the Asian crisis (the cause lay elsewhere), but it was this deficiency which
made the crisis so deep when it occurred.
By financial infrastructure, I mean:
• 
the body of commercial law which covers everything from the concept of limited liability to
bankruptcy provisions;
   the conditions under which entities can issue debt and equity;
the  body  of  competition  law,  trade  practices  law  and  securities  regulation  which  ensures
arm’s length dealing and limits related party transactions;
the  supervision of the  banking  system,  including  regulation  of  near  banks  such  as  finance
companies and merchant banks;
the provision of a safe payments system;
the application of sound accounting standards;
the existence of a court system which is capable of timely resolution of disputes and which
has the confidence of local and foreign participants.
This is quite a demanding list for several reasons. First, it is quite broad and involves the legal system,
the Government, regulatory bodies, financial market participants and the professions. Secondly,  and
more importantly in my view, the achievement of a high standard in each of the items on this list takes
a very long time. In our case, some of these things took a century to achieve. In many cases, we look
back to periods as recent as the 1980s and wonder why we ever thought that we had done enough.
That is one of the reasons I have been sympathetic to our Asian neighbours. It is inevitable that at an
early  stage  of  development  of  a  country,  its  financial  infrastructure  will  be  only  partly  formed.
1
BIS Review 23/2000
Furthermore, even with the best will in the world, it is going to take time to bring these things up to
scratch.
When  people  say  that  the  recent  financial  and  economic  instability  was  the  inevitable  result  of  a
combination of the free flow of international capital plus inadequate financial infrastructure, there is
much  truth  in  the  statement.  But  if  that  is  the  case,  we  cannot  expect  a  sudden  return  to  stability
because  the  second  essential  component  -  the  adequate  financial  infrastructure  -  will  take  years,  or
possibly decades - to achieve.
The second thing we learnt from the Asian crisis, and its spread to other countries, was the necessity of
having  deep  and  liquid  financial  markets.  We  also  learnt  it  was  an  advantage  to  have  a  floating
exchange rate, and to have a capital market that was diversified and not one that was too dependent on
the commercial banking sector.
This brings me to the Australian financial system, to the capital markets and to financial markets more
generally. The Australian financial system  has  developed  rapidly  over  the  past  20  years  or  so,  with
deregulation being a major driver of change. Deregulation started in the late 1970s with the gradual
removal of controls over bank interest rates. It picked up speed in the early 1980s with the removal of
other  controls  on  banks,  freeing  up  interest  rates  on  government  securities  (by  adopting  tender
arrangements for new issues), floating the exchange rate and opening up the banking system, in the
mid 1980s, to foreign competition. Shortly thereafter, bank supervision was formalised, and the Basel
framework for capital adequacy of banks was adopted in 1988.
The development of the financial markets in Australia is not, of course, the result purely of regulatory
change.  Financial  institutions  themselves  have  taken  the  opportunity  to  develop  new  markets  and
introduce new products. For example, in 1979 the Sydney Futures Exchange was the first derivatives
market  outside  of  the  United  States to introduce  a contract  based  on  a financial  instrument  when  it
introduced the futures contract on 90-day bills.
Australian financial markets have become larger and more diverse over time and are now regarded as
both sophisticated and deep. Turnover in the major Australian markets - the foreign exchange, money,
equity  and  derivatives  markets  -  has  grown  at  average  rates  of  more  than  20%  a  year  since
deregulation.  The  exception  to  this  rule  is  the  market  for  government  securities,  which  has  grown
more slowly than other markets in recent years because of the Government’s run of budget surpluses.
The relatively even pattern of development in Australia reflects both a lack of regulatory distortions or
incentives,  and  the  fact  that,  unlike  the  entrepot  markets  in  Singapore  and  Hong  Kong,  Australian
financial markets have a reasonably large domestic economy to serve.
As in most countries, the foreign exchange market has the largest turnover, with about $75 billion a
day, a little over half of which involves the Australian dollar. The Australian foreign exchange market
is  the  ninth  largest  in  the  world  and  the  Australian  dollar  is  the  seventh  most  actively  traded,
marginally behind the Canadian dollar. To put this in perspective, Australia ranks as the 14th largest
economy in the world, so the Australian dollar trades more actively than might be expected given the
size of the economy. Its relatively high position globally reflects the place the Australian dollar holds
in portfolios of international funds managers because of the opportunities for diversification it affords.
The  standing  of  the  Australian  dollar as  a  world  currency  is  recognised  by  its  inclusion  in  the  first
wave  of  seven  currencies  in  the  CLS  System  or  Continuous  Linked  Settlement  System  for  foreign
exchange settlement which is scheduled to come into operation in 2001. The other currencies are the
US dollar, euro, yen, Swiss franc, pound and Canadian dollar. Australia’s position in world financial
markets was reinforced recently when it was one of four “significant financial centres” invited to join
the G7 countries in the Financial Stability Forum, an inter-governmental group which monitors risks
in  the  international  financial  system.  As  a  “systemically  significant  economy”,  Australia  is  also  a
member  of  the  G20,  which  has  been  charged  with  broadening  the  dialogue  on  key  economic  and
financial policy issues globally.
A  major  gap  in  the  development  of  Australian  markets  until  recently  was  the  domestic
non-government bond market. This market, however, has recently grown strongly, representing further
welcome  diversification  for  borrowers  and  lenders.  With  non-government  bonds  on  issue  now
BIS Review 23/2000
2
totalling  about  $66  billion,  this  market  is  now  about  as  large  as  the  market  for  Commonwealth
Government securities. This development is beginning to produce a “credit curve” in Australia. Now
that  bond  yields  in  Australia  have  moved  lower  on  the  back  of  low  inflation  in  recent  years,  the
incremental  pick-up  for  taking  credit  risk  probably  looks  more  attractive  to  investors  than  it  might
have a decade ago when bond yields were perennially double-digit numbers.
The financial infrastructure in Australia has evolved to accommodate this growth of financial activity.
Practitioners and the authorities have worked together to ensure that the “plumbing” kept pace with
the  system  it  was  serving.  In  the  case  of  payments  and  settlements  systems,  Austraclear  and  the
Reserve Bank’s RITS system, which introduced delivery-versus-payment, and then the ASX’s CHESS
system  for  equities  were  important  steps  forward.  Our  systems  meet  the  highest  international
standards, as specified by the Group of 30. They have been inter-linked through the RTGS system to
provide a very efficient payments and settlements infrastructure. Australia’s RTGS system is among
the most advanced in the world because of the way it closely links to securities settlements, giving it a
very high coverage of high-value transactions.
We  have  already  witnessed  a  major  reorganisation  of  our  financial  regulatory  agencies  with  the
formation of APRA and changing responsibilities for the RBA and ASIC. The reform process is, of
course, ongoing. The main item on the agenda at present is the so-called CLERP initiative - Corporate
Law  Economic  Reform  Program  -  which  aims  to achieve  best  practice  in  fields  such  as  accounting
standards, disclosure, corporate governance, and takeover law. It also aims to facilitate the application
of technology to the conduct of business and promote competition in financial markets, including in
investment products.
The expansion of financial activity in Australia has not been confined to market trading. Holdings of
financial assets in general have expanded rapidly. In the early 1980s, holdings of financial assets were
about the same size as GDP; these days, they are about 2 1/2 times the size of the economy.
The development of financial markets and the financial system has not benefited only the “big end of
town” - if anything, the system has become more “democratic”. One measure of this is the spread of
ownership of equity, with share ownership by individuals increasing sharply in Australia in the 1990s.
The  Australian  Stock  Exchange  estimates  that  54%  of  adult  Australians  now  hold  shares  directly
(including  through  personally  managed  superannuation  funds);  in  1991,  this  figure  was  22%.  This
trend  reflects  the  programs  of  privatisation  and  demutualisation  in  Australia  in  the  1990s.  Another
measure  of  the  “democratising”  of  the  financial  system  is  that  practically  all  permanent  employees
now receive privately funded superannuation benefits, compared with less than half a decade ago. It is
the  investment  of  these  funds  which  has  provided  such  an  important  stimulus  to  the  growth  of  the
funds management industry over the past decade and a half.
It is growth in the size and diversity of financial markets that makes life rewarding and profitable for
market participants like yourselves. But from my perspective, the size, and particularly the diversity,
of  financial  markets  are  also  important.  Representing  an  institution  that  is  responsible  not  only  for
monetary policy, but also for financial stability more generally, I am conscious of the value of a strong
and diverse set of financial markets and institutions.
To illustrate this point, I want to conclude with a few words from Alan Greenspan. In a speech last
September on Lessons from the Global Crisis, he went over the experience of a number of countries
and attempted to draw some conclusions, which are of relevance to what I have been discussing. In his
view (and I will quote):
“The  mere  existence  of  a  diversified  financial  system  may  well  insulate  all  aspects  of  a  financial
system from breakdown. Australia serves as an interesting test case in the most recent Asian financial
turmoil. Despite its close trade and financial ties to Asia, the Australian economy exhibited few signs
of  contagion  from  contiguous  economies,  arguably  because  Australia  already  had  well-developed
capital markets as well as a sturdy banking system. But going further, it is plausible that dividends of
financial diversity extend to more normal times as well.”
On that note, I will conclude and wish you all well for a fruitful and stimulating Conference.
3
BIS Review 23/2000
