Jean-Claude Trichet: Structural and financial reforms
in Europe in a global economic environment
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, Governor of the Banque de France, at the International Securities
Market Association meeting, held in Paris, on 16 June 2000.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a great pleasure for me to take the opportunity of  this  ISMA  meeting  in  Paris to  present some
views on how European economies have entered a new era with the introduction of the euro.
First, I would like to elaborate on the pace of structural reforms, which have already produced tangible
and positive effects on the growth rate in the euro zone.
Second, I will focus on the integration process which is under way in financial markets across the euro
area.
1.
The euro area may expect a long phase of steady economic growth sustained by the
strong pace of structural reforms: further liberalization, increasing labor flexibility and
government budgetary discipline
Liberalization based on privatization, deregulation and transparency has been a success
The  time  is  long  past  when  a  significant  portion  of  the  European  economy  was  controlled  through
various  government  bodies  or  regulations.  The  liberalization  movement,  which  accelerated
substantially with the development of the European Union and principally the completion of the single
market, includes three aspects:
– 
A  significant  privatization  movement,  which  has  spread  throughout  all  of  Europe.  Since
1990,  Europe’s  governments  have  sold  more  than  $200  billion  worth  of  state  companies.
This  movement  was  particularly  important  in  Italy,  France  and  Germany,  where  sales
represented almost three-quarters of the total amount.  The  change  in  ownership has paved
the way for corporate strategies benefiting from an open access to financial markets.
  Another  force  at  work  in  Europe  is  deregulation.  The  change  is  particularly  noticeable  in
several  key  sectors  such  as  telecommunications,  transportation,  the  power  supply  industry
and,  of  course,  the  financial  sector.  This  movement  has  prompted  a  rapid  response  from
regulatory  bodies  to  monitor  the  introduction  of  market  rules  and  ensure  the  appropriate
functioning  of  fair  competition  throughout  the  entire  European  Union.  Today,  this
institutional  framework  appears  quite  appropriate  against  a  background  of  in-depth
restructuring and numerous mergers and acquisitions all across Europe.
Moreover, the liberalization required for the single market endeavor has been accompanied
by  an  increasing  need  for  transparency  and  accountability,  which  has  brought  substantial
changes  in  corporate  practices.  More  detailed  rules  of  disclosure  for  financial  information
and competitive offers for public procurement programs have been implemented throughout
a  large  part  of  Europe.  This  phenomenon  has  enhanced  the  overall  efficiency  of  the
European market economy.
A second series of reforms has resulted in increased flexibility in the labor market
During the past two years, employment has grown faster in Europe than in the United States. There
has  been  strong  job  creation,  particularly  in  the  new  economy,  as  can  be  seen  in  the  remarkable
1
BIS Review 52/2000
increase in employment in the IT companies listed on the “New market”. Employment in this sector
rose by more than 40% in France and Germany.
Besides  the  improvement  in  the  job  situation  in  the  euro  area,  which  results  from  better  economic
prospects, it should be mentioned that over the past few years the European Union has embarked on
determined efforts to promote structural reforms aimed at improving the functioning of labor markets.
European countries increased flexibility in the labor market, in particular by developing part-time and
temporary contracts.
Let me quote some figures to illustrate this point:
– 
From 1995 to 1999, part-time employment rose from 14% to 17% of total employment in the
euro area. This proportion is more important than in the United States, where it amounts to
around  13%  of  total  employment.  More  than  half  of  overall  net  job  creation  was  due  to
part-time employment.
 In conjunction with this development, temporary employment in the euro area rose to 15% of
total employees in 1999.
It  is  also  worth  mentioning  an  emerging  trend  towards  more  cross-border  mobility  of  human
resources, especially among young people. More and more university degrees include a stay in one or
two foreign universities, thus helping to overcome linguistic and cultural barriers in Europe.
Last but not least, a key feature which has fostered job creation in the euro area in recent years is wage
moderation,  together  with  reductions  in  the  social  charges  imposed  on  employers.  This  has  largely
contributed to the emergence of an environment favorable to price stability and low unit production
costs, strengthening the competitiveness of our European economy.
Finally, all countries have experienced significant fiscal consolidation in the 1990s
Enhanced European performances are also evidenced by the significant fiscal consolidation pursued in
Europe in the 1990s. The general government deficit for the euro area fell by 3.5 percentage points
between  1993  and 1997  and  was  brought  back  below  the  3%  threshold.  Since  then,  deficits  have
continued to fall. The most recent data point to a public deficit of 1.2% of GDP for the euro area in
1999,  down  from  2.0%  in  1998.  Four  countries  of  the  euro  area  have  managed  to  achieve  a  fiscal
surplus since 1999.
The fact that European member states have made significant efforts in order to improve their public
finances does not mean that the process of fiscal consolidation is over. In fact, some member states,
including  France,  still  have  some  way  to  go  to  meet  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  goal  of  budget
positions  which  are  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus.  In  addition,  there  is  a  need  to  further  reduce
government debt levels, which remained above 70% of GDP for the euro area.
When  one  considers  the  cumulative  effects  of  the  changes  currently  experienced  -  in  the  field  of
regulations, in the labor market and in public finances - which were triggered by the single market and
now  by  the  single  currency,  one  can  be  reasonably  confident  that  the  euro  zone  is  progressively
catching up with the US economy in terms of long-term potential growth.
The integration process of the euro-wide financial markets
2.
Turning now to the situation of financial markets, I would like to offer a couple of comments, related
to the integration of markets and the process of consolidation in the banking sector.
2.1
First, allow me to recall the important step taken on 24 March 2000 by the Lisbon European
Council towards an integrated financial services and capital market in the European Union. In Lisbon,
the  Heads  of  State  and  Government  recognized  the  central  role  of  efficient  financial  markets  for
long-term  European  competitiveness  and  for  the  development  of  the  new  economy.  The  central
bankers  and  market  practitioners  who  are  participating  in  this  meeting  share,  of  course,  a  common
interest in achieving the smooth and full integration of financial markets within the euro area: both you
BIS Review 52/2000
2
and  us,  because  of  the  very  nature  of  our  respective  jobs  and  responsibilities,  attach  the  utmost
importance to the smooth circulation of cash and securities across the euro zone. Indeed, it is crucial
that payments of cash and delivery of securities be performed without undue obstacles throughout this
very large financial area grouping so many market players keen on operating in deep and liquid capital
markets.
As regards this crucial issue of financial market integration, it is needless to insist on what has already
been achieved during the last eighteen months. However, it is also important to  keep  in  mind  areas
where some work remains to be done.
• 
The integration of interest rate markets within the euro zone is a first, key achievement that
deserves  to  be  underscored.  The  high  level  of  integration  that  was  accomplished  can  be
observed not only at the short end of the market, in the inter-bank and money markets, but
also  at  the  long  end.  Market  participants  across  the  euro  area  now  trade  according  to  the
same  rules  and  practices,  using  the  same  indices  (for  example  the  Eonia  and  Euribor
references on the swap market). When looking at the behavior of the market for government
securities, it is striking to see how fast intermediaries, but also issuers, have adjusted to the
new  environment  created  by  the  introduction  of  a  single  currency.  At  the  same  time,  the
advent  of  the  euro  has  been  the  catalyst  for  the  development  of  a  buoyant  market  for
corporate  securities.  A  market  for  high-yield  bonds  is  already  following.  I  would,  for
example, underline the development of asset-backed securities markets in different countries,
among  which  France,  to  take  advantage  of  demand  from  global  investors  for  this  type  of
securities. Let me also mention, as regards the short end of the yield curve, the very rapid
development of the market for commercial paper in euro and, in particular, the success of the
Paris-based  market,  which  has  attracted  large  foreign  issuers,  thanks  to  its  security,  an
appropriate regulatory framework and the efficient functioning of DVP procedures.
The  euro’s  market  share  as  an  issuance  currency  reflects,  to  a  large  extent,  the  ability  of
intermediaries to promote the deep and liquid markets that issuers and investors need. Hence,
as was predicted by observers, since the start of Stage Three the euro has become the second
most important currency in all segments of international capital markets.
At the shortest end of the market, the integration of the interbank market took place last year
right  from  the  start  of  EMU,  thanks  to  the  installation  of  the  TARGET  system,  which
enabled large-value payment systems to move money efficiently and safely in real time from
one location to another. An important feature to have in mind is that this efficiency has been
achieved  not  through  the  centralization  of  payment  systems,  but  through  a  decentralized
network  in  which  national  RTGS  systems  managed  by  NCBs  are  linked  together.  Such  a
structure is working well. This does not mean that we can now relax and sit back: additional
improvements will have to be considered in this field. For instance, we have to keep working
on reducing costs, especially concerning cross-border payments. This will certainly lead to
further  harmonization:  the  harmonization  of  standards  and  practices  and  also  the
harmonization of systems.
The integration of the euro money market was obviously a prerequisite for the ECB and the
national central banks, the so-called Eurosystem, to be able to conduct the single monetary
policy efficiently. This challenge has been met successfully in a decentralized framework in
which each national central bank, acting under the aegis of the ECB, is responsible for the
daily implementation of monetary policy in its country, as regards open market operations,
standing facilities and minimum reserves.
However, as I mentioned previously, some important work remains to be done before we can
consider that the euro financial markets are fully integrated and that they contribute in the
most efficient way to the best allocation of resources.
At  the  juncture  between  the  bond  and  the  money  markets,  the  repo  market  still  lacks
homogeneity  and  harmonization.  This  situation  derives  from  the  complex  nature  of  this
market,  in  which  legal  and  settlement  issues  play  a  prominent  role.  The  differences  in
   3
BIS Review 52/2000
domestic  legislation  can  prove  detrimental  to  the  development  of  an  homogeneous  repo
market on a euro-wide basis and to the adoption of common market standards. As such, this
issue needs to be addressed. Indeed, a lot of work has been conducted on this issue by market
participants - and I know that ISMA has been a driving force in this regard - as well as by the
public  authorities  at  the  European  level.  To  a  large  extent,  it  should  find  its  way  into  the
directive  on  collateral  that  the  European  commission  is  about  to  propose  to  facilitate  the
cross-border collateralisation technique.
As regards more specifically securities markets, the cross-border circulation and settlement
of securities needs to be further enhanced. One can expect the consolidation process that is
taking place among securities settlement systems (SSSs) to improve eventually the ability of
market participants to move securities efficiently at lower costs across the euro zone.
Similar remarks can be made regarding stock markets. Confronted with fierce competition
coming from new entrants, our traditional stock exchanges are implementing major changes.
The introduction of the euro has been a catalyst which added another strong incentive for the
rationalization of all the existing market structures. These tremendous changes, perhaps we
could even call them a revolution, have been sped up by the never ending improvements in
technology.  Indeed,  the  technology  revolution  is  transforming  not  only  the  architecture  of
stock markets, but also the organization of bond markets. It impacts the way intermediaries
and  investors  conduct  their  business.  The  outcome  of  the  changes  brought  about  by  these
developments  are  not  yet  well  known.  This  is  why  they  certainly  need  to  be  closely
monitored, not only within individual firms but also at the level of supervisory bodies.
At  a  moment  when  all activities  are  tending  to  accelerate and render  location  issues  more
acute,  changes  in  the  regulatory  environment  are  crucial  to  fostering  efficient  financial
markets. Let me mention in particular the UCITS (mutual funds) Directive and the directive
on  occupational  pension  funds,  which  ought  to  eliminate  barriers  to  investment  and,  of
course, the importance of the directive on take-over bids in the context of the integration of
national stock exchanges.
   More generally, it is very important for the European Union to accelerate reforms in the financial field.
In this respect, as I said, key directives have to be laid down and transposed adequately  in  national
laws,  whereby  the  public  authorities  within  FESCO  and  professionals  (like  the  members  of  your
association) should play a role to facilitate a harmonized set of principles or recommendations.
On all these subjects, we can expect a lot of progress in the following months, within the guidelines
already  issued  by  the  European  Commission  (in  its  Financial  Services  Action  Plan).  France,  for  its
part,  has  already  expressed  its  intention  to  put  these  matters  on  the  Agenda  when  it  takes  over  the
presidency of the European Union in July.
2.2
Coming now to the process of consolidation in the banking sector, there is no need to recall
how  banking  and  financial  consolidation  has  sped  up  in  recent  years  in  Europe.  Of  course,  this
evolution  is  closely  connected  to  the  introduction  of  the  euro  and  the  creation  of  a  single  capital
market.  Some  major  players  are  emerging  in  each  country  of  the  EEC.  Clearly,  we  have  new  and
exciting challenges ahead of us on the way to European banking consolidation.
The bodies in charge of banking regulations, along with those responsible for the supervision of credit
and financial institutions, keep a close eye on these developments.
The  stance  of  national  regulators  in  Europe  is  based  on  the  strong  and  efficient  coordination  of
banking  and  financial  supervision,  with  ongoing  flows  of  information  and,  where  necessary,
coordinated actions which may lead to the designation of a lead regulator.
Recently,  several  examples  of  such  coordinated  supervision  between  European  banking  authorities,
such  as  that  between  the  Belgian  and  French  authorities  for  the  DEXIA  group,  have  shown  that
national supervisors are well prepared to cope with large cross-border groups.
2.3
Finally, let me say a few words on the situation of the euro in the foreign exchange market.
BIS Review 52/2000
4
We  have  heard  quite  frequently  during  the  recent  months,  and  especially  when  the  euro  weakened
against  the  dollar,  that  the  cause  for  this  situation  was  to  be  found  in  the  supposed  absence  of
structural reforms that disadvantaged the euro zone vis-à-vis its main competitors.
In the same vein, it is often said that the poor performance of the euro reflects the growth differential
between the euro zone economy and the US economy.
Let me comment briefly on these two points. As regards the lack of structural reforms, I hope that my
previous remarks have underlined that the euro countries have clearly embarked on major structural
reforms - triggered by the single market and the single currency - that will bear lasting effects on the
functioning of their economies. The central banks of Europe call for the pursuit and reinforcement of
these reforms. At the same time, in order to serve these economies in the most efficient way, the euro
financial markets are experiencing the deep and rapid integration process that I described previously.
On  the  second  point,  one  has  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  American  and  European  economies  are  not
positioned  identically  in  the  economic  cycle,  as  the  latter  are  probably  at  the  beginning  of  a  more
robust phase of expansion. According to IMF forecasts, growth should reach 3% in the euro area in
2001, compared with 3.2% in the US.
From a central banking perspective, the present situation is clearly characterized by a misalignment of
the euro if one refers to the euro area fundamentals: robust domestic growth, inflation under control,
strong domestic savings, healthy external accounts.
We  are,  to  a  certain  extent,  in  a  situation  symmetric  to  that  which  prevailed  in  1995  when  the
weakness of the dollar was clearly out of line with the fundamentals of the US economy. At that time,
it took a few months before a correction appeared that aligned the dollar with its economic underlying
fundamentals. The euro has experienced a similar episode recently. This situation seems to be about to
correct itself, now that more and more signs point to a closing of the growth gap between the United
States and continental Europe.
Thus, the potential appreciation of the euro is more than ever a topical question. This potential clearly
reflects the economic soundness, dynamism and strengths of the euro area, supported by the structural
reforms under way. As these winning cards, if  I  may  say  so,  are  now  materializing  more  and  more
clearly, I am confident that market participants will soon share our analysis.
5
BIS Review 52/2000
