Willem F Duisenberg: Current economic developments and
prospects in Europe, as well as other activities of the Eurosystem
Introductory statement delivered by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank,
at the Hearing before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament,
Brussels, on 20 June 2000.
 Once  more  it  is  my  pleasure  to  appear  before  your  Committee  in  order  to  report  on  the  recent
monetary policy decisions taken by the ECB and on the reasoning underlying these decisions. To this
end, I shall also present the ECB’s analysis of current economic developments and comment briefly on
the outlook for the euro area. I should also like to add a few words on the change in the procedures for
the  allotment  of  liquidity  in  the  main  refinancing  operations  of  the  Eurosystem,  beginning  with  the
operation  to  be  settled  on  28  June  2000.  Moreover,  I  should  like  to  inform  you  of  other  important
decisions  taken  by  the  ECB,  particularly  in  the  area  of  transparency,  which  is  an  issue  that  has
frequently been raised in the framework of our regular dialogue, and to which the ECB attaches great
importance.
Current economic developments and prospects
1.
Over  the  past  few  months  both  pillars  of  the  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem  have
indicated that upward risks to price stability have increased. The developments in monetary and credit
aggregates over the first few months of 2000 clearly indicated that liquidity conditions in the euro area
were generous. The three-month average of the annual growth rates of M3 (covering the period from
February to April 2000) was 6.3%. This followed an increase of 5.9% in the period from January to
March 2000. There has, therefore, been a further deviation of M3 growth from the reference value of
4½%.  Annual  M3  growth,  as  measured  by  the  three-month  moving  average,  has  been  almost
1½ percentage points above the reference value since the end of the summer of 1999. It was almost
two percentage points above the reference value in April 2000. Growth of credit to the private sector,
which was already high throughout 1999, increased during the first four months of 2000, reaching, on
an annual basis, 11.4% in April 2000. Developments in the first pillar thus indicated that upward risks
to price stability had increased over the past few months. They needed to be counteracted in time.
Looking at the information provided under the second pillar, the outlook for growth in the euro area
has improved further since our last meeting in March, while upward risks to consumer price inflation
have  continued  to  increase.  There  is  widespread  consensus  among  the  forecasts  from  major
international organisations and private institutions that real GDP growth will exceed 3% this year and
next year. This is significantly higher than projected at the end of last year or earlier this year. On the
domestic side, this positive outlook reflects expectations that growth in domestic demand will benefit,
in  particular,  from  ongoing  employment  growth  and  higher  rates  of  capacity  utilisation.  On  the
external side, the upturn of growth in the world economy appears to be more robust and broadly based
than was anticipated earlier. This suggests that the growth of euro area exports should remain strong.
Information  from  recently  released  short-term  indicators,  such  as  the  surveys  of  the  European
Commission  on  consumer  and  industrial  confidence,  largely  confirm  these  forecasts.  They  indicate
continued  strong  growth  in  the  first  half  of  2000,  following  the  upturn  in  real  GDP  growth  in  the
second half of 1999.
With regard to consumer price developments, inflation has recently risen above the level expected by
most forecasters at the end of last year. At the same time, according to currently available forecasts,
consumer price inflation will exceed, this year and next year, the levels forecast at the end of last year.
The level and the pattern of overall HICP inflation observed over the past few months largely reflect
the impact of oil price developments on the energy component of the HICP. In March, annual headline
1
BIS Review 53/2000
inflation was 2.1%. While it came down to 1.9% in April and May, the rise in oil prices in May 2000
points to renewed short-term upward pressures. It should also be considered that, in the context of the
favourable prospects for strong economic growth in the euro area, the pass-through of exchange rate
changes  via  import  prices  is  normally  facilitated.  Overall,  for  these  reasons,  HICP  inflation  is  not
expected  to  fall  significantly  in  the  near  future.  In  the  context  of  robust  economic  growth,  these
short-term upward pressures were considered to potentially increase the risks of second-round effects,
implying that they could have longer-lasting effects on consumer price inflation, if monetary policy
did not counteract these in a timely manner.
Therefore, in response to these upward risks to price stability, as they emerged from the analysis under
both pillars of the monetary policy of the Eurosystem, the Governing Council of the ECB decided to
increase ECB interest rates by 25 basis points on 27 April 2000, and by 50 basis points on 8 June. The
rate  on the  main  refinancing  operations  has  thus  reached  4.25%.  The  rates  on  the  marginal  lending
facility  and  on  the  deposit  facilities  have  now  been  set  at  5.25%  and  3.25%  respectively.  The
Governing Council also decided on 8 June to switch to a new tender procedure for the allotment of
liquidity in the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem. I will discuss this issue later.
The decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB reflected the forward-looking character of
the  monetary  policy  of  the  Eurosystem.  I  should like  to  stress  that  the  decisions  of  the  Eurosystem
should  be  interpreted  as  responses  to  risks  to  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  before  they
materialise, rather than as reactions to a situation whereby price stability has already been jeopardised.
In  this  respect,  the  recent  increases  in  ECB  rates  have  been  motivated  by  a  desire  to  avoid  being
compelled to take stronger measures at a later stage. I believe this is the best way to fulfil our mandate,
as it is defined by the Treaty, and thereby to contribute to sustained economic growth in the euro area.
The sounder the growth process is, the longer will it normally last. The sounder the growth process is,
the more permanent and sustained will the creation of new jobs tend to be.
An important question in this context relates to the sustainability of the expansion of economic activity
at current growth rates. The answer to this question has important implications for our assessment of
the  monetary  policy  stance,  as  it  potentially  affects  the  interpretation  of  some  of  the  analysis
conducted under both pillars of the monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem.
At our last meeting in March, I already addressed the issue of the reference value for monetary growth.
This reference  value  is  compiled  from  the  estimated  trend  growth  of real  GDP,  the  estimated  trend
decline in the velocity of circulation of M3 and the quantitative definition of price stability. In the light
of the prospects for strong economic growth and upside risks to price stability which I have already
mentioned, the question has been raised as to whether these developments would require a revision of
the  reference  value  for  monetary  growth.  In  this  context,  I  should  like  to  recall  the  Governing
Council’s decision to review the reference value on an annual basis, and that the next review will take
place in December 2000. I should also like to emphasise that the reference  value is  a  medium-term
concept and does not constitute a monetary target. What we aim to capture by trend growth is the rate
of  growth,  which  is  sustainable  in  the  medium  term,  which,  according  to  our  analysis,  has  been
estimated as falling in the range of 2-2½%.
Let  me  also  emphasise  the  fact  that  estimates  of  potential  output  (and  thus  of  the  output  gap)  are
surrounded  by  considerable  uncertainty.  Therefore,  these  indicators  should  be  treated  with  great
caution.  We  are  currently  observing  a  strong  cyclical  expansion  supported  by  strong  productivity
growth. However, we need more compelling evidence before it can be concluded that this upturn will
be followed by higher growth potential, which is above trend growth, as it has been estimated so far. It
is  too  early  to  tell,  but  we  are  monitoring  and  analysing  developments  closely.  We  will  take  our
findings  into  account  when  reviewing  the  reference  value  and  taking  monetary  policy  decisions.
Nevertheless, I should like to stress that it is hard to imagine that the current growth in M3 could be
justified by an upward revision of potential growth. I should also like to point out that the analysis of
monetary  and  credit  developments  conducted  under  the  first  pillar  of  our  strategy  is  more  complex
than simply comparing actual M3 growth with the reference value.
The challenge to turn the current expansion into a prolonged period of non-inflationary growth clearly
requires  further  efforts  in  all  policy  areas.  Reforms  in  the  labour  market  will  be  a  major  factor
BIS Review 53/2000
2
contributing to sustained non-inflationary growth in the euro area. The current level of unemployment
in  the  euro  area,  despite  some  decline,  is  still  too  high.  In  this  respect,  both  appropriate  wage
settlements  and  structural  reforms  will  be  important  contributions  to  continued  employment  growth
and to maintaining low inflation. With a view to fiscal policies in the euro area, it is important that the
opportunity  of  the  current  economic  environment  is  seized  to  improve  the  soundness  of  public
finances. Member States should take advantage of the current cyclical position in order to achieve and
maintain  budgetary  positions,  which  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  More
ambitious fiscal positions than those targeted in Member States’ updated stability programmes should
be achieved, particularly in countries with high debt ratios and especially if economic growth develops
more favourably than expected. In addition, we welcome initiatives to implement tax cuts in a number
of countries, provided that these measures are consistent with the progress to be achieved in the area of
fiscal consolidation. At the same time, more emphasis should be placed on structural reforms on the
expenditure  side  of  budgets  leading  to  stricter  expenditure  restraint.  At  the  current  juncture,  a
pro-cyclical bias in fiscal policies should be avoided.
Let me now turn to the decision of the Governing Council to modify the procedure for the allotment of
liquidity in the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem. This change was motivated by purely
technical  reasons,  namely  by  the  need  to  address  the  problem  of  overbidding,  which  has  become
increasingly  severe  in  the  course  of  recent  months.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  since  early  2000,  the  bids
submitted in the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem have been following a steady upward
trend, leading ultimately to allotment ratios of less than 1% of the bids. For this reason, we decided
that the main refinancing operations would be conducted as variable rate tenders  using  the  multiple
rate auction procedure, beginning with the operation to be conducted one week from now. Contrary to
the  fixed  rate  tender  procedure,  whereby  the  counterparties  of  the  Eurosystem  submit  bids  for  a
specified amount of liquidity, the new procedure implies that the counterparties will also indicate in
their bids the interest rate they are prepared to pay for the requested amount of liquidity. This should
eliminate  the  incentive  to  overbid,  for  in  the  new  format  of  the  auction  the  bidding  behaviour  of
counterparties should be constrained by interest rate cost considerations.
I should like to stress that the switch to variable rate tenders is in no way intended to further modify
the stance of the monetary policy of the Eurosystem. In order to underline this intention, and to be able
to continue to send a clear signal concerning the monetary policy stance, we decided to introduce a
minimum  bid  rate,  below  which  no  valid  bid  may  be  submitted.  This  rate  will  signal  the  monetary
policy stance of the Eurosystem, and thereby assume the role that has, so far, been performed by the
main refinancing rate in the fixed rate tender procedure.
Other activities of the Eurosystem
2.
Turning now to other activities of the Eurosystem, I should like to begin by informing you of further
steps which have been initiated by the ECB in the area of its communications policy. In line with the
ECB’s principle to be as open as possible in the framework of its responsibilities as a central bank, and
in  order  to  enhance  the  transparency  of  its  regulatory  framework,  the  ECB  has  decided  to  make
available  to  the  general  public,  as  a  rule,  the  ECB  legal  instruments  governing  the  relationship
between the ECB and the national central banks (NCBs) of the euro area. So far, the publication of
such documents has been decided by the Governing Council on a case-by-case basis.
Obviously, it is indispensable to exclude from this general rule all sensitive information that needs to
be kept confidential in order to protect the public and economic interests underlying the activities of
the  Eurosystem,  in  particular  with  a  view  to  monetary  and  exchange  rate stability,  the  fight  against
counterfeiting  and  the  legal  protection  of  banknotes.  Thus,  confidentiality  has  to  be  maintained
whenever the disclosure of such information could have significantly adverse effects on the activities
of the Eurosystem or could seriously prejudice the effective conduct of its operations.
All non-confidential legal instruments of the ECB will be published both in the Official Journal of the
European  Communities  and  in  the  Compendium  of  the  ECB,  which  is  also  accessible  via  the  ECB
Internet  website.  At  the  current  stage,  the  Governing  Council  has  approved  the  publication of three
Guidelines addressed to the NCBs of the Eurosystem. They concern the authorisation to issue national
3
BIS Review 53/2000
banknotes  during  the  transitional  period,  the  exchange  of  banknotes  in  Community  currencies
according to Article 52 of the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank and the protection of confidentiality of individual statistical information collected by the
Eurosystem. The publication of several other documents adopted by the ECB is currently under way.
Let  me  now  briefly  refer to  two reports  relating  to  the  Eurosystem’s  tasks  in the area  of  prudential
supervision  and  financial  stability,  which  have  recently  been  released  to  the  general  public.  Both
reports  were  prepared  by  the  Banking  Supervision  Committee  of  the  European  System  of  Central
Banks  (ESCB),  which  comprises  high-ranking  representatives  of  the  central  banks  and  banking
supervisory authorities of the 15 EU Member States and the ECB.
The  report  on  “Asset  prices  and  banking  stability”  analyses  the  possible  implications  for  the  EU
banking sector in the event of a significant fall in asset prices. Given the difficulties and uncertainties
in measuring the “fundamental” value of an asset and the generally inconclusive results provided by
the  various  asset  price  valuation  models,  the  report  does  not  endeavour  to  determine  the
“appropriateness” of asset price levels. Rather, its main objective is to assess the resilience of the EU
banking sector to possible downward developments in asset prices.
The  report  concludes  that  stock  market  exposures  of  EU  banks  do  not  currently  give  any  rise  to
concern  from  a  macro-prudential  point  of  view.  The  EU  banking  sector  would  not  face  major
difficulties in the case of a sharp decline of stock prices. However, problems for EU banks could arise
if  a  fall  in  stock  prices  entails  second-round  effects  such  as  a  significant  slowdown  in  economic
growth leading to a further recession. Moreover, there appear to be some potential risks to EU banks
as  a result  of a  possible  price fall in  the  real  estate  sector,  but  no  major  threat to  systemic  stability
could be identified.
The report also addresses the policies pursued by the supervisory authorities in Member States in order
to preserve financial stability and to ensure prudent lending practices by banks. The actions taken in
the  various  Member  States  range  from  public  communications  of  concerns  to  specific  regulatory
measures, such as changes in risk provisioning and/or asset valuation rules. Given the interest of the
Eurosystem  in  these  kind  of  issues,  the  Governing  Council  has  given  the  Banking  Supervision
Committee of the ESCB a mandate to undertake periodic reviews of asset price developments from the
point of view of banking stability.
The second report that I should like to bring to your attention examines the question of the extent to
which  factors  such  as  technological  change,  financial  liberalisation  and  internationalisation  and  the
increasing  trend  towards  banking  disintermediation  have  had  an  impact  on  the  activities  and,
consequently, on the income structure of EU banks in recent years.
The most noteworthy change that has occurred in the income structure of EU banks is the increasing
importance  of  non-interest  income,  comprising,  inter  alia,  fees  and  commissions,  net  profit  on
financial  operations  and  income  from  variable  yield  securities.  This  trend  may  have  had  a  positive
effect on  the  overall  profitability  of banks  in recent  years, even  though  banks  were  also confronted
with increased costs associated with the development of non-interest income activities, e.g. in order to
attract  and  retain  highly  qualified  personnel.  The  report  also  indicates  that  the  shift  towards
non-interest income does not necessarily induce greater volatility in the income of banks.
The changes that have occurred within the income structures of banks, have also had an impact on the
risk profiles of credit institutions. Indeed, some categories of risks, including operational and strategic
risks, have become more significant compared with the risks associated with classical intermediation
activities  of  banks,  such  as  credit  risks.  Therefore,  the  findings  of  the  report  seem  to  support
suggestions  for  determining  specific  capital  requirements  for  risks  other  than  credit  risks.  Such
measures are currently under discussion in the relevant institutional fora, in the context of the review
of the capital adequacy regime for banks.
BIS Review 53/2000
4
