Stephen Grenville: Globalisation and the
international financial architecture: writing (and righting) the rules
Speech by Mr Stephen Grenville, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to CEDA Gold
Series Dinner, held in Sydney, on 29 June 2000.
 It  is  a  self-evident  truism  that  globalisation  has  changed  Australia,  and  the  world.  We  see  it  in  the
array  of  goods  available,  in  our  travel  habits,  in  media  and  entertainment,  and  in  the  intellectual
debate.  While  it  has  its  opponents,  their  arguments  are  often  partial -  criticising  aspects  of
globalisation, rather than the overall impact. My central theme is that globalisation brings with it huge
benefits, but at the same time, creates a need for a much more comprehensive set of rules to govern the
way it will be carried out, analogous to the complex and ubiquitous rules which govern interactions in
the domestic economy. These generalisations have application in an area relevant to the central bank
role: the development of an appropriate international financial architecture.
Are better international rules needed and feasible?
Some will argue that this search for more comprehensive rules is either unnecessary or futile.
Some would say that, to the extent that globalisation involves economic interchange, we can simply
rely on the invisible hand of the free market, and that therefore rules will not be necessary. The vision,
for  those  who  hold  this  view,  is  of  an  Adam Smith  world  in  which  everyone  pursues  their  own
individual self-interest but at the same time achieves society’s goals, with no more than a Walrasian
auctioneer to organise the process. This is, I suspect, the sort of world envisaged by Thomas Friedman
(1999) when he talks about the “Golden Straitjacket” - the set of rules which globalisation imposes on
participants. But what we know from experience with domestic markets is that every transaction and
every market is governed by a complex set of rules. Sometimes these are set down by governments,
but where they are not, the participants themselves find it advantageous to define a set of rules (in this,
the  example  that  springs  to  mind  is  futures  markets,  where  the  government  has  left  these  largely
unregulated  but  the  participants  need  to  define  their  relationships  with  each  other  by  quite
comprehensive rules). Sport, too, provides analogies - there are no games that are a total free-for-all,
but each game tries to find a sensible mix of rules which will allow individual talents to come to the
fore (a level playing field), team spirit and skills to be rewarded, the challenges to be appropriately
demanding, and for the “best man to win”.
Some see the effort to develop rules as futile. They argue that in a world of sovereign states, it is very
difficult to impose a set of binding rules which go beyond the realm of any one government. There is
much force in this argument, and the only counter is to say that, one way or another (either through
agreements between governments or informally-developed rules), there are already a complex (if not
comprehensive) set of international rules in a wide variety of areas. International cooperation on postal
services, telecommunications, and (less successfully) airlines are all relevant examples. The feasibility
of developing these further will depend on the nature of the rules required. Some rules will benefit all
parties (common sense or “win/win” rules), and agreement on these should be possible. Such cases are
not trivial - there are many examples where agreement benefits all: I see these as analogous to the rule
which determines which side of the road cars will travel on in a particular country - it does not matter
much which side, but it is important that everyone  has  a  clearly-understood  set  of  rules  which  they
stick  to.  For  those  with  a  sporting  bent,  the  examples  might  be  the  uniformity  of  sporting  codes
internationally: everyone plays soccer to the same set of rules, because it works better that way. These
are  the  easy  cases,  which  do  not  involve  serious  distributional  issues,  where  the  rules  determine
winners  and  losers.  But  even  with  thorny  distributional  issues,  domestic  jurisdictions  successfully
arbitrate  over  distribution  and  property  rights.  While  rules  of  this  nature  will  be  intrinsically  much
1
BIS Review 55/2000
harder to formulate and enforce internationally, the domestic political process shows that it is possible
to achieve general community acceptance of such rules (even when they discriminate or disadvantage
a  particular  group  in  the  community).  The  same  needs  exist  internationally:  only  the  process  is
deficient.
Technology and the global imperative
Not only is globalisation bringing countries closer together and integrating them more fully, but the
nature of technology is ensuring that the goods (and, increasingly, services) being traded are a bad fit
for  the  Adam Smith  free-market  model  (or  the  Ricardian  cloth-for-wine  model).  The  old  economy,
with its bales of wool and slabs of steel, is being replaced by an economy in which services are much
more  important,  and  in  which  information  goods  or  knowledge  goods  are  far  more  important  in
consumers’ purchases, and are readily internationally traded. The central characteristic of these goods,
which takes them outside the bounds of the simple free-market equilibrium model, is that the marginal
cost is much less than the average cost. This not only applies to “weightless” knowledge goods, but for
many physical goods, the cost of producing the first is  enormous  (research  and  “tooling  up”  costs),
while  the  cost  of  producing  another  unit  is  minimal  (eg pharmaceuticals).  The  usual  rules  of
economics  are  either  inapplicable  or  their  application  is  vastly  more  complicated.  No  longer  will  a
producer increase output until marginal cost equals price. Under old-fashioned goods, the main effort
by the producer is to make them more cheaply through more efficient use of capital and labour inputs.
But for goods whose marginal cost is low or zero, the producer has to find a way of avoiding selling
goods at marginal cost, because this would leave total costs unmet.
To add to the inconvenient lack-of-fit with the free-market equilibrium model, information goods and
many of the new service goods have the characteristics of public goods: in the jargon, they are both
non-rival and non-excludable - one person’s consumption does not diminish the availability for others,
and it is difficult or impossible to exclude one person from consuming these goods. Add to this the
idea of networking goods (where the number of consumers of the network increases the benefit to each
of them, such as a telephone system), and the greater opportunities for “winner-takes-all”  outcomes
(where  the  world-renown  sport  or  entertainment  star  displaces  all  the  local  heroes),  and  the  market
dynamic differs greatly from the textbook model.
These characteristics force producers in two important directions - towards creating some elements of
monopoly attaching to their production, and to seek larger and larger markets. Larry Summers (2000,
p 2)  captures  the  first  point  this  way:  “The  constant  pursuit  of  that  monopoly  power  becomes  the
central driving thrust of the new economy.” On the second, Zuckerman (1998, p 20), in triumphalist
mode, says: “On the brink of the 21st century, the United States is at a point reminiscent of its entry
into the twentieth. … Today, of course, the new frontier is the global economy.”
There  is  a  common  belief  that  the  most  obvious  manifestation  of  new  technology -  the  Internet -
operates in a world without rules. The Economist (2000a, p 77) put it this way: “There is nothing like
an absence of regulation for stimulating innovation. Such was the creed of early Internet enthusiasts.
The myth that the Internet has thrived only because it is anarchic is now firmly entrenched.” But The
Economist  goes  on  to  note  that  even  the  anarchic  Internet  is  subject  to  myriad  rules:  “In  fact,
cyberspace is highly organised and even regulated, and not just for technical standards.”1
This  sounds  very  “New  Economy”.  Just  how  new  these  concepts  are  remains  a  moot  point.  For
instance,  Thomas Jefferson  gave  probably  the  best  description  of  the  public  good  nature  of
information  when  he  said  “He  who  receives  an  idea  from  me,  receives  instruction  himself  without
lessening mine; as he who lights his taper at mine, receives light without darkening me.” (quoted by
Summers  (2000,  p 2)).  Some  of  the  characteristics  of  the  New  Economy  are  variants  on  the  old
“economies of scale”. But this does not diminish the motivation of producers to become monopolists.
1 And, of course, the Internet began as a public-sector (US Defence Department) project.
BIS Review 55/2000
2
Whether  or  not  these  concepts  are  an  example  of  old  wine  in  new  bottles  is  beside  the  point:  the
powerful dynamic of globalisation is clear in the figures. World trade has grown at more than twice
the pace of GDP growth for decades, and foreign direct investment rose six-fold during the decade to
1996 (compared  with  a  mere  doubling  of  domestic investment in  the  same  period).  Faced  with this
reality, we have to find a set of rules which allows and encourages these low-marginal-cost goods to
be produced (the development costs have to be recouped) without the dead-weight costs of monopoly.
We need a set of rules which provides a fair and efficient international game.2
If the reaction of the individual producer (the quasi monopolist) is to defend and enlarge his monopoly
power,  then  we  see  this  same  tendency  among  nations  to  pursue  their  own  narrow  self-interest.
Hal Varian (1999) quotes a neat example from US history of how perceived self-interest was pursued,
and also how the incentives might change over time, altering the rules. The United States refused to
extend  copyright  to  international  authors  until  the  late  19th century,  being  a  large  (free-riding)
consumer of the books which had been written elsewhere, particularly in England. As the balance of
American authorship changed, the United States finally granted copyright protection to international
authors (as well as its own), but in order to continue to provide  protection to  American  typesetters,
insisted  that  this  copyright  protection  extend  only  to  those  foreign  works  that  were  typeset  in  the
United States. This provision remained until the mid 1960s.
While we have noted that where governments do not lay down rules, private individuals will tend to
work out their own set of rules, perhaps the most interesting cases are where individual producers have
managed to set the rules and then coopt the state to enforce their rules. At one level, one might ask
why our own authorities should prevent us from buying fake brand-name designer-goods, and pirated
CDs and software, when the main beneficiary of the higher prices we currently pay is a foreigner. This
is obviously a controversial area, and before I get into trouble here, I should also acknowledge that as
soon as we admit that there are legitimate things such as intellectual property rights, then there is a
strong  case  for  getting  the  state’s  apparatus  to  defend  these,  in  the  same  way  that  it  defends  other
property  rights  such  as  our  cars  and  our  houses.  But  having  acknowledged  the  importance  of  the
concept of intellectual property rights, the unanswered issue then is exactly what value we should put
on these. When I go to buy a copy of Microsoft Windows for $200, say, is this the “correct” price, in
the sense of giving an appropriate incentive for software producers to go on producing software and
selling it in Australia? There is clearly a powerful case for such protection (to reward and encourage
innovation),  but  one  would  have  more  faith  in  the  economic  rationale  behind  this  if  it  were  not  so
heavily  based  on legislation  and  rules  from  the  horse-and-buggy  era.  Is  the  duration of  a  patent,  as
legislated for the steam age, still appropriate for the electronic age? Should the idea of a patent be so
wide as to allow, for example, proprietary control of an industry standard?
I find this a fascinating area, and could be drawn into this debate on whether patent protection should
be provided for general ideas (the classic example is Amazon’s protection for the idea of “single-click
purchasing”), but this would take me too far afield.
I have strayed well outside the usual territory of central bankers, and I am going to get back, now, onto
familiar ground - to discuss the New International Financial Architecture. But I want to key off from
the  generalities  discussed  so  far:  that  successful  globalisation  will  require  a  set  of  rules  no  less
complex than the rules which govern domestic economies. These rules will have to address the strong
monopolistic dynamic of the New Economy and the self-interested motivation of individual countries.
These  rules  have  to  be  hammered  out  under  the  most  difficult  of  circumstances,  where  there  is  no
2 While some of the rules will be directed at these New Economy characteristics, other rules should be aimed at enhancing
competition  and  all  the  elements  which  go  with  a  well-functioning  market  system.  So  the  general  thrust  of  the  WTO
towards  greater  opening-up  of  international  trade  and  the  policies  embodied  in  the  “Washington  Consensus”
(deregulation  and  opening-up  of  markets)  is,  of  course,  still  very  important.  Some  fine  distinctions  are  needed  here:
deregulation does not mean “no rules”: as detailed, intrusive, prescriptive regulations are relaxed, they should be replaced
by general rules-of-the-game. This distinction may seem subtle, but it is the one which applied to the process of domestic
financial deregulation in Australia: as the old prescriptive rules were dismantled, they had to be replaced by the broad
framework of prudential supervision.
3
BIS Review 55/2000
well-established  political  process  to  adjudicate  between  rival  claims  and  achieve  some  kind  of
consensus. Nevertheless, we have to try to do this, because if we do not, the rules will be hammered
out  by  others,  and  not  necessarily  in  our  best  interests.  Again,  I  would  refer  back  to  the
Thomas Friedman idea that a Golden Straitjacket has been developed (and will be further developed)
and that countries will, to a greater or lesser degree, have to adjust to it, like it or not. The need is to
find  some  kind  of  decision-making  process  (because,  after  all,  the  Golden  Straitjacket  is  not  the
product of some impersonal Adam Smith free market process) to write (and right) the rules governing
the financial relationships between countries. The post-war period produced the Bretton-Woods rules -
a  great  improvement  on  the  gold  standard.  The  motivation  which  produced  the  Bretton-Woods
institutions (the IMF and the World Bank) has been lost, but needs to be regained if we are to achieve
an appropriate New Financial Architecture.
Rules and the Asian crisis
The Asian crisis revealed significant weaknesses in the rules governing international capital flows, and
those relevant to the international response to a crisis:
• 
the IMF is seen, by many of us, to have been misguided in aspects of its response, at least to
some of the countries in crisis (and here I am thinking in particular of Indonesia). A better
deliberative process might have eased this problem;
 the  international  discussion  and  decision-making  process  seemed  quite  unrepresentative,
with  many  of  the  rules  being  formed  in  quite  narrow  groups  such  as  G7  and  G10.3  Even
where there are wider groups such as the IMF itself, the debate was dominated by one (or a
few) voices. As the crisis developed, a more representative body (G22) was formed, which
did  important  work  not  so  much  in  the  resolution  of  the  crisis  as  it  was  occurring,  but  in
preparing for the re-writing of some of the rules.
hedge funds;
bailing-in the private sector (also known as “burden-sharing”);
the volatility of capital flows and what might be done about this.
I have talked elsewhere about some of the issues which required new or different rules, and the real
progress which has been made in addressing these issues.4 These issues are:
• 
• 
• 
I  will  not  go  over  this territory  again,  but  I  would just  record  that  in  each  of  these  areas  there  is  a
domestic analogue, governed by rules which are accepted as beneficial. Within domestic jurisdictions,
each  country  has  a  set  of  bankruptcy  and  liquidation  rules,  which  acknowledge  that  things  can  go
sufficiently wrong for a business that it makes sense for the enterprise to be wound up, prior contracts
rescinded,  and  provides  equitable rules to  govern  this  process.  Similarly,  domestic  rules  govern  the
behaviour and obligations of mutual funds. And in many countries there are arrangements, in extremis,
for lender-of-last-resort for core institutions of the financial sector.  In  each  of these  cases,  the  rules
have been devised because the untrammelled working of the free market does not produce an optimal
(or even acceptable) result.
Perhaps the most important success coming out of the discussions on international architecture is the
more representative network of discussion (and perhaps even decision-making) bodies:
• 
the IMF has done a certain amount of introspection and will do more;
3 G10 - in its manifestation as the Basel Committee on Banking - provides a neat example of rule-writing. It set down the
Basel Rules on Bank Capital, which became the rules for all banks worldwide, even though they had been written for
G10 banks.
4
See Grenville (1999a, 1999b).
BIS Review 55/2000
4
  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (the  central  banks’  international  coordinator)  has
greatly  enlarged  its  membership  (in  particular  from  Asia)  and  has  swung  decisively  away
from its earlier European orientation;
while G22 was disbanded (largely because of pressure from the smaller Europeans who felt
excluded  in  the  new  process),  a  worthy  successor -  G20 -  has  been  set  up.  The  Financial
Stability  Forum  has  been  created  to  coordinate  prudential  rule-making.  The  FSF  has  the
technical  expertise  and  representation  to  formulate  rules  and  guidelines  for  the  financial
sector, and G20 has the clout to put them in place. It is now up to the various participants
(including Australia, which is represented on both the FSF and the G20) to make sure that
G20 becomes an effective forum for achieving consensus among a core group of countries.
This battle is far from won. I said earlier how difficult it is to develop international rules, beyond any
individual sovereign jurisdiction, and with the hope of enforcing them. But we may be able to make
some  progress  on  those  rules  which  are,  drawing  on  my  earlier  distinction,  common  sense  or
“win/win” - the Basel Capital Accord (which lays down prudential rules for banks) was of this nature.
I should note, here, that it is not necessary, in gaining acceptance of rules, for every single player to be
a winner always. The sporting analogy may be helpful: all that is required is for the players to agree to
abide by a set of rules. Some players may “spit the dummy” or “take their bat home”: but most accept
that, in the long run, it is sensible to stick to a set of rules under which they sometimes lose. We may
even be able to find some forum for trade-offs where the issues are those more difficult ones involving
distributional decisions. If success is to be achieved, it is more likely to come from different sets of
rules  reached  between  experts  in  individual  fields  of  expertise,  rather  than  one  great  centralised
rule-making process (like the UN).5 We already see international forums which grapple with specific
problems - WTO is one example, although it is not an unalloyed success.
In any rule-making process, there is a danger of over-prescription. Within domestic jurisdictions, this
is  an  ever-present  concern -  that  governments  are  asked  to  use  regulation  to  fix  every  problem.
Domestically,  there  is  now  healthy  scepticism  that  rules  can  provide  the  universal  fix-all.  In  the
international  arena,  the  starting  point  is  not  one  of  over-regulation.  Widespread  acceptance  of  the
starting  point  given  by  the  Washington  Consensus  (“deregulate  and  open-up  internationally”)  and
acceptance  of  an  international  version  of  the  medicos’  dictum  “first  do  no  harm”  should  avoid  the
mistakes of over-zealousness. Part of a good rule-making regime is a recognition that parsimony is a
virtue and that some rules are bad - where vested interests or misguided lobby groups gain influence in
the process, we can end up with the wrong rules.
Conclusion
My  starting  point  was  that  globalisation  has  been  enormously  beneficial  for  Australia,  and  for  the
world. Even if we cannot design a perfect set of rules to govern its development, it will go on being
enormously beneficial, and most will share in that process. But this does not in any way diminish the
importance of trying to ensure that the rules are appropriate both in their technical aspects (providing
the right incentives for further innovation and dissemination of ideas), and in an income-distribution
sense,  both  between countries and  within  countries.  During  the  Asian  crisis,  Larry Summers  (1998)
argued that we would not wish to restrict the use of airline travel just because of the occasional plane
crash, and by analogy that we would not want to slow globalisation. This seems to me to be correct,
but  to  emphasise  the  wrong  issue:  we  respond  to  crashes  (and  crises)  by  putting  in  place  rules,
regulations and procedures to diminish the chance of a recurrence, and to be better prepared should
that eventuality arrive. Australia cannot, as a medium-sized player on the international stage, hope to
dominate the outcomes or achieve all its objectives. But we need to be at the table, to speak up, and to
work actively for a better set of international rules, not only for the set of issues encompassed by the
international financial architecture, but for the entire gamut of the globalisation process.
5 Although the UN is attempting to coordinate international patents - see The Economist (2000b, p 99).
5
BIS Review 55/2000
References
Friedman, Thomas L (1999), The Lexus and the Olive Tree, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York.
Grenville,  S  A  (1999a),  “Financial  Crises  and  Globalisation”,  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  Bulletin,
August (http://www.rba.gov.au).
Grenville, S A (1999b), “The International Reform Agenda: Unfinished Business”, Reserve Bank of
Australia Bulletin, December (http://www.rba.gov.au).
Summers, L (1998), “Go with the flow”, Financial Times, 11 March.
Summers,  L  H  (2000),  “The  New  Wealth  of  Nations”,  remarks  by  Treasury  Secretary
Lawrence H Summers,  Hambrecht  &  Quist  Technology  Conference,  San Francisco,  10 May
(http://www.ustreas.gov/press/releases/ps617.htm).
The Economist (2000a), “Regulating the Internet: The Consensus Machine”, 10 June, pp 77-79.
The Economist (2000b), “Patent Law: Going Global”, 17 June, p 99.
Varian,  H  R  (1999),  “Markets  for  Information  Goods”,  Bank  of  Japan  IMES  Discussion  Paper
No 99-E-9.
Zuckerman, M B (1998), “A Second American Century”, Foreign Affairs, May/June, 77(3), pp 18-31.
BIS Review 55/2000
6
