Mr O’Connell gives a review on the euro and
the European Central Bank and makes a few
brief remarks on the world economy
Statement  by  Mr  Maurice  O’Connell,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the  Irish
Parliament’s Joint Committee on European Affairs, Dublin, on 23 February 2000.
 Before I speak about the euro and the European Central Bank, may I make a few brief remarks on the
world  economy.  The  outlook  is  quite  positive.  The  US  economy  has  surprised  even  the  most
optimistic of observers. Growth was of the order of 4% last year and inflation remains low. Europe
appears to have turned the corner and to be on a path of stable, if unspectacular, growth. The European
economy should expand by 3% this year and this should be sustained in 2001. The Far East generally
is recovering, though the recovery in Japan appears to be very tentative.
As always, there are risks. In the US, factors such as the persistent balance of payments deficit or a
declining  stock  market  could  undermine  success.  Europe  must  address  vigorously  the  structural
deficiencies  that  are  a  dead  hand  on  the  economy.  Japan  has  yet  to  demonstrate  convincingly  that
reforms, including consolidation of the financial sector, are beginning to work.
At the international level generally, the succession of economic crises in recent years has prompted the
authorities  to  review  comprehensively  the  whole  international  financial  architecture.  Central  to  this
response have been efforts to improve the quality and availability of economic and financial data and
strengthen financial regulation. This is underpinned by institutional developments, such as the creation
of two new bodies - the Financial Stability Forum and the G20. This is not today’s subject. I mention
it, however, because there will be changes ahead which will enforce new standards of regulation and
transparency worldwide.
The euro
It is against this background that we should assess the progress of the euro. The new currency is now
in  its second  year.  It  is an  accepted  element  of  the  international  financial  system,  being  the  second
largest currency - second only to the US dollar and ahead of the yen. The euro area has an internal
market of about 290 million people, some 20 million more than the US. Exports from the area account
for almost 20% of world exports. In 1999 the euro became the most popular currency for new bonds in
international markets, accounting for some 45%, compared with 42% in US dollars.
While  the  launch  of  the  euro  has  been  a  remarkable  success,  the  first  year  has  not  been  without
difficulty. During 1999, it weakened by 14% against the dollar, while, in overall terms, the effective
exchange  rate  was  down  by  about  13%.  Currency  developments  largely  reflected  an  unexpected
divergence in economic performance between the US and the euro area. Growth in the US economy
accelerated beyond expectations in 1999, while the expected recovery in the euro area economy was
slow. Stock markets in the US lent further support to the dollar while outward investment from  the
euro  area  weighed  on  the  euro.  It  was  also  weighed  down  by  the  impression  that  structural
impediments were retarding economic activity in Europe. Besides, it did not help matters that, in the
early  days,  there  was  a  variety  of  spokespersons  with  different  prescriptions  for  the  new  currency.
Most  commentators accept  that  the  currency  is now  significantly  undervalued and that  the  tide  will
turn.
The  question  is  sometimes  asked  whether  the  absence  of  political  integration  is  a  drawback  to  the
currency. Perhaps there is some disadvantage; all other major international currencies are underwritten
by political union. I would not wish to exaggerate the significance of this.
1
BIS Review 27/2000
The integration of financial markets within the euro area is going ahead at different speeds in different
markets.  While  the  money  market  has  been  unified  quickly,  the  bond  market  is  still  not  fully
integrated. Market structures differ and most of the smaller countries do not have sufficient issue sizes
to achieve benchmark status. Investors have a preference for the larger markets, where there is greater
liquidity. This is not to our advantage.
Equity markets are least advanced in terms of integration. For many stocks, national considerations are
still important. In time, however, trading may become concentrated in a small number of larger centres
and the existence of small equity markets may be put in doubt. In this context, the ability of national
markets  to  be  competitive,  especially  in  terms  of  transaction  costs,  will  be  a  very  important  factor.
EMU has brought these issues of competition to the fore and increased the urgency of resolving them
successfully.  These  developments  are  a  source  of  concern  to  us  because  of  the  tendency  towards
centralisation.
The  European  Central  Bank  is  realising  its  primary  objective,  which  is  to  maintain  price  stability
within the euro area. Although the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) rose by 1.7% in the
year to December 1999, this was boosted by a rise of over 10% in energy prices. While the Bank does
not  target  an  exchange  rate  for  the  US  dollar  or  any  other  currency,  it  would  be  entirely  wrong  to
imply that it pursues an attitude of benign neglect or is indifferent to the exchange rate. A strong euro
is in Europe’s interest and in Ireland’s interest. The more stable it is at home, the better its prospects
on the international stage.
Credibility is never easy. In the normal course, it is built on a good track record. One obvious measure
of  credibility  for  a  currency  is  long-term  interest  rates.  In  this  respect  the  euro  is  faring  well.  It  is
evident that the financial markets believe that stability will be maintained within the euro area.
Ireland and the euro
The Irish economy is just one percent of the total euro area economy. It follows that Irish experience
will not greatly influence nor dictate policy. Our experience up to now has been decidedly different
from that of the euro area generally, because of the scale of economic growth here in recent years. As
a consequence, we have had to adjust to a monetary policy which, in the short term, is not well suited
to Irish conditions. There is nothing that we can do about this in terms of tightening monetary policy.
We  cannot  raise  interest  rates  unilaterally  to  suit  our  circumstances.  While  euro  interest  rates  have
risen  in  recent  months,  they  remain  substantially  below  what  the  Central  Bank  would  consider  as
appropriate  here  in  the  present  buoyant  conditions.  There  is  no  longer  an  Irish  exchange  rate.  We
cannot  impose  formal  ceilings  or  restrictions  on  the  growth  in  credit,  which  is  running  at  a  very
uncomfortable  rate.  We  do  require  the  lending  institutions,  however,  to  observe  good  prudential
standards.
As monetary policy is no longer determined to suit Irish conditions, our economy is more vulnerable
than before to overheating and the consequences of this - inflation and a loss of competitiveness. The
Central Bank’s ability to take corrective action is severely restricted. A greater onus is now placed on
other factors, such  as fiscal  and  incomes  policies.  In  particular,  there  is  a  greater  need  to use fiscal
policy to contain strong demand. Continuing economic success must not blind us to the reality that we
are  in  a  new  regime  which,  sooner  or  later,  may  demand  from  us  disciplines  to  which  we  are
unaccustomed.
Because of the uncertainties linked to sterling, it would be to our advantage if the UK were to join the
euro area sooner rather than later. The indications are, however, that the UK is unlikely to become a
member at an early stage. Besides, if it should decide to join, it will presumably have to satisfy entry
requirements in relation to the exchange rate and central bank independence. Sterling has been very
strong against the euro, contrary to earlier expectations. This is to our advantage in the short term to
the  extent  that  it  facilitates  exports.  It  also  raises  the  prospect  of  importing  inflation.  Taking  a
longer-term  perspective,  we  need  to  be  prepared  for  the  possibility  that  in  due  course  a  declining
sterling may intensify competition.
BIS Review 27/2000
2
European Central Bank
Decisions on monetary policy issues in the euro area rest with the Governing Council of the European
Central Bank. Within the requirement of price stability, the Bank also has a duty to facilitate growth
and employment. Stability has been defined by the Bank as an inflation rate not exceeding 2% in the
medium term. The Bank also has a reference value for monetary growth as part of its overall strategy.
I said already that the Bank does not target an exchange rate for the euro. Obviously, if the rate were
seriously out of line with economic realities or if there were extreme volatility, there would be some
corrective action. This would not arise in normal circumstances.
In the European Central Bank there is a genuine commitment to transparency. This is reflected in the
extensive published information and in the regular and detailed press briefings. The President attends
before  the  European  Parliament.  He  is  also  present,  as  required,  at  meetings  of  EcoFin  and  the
Euro-11 Ministers. Some members of the Governing Council attend periodically before their national
parliaments. It would serve no useful purpose, in my opinion, to publish minutes of Council meetings
and  the  voting  records  of  individual  members.  This  could  inhibit  discussion  and  possibly  impose
undue pressures on members to reflect a national viewpoint. This would be contrary to the spirit and
the letter of economic and monetary union.
Reserves
On  the  previous occasion  that  I  came  before  this  Committee,  I  referred  to  the  perception  that  there
would be a large surplus of free reserves when we joined EMU. This is a rather complex subject. The
position is as follows.
We  have  already  contributed  467  million  euro  to  the  capital  and  foreign  reserves  of  the  European
Central  Bank.  In  practice,  we  retain  and  manage  these  funds  here.  They  do  not  belong  to  us;  they
belong  to  the  ECB.  In  addition,  we  hold  and  manage  our  own  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  euro
assets which, at the end of 1999 totalled nearly 7½ billion euro. On top of this, we also have assets
arising largely from the conduct of the money market. In short, the total assets of the Bank amount to
12.75 billion euro. For the greater part, these are matched by liabilities in the form of currency, bank
deposits and Government deposits. The excess of assets over liabilities is represented by capital and
internal reserves. These totalled 2½ billion euro at end-1999. This is the figure to which the term “free
reserves” is applied. This is the capital which supports the Bank. It is also a buffer against changes in
the value of external reserves, arising from movements in the euro vis-à-vis other currencies. Relative
to the size of our balance sheet, this figure is at the lower end of the scale vis-à-vis other euro area
national central banks.
The national central banks in the Eurosystem no longer conduct foreign exchange intervention. It is
fair to ask, therefore, whether they now have surplus external assets. There is a recognition that this
question should be addressed in due course. These reserves are subject to call by the European Central
Bank. In all likelihood it will make a further call for additional capital and foreign reserves. It would
seem preferable therefore that the issue of superfluous reserves be settled at the general European level
rather than taking unilateral action.
Our external reserves are denominated, for the greater part in US dollars and to a much lesser extent in
sterling  and  yen.  There  is  also  a  small  quantity  of  gold.  The  reserves  are  invested  in  deposits  and
securities and are managed by reference to an independent benchmark. The Central Bank has a very
good record in managing large-scale funds. In respect of 1998 we earned a surplus of 225 million euro
(IR£177  million),  mainly  from  investment  of  reserves  and  interest.  Of  this,  193  million  euro  was
transferred to the Exchequer.
Banknotes and coin
To most people the euro probably remains largely academic until it is available in their pockets. It is
still considered a currency in transition. In less than two years from now the new banknotes and coin
will have begun to replace national currencies. The impact will be huge at local level; immediately the
3
BIS Review 27/2000
euro  will  become  the  concern  of  everybody.  May  I  remind  you  that  the  largest  banknote  will  be
500 euro (roughly £400) and the smallest coin will be one cent (which is 4/5 of a penny). There will be
seven banknotes and eight coins.
Our  production arrangements  are  already  well in  hand.  In  recent  years  we  have invested  more  than
£30  million in new plant and machinery. Coin production is under way since last autumn; we plan to
begin the production of euro banknotes in April. We must provide, for our own initial needs, almost
200 million euro notes and over 900 million coins. We also must maintain an adequate supply of Irish
notes and coin up to the end of next year. Despite the competition from electronic money, the demand
for notes and coin continues to well exceed the growth in the economy. There have been some reports
in recent months about a shortage of coin. There are 2,400 million coins in circulation. Last year we
issued 236 million, which represents 60 additional coins for every person in the country.
Overall,  the  entry  into  EMU  has  had  a  profound  impact  on  organisation  and  work  practices  in  the
Central  Bank  of  Ireland.  The  euro  is  now  the  currency  of  the  State.  The  Irish  pound  is  now  a
denomination of the euro and it is no longer traded on the foreign exchange market. There is constant
daily interaction with the European Central Bank. Our personnel serve on a wide range of European
Central Bank committees. The Eurosystem is quite unique; while policy is determined collectively in
Frankfurt, it is implemented on a decentralised basis by the national central banks. It is important that
this emphasis on decentralisation is not eroded over time.
The Irish economy
I have said earlier that within the euro area Ireland continues to be the grand exception because of our
rate of economic growth. Studies undertaken by the Central Bank suggest that, for the medium term,
we have the capacity to sustain a growth rate of the order of 4-5%. This is about twice the estimated
potential growth rate for most European economies. The exceptional growth over and above this for
the past few years was made possible by a high degree of slack in the economy and in particular, by a
rather  low  employment  rate.  This  good  performance  contributed  to  a  welcome  increase  in  living
standards and employment. Now, however, there is mounting evidence of overheating in the domestic
economy. This is reflected in exceptionally rapid increases in property prices, unprecedented demand
for  credit,  labour  shortages,  higher  inflation  in  the  services  sector  and  chronic  congestion  in  the
physical infrastructure.
During the past year, there has been a marked disimprovement in our inflation performance, both in
absolute terms and by reference to our main trading partners. In January, the rate of inflation here, as
measured by the HICP, the benchmark index for euro area comparisons, was 4.4%. This was two and
a half times the rate prevailing in the euro area as a whole. This puts us at the top of the league table.
Some of the rise in headline inflation can be ascribed to once-off or temporary factors - such as the rise
in excise duty on cigarettes, higher oil prices and weakness in the euro. There is, however, a strong
rise in underlying inflation which for the most part reflects the existence of strong demand.
Nobody claims that inflation here must be at precisely the same level as in the euro area generally. It is
reasonable to expect some differential at this time in view of our economic conditions but there are
obvious limits. The point I want to emphasise is that, if present trends persist, we may have a sharp
loss of competitiveness on our hands.
One of the inevitable consequences of an integrated European economy and a single currency is the
strong tendency to centralise financial activities in the larger centres and an increase in cross-border
competition.  This  is  a  threat  to  the  Irish  financial  services  industry,  which  has  been  expanding
vigorously  in  recent  years.  It  is  compounded  by  the  pressures  within  the  industry  for  mergers  and
acquisitions, which are driven by new technology and the perceived benefits of economics of scale. I
would  like  to  believe  that  in  ten  years  from  now  we  will  continue  to  have  a  vibrant  indigenous
financial services industry. I would be optimistic that the International Financial Services Centre will
continue to grow and evolve as an integral part of our financial system.
BIS Review 27/2000
4
Conclusion
After years of preparation, EMU is now a reality. In time, we will undoubtedly benefit from being part
of an economy whose currency has a leading international status. We will benefit also from internal
price stability and the security  that  this brings.  We  must  not lose sight  of the reality,  however,  that
membership of the euro area also imposes new disciplines, which will be put to the test at some stage.
There is no provision in the Eurosystem for a bail-out in the event that any member encounters serious
economic difficulties. We can no longer fall back on the exchange rate or interest rates. We can no
longer  control credit. These  options  are  gone.  Having  said  this,  the  advantages  of  being  part  of  the
euro area should well outweigh the disadvantages in the long term. I am confident that we will come
to realise this more and more as time goes on.
5
BIS Review 27/2000
