Mr Clementi elucidates the core purposes of the Bank of England
and gives his thoughts on the UK economy
Speech by Mr David Clementi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the Cardiff Business Club
Dinner, Cardiff, on 28 February 2000.
 Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a pleasure to be here in Cardiff. I last visited the city in November for the
final  of  the  Rugby  World  Cup.  I  admired  the  new  stadium,  loved  the  atmosphere  and  enjoyed  the
game. Of course the big match is coming up this Saturday, where the men in white will be seeking
revenge for the damage done to them last year in the unlikely setting of Wembley Stadium. We can
safely leave the  debate  on the  match to the  newspapers,  sure in  the  knowledge  that they  will  cover
huge  amounts  of  column  inches  on  the  likely  outcome  by  the  time  we  get  to  kick-off.  Instead  this
evening I would like to outline the changes in the Bank since independence in 1997.
The  Bank  may  trace its  origins  back  to  1694; but it has  been  through  a  period  of  profound  change
since 1997 when the Labour Government was elected: the arrival of monetary independence and with
it  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee;  the  transfer  of  debt  management  to  the  new  Debt  Management
Office;  and  the  merger  of  the  Bank’s  banking  supervision  department  into  the  Financial  Services
Authority.
On  the  face  of  it,  these  add  up  to  a  substantial  change  to  the  Bank’s  responsibilities;  and  to  our
operations and staffing needs. But in fact our underlying objectives as a central bank - what we term
our  three  core  purposes  -  have  remained  remarkably  unchanged.  These  are,  first,  maintaining  the
integrity and value of the currency; secondly, maintaining the stability of  the  financial  system;  and,
thirdly,  seeking  to  ensure  the  effectiveness  of  the  UK’s  financial  services.  I  would  like  to  say
something about each of the three core purposes in turn.
Core purpose: monetary policy
As regards monetary stability, as you all know, the Bank was given monetary independence in May
1997 when the Monetary Policy Committee was established to set interest rates. The structure of the
Committee was later set out in the Bank of England Act 1998 and the Bank’s independence in pursuit
of monetary policy is enshrined there. To quote directly, our objective is “to maintain price stability
and, subject to that, to support the economic policy of HM Government including its objectives  for
growth and employment”. The balance implied in this objective is important. First,although the Bank
has  operational  independence,  the  inflation  target  -  RPIX  (that  is,  retail  prices  excluding  mortgage
interest payments) of 2.5% - is set by the Government and confirmed in the Budget each year. And
this target is symmetrical. We on the MPC are as concerned about inflation being below 2.5% as we
are  about  it  being  above  2.5%.  Indeed,  if  inflation  is  more  than  1%  above  or  below  target,  the
Governor is required to write an open letter to the Chancellor to explain why. But the accountability of
the  MPC  is  much  wider  than  this.  It  has  to  answer  to  Court  (the  Bank’s  board  made  up  largely  of
non-executive  directors)  and  to  the  Treasury  Select  Committee.  But  of  equal  importance,  through
publication of the Inflation Report and the minutes of its monthly meetings, the MPC answers to the
public, setting out in some detail the decisions it has made.
And this accountability is personal. The votes of each of the nine individual members are recorded in
the minutes. As you might imagine, knowing that one’s voting record will be subject to public scrutiny
helps wonderfully to concentrate the mind. But we think it is important that differences of view are
properly  reflected;  and  nor  is  it  altogether  surprising  that  differences  of  view  exist  given  the
uncertainties in economic forecasting.
1
BIS Review 19/2000
Transparency is another key ingredient of the new framework. Holding MPC meetings on a regular
monthly cycle, with minutes published within two weeks, contrasts with the more ad hoc approach of
the past, Chancellors announcing changes with little or no notice and with limited explanation.
The minutes not only record the discussion within the MPC and explain the decision reached but also
list the data that the Committee has considered. The Committee relies primarily on official statistics
but  these  are  often  produced  on  aggregate  basis  and  with  a  lag.  The  Bank,  therefore,  relies  to  a
considerable extent on its established network of twelve Regional Agents who have the role of finding
out  from  local  businesses  and  firms  their  views  on  the  state  of  the  economy.  The  Agents  maintain
direct  contact  with  around  7,000  businesses  across  the  UK  and  provide  a  monthly  report  for  each
region  to  the  MPC.  Where  there  are  particular  concerns,  the  MPC  also  commissions  the  Agents  to
carry out inquiries on specific issues.
Because of the time it takes for changes in interest rates to impact on inflation, it is perhaps too early
to judge the success of these new arrangements. We could argue that we have made a reasonable start,
given the period of sustained growth with low inflation and falling unemployment the UK has enjoyed
since the new monetary framework was put in place.  But  a  fairer  measure  of the  MPC’s  success  is
perhaps  the  fall  in  inflation  expectations  since  May  1997  (which  can  be  derived  from  prices  of
government bonds) which has brought the cost of long-term borrowing down to historically low rates.
I think that this provides some measure of the growing credibility of the monetary policy framework;
and  the  expectation  that  we  have  moved  into  an  era  where  we  can  expect  low  and  stable  price
conditions.
Core purpose: financial stability
I  will  say  more  later  about  the  current  position  of  the  UK  economy,  but  first  I  would  like  to  say
something about the other functions of the Bank which are perhaps less familiar than the MPC. The
Bank’s second core purpose is maintaining the stability of the financial system.
The Bank is no longer responsible for the supervision of individual firms but has a clear interest in
ensuring  the financial  system  functions smoothly.  As  the  Asian  Crisis  in  1998  and  the  problems  in
Japan show,  dislocation  of the  financial  system  can  impose  significant  economic  costs  and  it  is  the
Bank’s role, looking at the system as a whole, to identify potential threats and vulnerabilities.
In  some  respects  this  interest  is  integral  to  the  Bank  as  a  central  bank.  For  example,  secure  and
efficient payment and settlement systems are an essential condition for economic  growth,  providing
the  means  for  money  to  flow  between  individuals,  businesses  and  government.  Like  other  essential
services - electricity, water - it is easy to take payment systems for granted. But the amounts involved
are huge: 30mn transactions are processed every day in the UK clearing system, the value of which
totals  over  £800bn  every  week.  These  payments  ultimately  result  in  transfers  between  settlement
banks across accounts which they maintain at the Bank of England.
A failure in the payment system could have an immediate impact on the economy and the Bank has
worked  with  clearing  banks  to  reduce  the  risk  to  the  financial  system,  first  by  the  introduction  of
Real-Time  Gross  Settlement  and  now  by  moving  towards  delivery  versus  payment  in  securities
markets.
Less esoteric, perhaps, is our interest in the financial stability of individual firms and the structure of
the financial system as a whole. While responsibility for individual firms lies with the FSA, the Bank
takes  a  close  interest  in  the  impact  on  the  wider  economy  of  the  regulatory  structure  and  the  links
between individual institutions and markets.
The Bank also has a direct role as lender of last resort. In the event that a bank has liquidity difficulties
that  might  undermine  confidence  in  banks  more  generally,  the  Bank  has  the  power  to  step  in  to
provide support on a temporary basis. But in exercise of this power and in other aspects of financial
stability, the Bank works closely with the FSA and HMT; and this common interest is governed by a
Memorandum  of  Understanding.  The  three  parties  also  meet  monthly  in  a  Standing  Committee  to
BIS Review 19/2000
2
discuss any issues of current concern; and relations with the FSA are further cemented by the fact that
I sit on the FSA Board and Howard Davies is a Member of Court.
One of the major driving forces in financial markets currently is technology. The face of banking is
changing  rapidly,  with  barriers  to  entry  in  particular  markets  and  between  markets  falling  as  first
telephone  banking  and  now  internet  banking  and  e-commerce  impact  on  more  traditional  banking
services.
Technological innovation creates opportunities for integration of services and wider access to markets
that previously did not exist. This can be seen clearly in the movement towards integration of stock
exchanges  and  clearing  houses.  But  more  technology  brings  with  it  more  operational  risk.  One
example is the work involved with preparation for the Millennium date change, in which the Bank was
heavily  involved  in  ensuring  that  the  UK  financial  system  was  ready;  this  work  certainly  brought
home to me the reliance on IT and the huge variety of interconnections between different systems.
While IT networks and improvements in communications have allowed provision of financial services
more  cheaply  and  efficiently,  they  have  also  brought  financial  markets  around  the  world  closer
together.
This  trend  to  globalisation  has  been  beneficial  to  the  UK.  Net  investment  income  and  profits  from
overseas make an increasingly large contribution to the UK balance of payments, going some way to
offset the deficit on traded goods. However, with global markets, shocks in one part of the world are
transmitted more quickly to other financial systems.  The  most  recent  example  was  the  Asian  crisis,
starting in the summer of 1997 in Thailand; and spreading to Korea which had to seek outside support
in  December  of  that  year.  As  turmoil  spread  through  financial  markets  in  the  region,  within  a  year
equity  markets  had  halved  in  value  with  a  similar  depreciation  in  exchange  rates.  Conditions  were
further exacerbated in August 1998 by the default on Russian government debt, fuelling further fears
about emerging market debt. The flight to quality this prompted contributed in turn to the collapse of
one of the large US hedge funds, Long-Term Capital Management.
The  events  of  1997  and  1998  brought  home  the  complex  linkages  between  financial  markets  in  a
global economy. The international community has been active since in putting in place arrangements
for  more  advance  warning  of  risks  to  the  financial  system.  The  accent  has  been  on  improved
disclosure, establishing new international standards for transparency in monetary and financial policies
and for publication of economic and reserves data forcountries to follow; and for firms (in particular,
banks) in developing countries improving standards for corporate financial disclosure. The Bank has
been actively involved in these initiatives. For example, to watch over the financial system, in order to
permit either early warning of an impending crisis or to permit the coordination of a speedy response
to problems, a new body was established, the Financial Stability Forum; and this body brings together
representatives  from  central  banks,  governments  and  regulators  from  most  of  the  major  world
economies.
All this may seem a long way from South Wales but the stability  of  different parts  of  the financial
system, here and overseas, can have a significant impact on what is happening in our back yard, not
least  because  of  the  importance  of  foreign  direct  investment  from  countries  such  as  Korea  into  the
United Kingdom, and particularly here in Wales.
Core purpose: effectiveness of financial services
There  is  a  connection  here  to  the  Bank’s  third  core  purpose  -  promoting  the  efficiency  and
competitiveness of UK financial services.
The Bank has been active in particular in promoting financing for small business. This role dates back
to  1993  in  the  aftermath  of  the  last  recession.  At  the  time  there  was  evidence  of  a  breakdown  in
communication  and  trust  between  small  firms  and  their  finance  providers  which  threatened  the
effectiveness of the provision of finance to this sector of the economy. Since that time, the situation
has improved, in part against a background of economic growth but also with a change in the structure
of  small  business  finance  with  a  move  away  from  overdrafts  towards  some  element  of  fixed-term
3
BIS Review 19/2000
lending. A particular interest has been financing for high technology companies, focusing attention on
the access that technology-based firms have to the equity  they  need  in  their  early  stages. The  Bank
produced its first report in this area in 1996 and has since held an annual forum with regular meetings
with  small  business  groups,  venture  capitalists  and  fund  managers.  Small  business  investment  is
especially relevant for Wales given the ongoing need  to attract  more  knowledge-based  industries  to
replace more traditional sources of investment.
One final area where the Bank has taken an active role is worth mentioning; and that is in assisting the
UK financial sector in its practical preparations for EMU. This was concentrated in the run-up to the
introduction of the euro at the end of 1998 but the UK’s readiness at that time has meant that a large
part  of  cross-border  business  in  euro,  whether  in  bonds  or  equities,  is  transacted  with  the  UK,
particularly  in  London.  The  Bank  continues  to  promote  London’s  merits  as  a  financial  centre  and,
despite EMU, London remains the primary financial centre in Europe.
The UK economy
Let me conclude with some thoughts on the UK economy. With inflation below target and sterling so
strong, whilst the MPC’s recent decision earlier this month to raise rates was expected by the market,
it also attracted some criticism. But if the inflation target is to be met, the MPC cannot afford to ignore
evidence  of  inflationary  pressure  emerging  in  the  economy.  Domestic  demand  is  strong  and  the
economy as a whole is growing above trend (at around 3%); a rate that is unsustainable unless, that is,
UK  productive  capacity  and the trend  rate  of  growth  have  increased,  such  that the  UK  can  enjoy  a
period  of  rapid  non-inflationary  growth  similar  to  the  US.  The  labour  market  is  clearly  tight  with
average earnings rising at close to 5%, even before the large jump in December’s data which we think
may have been influenced by bonuses and Y2K payments. Increases through last year in the price of
oil and other commodities are beginning to feed through the supply chain to producer prices. At the
same time, increases in asset prices - share prices and housing - are fuelling consumption further, not
least  through  the  pick-up  in  mortgage  equity  withdrawal.  Given  the  time  it  takes  for  interest  rate
changes to feed through to inflation, it is important for the MPC to be forward-looking and proactive
in dealing with these threats.
Set against this, sterling’s strength, essentially against the euro since the dollar rate has remained fairly
constant for some time, continues to bear down on some sectors and some regions. Within the MPC
we  are  very  conscious  of  the  resulting  sectoral imbalances  in  the  economy  and  you  may  have  seen
from  the  latest  minutes  that  we  have  discussed  the  issue  at  length.  One  of  the  standard  policy
responses in these circumstances would be a fiscal tightening, but active use of fiscal policy in  this
way is by no means straightforward.
In the circumstances, it is not clear how monetary policy in the short run can help in bringing sterling
down to what we might regard as a more appropriate level. A decision not to have raised rates would
not necessarily have resulted in a fall in sterling. In the context of buoyant  domestic demand  and  a
tight  labour  market  pointing  to  strong  underlying  domestically-generated  inflation,the  market  might
have been left with the expectation that tighter policy had simply been deferred, and this might have
had  the  perverse  effect  of  putting  further  upward  pressure  on  sterling.  Another  possibility  that  the
Committee  considered  was  foreign  exchange  intervention;  but  there  is  no  indication  that  market
support  for  sterling  at  these  levels  is  fragile  and  any  intervention  operation  that  failed  would  be
damaging to the credibility of the Committee and thus of the new UK monetary policy framework.
These were the factors behind the MPC’s decision at the last meeting to raise rates: but it may well be
that there is now an opportunity to wait and see for a period how the economy develops; and this need
not  damage  our  prospects  of  meeting  the  inflation  target;  and  it  might  improve  the  chances  of
continued sustainable growth in output and employment, and, perhaps, of a return of sterling to a more
realistic level.
I would like to finish by thanking the Cardiff Business Club and Sue Camper for providing me with
the opportunity to speak to you tonight. I believe most of you know Sue and the work she does as the
Bank’s Agent in Wales. The Agents play a vital role as a channel of communication not only for the
BIS Review 19/2000
4
Bank  to  explain  more  widely  the  monetary  policy  framework  and  the  reasoning  behind  MPC
decisions; but also to hear the views of others on the economic conditions they are facing. And I am
grateful, on behalf of the MPC, for the support you give her.
5
BIS Review 19/2000
