Mr Noyer discusses “the euro from A to Z”
Speech  delivered  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the
European Union Centre, Sam Nunn School of International Affairs, Atlanta on 14 January 2000.
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure to  speak  to such a  (young)  audience  about  what is,  after all,  the  world’s
youngest and newest currency. As indicated by the title of  my  speech,  I  do  not  intend to  enter into
complex economic and political considerations concerning the pros and cons of the introduction of the
euro under the specific economic and political conditions prevailing in Europe. Rather, I should like to
provide you with a concise overview, from A to Z, of the main elements of the new institutional and
operational  framework  under  which  monetary  policy  is  being  conducted  in  Europe  following  the
introduction of the euro. Nonetheless, I do hope to be able to enhance your understanding of the euro,
both  in  the  broader  context  of  European  integration  and  in  terms  of  the  practical  functioning  and
implications of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) in Europe.
In this context, you will see that there are some similarities between the institutional framework and
conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  the  United  States  and  in  Europe.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  also
substantial  differences,  particularly  with  regard  to  the  political  and  economic  framework  in  which
monetary policy has to operate on your side and our side of the Atlantic.
 The  successful  introduction  of  the  euro  represents  one  of  the  greatest  achievements  in  modern
European economic history and, in order to understand how it came to be that 11 European countries
decided to relinquish their monetary sovereignty and adopt a common currency, one must first look
back, at least briefly, over 50 years of European integration.
The first concrete step towards achieving this goal was taken when the continent lay in ruin following
the Second World War and six countries signed the Treaty of Paris in 1951 establishing the European
Coal and Steel Community (ECSC). This Treaty not only led to the removal of barriers to trade and
the creation of a “common market” in coal and steel products, but also transferred powers previously
exercised by the Member States in the coal and steel sectors to a newly established and independent
High Authority.
This showed how economic integration could serve not only as a means of fostering increased trade
and improving economic welfare, but also how it could act as a driving force behind greater political
integration by increasing the interdependencies between the participating Member States. When, six
years  later,  the  same  six  countries  signed  the  Treaty  of  Rome  establishing  the  European  Economic
Community (EEC), the same approach was extended to virtually all sectors of the economy with the
explicit  aim  of  creating  an  ever  closer  union  among  the  peoples  of  Europe  and  a  common  market
within which goods, capital and labour would circulate freely.
Since  then,  the  process  of  European  integration  has  continued  to  develop.  Throughout  this  process
national policymakers, economic actors and the general public have each had to undergo  a  learning
process  whereby  the  previous,  narrowly  defined,  national  perspectives  have  been  replaced  by  an
increasingly European vision. This was and is not always easy.
Today,  the  European  Union  stands  for  a  highly  integrated  single  market  with  about  380  million
people, which combines the economies of 15 European countries and accounts, like the United States,
for around 20% of world GDP. Moreover, it stands for a Monetary Union with a common currency,
the euro, which, at present, has been introduced by 11 countries. Finally, the European Union, even
though  it  lacks  international  personality,  is  characterised  by  a  substantial  and  growing  degree  of
political cooperation and coordination. This applies to justice and home affairs as well as to foreign
and security policies.
1
BIS Review 4/2000
 The  dynamics  of  the  integration  process  and,  with  it,  the  increasingly  European  outlook  of  both
politicians and citizens was essential for creating an environment in which Europe’s leaders could take
the bold decision to adopt a single European currency. But there were also a number of more specific
factors that facilitated this decision, some of which I should briefly mention.
The  first  of  these  was  the  signing  of  the  Single  European  Act,  in  1986,  which  committed  the  then
European Community of 12 to adopt the measures necessary to complete the “single market project”
by the end of 1992. This not only created a dynamic towards further integration, but also resulted in a
growing  realisation  that  a  truly  single  European  market  could  not  be  created  while  currency
fluctuations and the exchange rate risk continued to create de facto barriers to trade. Then, in 1989, the
collapse  of  the  communist  regimes  in  Eastern  Europe  and  the  fall  of  the  Berlin  Wall  provided
Europe’s  leaders  with  an  opportunity  to  shape  the  Europe  of  the  future  in  ways  that  had  been
unimaginable before.
If  the  completion  of the  single  market  project  and the  fall  of  the  Berlin  Wall  created  the  necessary
dynamics, the changing economic environment and, with it, the growing economic policy consensus
removed, at the same time, many of the obstacles that had previously stood in the way of European
Monetary Union. Increased international capital flows and the removal of restrictions on cross-border
capital  movements  made  it  virtually  impossible  for  individual  Member  States  to  pursue  truly
independent monetary policies without this resulting in destabilising capital flows and, ultimately, a
reversal of policy. Moreover, it had, in any case, come to be universally accepted that monetary policy
could not be used successfully to stimulate economic growth, but should instead focus on maintaining
stable  prices,  thereby  also  creating  an  appropriate climate  for  sustainable  growth.  Since  it  was  now
considered  neither  possible  nor  desirable  for  individual  countries  to  pursue  significantly  diverging
monetary policies, both the real and the perceived losses that might result from relinquishing monetary
policy sovereignty and adopting a single currency had been significantly reduced.
 Returning to the present day, a little more than eight years after Europe’s leaders signed the Treaty of
Maastricht and agreed on the necessary framework and timetable, we now have a functioning EMU
with a single European currency. Nonetheless, I would not be surprised if, to some external observers,
EMU might at first glance appear rather  unusual  and perhaps even  somewhat  confusing. This  is  no
doubt a consequence of some of the specific features of EMU that I should take some time to explain.
This also holds true of the European Union, which still does not fully correspond to the model of a
union you may have in mind, namely the United States.
Starting from basics, I should point out that some of these specific features relate to the fact that while
the European Union is comprised of 15 Member States, only 11 of these have so far adopted the euro.
We cannot therefore talk about the single monetary policy of the European Union, but rather, for this
purpose, we must instead refer to the euro area, the euro zone or, as some people have chosen to call it,
Euroland.
A similar problem arises when we wish to refer to the authority responsible for the conduct of the euro
area monetary policy. The Treaty establishing the European Community stipulates that this policy is to
be  conducted  by  an  independent  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB),  which  comprises  the
European Central Bank (ECB) and the national central banks of the 15 EU Member States. However,
since four of the national central banks which form part of the ESCB continue to conduct their own
autonomous monetary policies, one cannot accurately refer to the ESCB as the authority responsible
for conducting monetary policy in the euro area. We must instead use the term “Eurosystem”, which
comprises the ECB and the 11 national central banks of those countries which have adopted the euro,
and which has been adopted as a “user friendly” expression to denote the form in which  the  ESCB
performs its tasks and responsibilities.
The Eurosystem is set up, like the Federal Reserve System, in a distinctively decentralised manner. At
the same time, however, the Eurosystem disposes of marked centralised structures, since the definition
and implementation of the single monetary policy are carried out under the exclusive responsibility of
BIS Review 4/2000
2
the decision-making bodies of the ECB. These are, first of all, the Governing Council, which defines
the single monetary policy for the euro area and takes all other decisions of fundamental importance to
the Eurosystem. The Members of the Governing Council are the Governors of the 11 national central
banks and the six members of the Executive Board of the ECB. Basically, all decisions are taken by
simple majority, whereby each member has one vote. The other important decision-making body is the
Executive Board of the ECB, which is basically responsible for the implementation of monetary policy
in accordance with the decisions taken by the Governing Council.
Against  the  background  of  this  centralised  decision-making  structure,  the  role  of  the  11  national
central banks consists mainly of the practical implementation of monetary policy and other tasks of the
Eurosystem, such as the issuance of banknotes, the collection of monetary statistics or the operation of
the  Eurosystem’s  payment  systems.  The  fact  that these  tasks  have  to  be  carried  out  on  the  basis  of
agreed rules and specific instructions given by the decision-making bodies of the ECB, however, by
no means lessens the importance of the national central banks in the overall set-up of the Eurosystem.
 Another particular characteristic of EMU is that, while Monetary Union has led to the introduction of
a  single  monetary  policy,  Economic  Union  has  not  resulted  in  the  development  of  other  common
macroeconomic  policies,  which  instead  remain  in  the  hands  of  the  national  governments  of  the
Union’s  Member  States.  With  a  centralised  monetary  policy  and  decentralised  fiscal  and  structural
policies, the economic and monetary pillars of EMU can appear to be somewhat uneven at first glance.
But we should not be fooled by appearances. In fact, the structure of EMU’s economic pillar reflects
the  need  to  strike  an  appropriate  balance  between  providing  flexibility  and  diversity,  while  -  at  the
same  time  -  ensuring  that all  of  the  economic  policies  of the  euro  area  contribute to  the  success  of
EMU.
Two factors have to be considered in this regard. First of all, in a Monetary Union which covers an
area stretching from Lapland in the north of Finland  to  Andalusia  in  the  south  of  Spain,  we cannot
expect  complete  homogeneity  of  the  economic  cycle  or  of  economic  conditions  in  a  more  general
sense.  Therefore,  it  makes  sense  for  the  euro  area  Member  States  to  maintain  control  over  the
remaining tools of economic policy so as to be able, if necessary, to respond to developments which
are particular to their own economies.
On  the  other  hand,  when  formulating  their  economic  policies,  euro  area  Member  States  must  give
sufficient  consideration  to  the  impact  that  these  policies  will  have  on  the  rest  of  the  euro  area
economy. This is particularly important in EMU since euro area countries are no longer exposed to the
discipline of financial markets to the same extent as used to  be the case  when they  conducted  their
own  autonomous  monetary  policies.  Prior  to  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  unsustainable  economic
policies were penalised by the markets in the form of higher interest rates, substantial risk premia and
exchange  rate  pressure.  In  EMU,  however,  where  financial  markets  take  an  increasingly  euro
area-wide focus and where the exchange rate risk associated with national currencies no longer exists,
the  effects  of  inappropriate  policy  choices  in  any  one  country  tend  to  be  largely  spread  across  the
entire euro area. Only relatively small risk premia remain.
For these reasons, the euro area Member States are obliged to treat their economic policies as a matter
of common concern and, to this end, a number of instruments and procedures have been developed to
facilitate  the  monitoring  and,  if  necessary,  coordination  of  those  policies  that  are  still  basically
conducted at the national level.
At  the  centre  of  this  monitoring  and  coordination  process  lies  the  EU’s  Broad  Economic  Policy
Guidelines, which set out general orientations for the conduct of economic policies in the individual
Member States, covering areas such as public finances and tax policy as well as structural reform and
market  regulation.  While  these  Guidelines  are  not  binding  in  themselves,  their  elaboration  and
discussion in European institutions and fora in which each of the Member States is represented usually
creates sufficient peer pressure to galvanise governments into appropriate policy action.
While  monitoring  and  peer  pressure  are  very  effective  tools  for  assuring  that  the  various  economic
policies of the Member States move in the right direction, specifically in the area of budgetary policy,
3
BIS Review 4/2000
the EMU framework not only specifies commonly agreed targets, but also sets a binding upper limit
for Member  States’  budget  deficits  of  3%  of the  gross  domestic  product (GDP).  The failure  of  any
Member State to respect this upper limit automatically triggers an excessive deficit procedure under
which, if the deficit is not corrected in time, sanctions can be imposed on the Member State concerned.
The relative rigidity of the rules governing the conduct of budgetary policy, when compared with other
economic policies, is no accident. In line with what I said earlier, these restraints serve the purpose of
preventing  individual  Member  States  from  pursuing  unsound  budgetary  policies,  which  -  perhaps
more than any other type of policy - might otherwise hamper monetary policy and impact negatively
on the market’s perception of the euro area as a whole.
 Having emphasised the importance of sound budgetary and structural policies, let me now turn to a
subject which is even closer to the heart of a European central banker, namely the role of the single
monetary policy in the euro area. In contrast to the economic pillar of EMU, there is, of course, only
one  monetary  policy  and,  in  formulating  and  conducting  this  policy,  the  Eurosystem  has  one
overriding or, as the Treaty establishing the European Community calls it, “primary objective” which
is  to  maintain  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  For  this  purpose,  price  stability  has  since  been
defined  by  the  Eurosystem  as  a  year-on-year  increase  of  less  than  2%  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of
Consumer Prices in the euro area as a whole. Anything above (inflation) or below this (deflation) is
considered to be inconsistent with price stability. Price stability is to be maintained over the medium
term. Given the long lags with which monetary policy impacts the price level, short-term movements
in the price level, due, for instance, to volatile movements in commodity prices, cannot be controlled.
 Talking  with  hindsight,  after  one  year  of  experience  since  the  successful  launch  of  the  euro  on
1 January 1999, the most important challenge to the Eurosystem was the definition of the appropriate
monetary policy for the euro area as a whole. In this respect, the Eurosystem had to navigate uncharted
waters, since it could neither build upon practical experience with policies for the euro area as a whole
nor on any reputation of its  own,  although  it could  draw  upon the reputation  and experience  of the
national central banks. In fact, apart from theoretical considerations and econometric test runs, we had
- in that sense - to start right from scratch. The complexity of this challenge can easily be derived from
the fact that the Eurosystem has to define a single monetary policy for a quite heterogeneous area that,
as mentioned earlier, stretches from Lapland in the north of Europe to Andalusia in the very south.
From a US point of view, this might not appear particularly demanding. The Federal Reserve System
has always been confronted with the challenge of defining a single monetary policy for an even larger
and likewise not fully homogeneous area. However, there seems to be a substantive difference. The
US economy has evolved over decades, even centuries, under the conditions of the specific political
set-up of the United States. This has not only created, regardless of existing  differences  at the  state
level, a common legal environment, but also led to harmonised or similar policies in most other areas
and  not  least  fostered  the  development  of  a  common  ground  of  behaviour  in  economic  life.  By
contrast,  the  history  of  the  11  Member  States  of  the  euro  area  was  different.  Notwithstanding  my
earlier reference to the integration process over the last decades and the EU institutional set-up for the
coordination of economic policies, Europe is still a more heterogeneous area than the United States.
The  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community  does  not  state  how  price  stability  is  to  be
maintained. In other words, it does not define what is called a monetary policy strategy. Therefore, the
Eurosystem has designed its own stability-oriented strategy. Apart from the quantitative definition of
price  stability,  it  consists  of  two  pillars.  The  first  pillar  is  a  prominent  role  for  a  broad  monetary
aggregate,  M3.  This  is  based  on  the  view  that  inflation  is  ultimately  a  monetary  phenomenon.  A
reference value of 4½% for annual M3 growth has been defined. Deviations of actual monetary growth
from the reference value will not be corrected mechanically, but will always be analysed with regard
to the signals they provide with regard to future price developments. The reason for being cautious is
that  the  introduction  of  the  euro  may  have  changed  the  behaviour  of  economic  subjects,  also  their
demand  for  money.  This  is  also  the  reason  for  not  only  looking  at  monetary  developments  and
introducing the second pillar in our strategy. This pillar is a broadly based assessment of the outlook
BIS Review 4/2000
4
for price developments and risks to price stability. In this context, a host of indicators is analysed, such
as interest rates, the output gap, exchange rates, wage developments, developments in public finance,
asset  prices  and  surveys  of  consumer  and  business  confidence.  The  Eurosystem  also  examines
forecasts  of  the  economic  outlook  and  produces  such  forecasts  itself.  They  are  one  piece  of
information in the second pillar. On the basis of both pillars, central bank interest rates are set at the
level which is deemed to be appropriate to maintain price stability in the medium term.
Defining  the  appropriate  stance  of  monetary  policy  for  an  area  the  size  of  the  euro  area  remains
particularly challenging. On the other hand, experience over the last year has clearly demonstrated that
there  are  no  insuperable  impediments  to  the  conduct  of  a  truly  single  monetary  policy  for  the  euro
area.  This  is  underpinned  by  the  proven  ability  of  the  Eurosystem  to  act  decisively,  noted  by  its
decisions to cut interest rates in April and to raise them in November. At the same time, this is also
evidenced by the prevailing climate of price stability, with price increases of around 1% for the euro
area on an average annual basis. The outlook for price stability is also favourable, although inflation is
expected to rise somewhat in the near future. This is mainly a result of the recent strong increase in
energy prices.
The fact that regional discrepancies in price increases amounted to up to 2 percentage points does not,
by any means, conflict with this assessment. This phenomenon, which is almost typical for large-sized
monetary areas and is also to be found in the United States, can reasonably be explained.
 So far, I have limited myself to considering the internal aspects of EMU, but the introduction of the
euro  also  has  implications  that  extend  far  beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  European  Union.  As  the
currency  of  an  economic  area  with  a  population  of  nearly  300  million  people  and  one  sixth  of  the
world’s gross domestic product (GDP), the euro is already the second most widely used currency in
the world after the US dollar. Moreover, as investor confidence grows and as more EU Member States
join the euro area, in particular following EU enlargement, the euro’s role as an international currency
is destined to gain in importance.
This is not to say that the Eurosystem will actively promote an international role for the euro, or that
there  is  a  policy  of  trying  to  supplant  the  US  dollar  as  the  world’s  leading  currency.  Rather,  by
adopting a neutral stance, the pace with which the euro acquires its international role - whether as a
trade  currency,  an  investment  currency  or  as  a  reserve  currency  -  will  be  left  primarily  to  market
forces.  However,  if  the  Eurosystem  is  successful  in  maintaining  price  stability,  confidence  in  the
single currency will automatically foster the euro’s international role.
The  exchange  rate  of  the  euro is to  be regarded,  primarily,  as  the  outcome  of  current and  expected
monetary and fiscal policies as well as of cyclical and other economic developments. At the moment,
the  European  economy  is  clearly  recovering  and  the  outlook  is  favourable,  with  economic  growth
accelerating in the direction of 3%. As a result, the euro has a strong potential for appreciation. This is
also firmly based on internal price stability and a sound current account position.
 Before I draw to a close, allow me finally to return to another of those peculiarities of EMU that can
sometimes confound the external observer. If any of you have travelled to a euro area country over the
past 12 months, you may have been misled into thinking that what you saw change hands were not
euro, but rather French francs, Deutsche Mark or Italian lira. In that case, you would be only partially
correct.  While  national  banknotes  and  coins  remain  in  circulation  for  the  time  being,  they  are  no
longer,  despite  appearances,  actual  currencies  in  their  own  right.  They  are,  in  fact,  sub-units  of  the
euro,  waiting  to  be  replaced  by  euro  banknotes  and  coins  as  soon  as  these  are  introduced  at  the
beginning  of  2002.  Only  then,  I  suppose,  will  we  have  finally  completed  one  of  the  greatest
achievements in modern European history that is the introduction of the euro.
5
BIS Review 4/2000
