Eva Srejber: Globalisation and the IMF
Speech  by  Ms  Eva  Srejber,  Second  Deputy  Governor  of 
The Social-Domocratic Student Club, Stockholm, on 19 September 2000.
the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at
 Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  of  coming  here  to  Stockholm  University  and  meeting  you  from  the
different social-democratic student clubs in Stockholm and others among you who have seen posters
here at the University.
In a week’s time, the International Monetary Fund, IMF, will have its annual meetings with the World
Bank in Prague. We will probably see demonstrations at these meetings - in the same way as we saw
at the World Trade Organisation’s meeting last winter and at the IMF and World Bank meetings in
Washington in April. In a short time, the IMF has increasingly become the subject of debate, not least
since it is closely associated with the controversial and often hard-to-interpret economic trend called
“globalisation”.
The Riksbank has a reason for taking part in this debate. Most of you will be aware that one of our
tasks is to maintain stable prices. The other main task of the Riksbank is to promote financial stability
and an efficient payment system and to issue banknotes and coins. As part of this task, we participate
in various international organisations which work for financial stability, among other things we are the
contact authority for the IMF in Sweden. This means that we, together with the Ministry of Finance in
the Government Offices, coordinate and conduct Swedish policy in this forum.
This  evening,  I  am  intending  to  talk  about  globalisation  -  as  an  opportunity  and  a  challenge.  I  am
going to discuss what the International Monetary Fund is and  the  role  that it  has in  an increasingly
globalised  world.  To  conclude,  I  will  take  up  Sweden’s  participation  in  the  IMF,  and  what  we  can
expect from the meetings in Prague next week.
Globalisation and its benefits
Before commenting on critical remarks often presented on globalisation, let me first begin by noting
that prosperity in the world has improved dramatically during the past decades. Never before in history
has the situation of so many people improved so much so quickly. Since the beginning of the 1980s,
purchasing power per capita in the world has more than doubled. In the poor developing countries, this
has meant that purchasing power correlated GDP per capita has increased by almost 350%. In the rich
industrialised  countries,  the  corresponding  growth  was  220%.  In  certain  cases,  developments  have
been particularly spectacular, not least in Asia. In 1975, six out of ten Asians lived in absolute poverty
- under a dollar a day. Today, the figure is two out of ten.  In  China  alone,  the  number  of  poor  has
fallen from 60 to just under 30% in less than twenty years.
There  are  many  factors  that  explain  this  development.  Major  technical  advances  have  taken  place
enabling manufacturing and other production to be made more efficient. However, a crucial factor has
been  the  increased  opportunities  for  contact  between  people  in  different  parts  of  the  world,  and
increased  opportunities  for  making  use  of  each  other’s  abilities.  All  prosperity  is  based  on  people
producing goods and engaging in trade to obtain other goods from those who are comparatively better
at producing them. This was the case when the Vikings exchanged fur and amber for salt and it still
applies today when banks sell foreign exchange derivatives and equity. These greater opportunities for
exchange  are  the  foundations  of  globalisation.  It  materialises  in  increased  trade,  increased  capital
investment, increased travelling and increased flows of information.
The  greater  opportunities  are  often  related  to  political  decisions  on  deregulation  and  opening  of
borders. Since 1950, the quantity of tariffs and other trade barriers has drastically reduced. This has
meant that the total trade in goods and services in the world is now sixteen times larger than then. The
1
BIS Review 78/2000
market for consumers and producers has thus become many times larger than before. This has meant
that workers and companies in different parts of the world have been able to concentrate on producing
what they are relatively  best  at.  Specialisation and increased  competition  have  pushed  down  prices.
The housekeeping money lasts longer. Moreover, we can buy far more types of goods. It was not so
long ago that oranges were a luxury. If you go into a food shop today, you will find Swedish blood
pudding as well as Italian salami, Chinese noodles, American peanut butter and coffee from  Brazil.
The same applies to most other types of goods.
Increased  trade  also  benefits  the  developing  countries,  which  has  been  shown  in  various  studies.
Jeffrey  Sachs  and  Andrew  Warner  at  Harvard  University  have  found  that  welfare  in  developing
countries with an open trade policy has increased by 4.7% per year between 1970 and 1990, compared
with 0.7% per year for those with closed borders. This means that a country can create more than six
times as much welfare each year, just by deregulating its trade. No development assistance project in
the world comes anywhere near such figures. The price for shutting oneself off from world trade is
very high.
Another important trend in recent years has been the deregulation of the international capital markets
and the new information technology enabling savings capital to move in a second between different
parts  of  the  world,  at  almost  zero  cost.  Capital  is  not  really  different  from  any  other  type  of  good.
Some people need capital, and are willing to pay to borrow it. Others have savings and can sell the
opportunity to use these for a period of time. Deregulation has meant that savings can to an increasing
extent be channelled to where they will be most useful. The medium income countries today finance
their growing industries and their infrastructure with the aid of the savings capital from us in the rich
part of the world. At the same time, those who save money - not least all those saving for pensions -
can benefit from the growth potential that exists outside of their own country’s borders. Free capital
movements have also made it possible to diversify savings capital and thus reduce risks. This gives
greater financial security both among those who invest and those who use borrowed capital.
Globalisation brings many benefits that are not only economic. Contacts with the surrounding world
have increased and developments in IT make it increasingly difficult to isolate a country. Openness is
increasing  in  all  areas, facilitating  the  exchange  of  knowledge  and  information  and  receives  further
nourishment from growing economic prosperity. In addition, since it has become less costly to travel
and  easier  to  undergo  education  in  other  countries,  more  and  more  people  have  had  personal
experience of everyday life in other countries.
Criticism of globalisation
Nevertheless - despite the  very  positive  development in  many  respects  -  there  are  many  that  regard
globalisation  as  a  threat  rather  than  an  opportunity.  There  are  a  lot  of  organisations  with  many
different  views  in this  area.  However,  they  seem  to  share some  of  the  concerns  about  trends  in  the
world economy. This may concern the following:
•  Trade and new technology increase competition and the requirement to change. The changeover to
new types of production makes demands for great, and often swift, adaptation. Some companies
become unprofitable and employees both in industrialised countries and developing countries are
forced to leave their jobs and look for new.
•  Although the situation of more and more people is improving, the gap between the poor and the
rich  is  increasing.  Countries,  which  due  to  deficient  infrastructure  and  incapable  political
leadership,  etc.  are  not  equipped  to  take  advantage  of  the  benefits  of  globalisation,  risk  falling
further and further behind.
•  The global environmental problems are aggravated.
•  Free capital movements make countries more vulnerable if they carry out less credible policies. As
quickly as investments flow in when economic prospects are good, they flow out just as quickly
when  financiers  suspect  that  growing  problems  threaten  the  savings  they  have  the  task  of
managing.
BIS Review 78/2000
2
These are some of the problems that we cannot ignore. They are among the great challenges for world
politics  today,  and  I  understand  those  who  feel  concern.  Many  of  these  issues  require  coordination
between countries, and it is therefore an ambitious agenda that we have to tackle energetically. A lot of
work is already in progress, nationally and in various multilateral organisations.
However,  despite  these  issues  being  important,  the  conclusion  is  not  that  we  should  endeavour  to
reduce  trade  or  have  fewer  contacts  between  countries.  A  number  of  the  problems  I  mentioned  are
rather related to growth and economic development in general entailing change. All societies, whether
open or closed, must find ways of ensuring that people are not excluded when technological progress
makes  old  industries  unprofitable.  All  societies  also  have  a  responsibility  for  production  and
consumption not having too great an impact on the environment since the welfare and health of future
generations will otherwise be imperilled.
We must be clear that development and collaboration are good. Almost everyone, including many of
the poor in the world, has experienced great improvements in the past decades. In many respects, it is
exactly the increased contacts and trade between countries that has contributed to it being possible to
solve  the  problems  that  I  have  just  mentioned.  Growth  in  the  industrialised  countries  has  led  to  us
being able to afford to conserve our environment, which most poor countries cannot afford to do. To
reverse the trend - to attempt to isolate countries from one another - is not the way forward.
Globalisation makes new demands
I  will  now  make  some  remarks  on  challanges  specifically  related  to  globalisation.  Like  all  other
development,  globalisation  is  not  without  problems.  These  were  clearly  expressed  in  the  severe
economic  crises  that  we  have  seen  in  recent  years  -  in  Mexico  in  1994-95,  in  South-East  Asia  in
1997-98,  in  Russia  in  1998  and  in  Brazil  in  1999.  These  crises  illustrate  that  increased  trade  and
financial flows makes new demands public policy.
Firstly, requirements increase on the national institutional settings - on laws, authorities and practices.
These systems must be solid enough to cope with increased flows of trade and capital. Some countries
are  not  sufficiently  well  prepared  to  handle  the  new  conditions  of  the  world  economy.  Sometimes,
countries have deregulated their economies too quickly or in the wrong way. Industrialised countries
have deficiencies too.
Secondly,  requirements  increase  on  coordination  of  policy  among  countries.  The  countries  of  the
world are increasingly dependent on one another. A financial crisis in South-East Asia has effects in
Sweden as well. For this reason, we also benefit from other countries on the other side of the world
acquiring better systems for, for instance, bank supervision and bankruptcies. This means that we have
greater reason to become involved in global issues. We also have reasons to show lenience on issues
that are important for Sweden sometimes, in order to create common rules of play and agreements that
will  benefit  everyone.  The  old  slogan  “international  solidarity”  is  national  self-interest  in  a  very
concrete way.
International collaboration is thus of great value. Therefore, we have reason to take a great interest in
the multilateral organisations for collaboration that exists. The “Bretton Woods institutions” - the IMF,
the World Bank and WTO/GATT - were established fifty years ago during a period when the countries
in  the  world  economy  drew  the  lesson  that  the  trade  wars  of  the  1930s,  payment  obstacles  and
competitive  devaluations  contributed  to  unemployment,  lower  prosperity  and  war.  Among  other
things, it is the collaboration in these organisations that opened the road for the economic development
we  are seeing  today.  It  is  also  in  the  first  place  within  these  organisations  that  the  countries  of  the
world discuss how the gains from globalisation shall benefit everyone.
The World Bank is a development organisation, whose main purpose is to reduce poverty in the world.
Every year, the World Bank lends the equivalent of roughly 200 billion Swedish crowns (25 billion
US dollars), to finance several thusand projects in water sanitation, combating AIDS, vaccination, etc.
The World Trade Organisation, WTO, that has replaced GATT, is working to remove tariffs, import
quotas  and  other  trade  barriers.  The  increased  world  trade  that  I  recently  mentioned  is  largely  a
product of the work that has taken place in this forum.
3
BIS Review 78/2000
The organisation and purpose of the IMF
The IMF can be characterised as a financial “club”. It is an association of countries that share their
experiences and help one another during crises, among other ways by lending one another money from
a common fund. Influence in this club - in the form of voting rights on the IMF board - is quota-based
and  reflects  among  other  things  the  amount  of  capital  the  member  countries  have  provided.  The
background  to  this  is  that  the  creditors  in  the  IMF  wish  to  have  a  reasonable  control  of  how  their
money is used. Not least to be able to justify this to taxpayers in their home countries. Voting power in
the IMF is a balance of creditors’ interests, borrowers’ needs and that all members should be able to
exercise influence.
Membership of the IMF is open for all countries that meet certain criteria. Today, 182 countries are
members, which means that very few countries do not take part in the IMF. This broad membership is
one of the organisation’s strengths. The IMF’s head office is in Washington DC in the USA. Around
3,000  people  work  there.  The  major  part  are  economists  specialising  in  macroeconomics  and
international  finance. The  IMF  board  which  decides  on  the  day-to-day  policy  in  the  organisation  is
also located in Washington DC. The board meets at least three times per week. It has 24 seats, where
all countries are represented, most of them in geographical groupings.
The  IMF’s  purpose  is  to  work  for  financial  stability.  In  simple  terms,  this  means  ensuring  that  the
various  macroeconomic  variables in  a country  –  the  exchange  rate, inflation,  the  budget  deficit,  for
instance - are dealt with in such a way that the economy can run smoothly and efficiently. A stable
economy allows people to think in a long-term way when they invest and consume. Without stability,
it is not possible to create sustainable growth. In Sweden, we have recent experiences of the opposite.
The  financial  crisis  here  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  increased  unemployment  and  reduced
production at the same time as government finances were dramatically weakened and Sweden entered
the  deepest  recession  since  the  1930s.  Bear  in  mind  then  that  Sweden  is  an  industrialised  country.
Many  of  the  member  states  of  the  IMF  are  poor  and  have  even  in  calm  periods  unemployment  of
around 30%, a very strained government budget and limited opportunities to obtain foreign finance.
Financial stability is even more important in these countries.
Activities to prevent crises
A large part of the IMF’s activity centres around  preventing  crises  arising.  Globalisation  has  meant
that  this  work  has  become  increasingly  important.  Few  people  want  to  trade  with  a  country  that  is
insecure, and even fewer to lend money there. Since the flow of information is increasing and capital
can  swiftly  be  moved  between  countries,  economic  crises  can  arise  more  quickly  in  the  event  of
indications of problems in a country. They can also become deeper and spread to regions farther away
than previously. The value of a stable, long-term economic policy has therefore been reinforced.
Briefly, the IMF’s preventive work involves spreading knowledge, giving advice and creating norms.
Spreading knowledge means that the IMF continually monitors trends in the world economy, conducts
research  and  spreads  knowledge  to  national  governments  and  the  general  public.  Knowledge  about
where the economic risks are has a stabilising effect on markets and also allows countries to tackle
their  problems.  The  IMF  continuously  surveys  economic  trends  in  each  member  country  and  also
gives regular advice on economic policy on issues concerning, for instance, exchange rates, inflation
and  the  financial  market.  Most  countries  receive  a  visit  from  the  IMF  every  year.  In  Sweden  this
usually  takes  place  in  the  early  summer  and  the  delegation  stays  for  a  week  and  visits  during  this
period the Riksbank, the Ministry of Finance, Finansinspektionen [the Swedish financial supervisory
authority],  the  social  partners  and  other  central  economic  participants  to  obtain  a  picture  of  the
economic state of the country. This leads to a report that is discussed in the IMF board.
In  some  cases,  the  IMF  has  a  very  practical  involvement  in  countries.  Many  central  banks  in
developing countries have been established with the assistance of the IMF. An example that is close to
hand  is  the  establishment  of  a  central  bank  in  Kosovo.  The  same  applies  to  introductions  of  new
currencies,  or  the  introduction  of  new  exchange  rate  regimes.  The  IMF  also  trains  officials  from
national central banks and ministries of finance as part of the work of spreading knowledge.
BIS Review 78/2000
4
An increasingly important part of its activity concerns creating common rules of play within different
areas that affect financial stability. Many of these are in the form of general minimum standards and
recommendations,  for  instance,  in  bank  supervision,  financial  statistics,  transparency  and  foreign
exchange  reserve  management.  By  encouraging  countries  to  meet  these,  countries  reinforce  their
institutional framework, at the same time as increased standardisation makes it easier for everyone to
be  cognisant  of  systems  in  different  countries.  Not  least,  this  assists  investors  to  make  risk
assessments.
Fund lending
The areas of activity that I have just mentioned involve in the first place the long-term prevention of
crises and  the  promotion  of  trade  and  growth.  They  account  for  the  major  part  of  the  IMF’s  work.
However,  the  IMF  also  has  the  role  of  fire  brigade  in  the  international  financial  system.  Roughly,
financial problems occur in four or five countries each year. This often includes difficulties for these
countries to handle their foreign payments - their foreign exchange reserve runs low since imports are
greater  than  exports,  and  there  is  insufficient  foreign  capital  inflow  to  bridge  the  gap.  In  such  a
situation,  the  country  can  apply  to  the  IMF  for  a  loan.  A  team  of  economists  is  then  quickly  put
together and sent to the country to assess how severe the crisis is and what has to be done to regain
control over the situation. Together with the country’s government, the IMF staff rapidly creates an
economic reform programme that runs over a couple of years. The purpose of this programme is to
establish confidence in the country’s economy and in this way turn the outflow of capital to an inflow,
so  that  the  country  can  regain  balance  in  its  payments.  During  the  period  that  the  country  is
undergoing  the  programme,  it  can  also  borrow  limited  amounts  from  the  IMF  to  assist  in  covering
parts of its deficit.
The IMF’s lending is thus relatively short-term.  It is often sufficient with loans with a three to five
year term to restore balance in the foreign payments. In the case of developing countries, however, it
has  increasingly  been  seen  that  short-term  instability  often  depends  on  deep-seated  structural
problems.  Examples  of  this  type  of  problem  are  inability  to  collect  taxes,  inefficient  bankruptcy
legislation, widespread corruption and weaknesses in the banking sector. These types of issues are in
the  borderland  between  the  mandate  of  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  and  the  two  organisations
collaborate in initiatives in this area. Among other things, the IMF and the World Bank have certain
types  of  loans  which,  in  combination  with  economic  reform  programmes,  are  focused  on  building
long-term, strong structures in poor countries.
Another  type  of  structural  problem  is the  unsustainable  foreign  debts  burden  that some  of  the  most
poor developing countries have to contend with. For a couple of years, the IMF and the World Bank
have been working together in debt relief projects for these countries. In practice, this implies writing
off parts of the debts. The debt relief goes hand-in-hand with economic reforms in the countries, aimed
at decreasing poverty. In the longer term it is only through a responsible economic policy, focused on
growth,  stability  and  sound  government  finances,  that  these  countries  can  avoid  debts  building  up
again. An important part of the IMF’s work with debt management in the poor countries is therefore to
strive  for  the  resources  that  are  released  in  the  country  are  invested  long-term  and  in  a  way  that
benefits all the population.
Research shows that IMF lending and programs are successful. In the years a program is implemented,
and the countries save to finance their deficits, growth is normally decreased a bit. After a few years,
the countries can however reap the fruits of a more stable economy, in terms of lower inflation and
higher  growth.  Successful  programs  also  have  a  positive  effect  on  social  policy  in  the  countries.
Expenditure on education and healthcare in the poorest program countires increased by four per cent
per capita between 1985 and 1998, and these areas now account for a larger share of the government
budgets.  Countries  with  IMF  programs  have  seen  more  children  in  schools,  increased  literacy  and
access to clean water, and lower child mortality.
5
BIS Review 78/2000
Swedish participation in the IMF
Sweden  is  one of  the  creditor  countries  in  the  IMF.  In  the  board  we  share  a  seat  together  with  the
seven  other  Nordic  and  Baltic  countries.  As  well  as  other  country  groups,  we  have  an  office  in
Washington with representatives who work full time on pursuing our interests on the board. I worked
at  this  office  myself  for  over  four  years  as  Nordic-Baltic  representative  in  the  board.  Our  board
representatives receive guidance from their home countries on important issues and statements in the
board  are  coordinated  among  our  countries  in  advance.  In  Sweden,  the  Riksbank  has  the  main
responsibility  for  contacts  with  Washington,  but  all  issues  are  coordinated  with  the  Government
Offices where the Ministry of Finance is our contact. In certain cases, there is also consultation with
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The Nordic and Baltic countries are small on the board - our combined voting power is just over 3.5%
of that of the IMF as a whole. Our opportunities to pursue policies on the board are in having sensible
points  of  view  on  the  proposals  that are  on  the  agenda  and, together  with  other  countries, trying  to
influence proposals so that they move in the direction we want them to. To some extent, we have an
advantage  in  appearing  independent  on  the  board,  since  we  represent  neither  the  most  influential
creditors within G7 nor the large group of debtor countries. This means that our statements sometimes
have more weight than our voting powers indicate.
Let me give three examples of issues where our countries have been actively involved in the IMF. The
first concerns the transparency of the IMF. In Sweden, we are  accustomed  to  authorities  publishing
their decisions and their way of dealing with items. Many international organisations on the other hand
operate behind closed doors. However, the IMF has become considerably more open in recent years,
and today material on almost all activities is available, not least on the IMF’s website (www.imf.org).
A second example is the issue of capital account liberalisation. Besides working for opening up the
capital  account  in  many  countries,  we  strive  for  the  long-term  goal  of  giving  the  IMF  a  clearer
mandate  to regulate issues relating  to the international  capital  market.  A  third  issue  where  we  have
been active is developing a body of rules for how private creditors are to contribute to the financing of
countries’ finance requirements in crisis situations.
The increased attention in the media about the IMF and the World Bank has arisen during a period
when  the  functioning  of  these  organisations  and  their  mandate  have  been  discussed  intensively
internally  as  well.  The  growth  of  private  capital  markets  has  resulted  in  many  countries  no  longer
requiring  financing  from  the  IMF.  At  the  same  time,  the  need  to  build  institutions,  regulation  and
coordination is increasing, not least in the financial sphere. Some radical groups have argued that the
IMF should be abolished, or considerably reduced in size. Others believe that the organisation should
take on more responsibilities, such as within areas concerning the labour market, the environment and
money  laundering.  Sweden  is  among  those  who  believe  that  the  IMF  can  only  be  an  efficient
organisation if its mandate is kept relatively narrow. The IMF shall work with financial stability, and
in  particular  macroeconomic  issues.  Within  this  area,  the  IMF  has  its  main  competence  and  can
contribute most. At the same time, the world has changed a lot since the IMF was set up at Bretton
Woods in the forties, and it is natural for the organisation to expand its involvement in financial issues
and, in particular, with respect to how private flows of capital are to operate within a good regulatory
framework.
The annual meetings in Prague
The coming annual meetings in Prague are to some extent a continuation of this discussion. In Prague,
the  ministers  of  finance  and  governors  of  central  banks  from  the  member  countries  will  meet  to
discuss the IMF’s future agenda and share views on the work that has been done since the meetings in
Washington in the spring. Most of the issues that I have mentioned will be taken up at these meetings.
They will discuss trends in the world economy and future risks and opportunities. They will discuss
the increased role of private flows of capital and how they affect the IMF’s provision of advice and
loans. They will also discuss how the IMF can obtain a more constructive collaboration with private
financiers. The experiences of standards within different areas will be analysed as well as the poorest
countries’ debt situation, and not least how the debt relief is to be financed.
BIS Review 78/2000
6
The IMF has accordingly a key role in what we somewhat carelessly call globalisation. I hope that the
trend towards increasing economic and cultural openness will continue. People continually seek new
opportunities  to  trade  and  communicate  with  one  another,  and  find  new  ways  to  benefit  from  one
another’s  knowledge  and  possibilities.  It  is  fundamentally  a  very  positive  development  which  gives
poor  and  rich  people  enormous  opportunities  for  greater  wealth  and  reduced  suffering.  In  order  to
make  use  of  this  potential,  intensive  international  collaboration  is  required,  and  energetic  national
efforts. Sweden and all other countries must adapt their national systems so that they can cope with the
increased  contacts  with  the  outside  world  and  so  that  other  countries  can  benefit  from  increased
contacts with us.
Issues of financial stability and macroeconomics are intimately related to this. The IMF therefore has
an increasingly important function to fill. Economic developments, not least in the financial sphere,
take place quickly,  however.  In  order to  be  able  to  make  an  active  contribution, the  IMF  and  other
financial  organisations  must  continually  be  reformed  and  keep  in  step  with  this  development.  The
meetings in Prague are a part of this reform process.
7
BIS Review 78/2000
