Hermann Remsperger: The importance of the
European Monetary Union in transatlantic relations
Speech by Professor Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the
7th Transatlantic Summer Academy on “Europe facing the 21st century: defining the central issues”,
Zentrum für Europäische Integrationsforschung, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität in Bonn,
on 26 June 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to begin my speech by quoting two of the sharpest critics of EMU.
And you may imagine that I do not agree with these critics.
Before the start of the euro, MIT professor Rudi Dornbusch made the following statement:
“So EMU has gone from being an improbable and bad idea to a bad idea that is about to come true...
The struggle to achieve monetary union under the Maastricht formula may be remembered as one of
the  most  useless  battles  in  European  history.  The  costs  of  getting  there  are  large,  the  economic
benefits minimal, and the prospects for disappointment major.”1
Martin Feldstein, the former chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, went even further and
warned that EMU might increase intra-EU conflicts rather than foster political union. He concluded:
“Although it is impossible to know for certain whether these conflicts would lead to war, it is too real
a possibility to ignore in weighing the potential effects of EMU and the European political integration
that would follow.”2
However,  there  were  not  only  negative  or  sceptical  views  on  EMU.  One  of  the  most  prominent
proponents of EMU, Nobel laureate Robert Mundell, describes the benefits of a successful EMU:
“Members of the EMU will get not just a currency on par with the dollar and the right to share in
international  seigniorage  but  also  greater  influence  in  the  running  of  the  international  monetary
system. The rest of the world will get an alternative asset to the dollar to use in international reserves
and a new and stable currency that could be used as the focus for stable exchange rates or currency
boards. The US will get a needed relief from the eventually debilitating overuse of the dollar as an
international currency, a single-currency continent that vastly simplifies trade and investment, and a
strong  partner  in  Europe  with  an  equal  stake  in  constructing  an  international  monetary  system
suitable for the 21st century.”3
I think Mundell’s statement is a very good starting point for my own considerations. In the following,
I would like to discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the euro as an international currency and
evaluate them on the basis of the empirical evidence available. I will then analyse what implications
the  broad international  use  of  the  euro  might  have  for  monetary  policy.  Finally,  I  will  examine  the
possible impact of EMU on relations between Europe and the United States.
Given the limited time available, I will certainly be unable to give full coverage to all aspects of the
subject matter. However, I will be glad to answer any questions at the end of my talk.
1 R Dornbusch, Euro Fantasies, Foreign Affairs 75, September/October 1996, p 113.
2 M Feldstein, EMU and International Conflict, Foreign Affairs 76, November/December 1997, p 62.
3 R Mundell,  The Case for the Euro - II, Wall Street Journal, 25  March 1998,  p  A22.  Cited by  C  R  Henning,  U.S.-EU
Relations  after  the  Inception  of  the  Monetary  Union:  Cooperation  or  Rivalry?,  in:  C  R  Henning  and  P  C  Padoan,
Transatlantic Perspectives on the Euro, Brookings Institution Press, Washington, 2000, p 10.
1
BIS Review 54/2000
A  striking  feature  of  the  transatlantic  relations  between  “Europe”  and  the  United  States  was  the
dominance of the US dollar in the area of international monetary policy during the second half of the
20th century. This was partly due to the institutional setting. In the post-war monetary system, the US
currency was assigned a prominent role as the anchor currency. This - in addition to other factors -
fostered the international use of the dollar. However, even after the end of the Bretton Woods system
of fixed exchange rates at the beginning of the 1970s, the dollar maintained its position as the most
important transaction, investment and reserve currency - and it did so despite its overall depreciation
against staple currencies.
the economic size of the euro area;
With  the  euro,  market  players  now  have  an  alternative  currency  which  may  become  a  serious
competitor  to  the  US  dollar.  Any  currency,  especially  a  new  one,  will  only  establish  itself
internationally  -  that  is  to  say,  outside  its  own  currency  area  -  if  it  provides  its  users  with  specific
advantages  over  other  currencies.  Those  advantages  may  be  in  the  form  of  lower  transaction  costs,
greater stability or more opportunity for diversification. There are at least four reasons supporting the
argument that the euro could play an important role as an international currency:
– 
– 
– 
– 
The euro area has about the same economic weight as the United States; both economic areas are well
ahead of Japan. The population of the euro area, at around 290 million, is larger than that of the United
States (270 million) and Japan (125 million).
the euro area’s close trade and financial ties with countries outside the euro area;
the institutional arrangements for maintaining price stability in the euro area.
the favourable changes in the euro area financial markets;
It is obvious that the size and capacity of an economic area is of importance to its currency: economies
of  scale  play  an  important  role,  especially  in  the  use  of  money.  A  large  economic  area  generates  a
large  “natural  constituency”  for  its  own  currency.  If  a  currency  is  widely  accepted,  this  normally
lowers transaction costs, which, in turn, attracts international customers and leads to a further spread
of the currency beyond its domestic area.
The argument of size is important since the euro area is highly integrated into the world economy. The
euro area accounts for one-fifth of world trade excluding trade within the euro area. This is more than
the corresponding ratios for the United States with 15% or Japan, which is just under 9%.
What  is  more,  the  end  of  currency  segmentation  has  led  to  a  dramatic  change  on  the  euro  area’s
financial markets. The range of financial products is expanding, and the markets are becoming more
liquid. The money  market, in  particular,  is  now  unified.  Concerning  the  European  stock  exchanges,
mergers are being planned, and greater attention is being paid to the wishes of market participants. All
that tends to have a favourable impact on the efficiency of the euro financial markets, although they
are still lagging behind the US markets in that respect.
Despite the introduction of a single currency and cooperation among the stock exchanges, the financial
markets in the euro area continue to be segmented to a larger extent than those in the United States. In
particular,  issuing  on  the  bond  market  is  heavily  fragmented;  in  the  euro  area,  there  is  no  issuer
comparable to the US Treasury. The existence of different securities settlement systems continues to
entail higher costs than in the United States. Finally, purchasing securities across borders in the euro
area is still more expensive than buying them in a particular member state.
The size and openness of the economic area as well as the dynamism and efficiency of the financial
markets are definitely important factors in determining a currency’s international success. Ultimately,
however, the euro will hold its own in competition with other currencies only if it can be kept stable
over the long term. The relevant institutional requirements have been met: the ECB is an independent
central bank which is primarily committed to the objective of price stability.
The  euro’s  greatest  success  to  date  has  been  as  an  issue  currency  on  the  international  financial
markets.  Between  January  1999,  the  start  of  EMU,  and  March  2000,  47%  of  the  net  issuance  in
international debt securities was denominated in euro, compared with a dollar ratio of 45%. It seems
BIS Review 54/2000
2
that the large issuers took advantage of the low euro interest rates in order to raise large amounts of
funds in euro. However, it is also apparent that the euro’s success in terms of new issues increased its
share  of  all  international  debt  securities  outstanding  only  slightly  compared  with  its  predecessor
currencies, namely from 25% at the end of 1997 to 30% at the end of March 2000. At this reference
date, the share of the dollar stood at 47%.
The euro’s share of international banking business is somewhat smaller than on international securities
markets,  amounting  to  28%  in  the  case  of  bank  assets  and  24%  in  the  case  of  bank  liabilities,
compared  with  a  dollar  market  share  of  40%  and  42%,  respectively.  Relative  to  the  share  that  the
euro’s predecessor currencies had previously, the euro comes off much better in international banking
business.4
From the perspective of a central bank, it would be especially interesting to know the euro’s share of
the  official  foreign  exchange  reserves.  It  is  precisely  as  a  reserve  currency  that  the  dollar  has
traditionally  had  the  largest  lead  over  all  other  currencies,  with  a  recent  share  of  more  than  60%.
Unfortunately, the corresponding share of the euro cannot currently be quantified reliably, since the
underlying database is decidedly incomplete.
The euro has developed  very  quickly  into  an  -  at  least  numerically  -  important international  anchor
currency. The ECB has recently listed some 50 countries in whose currency regime the euro is playing
a role. The arrangements  stretch  from  D-Mark  or  euro-based  currency  boards  (Bosnia-Herzegovina,
Bulgaria,  Estonia)  and  mutual  agreements  as  part  of  ERM II  (Denmark,  Greece)  to  rather  informal
exchange rate links, which are geared to baskets that, in addition to the euro, include other currencies,
too.
Two results of my empirical analysis merit particular attention. Firstly, the dollar continues to be the
leading international currency in virtually all functions, even though the euro has reduced the gap here
and  there.  Secondly,  the  role  that  the  euro  is  playing  on  the  international  financial  markets  is  now
already clearly more important than that of its predecessor currencies. The weight that the euro area
lends to its currency is evidently greater than the simple sum of the 11 participating countries.
The  euro’s  growing  importance  on  the  international  financial  markets  contrasts  sharply  with  its
exchange  rate  movements  until  mid-May.  Between  January  1999  and  its  trough  in  May,  the  single
currency lost around one-quarter of its value against the dollar, and as a weighted average against the
currencies of the euro area’s 13 most important trading partners, it did not come off much better either.
How can the euro gain market shares on the international financial markets while losing so much of its
value?
Taking a look back into the past may be helpful in providing an explanation. The dollar has always
been able to maintain its position as the leading world currency despite the ups and downs in the dollar
exchange rate. Apparently, the individual currencies’ positions on the international financial markets
are determined, at least to some extent, by factors other than the exchange rate. In addition, the time
horizons underlying decisions on the foreign exchange market and the (long-term) capital market are
probably different as a rule.
If  you  ask  me,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  what  my  analysis  up  to  now  means  for  the  transatlantic
relations, I would not deny that the exchange rate between the euro and the US dollar will always play
a central role. However, it is essential to add that the external value of the euro cannot nearly be seen
as the sole indicator for the importance of EMU within the transatlantic relationship. I shall return to
this point soon again but from rather an American perspective.
Before I continue, please allow me to emphasise that the expanding international use of the euro could
have far-reaching consequences for monetary policy. Indeed, there is some evidence to suggest  that
the  capital  markets  might  play  an  increasing  role  in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  (at  the
4
For  some  methodological  problems  connected  with  the  data,  see  International  Banking  and  Financial  Market
Developments, BIS Quarterly Review, February 2000, p 33ff and June 2000.
3
BIS Review 54/2000
expense of the banking system). This might enhance the efficiency of monetary policy by reducing the
time  lags  in  the  transmission  process,  since  the  capital  markets  usually  respond  more  quickly  to
interest rate changes than does the banking system.
The  exchange  rate channel  might  likewise lose in importance  if  other  countries,  for  example  future
accession countries, pegged their currencies to the euro. This primary effect would be diminished by
the fact that the Eurosystem’s monetary policy would, in that event, have an immediate impact on the
real economy in those countries, which would feed back to the euro area on account of the close trade
links. However, in the light  of  the  small  weight  of the  countries  which  may  be  willing  to  peg  their
currencies to the euro, the overall effect should not be overstated.
Another aspect may prove to be very important. The more the euro gains acceptance internationally,
the more difficult it may be in certain circumstances to interpret monetary growth. Transfers of funds
from  euro  area  monetary  financial  institutions  to  the  banking  systems  of  third  countries  (and  vice
versa)  and  -  from  2002  -  the  circulation  of euro  banknotes  outside the euro  area  might  prove  to  be
potential sources of  distortions.  However, the  Bundesbank’s  past  experience  suggests that,  although
such problems may cause uncertainty in the short run and thus make higher demands on the central
bank’s  analysis  and  communication  policy,  over  the  longer  term  they  are  controllable  by  monetary
policymakers.  Judging  from  the  experience  gained  from  the  Bretton  Woods  system  and  the  EMS,
however, this applies in an environment of generally flexible exchange rates only.
Now, let me take the opportunity to talk about some of the American interests that may be affected by
EMU - interests which are divided into three categories: political, institutional, and economic.5
Regarding the political aspects, the United States is highly interested in stabilising central and eastern
Europe.  If  EMU  paves  the  way  for  economic  and  institutional  reforms  that  will  ultimately  lead  to
higher growth in Europe, then EMU is clearly in the political interest of the United States.
With  regard  to  institutional  issues,  pragmatic  solutions  have  been  found  for  the  question  of
representation, with the result that the ECB represents EMU monetary policy in international bodies.
Apart from this, potential changes in the decision-making process in an enlarged European Union have
received  attention  in  the  US  due  to  the  substantial  implications  they  have  on  European-American
relations.  The  US  seems  to  be  interested  in  institutional  arrangements  within  Europe  that  lead  to
greater efficiency in international cooperation.
As regards the economic interests of the United States that might be affected by EMU there are at least
four points that ought to be distinguished:
First,  some  US  economists  seem  to  be  anxious  that  EMU  in  combination  with  the  Stability  and
Growth  Pact  might  be  detrimental  to  growth  in  Europe.  I  think  the  opposite  is  true.  In  addition,
structural  reform  in  Europe  would  stimulate  growth  in  the  long  run  and  create  positive  spill-over
effects in other regions, too. The transformation of the euro area into a “New Economy”, characterised
by more flexibility, higher growth rates and low inflation rates would definitely be much appreciated
by our American partners - and not only by them. Whereas some observers expect EMU to increase
the necessity for and the feasibility of structural reform, others argue that an intensified competition in
a currency union might call for more social protection.
Second, the smooth financing of the American current account deficit seems to be an issue of concern
on both sides of the Atlantic. With the euro potentially rivalling the dollar, some economists have been
expecting huge shifts in international portfolios which might limit the ability of the US to finance its
current account deficit. However, in the light of my remarks about international capital flows, I think
that external financing constraints for the United States will not be too narrow as long as a reasonable
economic policy is pursued.
5
See, for example, C R Henning (2000), p 17ff.
BIS Review 54/2000
4
Third,  the  US  is  interested  in  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  international  monetary  system.  In
principle,  US  authorities  prefer  flexible  exchange  rates.  In  the  case  of  a  crisis,  however,  the  US  is
interested in an efficient decision-making process at international level.
Fourth, systemic stability is an objective with high priority for US policy. The question as to whether
the emergence of the euro as an international currency might indirectly contribute to systemic risks has
already  been  raised.  In  particular,  large  and  rapid  shifts  out  of  the  dollar  have  been  seen  as
problematic, whereas gradual changes in market shares are not an issue of concern.
In the run-up to monetary union, there was much speculation about how the launch of the euro would
influence volatility on the foreign exchange markets. It was said that the rivalry between a few major
international investment currencies might lead to stronger short-term exchange rate fluctuations, since
changing  market  sentiments  would  immediately  turn  out  to  the  advantage  of  one  currency  and
disadvantage of the other. It was further argued that the euro area’s degree of openness in foreign trade
would be smaller than that of the individual participating countries prior to their entry into EMU and
that the Eurosystem would therefore probably be more inclined to pursue a policy of benign neglect
than,  for  example,  the  Bundesbank  had  been  in  the  past.  Apart  from  the  fact  that  some  of  those
theoretical considerations  are  on shaky  ground,  the  empirical findings  argue  against  them,  too.  In  a
larger  and  more  liquid  euro  capital  market,  the  reallocation  of  assets  does  not  necessarily  lead  to
increased exchange rate fluctuations, and a generally increased exchange rate volatility has not been
observed  so  far  either.  On  the  contrary,  measured  in  terms  of  the  standard  deviation  of  daily
percentage  changes,  the  average  volatility  of  the  euro’s  rate  against  the  US  dollar  between  January
1999  and  May  2000  was  actually  somewhat  lower  than  the  volatility  of  the  D-Mark  against  the
US dollar between 1991 and 1998.
In concluding, I would like to emphasise that although the interests of Europeans and Americans may
differ here and there, I do not see any fundamental differences, at least not in the economic fields that I
have just discussed: smooth balance of payments financing, higher growth rates in Europe, stability of
the financial system and flexible exchange rates between the major currencies. I think most Europeans
would subscribe to these objectives as well.
However,  EMU  will  not  automatically  help  to  achieve  these  objectives.  Consequently,  major
challenges for European and American policymakers still exist, some of which could be dealt with by
competing for better policies. Others, such as maintaining the stability of the global financial system,
argue in favour of closer cooperation. At many levels - for example, the IMF, the Financial Stability
Forum,  the  BIS  -  such  cooperation  actually  takes  place  without  being  ultimately  hampered  by  the
complex political structures in Europe.
Competition and cooperation will presumably remain the salient features of transatlantic relations in
the  foreseeable  future.  Interpreted  as  the  struggle  for  the  best  solutions  and  by  assuming  joint
responsibility, these two guiding principles - competition and cooperation - might complement each
other almost ideally.
5
BIS Review 54/2000
