Luis Ángel Rojo: Presentation of the Annual Report of the Banco de España
Address by Mr Luis Ángel Rojo, Governor of the Banco de España, to the Governing Council of the
Banco de España on the presentation of the Annual Report, Madrid, on 20 June 2000.
 Gentlemen,
When this Governing Council met a year back to examine and publish the Annual Report of the Banco
de España, the international economic setting was substantially different from at present. True, fears of
a forthcoming worldwide contraction had faded. But doubts persisted over the strength of the recovery
in those economies most affected by financial crises in the two preceding years and, therefore, over the
speed  with  which  the  world  economy  would  fully  overcome  the  setback  resulting  from  such
disturbances. The doubts were progressively dispelled, however, in the second half of the year. The
recovery firmed with greater speed than initially envisaged and it has led to a phase of expansion with
forecasts for world output growth currently at above 4% for this year and the next, which might yet
run  for  several  years.  These  highly  favourable  expectations  are,  however,  clouded  by  significant
uncertainties which lie at the heart of current international concerns.
Among these concerns are, of course, those relating to the effects of the rise in oil prices since early
1999. This rise has largely involved a recovery in the price of crude from the low levels posted in the
previous months of sluggish demand. But if the current high levels are sustained or rise further, there
could  ultimately  be  a  contractionary  monetary  policy  response,  with  adverse  effects  for  the  very
countries regulating the supply of oil.
The greatest worries, however, surround the United States. The US economy has been the linchpin of
the world economy over the past decade, but today it stands at an uncertain juncture. The stabilising
effectiveness of macroeconomic policies, the greater competition resulting from globalisation, and the
deregulation and increased flexibility of labour and product markets have created the conditions for
greater cyclical stability, while moderating the wage rises associated with each level of unemployment
and  encouraging  investment  in  new  technology.  During  the  1990s,  the  US  economy  has  enjoyed  a
lengthy  expansion  with  strong  job  creation,  a  declining  unemployment  rate  and  low  inflation.  And,
since  1996,  when  the  cyclical  upturn  was  already  at  an  advanced  stage  and  expected  shortly  to
weaken, the US economy has shown renewed vigour. This fresh momentum has been linked to a surge
in productivity growth, attributed to the more intensive and extensive use of new technology, which
has  allowed  the  unemployment  rate  to  fall  to  very  low  levels,  without  significant  increases  in  the
inflation rate over a considerable period, and has also caused share prices to soar. However, the strong
rise in overall demand in relation to supply (spurred partly by the effects of the sharp increase in share
prices  on  consumption  and  investment)  could  not  continue  without  eventually  exacerbating
pre-existing  imbalances  and  causing  others  to  emerge.  Thus,  the  balance  of  payments  deficit  on
current  account,  reflecting  the  sharp  decline  in  US  private-sector  saving,  has  widened  to  barely
sustainable  levels,  while  the  march  of  the  economy  at  above  capacity  has  led  to  the  appearance  of
inflationary pressures on costs and prices in excess of what might be attributable to dearer oil.
The US economy requires an adjustment, and the monetary authorities have registered the fact. While
the virtues of the so-called “new economy” are valid to some extent, they cannot preclude the ultimate
emergence  of  the  problems  that  have  always  concerned  the  old  economy.  The  US  Federal  Reserve
acknowledges that the explanation of recent economic developments is not satisfactory if no reference
is  made  to  the  spur  provided  by  new  technology.  But,  at  the  same  time,  it  points  out  that  the
productivity gains resulting from this spur have tended to generate even greater increases in aggregate
demand than in potential supply. It concludes, in the words of Chairman Greenspan, that “until market
forces,  assisted  by  a  vigilant  Federal  Reserve,  effect  the  necessary  alignment  of  the  growth  of
aggregate  demand  with  the  growth  of  potential  aggregate  supply,  the  full  benefits  of  innovative
productivity acceleration are at risk of being undermined by financial and economic instability”.
1
BIS Review 59/2000
Last  July,  the  US  authorities  duly  initiated  a  tightening  of  monetary  policy  pursuing  a  strategy  of
gradual rises in interest rates, only reinforcing this process in May this year in view of the vigorous US
economy’s  stubbornness  to  adjust.  It  is  difficult  to  anticipate  whether  the  economy  will  move
smoothly onto a sustainable growth path with stability or whether, on the contrary, the persistence of
monetary  restrictiveness  to  overcome  the  resistance  encountered  will  ultimately  lead  to  a  sudden
adjustment whose adverse effects might impact the rest of the world economy. The consequences of
this  impending  adjustment  in  the  United  States  are  the  main  factor  of  uncertainty  in  the  optimistic
outlook for most of the industrialised and emerging countries. Naturally, mention should also be made
of the doubts about the capacity of the Japanese economy to overcome its deep-seated problems in the
short term.
In the euro area, the hesitant recovery embarked upon in the spring of 1999 progressively firmed in the
second  half  of  the  year.  Indeed,  it  has  made  way  for  an  expansion  underpinned  by  the  strength  of
domestic  demand  and  higher  exports,  which  promises  growth  rates  of  more  than  3%  this  year  and
next, and which might run on into the following years. The fears of recession surrounding the start-up
of  Monetary  Union  gradually  gave  way  to  concern  to  ensure  stability  in  an  upturn.  As  demand
increased and growth expectations were revised upwards, the area began to experience price pressures,
compounded by dearer oil, and it became evident that the low interest rate monetary policy adopted in
the  early  months  of  EMU  was  progressively  proving  inadequate.  The  strong  growth  of  the  money
supply and of credit, low real short-term interest rates and the weakness of the euro all portrayed an
overly  lax  monetary  policy  that could  fuel inflation  pressures  in  the  longer  term.  Consequently,  the
European  Central  Bank  adopted  last  November  a  somewhat  tighter  policy  stance  which  it  has
sustained with five increases in its intervention rates as the expansion has taken root.
The  European  Central  Bank  is  an  important  and  newly  founded  institution  whose  decisions  are
scrutinised  by  economists,  markets  and  the  media.  Such  close  attention  is  to  be  welcomed  and  can
contribute positively  to  the  development  of the  common  monetary  policy.  Inevitably  though,  as  the
institution takes its first steps, its decisions often give rise to confused and divergent interpretations.
Sometimes  this  is  because  the  transmission  of  intentions  leaves  something  to  be  desired,  and  other
times because observers pass the expression of such intentions through the prism of their prejudices.
But  the  constant  here  is  that  monetary  policy  is  not  an  exact  science  and  it  can  be  judged  from  a
plethora of different positions. That said, the 18 months in which the common  monetary policy  has
operated to date should suffice to bring observers round to the idea that the decisions of the European
Central Bank have been geared to its primary goal of maintaining price stability in the area over the
medium and long term. These decisions have been underpinned by inflation forecasts based on a broad
range of indicators, among which those of a monetary nature are logically given privileged attention,
especially the money stock. Of course, it can always be debated whether the decisions adopted with
this basic aim and founded on the interpretation of the information available are appropriate or not.
But it is much more difficult to maintain, for example, that such decisions have been deeply affected
by the behaviour of the euro to the point of introducing confusion into the objectives pursued.
The European Central Bank does not, as it is sometimes claimed, practise “benign neglect” in respect
of the euro. The euro may act as a generator of inflationary  pressures and, as  such, is  an  important
element  in  the  definition  of  the  area’s  monetary  conditions.  Moreover,  it  is  important  for  a  new
currency to have the public’s confidence as regards its future capacity to retain its value. It is my view,
however, that the euro cannot be the decisive factor in monetary decision-making. The successive rises
in the European Central Bank’s intervention interest rates over the past eight months have sought to
adapt  monetary  conditions  to  the  growing  expansion  while  attempting  to  prevent  the  emergence  of
price pressures from harming durable growth in the area in future. Admittedly, the strong differentials
(favourable  to  the  dollar)  in  short-  and  long-term  interest  rates  and  expectations  about  their  course
have been one of the immediate determinants of the euro’s weakness. But the European Central Bank
has, fortunately, not been tempted to narrow spreads which are the result of different growth rates in
the  United  States  and  in  the  euro  area  and  of  the  efforts  by  the  US  authorities  to  realign  overall
demand and supply in the United States.
The euro area members are currently enjoying a most favourable economic situation. The expansion is
running at a high rate overall and now extends to all the countries in the area (including Germany). It
BIS Review 59/2000
2
promises to continue narrowing the growth gap between the euro area and the United States given the
high business and consumer confidence levels prevailing. The current inflation rate in the area is very
moderate,  both  in  relation  to  the  US  situation  and  to  Europe’s  past  experience,  and  the  balance  of
payments  on  current  account  is  running  a  surplus,  in  contrast  to  the  burgeoning  US  deficit.  The
foreseeable  continuation  of  this  situation,  assisted  by  a  monetary  policy  firmly  focused  on  price
stability, will be propitious to the euro strengthening, although the rate at which this occurs will hinge
decisively on how the adjustment sought by the US monetary authorities unfolds.
It is my belief that the common monetary policy, taken overall and with a perspective of 18 months,
may be said to have been satisfactory. Its main problems have been its different significance and effect
in  the  various  countries  of  the  area  and,  regarding  implementation,  those  of  the  arrangements  for
liquidity allotment via regular tenders for euro area credit institutions.
The latter problem - to some extent a secondary one for monetary policy but an important one from the
standpoint  of  the  terms  of  access  to  liquidity  for  credit  institutions - has  arisen  from  the  liquidity
allotment  system  used  in  the  regular  (normally  weekly)  tenders.  This  system  was  based  on  a  fixed
interest  rate  at  which  the  amounts  bid  by  the  institutions  were  satisfied  according  to  a  uniform
percentage based on the total volume of funds that the European Central Bank wished to provide at
each tender. Since the funds supplied had to be fully collateralised by the recipient institutions, and
since  the  collateral  volumes  available  varied  greatly  from  one  institution  to  another  and  from  one
country to another owing to the differing features of national financial systems, the amounts allotted
and  the  rationing  of  funds  at  the  fixed  interest  rate  gave  rise  to  a  distribution  of  liquidity  among
institutions and among the Eurosystem countries that owed more to the relative volumes of collateral
available  than  to  actual  liquidity  requirements.  When  the  European  Central  Bank  judged  that  the
volume of collateral required was only that needed to cover the liquidity allotted to each institution,
overbidding by institutions became a structural feature of the system, becoming accentuated with time
and increasing strongly in periods in which there were expectations of interest rate rises. In parallel,
the  fund  rationing  percentages  applied  in  tenders  declined  and  became  more  volatile,  thereby
heightening  banks’  difficulty  in  deciding  on  the  size  of  their  bids.  Recently,  the  European  Central
Bank has decided to change to a regular tender system based on a variable interest rate (as hitherto
applied in the fortnightly tenders) which, it is expected, will resolve the above-mentioned difficulties.
The first of the above problems is more important and is, moreover, inevitable. The single monetary
policy is common to the entire euro area and is defined having regard to the situation and outlook for
the  countries  of  the  area  as  a  whole.  Since  cyclical  positions  and  the  transmission  mechanisms  for
monetary  measures  vary  from  one  country  to  another,  the  common  or  single  monetary  policy  will
never have the same significance (as regards its being more or less expansionary or contractionary) for
all  the  economies  of  the  area.  When  the  common  monetary  policy  adapted  to  the  area’s  overall
situation proves too expansionary or contractionary for a country in the area, that country has to offset
this accordingly with a contractionary or expansionary fiscal policy, respectively, and, in the former
case, pursue policies that increase flexibility and competition in the economy.
This problem, which is unavoidable in any monetary union, has been quite considerable in  the  first
year and a half of Stage Three of EMU. The common monetary policy began at a time when external
demand in the Eurosystem economies was weak owing to the international financial disturbances of
the two previous years. Likewise, domestic demand was sluggish in some member states while surging
in  others,  fuelled  by  strong  interest  rate  cuts  and  the  improved  outlook  resulting  from  the
macroeconomic  policies  pursued  to  join  EMU.  Hence,  the  relatively  accommodating  common
monetary  policy  adopted  by  the  European  Central  Bank  in  view  of  the  overall  conditions  of  and
outlook  for  the  area  was  perhaps  insufficient  for  some  countries  while  excessively  loose  for  those
others  (Spain  among  them)  where  demand  and  activity  were  advancing  robustly.  Later  came  the
improvement in the world economy, the pickup in exports and the gradual strengthening of domestic
demand  across  the  area.  And  the  European  Central  Bank,  given  the  clearly  expansionary  climate
taking hold, began the course of intervention interest rate rises it has followed to date. However, the
recovery of exports and the strengthening of domestic demand have also spread to the countries in the
area - including  Spain - whose  economies  were  already  growing  forcefully  and  have  stepped  up  in
pace in  the  closing  months  of  1999  and  the  opening  months  of  the  present  year.  Consequently,  the
3
BIS Review 59/2000
common monetary policy has been tightened, but it is perhaps still too relaxed for the latter countries.
These situations of relative monetary easiness are unimportant if temporary. But if they persist over
time and are not sufficiently offset, they may ultimately generate demand pressures on supply in the
countries affected. That may lead to losses in competitiveness the correction of which would exact a
reduction in the growth rate of output and a fall in the level of employment.
Over the past three years Spain has run high GDP growth and job creation rates clearly above those in
the euro area as a whole. And although the economic recovery in the euro area will lead to a narrowing
of  these  differences  this  year  and  next,  our  economy  will  continue  to  experience  high  rates  of
expansion in this period. The government has pursued a fiscal policy which has lowered the general
government deficit to 1.1% of GDP in 1999 (down from 5% in 1996), and promises to place it at 0.4%
of  GDP  this  year.  It  has  further  applied  a  deregulation  and  competition-enhancing  policy  of
undoubtedly favourable effects for the price level and, in the short run, for the inflation rate. However,
against a background of highly optimistic expectations, monetary conditions remain lax, as testified by
the  growth of  the  main  monetary  aggregates  and  the  low  level  of  real  interest  rates.  Further,  credit
continues  to  rise at  very  high  rates. The  overall  result  is  thus  a  heightening  of  demand  pressure  on
trend  output,  with  worrying  effects.  On  one  hand,  the  consumer  price  index  has  undergone  a  rise
which, though largely attributable to exogenous factors (higher prices of oil and other commodities on
international  markets,  the  depreciation  of  the  euro  and  bad  weather),  and  despite  the  moderate
behaviour of wages, also reflects the effects of demand pressure. This has taken the Spanish CPI to
somewhat  more  than  1  percentage  point  higher  than  the  average  for  the  area.  On  the  other,  the
resilience of demand has led to a very high growth rate of imports in real terms. And this, along with
the rise in the prices of imported goods, has tipped the balance of payments on current account into
deficit. Under these conditions, the Spanish economy needs to restrain the expansion of demand and
increase the degree of flexibility in labour and product markets in order to sustain high, stable growth
rates in the future. Specifically, it requires a policy to further reinforce fiscal consolidation, to push
through  greater  labour  market  flexibility  in  industrial  relations  bargaining  and  to  forcefully  pursue
deregulation  and  the  infusion  of  greater  competition  in  product  and  service  markets.  The
Government’s announcement that it intends to act firmly along all these lines is thus to be welcomed
and encouraged.
This  desirable  Spanish  economic  policy  stance  for  circumstantial  reasons  has  the  advantage  of
coinciding  with  that  required,  to  differing  degrees,  in  most  Eurosystem  countries  to  overcome  the
structural problems that are at the very core of current difficulties. The United States is faced with a
thorny issue of cyclical adjustment. But the euro area economies have a worrying point of reference in
the US economy as regards matters such as the capacity to generate employment, the development and
application  of  new  technology  and  productivity  growth.  The  euro  area,  in  order  to  maintain  and
strengthen its position in the world economy, needs to increase employment among its population of
working age and productivity so that its current expansion, exceeding its cyclical component, may lead
to intense and sustained growth. That will require greater dynamism than the area has shown in recent
years.
Winds  of  change  are,  of  course,  blowing  across  Europe.  Corporate  mergers  and  acquisitions  have
intensified of late and industrial restructuring is much more frequent than in the past. There are several
forces behind this process. First, the heightened competition arising from the expansion of global trade
in goods and services, which leads to size and strategy reviews and to cost-cutting drives. Adding to
this  in  the  euro  area  are  the  effects  of  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency;  this  heightens
competition in the area, highlights the industrial fragmentation of Europe and leads to the search for
competitive  edge  through  greater  size.  Privatisation  and  deregulation  are  also  forcing  former
monopolies  or  oligopolies  to  shake  off  inertia,  to  compete  and  to  restructure.  Moreover,  major
European  companies  have  tended  to  replace  bank  finance  by  resorting  more  to  bond  and  equity
markets. That has led them to pay greater heed to the requirements of stock market investors, moving
closer  to  the  Anglo-Saxon  model  of  capitalism,  to  be  more  mindful  of  profits  and  to  serve
shareholders’  interests  more.  In  turn,  they  have  been  led  to  undertake  restructuring  with  a  view  to
enhancing their effectiveness and cutting their costs.
BIS Review 59/2000
4
Governments,  for  their  part,  have  in  recent  years  adopted  a  stance  more  favourable  to  fostering
competition  and  limiting  intervention,  to  assisting  the  creation  of  companies  and  to  reducing  a  tax
burden that is a deterrent to risk-taking. They are convinced that if they fail to do this, companies will,
under the pressure of markets, emigrate to less regulated and lower-cost regions outside the euro area.
Despite  these  signs  of  greater  dynamism,  much  remains  to  be  done  in  the  euro  area  in  terms  of
increasing  competition,  reducing  intervention,  promoting  innovation,  boosting  public  and  private
research,  and  overcoming  a  nationalist  bias  which  sees  only  a  minor  portion  of  corporate  mergers
cross borders and witnesses others being supported by governments to create dominant corporations of
their nationality in the area.
The  recent  extraordinary  European  Council  in  Lisbon  has  highlighted  Europe’s  backwardness  in
developing  and  applying  new  technology.  This  is  not  the  only  area  where  Europe  lags  behind,
although it does appears to offer an explanation, at present, for the gap between the results achieved by
the US economy and the European economies in recent years. Reflection on the range of factors and
conditions  bearing  upon  the  progress  and  the  absorption  of  the  transforming  effects  that  the  new
technology  heralds leads  inevitably  to the  general  matter of  the  context  in  which  economic  activity
unfolds  and  which  encourages  or  hampers  dynamic  growth  in  Europe.  Indeed,  the  shortcomings  in
research, education and technical and professional training which hinder scientific and technological
progress,  the  inadequate  levels  of  competition  which  hold  back  the  introduction  of  new  technology
and  the  rigidities  which  prevent  the  replacement  and  reallocation  of  productive  factors  that  are
normally associated with technological innovation are problems no different from those that generally
stifle productivity and job creation in Europe.
It is to be hoped that the course of action agreed upon in Lisbon will not be hamstrung by dissenting
voices in the complex world of European politics and that the guiding principles of such action will
extend beyond the field of new technology. It is also to be trusted that these programmes of action are
structured around the goals, likewise formulated in Lisbon, of strongly increasing employment during
this  decade  and  of  finding  sound,  viable  social  welfare  systems  in  Europe.  Such  goals  need  not  be
eroded by greater economic and technological drive; rather, they should be tackled bearing in mind the
likely technological future and the reality of population trends and of the resulting conditions, so as to
design  appropriate,  sustainable  social  protection  systems  in  the  area.  The  European  economies’
apparent impending boom provides them with the opportunity to address a set of decisions geared to
ensuring  firmer  and  stable  growth  in  the  long  run.  Spain  should  participate  purposefully  in  such
reforming policies, which are currently the main challenge facing the euro area economies.
 Following the introduction of the euro, European financial markets have witnessed an acceleration of
the  trends  discernible  in  the  years  prior  to  monetary  union.  These  have  been  induced  by  growing
deregulation, the introduction of remote access further to banking and investment services directives
and  the  ongoing  process  of  globalisation  in  economic  and  financial  relations.  The  changes  are
introducing  growing  measures  of  consolidation  and  integration  in  European  financial  markets  and
paving the way for a more appropriate framework in which these markets may rapidly assimilate the
effects of developments in information and communications technology.
The most rapid and direct effects of the introduction of the euro have been on the degree of integration
of money markets, especially in the interbank deposit and derivatives (including most notably interest
rate  swaps)  segments.  This  has  been  a  consequence  of  the  implementation  of  the  single  monetary
policy and the sound functioning of the TARGET system.
In the market for fixed income securities, the defining characteristic of the year has been the strong
growth of issues by non-financial private firms, which have resorted to the primary markets in many
cases  to  finance  mergers  and  acquisitions.  The  success  of  these  placements  has  been  assisted  by
investors’  desire  to  diversify  their  portfolios  and  purchase  the  higher-yield  instruments  offered  by
private  companies  following  the  process  of  convergence  in  interest  rates  on  European  public  debt.
Further, the demand for bonds has benefited from the expansion of pension and mutual funds.
5
BIS Review 59/2000
On the equity markets there has been a fresh increase in stock market capitalisation. This has come
about  due  both  to  rising  prices  and  a  greater  number  of  companies  accessing  the  market.  A  key
development in this area has been the establishment in the main European stock markets of a “new
market”  for  technology  or  high-growth  companies.  The  reporting,  listing  and  trading  rules  of  this
market differ from those prevailing on the traditional markets.
Following  the  changes  on  derivative  markets,  equity  markets  are  witnessing  a  deep-seated
transformation, especially as regards trading. The construction of new electronic trading platforms has
established  a  more  competitive  environment,  characterised  by  a  wealth  of  information,  lower
transaction costs and the elimination of entry barriers, all of which provides direct market access to a
broader range of investors. This innovative process has prompted adaptation by the traditional market
members.  They  have  likewise  offered  electronic  options  for  trading,  and  amended  their  governing
structures, characterised to date by mutualism, which offered privileges to market members, through
whom all transactions had to pass. As part of this process of adaptation to what will be a broader and
less segmented market territorially, mention may likewise be made of the increasingly prominent role
of strategic mergers and alliances between traditional market participants.
EMU has also led to advances in the consolidation of clearing and settlement systems. Nonetheless, it
is premature as yet to talk of the speed or outcome of this integration  process,  which  will  probably
lead to one or two major pan-European platforms being established.
Spanish  financial  markets  have  largely  moved  in  step  with  other  European  markets  following  the
introduction of the euro. They have also been influenced by the entry into force of the reform of the
Securities Market Act and by the changes in the taxation of a good number of financial instruments.
These events have generally tended to heighten competition in the markets and they have given extra
momentum to financial disintermediation and to the internationalisation both of investor portfolios and
end borrowers’ sources of financing.
The  high  degree of integration  attained in  the  biggest  segments  of  the  euro  area  money  market  has
allowed Spanish deposit money institutions, as a whole, to offset the decline in financing extended by
the  central  bank  with  interbank  loans  obtained  from  the  rest  of  the  area.  The  system  of  periodic
liquidity injections by the Eurosystem via fixed rate tenders and rationing (now under change) and the
relatively  modest  volume  of  assets  usable  by  Spanish  banks  as  collateral  for  the  liquidity  received
have adversely affected our institutions’ capacity to receive funds directly from the central bank; as a
portion  of  what  were  previously  domestic  transactions  are  now  cross-border  ones,  the  domestic
interbank market has shrunk considerably. At the same time, the integration of the money market has
affected foreign banks with a presence in Spain: some such institutions have withdrawn or cut back
their activity as their main source of business has disappeared.
In 1999, and generally in parallel with developments in the euro area, there was a slowdown in net
issuance of public fixed income (reflecting the Treasury’s lower borrowing requirements) and a strong
expansion of net issuance of private fixed income on the bond markets.
In the public fixed income segment, which remains the biggest and predominant one in total trading,
there  were  several  notable  developments.  First,  reforms  have  been  made  to  the  group  of  market-
makers,  giving  access  to  new  non-resident  market-makers  without  a  presence  in  Spain.  Further,  an
electronic public debt trading platform has been created, and the trading of public debt derivatives has
fallen sharply as a result of the high substitutability between the products offered by various European
centres following the launch of the euro, making for a strong concentration of these operations in the
British  (for  short-dated  terms)  and  German  (for  medium-  and  long-term  maturities)  markets.  As  to
public debt clearing and settlement systems, the Spanish Public Debt Book-Entry System (CADE by
its Spanish abbreviation) has established links with other central securities depositories and embarked
on a venture to join forces with the Securities Clearing and Settlement Service (SCLV), which will be
open to other systems. In this connection, the entity promoting the venture has been incorporated as a
private company for the ultimate purpose of unifying the registration, clearing and settlement systems
and  thus  improving  the  Spanish  position  vis-à-vis  the  foreseeable  concentration  into  one  or  two
European central depositories.
BIS Review 59/2000
6
Private fixed income dominated the scene in 1999. Issuance increased fivefold on the previous year,
although this figure should be interpreted bearing in mind the low starting level. The reasons for such
a  strong  expansion  in  issues  are  to  be  found  in  the  finance  sought  on  this  market  by  financial  and
non-financial corporations to fund their expansion; in the placing of private fixed income on the same
tax  footing  as  public  debt  for  legal  entities;  and  in  the  rapid  advance  of  portfolio  securitisation  to
convert holdings into assets that may be used as collateral for monetary policy and payment system
operations. Private fixed income trading is still very modest in relation to total trading, but AIAF (the
Spanish  association  of  securities  dealers)  dealing  doubled  last  year  and  it  would  be  desirable  if  its
initiative  to link  up  to  the  Electronic  Public  Debt  Platform  were  to  prosper  so  that  both  public  and
private  fixed  income  could  be  commonly  traded.  Both  public  and  private  debt  could  find  a  single
clearing and settlement platform under the roof of a future union between CADE and SCLV.
Compared  with  the  strong  volumes  of  previous  years,  equity  issues  in  1999  were  affected  by  the
decline in privatisations. If this effect is stripped out, equity issues were up by over 50%, while trading
increased  moderately.  Equity  derivatives  withstood  the  integration  of  European  financial  markets
better  than  their  fixed  income  counterparts,  and  held  at  positive  growth  rates.  There  were  some
significant  structural  innovations  on  equity  markets.  First,  a  market  for  Latin  American  companies
called  LATIBEX  has  been  created,  allowing  the  listing  of  certain  companies  from  Latin  American
countries which are quoted in euro via the Spanish stock markets’ electronic system and settled  via
SCLV. And more recently, the New Market has been instituted. The eligibility, listing and disclosure
requirements of this market are better adapted to the particular features of technology and high-growth
firms, whose financing requirements are also better served. Finally, the Spanish stock markets reached
an agreement with seven other European exchanges to form a single pan-European trading platform,
although little headway has been made given the difficulties of harmonising criteria and  procedures
and the new stock market merger plans in Europe.
Generally,  the  organised  financial  markets  may  be  said  to  be  undergoing  a  process  of  accelerated
change and ongoing reforms under the pressure of the trend towards integration, accentuated by the
introduction  of  the  euro,  and  of  technological  innovation.  Uncertainty  persists  over  the  foreseeably
significant effects all this will have on the location of financial business in Europe. In any event, the
process will lead to greater competition, cheaper operating costs in markets, greater diversification in
investor  portfolios  and  improved  financing  possibilities  for  companies.  It  is  important  that  the
institutional structure of our markets should be reformed with a view to increasing negotiating power
vis-à-vis the mergers that will, no doubt, ultimately take place in the euro area.
Turning to financial intermediaries, and commencing with institutional investors, mention should be
made of the modest increase in the net asset value of mutual funds, following the very strong increase
in  previous  years,  and  the  considerable  growth  in  pension  funds  and  insurance products. The lesser
increase in the net asset value of mutual funds was due to the lower rise in the value of their holdings
and to the lower net subscriptions of their shares by the public. The latter was the result, in turn, of the
decline in the  net financial  saving  of  households  and  firms  and  of  the  lesser  attractiveness  of  these
shares compared with other investment alternatives (owing in part to the reforms detracting from the
relative  tax  benefits  of  this  type  of  product).  By  contrast, the fact  that  pension  funds  and  insurance
products retained significant tax benefits combined with their lesser degree of development meant that
demand  for  them  continued  to  grow.  Institutional  investors  have  been  and  remain  the  preferential
vehicle used by final savers to attain greater diversification of their assets, seeking higher profitability
and approving a greater internationalisation of the holdings. Such preferences on the part of the public
are discernible in the composition of institutional investors’ portfolios, where the increase in foreign
holdings has been particularly notable since the introduction of the euro, at the same time as foreign
positions in Spanish debt have increased.
I  shall  now  turn  to  the  basic  group  of  financial  intermediaries,  namely  deposit  money  institutions.
Recently,  they  have  had  to  face  the  challenges  arising  from  the  changes  in  monetary  policy
implementation arrangements, from the creation of a single money market in the euro area and from
greater competition with deposit money institutions from the various countries now operating in the
single  currency.  The  notable  capacity  of  Spanish  institutions  to  respond  and  adapt  to  the  new
environment and harness its potential benefits should be highlighted.
7
BIS Review 59/2000
In  this  respect,  the  fresh  momentum  given  to  the  process  of  consolidation  of  the  credit  system,
especially among the major banks, has been appreciable. Two major banking groups have emerged,
accounting between them for around 40% of deposit money institutions’ total assets. Moreover, these
groups  are  pursuing  a  significant  international  strategy  based  chiefly  on  extending  their  activity  to
countries with a less developed banking culture to which they may lend their notable experience and in
which they may expect satisfactory returns. That said, they are not forgoing a simultaneous increase in
their presence and weight in the European banking market.
Another salient aspect of Spanish deposit money institutions’ activity in 1999 was, for a further year,
the expansion of credit to the resident private sector. The weight of this variable in the balance sheet
continued to increase and showed very high growth rates, which are dangerous from a macroeconomic
standpoint and insufficient from the perspective of banking prudence (a subject to which I shall return
very shortly). The main factors behind this strong credit growth are well known. On the demand side,
such  factors  include  low  interest  rate  levels,  the  favourable  outlook  for  the  economy  and  corporate
restructuring,  including  the  acquisition  of  companies  in  Spain  and  abroad,  adding  to  which  is  the
improved financial position of households and firms as a result of the lower interest burden on their
debt and of the rise in the value of financial assets in recent years. Instrumental on the banks’ side is
the stiff competition between institutions, the optimism arising from historically low default rates and,
no doubt, an easing of the conditions to be met to extend credit.
The strong expansion of credit could only be financed in part by deposits (despite the strong growth of
sight deposits and the pickup in time deposits in response to their new tax treatment), while there was
a heavy decline in asset sales under repurchase agreements to the private sector. Consequently, credit
institutions  had  to  raise  sizeable  net  resources  on  the  international  interbank  market  (switching
towards the euro area market), but also on domestic and foreign capital markets, taking advantage of
the favourable conditions.
Deposit money institutions’ results followed the same pattern in 1999 as in previous years. Their net
interest,  gross  income  and  net  income  fell  once  more  as  a  proportion  of  average  total  assets.
Notwithstanding, pre-tax profits continued to increase since the decline in gross income was more than
offset by lower writedowns and provisions against the background of a highly favourable economic
situation.
However,  in  a  strong  economic  upturn  and  in  a  context  of  significant  financial  transformation  and
technological  progress,  credit  institutions  must  pay  great  attention  to  their  operating  costs  and
measures of efficiency and exercise particular caution with their strategies for profits, provisions and
writedowns  and  capital.  Cyclical  upswings - when  the  demand  for  finance  is  intense,  when  the
measures of disclosed bad debts are very low and when the climate of optimism tends to weaken the
assessment  of  risks,  the  quality  of  their  selection  and  the  terms  under  which  credit  is  granted - are
periods  in  which  problems  that  may  later  emerge,  when  operations  mature  or  economic  conditions
change, are first sown. Accordingly, the Banco de España must continuously urge restraint on credit
institutions and, when necessary, enact measures to strengthen prudence during phases of optimism.
The problems that may stem from the internationalisation of markets, from their volatility, from the
development  of  new  financial  products,  from  the  use  of  new  technology  and  from  the  growing
complexity of institutions are causing the BIS Committee on Banking Supervision and the supervisory
groups  of  the  European  Union  to  consider  fresh  approaches  towards  solvency  which  will  make
themselves  felt  in  the  near  future.  These  approaches  have  as  their  starting  point  the  desirability  of
adapting the regulatory requirements governing credit institutions’ capital to those resulting from an
economic  evaluation  of  the  risks  assumed  taking  into  account  both  the  objective  characteristics  of
operations and the supervisors’ assessment of the risk analysis, management and monitoring systems
used by banks.
One  significant  idea  making  a  mark  in  the  new  approach,  and  one  that  the  Banco  de  España  has
advocated for some time, is the need to combine credit risk provisioning policy and capital adequacy
policy. Credit risk remains the most important risk for the vast majority of banks and the main cause
of bank failures. Inadequate assessment of the foreseeable failure of investments can make any capital
adequacy  ratio  appear  inadequate.  International  regulators  had  hitherto  focused  on  the  capital
BIS Review 59/2000
8
adequacy  ratio,  but  they  had  scarcely  looked  into  the  prior  problem  of  provisioning.  This  focus
appears to be shifting with the new reflections on credit risk assessment methods.
Since it first began dictating accounting rules two decades back, the Banco de España has paid great
attention  to  credit  risk  rating  and  provisioning.  In  1999,  these  rules  incorporated  a  somewhat
pioneering idea but one which is in tune with the new global approach to provisions: the idea that the
assessment of different individual operations at a specific point in time should be rounded off with an
assessment of the potential risks of the portfolio over time, bearing in mind the cyclical movements of
the  economy,  the  correlation  between  general  economic  conditions  and  bank  loan  default,  and  the
inertia of banks’ portfolios and customers. It is sought to capture this dynamic element of risk with a
new, so-called statistical provision that tends to take provisions for bad debts as a whole towards the
average level required by bad debts over the course of the business cycle. In short, it is a stabilising
mechanism  which  seeks  to  adjust  the  strong  cyclical  fluctuations  of  provisions.  And  it  has  been
introduced  at  a  time  in  which  the  economic  boom  has  reduced  disclosed  portfolio  credit  risk  to  a
minimum  and  in  which,  therefore,  the  specific  provisions  for  loan  losses  are  very  low  despite  the
strong  expansion  of  credit.  As  the  system  is  new,  the  initial  values  of  the  vector  of  coefficients
defining the new statistical provision have been  set  with  great  caution, and  no doubt  fall  somewhat
short  of  the  average  burdens  that  insolvency  risk  has  entailed  in  Spain’s  past  experience  or  in  the
comparative experience of other countries. It is thus highly likely that the provisioning system will be
revised in the near future to draw it closer to the reality of credit portfolio risk, and this likelihood will
be even greater if credit institutions persist in lending at the very high current growth rates.
It would not be possible to conclude these thoughts on banking supervision without referring to the
emergence  of  the  internet,  in  the  field  of  banking  technology,  as  a  new  means  of  contact  with  the
public.  The  Web  induces  all  banks  to  offer  these  new  access  services  at  least  passively,  but  it  is
leading some to a highly active virtual banking strategy. As this course of action is an entirely new
one,  it  is  difficult  to  assess  economically  the  associated  opportunities,  which  can  naturally  only  be
addressed  following  a  rigorous,  objective  analysis  of  the  projects  involved  and  an  appropriate
assessment  of  the  related  investments.  Undoubtedly,  the  internet  will  lead - and  is  in  fact  already
leading - to an increase in competition on banking markets. This is because customers can compare the
offers of various banks with greater ease and because banks wishing rapidly to gain market share will
resort to tempting offers. In this connection, supervisors should insist that nobody make offers that are
not economically rational and that cannot be sustained in the long run. Further, consumer safeguard
systems  are  also  valid  and  applicable  to  virtual  banking,  and  the  Banco  de  España  has  warned  as
much,  without  prejudice  to  the  fact  that  it  may  adapt  the  current  rules  in  some  way  to  the
particularities of the new medium.
 That  marks  the  end  of  my  address  today,  which  is  also  the  last  of  the  series  of  speeches  to  this
Governing  Council  which,  during  my  eight  years  as  Governor  of  the  Banco  de  España,  have
accompanied  the  presentation  of  a  like  number  of  Annual  Reports  and  corresponding  Financial
Accounts of the Spanish Economy.
During this period the Banco de España has striven to comply with the functions entrusted to it by law.
To this  end,  it  continued refining  a  monetary  policy  whose  design  and  implementation  was  geared,
under  the  constraints  at  each  moment  in  time,  to  attaining  price  stability,  until  Spain  joined  the
Monetary Union. It has also performed a regulatory and supervisory function contributing to the sound
working and stability of the financial system and  the payment  system.  And  finally,  it  has sought to
ensure  in  its  services - from  the  preparation  of  studies  and  compilation  of  statistical  information  to
supervision and operational tasks - a level of quality enabling it to perform its functions effectively.
The ongoing activity of the Bank in its areas of responsibility has, however, had to confront highly
varied circumstances and adapt to changing institutional conditions. A few days after I took office in
July 1992, the depreciation of sterling began that would eventually lead to the outbreak of the ERM
crisis in September. This crisis violently shook the European economies for almost two years and was
the result of the inadequate coordination of national monetary and exchange rate policies in the area
9
BIS Review 59/2000
following  German  reunification.  It  will  probably  be  viewed  by  historians  as  the  final,  conclusive
argument  in  favour  of  a  monetary  union  in  Europe.  The  crisis  affected  particularly  harshly  those
economies,  such  as  Spain’s,  which  were  at  that  time  in  a  situation  of  great  weakness.  When  it
concluded  in  early  August  1993,  Spain  appeared  to  be  very  far  from  being  able  to  meet  the
convergence  criteria  set  under  the  Maastricht  agreement  as  requirements  for  EMU  membership.
Although serious doubts persisted over the possibility of creating the Union within a reasonable time
frame, the European Monetary Institute embarked on the detailed preparation of the future Union at
the  beginning  of  1994.  The  time  available  to  pursue  convergence  policies  would  be  limited  if  the
schedules envisaged at Maastricht were to be met.
The  legislation  enacted  on  2  June  1994  granting  full  monetary  policy  autonomy  to  the  Banco  de
España,  with  a  view  to  its  future  participation  in  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks,  was  a
landmark  for  our  institution  and  enabled  it  to  focus  its  efforts  on  the  development  of  a
stability-oriented monetary strategy geared to Spain joining the Union. The design of monetary policy
was  modified,  defining  its  targets  in  terms  of  the  inflation  rate,  and  reporting  and  communication
channels with Parliament and with society were extended to address existing problems and the results
obtained. After some teething problems, the new monetary policy soon entered into a phase of highly
positive  achievements  and,  supported subsequently  by  a  fiscal  consolidation  drive  and  continuously
improving  expectations,  it  contributed  finally  and  significantly  to  the  fulfilment  on  schedule  of  the
convergence criteria.
At the same time, the Banco de España participated actively in the preparatory studies for EMU within
the European Monetary Institute through numerous working groups and committees which paved the
way for the resolutions adopted by  its  Council.  It  has  continued  doing  this in the  European  Central
Bank, contributing to the refinement and subsequent implementation of the common monetary policy
and  of  the  underlying  mechanisms.  All  the  foregoing  has  required  considerable  adaptation  by  our
monetary system and by the Banco de España itself as from the successful “changeover to the euro” at
the start of 1999.
In parallel, with regard to banking  supervision, the serious  crisis  at  Banesto  in  the  early  part  of  the
period  to  which  I  am  referring  led  to  a  strengthening  of  the  supervisory  area,  while  the  range  of
institutions  whose  supervision  was  entrusted  to  the  Banco  de  España  was  broadened.  Further,  the
ongoing march of financial innovation, the growing technical sophistication of our credit institutions
and  the  most  significant  changes  in  Spanish  banking  during  these  years,  with  rapid  consolidation
processes and the extension of activity into other geographical areas, have imposed significant reforms
on  the  organisation  and  substance  of  supervision.  I  believe  our  supervisory  arrangements  have
contributed to the prestige the Spanish banking system has acquired in the eyes of the world over these
past years.
In sum, this period has had its difficult moments, but also greatly satisfying ones. Time will judge the
role played by the Banco de España during these years, although I will venture to say I am optimistic
in  this respect.  What  I  should  stress is that  the  achievements  have  been  the  result  of  teamwork:  by
those whose work has been directly affected by the problems and transformation of monetary policy,
of  the  payment  system  and  of  regulation  and  supervision;  by  those  for  whom  frequent  trips  to
Frankfurt to participate in meetings at which the new European monetary system has been forged or
those  for  whom  lengthy  stays,  away  from  their  families,  to  carry  out  on-site  inspection  of  credit
institutions have been a regular feature of their lives; and by the rest of the Bank’s staff, who have also
felt  the  effect  of  such  changes  and  have  participated  cooperatively  and  effectively  in  our  common
mission. My congratulations and gratitude to all of them.
I  should  convey  my  gratitude  especially  to  the  Deputy  Governor,  who  has  shared  satisfactions  and
setbacks with me these past years, and to the Directors General, those present and those who have left
the Bank during my term of office. Some debts cannot be repaid, and this is the case for those I have
with them for their professional abilities, their commitment and their loyalty. I shall not seek to settle
this debt with further words.
Finally,  my  sincere  gratitude  to  this  Council,  to  you  the  present  members  and  your  predecessors.
During these years you have provided the Bank with your extensive knowledge, wise counsel and will
BIS Review 59/2000
10
to reach the right decisions and to contribute. Our meetings have been characterised by a high calibre
of debate, seriousness and cordiality. Let my gratitude and best wishes to you all sound the final note
of this somewhat lengthy coda.
11
BIS Review 59/2000
