Klaus Liebscher: Challenges for the Eurosystem’s monetary policy
Contribution  by  Dr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank,  to  the  panel
discussion  on  monetary  policy,  28th  Economics  Conference  of  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank,
held in Vienna, on 15 June 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen!
Central  bankers  are  used  to  acting  under  uncertainty  -  in  fact,  this  is  a  major  rationale  for  their
existence. The Eurosystem - i.e. the ECB and the euro area national central banks - has undergone -
and, I believe, successfully passed - a special test on “Monetary policy under uncertainty” in managing
the transition to EMU and in conducting monetary policy during the first one and a half years of the
euro  area’s  existence.  Indeed,  EMU  represents  a  major  regime  shift,  with  a  number  of  associated
uncertainties,  such  as  data  uncertainties,  uncertainties  about  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism
across the euro area, uncertainties about the economic structure of the euro economy as it is adapting
to the new, more competitive environment, and, last but not least, uncertainties about the interaction
between the various economic policymakers.
Ladies and gentlemen, let me contribute six observations to the issue of our panel discussion which
were obviously similar.
The first observation relates to the role of monetary policy in a situation when the economy is possibly
entering  a  new  era.  Some  proponents  of  the  New  Economy  claim  that  monetary  policy  should  be
relaxed  to  “give  growth  a  chance”.  Now,  while  I  certainly  have  sympathy  with  economic  policies
supporting economic growth, employment and welfare, I think this categoric claim is beside the point.
Monetary policy should always and unambiguously - with or without a “New Economy” - pursue its
primary objective of maintaining price stability. A stable anchor for price expectations is particularly
important  in  a  period  of  heightened  uncertainty.  It  is  common  wisdom  by  now  that,  by  credibly
sticking to price stability, monetary policy serves growth best. Indeed, it has been argued - and I would
subscribe to this assessment - that the low inflation of the 1990s was among the contributing favorable
framework  conditions  which laid  the  ground  for  the  recent  emergence  of  dynamic  entrepreneurship
and innovation in the United States. In addition, the highly competitive and far less regulated market
structure of the US economy has contributed substantially to new businesses and new technologies.
This does, however, not mean that monetary policy should be blind and ignorant vis-à-vis the changes
brought about by a New Economy. Quite on the contrary!
This brings me to my second observation, ladies and gentlemen. In a situation of uncertainty about a
regime change, the central issue for monetary policy is: on which economic indicators best to focus in
order to assess inflation  prospects.  And it is  with these  indicators  -  not  with the  policy  objectives  -
where shifts of weight might be appropriate.
Any regime change may have the unwelcome effect of altering long standing economic relationships.
The advent of a New Economy affects a number of variables which the central bank would normally
monitor  to  assess  whether  the  economy  is  below,  at  or  above  its  potential  and  whether  therefore
inflationary  pressures  are  likely  to  emerge.  A  New  Economy  would,  by  definition,  increase  the
economy’s potential output, so potential output and any concept directly or indirectly derived from it -
such as the output gap, NAIRU (i.e. Non-Accelerating-Inflation Rate of Unemployment) or the natural
rate of unemployment and growth - become less reliable indicators of future price developments.
Thus,  the  central  bank  should  attach  less  weight  to  these  indicators  in  periods  where  fundamental
changes to the trend growth of potential output are suspected. At the same time, the potential break in
long-standing  economic  relationships  means  that  quantitative  models,  which  are  usually  estimated
from  long  time  series,  become  a  less  reliable  guide  for  the  interpretation  of  current  and  future
1
BIS Review 52/2000
economic developments. Thus, by necessity, the central bank should attach more weight on a detailed
analysis of current economic developments.
Ladies and gentlemen, this leads me to my third observation. The Eurosystem’s two-pillar monetary
policy strategy was particularly chosen to cater for a period of transition and uncertainty, although - to
be frank - at the time of designing this strategy, we certainly did not have a New Economy in mind but
had quite different concerns. The two-pillar strategy allows us - and compels us - to follow closely and
systematically  a  wide  range  of  monetary,  economic  and  financial  indicators  which  may  give
indications  on  future  inflation  and  economic  developments  at  large.  It  easily  accommodates  the
advisable shift in the relative weight attached to various variables which I advocated previously.
What is more, the two-pillar strategy does not pretend the existence of certainty and stable economic
relationships where there are in reality no such things. In this sense, it is a very honest strategy. To be
transparent to the public, though, it requires special communication efforts by the central banks.
By all means, the two-pillar strategy is in my conviction clearly superior - particularly at the present
juncture of considerable model uncertainty - to any mechanical rule-based approaches. The latter are
usually tailored to specific views of how the economy operates and are therefore less likely to perform
well in periods where these views might have to be adapted. Monetary policy rules usually derive their
policy recommendations from a very narrow set of economic indicators only. In many cases they rest
heavily  on  the  output  gap  and  the  equilibrium  real  interest  rate,  which,  as  I  have  pointed  out,  are
potentially very unreliable concepts at the present juncture.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  now,  as  my  fourth  observation,  address  the  issue  of  how  a  New
Economy  would  influence  monetary  policy  in the long  run, in  other  words  how  it  would  affect  the
long-term prospects for real interest rates. Again, there is unfortunately no simple answer.
Even in the United States, where recent data clearly point to a substantial increase in the growth rate of
productivity,  it is  still  open  whether a  New  Economy  would  permanently  increase  the  trend  rate  of
productivity growth or, alternatively, cause a one-off shift in the level of productivity only.
What  is  more,  even  in  the  latter  case  of  a  one-time  level  shift  in  productivity,  it  could  take  the
economy quite some time - up to a decade or more - to reach its new steady state. It will therefore also
in the near and medium-term future remain unclear which of the two effects the ICT revolution entails.
Ladies and gentlemen, let me now, as my fifth observation, turn to the more immediate period of the
transition  to  a  possible  New  Economy.  As  has  recently  been  pointed  out  by  Alan  Greenspan,  the
potential problem for monetary policy from the New Economy is that the pick-up in productivity may
create  even  greater  increases  in  aggregate  demand  than  in  potential  aggregate  output.  So,  in  other
words,  monetary  policy  needs  to  closely  watch  the  relative  size  -  and  the  timing  -  of  the  potential
effects on aggregate supply and demand. Let me elaborate a little bit on this. I am close to what was
said by President Broaddus and Governor Bäckström.
The prospect of higher productivity, higher economic growth and thus higher profits may boost stock
prices  particularly  of  firms  operating  in  the  new  ICT  sectors,  as  we  have  observed  in  the  past  few
years. The associated stock price rally increases consumers’ financial wealth.
At the same time, current high labor demand and the generally optimistic outlook on the economy may
increase  workers’  expectation  of  their  future  salaries,  and  thus  also  increase  human  wealth.  Taken
together,  this  may  boost  consumer  spending  even  ahead  of,  and  in  excess  of,  the  growth  effects
actually materializing. In this case, the temporary excess demand would spur inflation, and monetary
policy  should  intervene  in  order  to  cool  off  demand  to  a  pace  consistent  with  the  increase  in  the
economy’s productive capacity.
By  contrast,  if  demand  and  supply  effects  from  a  New  Economy  developed  broadly  in  parallel,
monetary policy could pursue a neutral stance. This does not mean that the central bank should keep
nominal  short-term  interest  rates  constant.  Rather,  it  should  see  that  overall  monetary  conditions,
including the exchange rate and long-term interest rates, remain neutral.
It also follows from what I said before, that monetary policy should not try to target a specific level of
stock  prices  or  to  put  a  lid  on  stock  prices.  Particularly  in  an  era  of  a  potential  substantial  regime
BIS Review 52/2000
2
change,  it  is  impossible  to  judge  with  any  confidence  on  the  appropriate  level  of  stock  prices.
Monetary  policy  should,  however,  take  into  account  the  current  -  and  potential  future  -  aggregate
demand effects arising from rising - and potentially falling - stock prices.
Concluding, ladies and gentlemen, let me finally observe that  the  factors behind  the  New  Economy
applicable to the US could also have a similar positive effect on Europe.
As regards technology, as I already pointed out in my opening remarks, there is the chance for Europe
- based on the US experience - to achieve good results. A second argument consists in the benefits of
the European integration into the global economy and the advantages of the Common Market - like
deregulation  in  areas  such  as  telecommunications  and  in  the  public  utilities  sector.  Finally,  the
establishment of the Monetary Union forces a restructuring in the corporate sector and facilitates new
economic policies.
All in all, the latter requires a much stricter approach on the European level to abandon rigidities in the
labor, goods and services markets, to create a more favorable environment for entrepreneurship and to
improve the structures and techniques of the risk capital markets.
Compared with the situation a few years ago, we are heading forward in these crucial areas. Therefore,
I am very much convinced that Europe has also the potential for a New Economy if we are willing to
adopt the process of further structural reform. But there are many and good reasons for optimism. An
important one is the well-functioning Monetary Union, which opens up many opportunities.
Thank you very much for your attention.
References
Brainard, William (1966), Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy, American Economic Review,
Vol. LVII, No. 2, May.
Estrella,  Arturo,  and  Frederic  S  Mishkin,  Rethinking  the  Role  of  NAIRU  in  Monetary  Policy:
Implications of Model Formulation and Uncertainty, NBER Working Paper 6518, April.
Federal  Reserve  Board  (2000a),  Humphrey  Hawkins  Testimony  of  the  Chairman  Alan  Greenspan,
17 February.
Federal  Reserve  Board (2000b), Technological  innovation  and the economy,  Remarks  by  Chairman
Alan  Greenspan  before  the  White  House  Conference  on  the  New  Economy,  Washington  D.C.,
5 April 2000.
Ferguson, Roger W, Jr (2000), Conversation with Leaders of the “New Economy”, speech held at the
Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, 9 May 2000.
Gordon, Robert J (1999), Has the “New Economy” Rendered the Productivity Slowdown Obsolete?”,
Working paper, Northwestern University, 14 June.
Issing,  Otmar  (2000),  European  Integration  at  the  beginning  of  the  new  millenium,  Excerpts  from
lecture  given  at  the  Forum  Dialogue,  organized  by  the  Banque  Central  du  Luxembourg,  on
8 February 2000 in Luxembourg.
Jorgenson, Dale W, and Kevin J Stiroh (2000), Raising the Speed Limit: US Economic Growth in the
Information Age, Working Paper, 3 March. Forthcoming in: Brooking Papers on Economic Activity.
Oliner,  Stephen  D,  and  Daniel  E  Sichel  (2000),  The  Resurgence  of  Growth  in  the  Late  1990s:  Is
Information Technology the Story?, mimeo, Federal Reserve Board, February.
Orphanides,  Athanasios  (2000),  The  Quest  for  Prosperity  without  Inflation,  ECB  Working  Paper
No. 15, March.
Schellekens, Phillip (1998), Caution and Conservatism in Monetary Policymaking, London School of
Economics, Financial Markets Group Discussion Paper 284, March.
3
BIS Review 52/2000
Srour, Gabriel (1999), Inflation Targeting Under Uncertainty, mimeo, Research Department, Bank of
Canada, January.
Wieland,  Volker  (1998),  Monetary  Policy  and  Uncertainty  about  the  Natural  Unemployment  Rate,
Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.
BIS Review 52/2000
4
