Jean-Claude Trichet: Euro prospects and international financial reforms
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, Governor of the Banque de France, at the  21st  Century  Forum,
sponsored by the National Committee Chinese People’s Consultative Conference, held in Beijing, on
15 June 2000.
 It is a great privilege to participate in such an extraordinary forum. I want to express all my gratitude
to the National Committee Chinese People’s Consultative Conference, and particularly its chairman,
for having sponsored this 21st Century Forum, here in Beijing.
the international financial architecture and its necessary evolution;
Let me take this opportunity to present some views on international issues. I would like to focus on
two major topics,
– 
– 
Both topics are in fact related: both have a bearing on  the  future  of  the  International  Monetary  and
Financial System; both illustrate the worldwide efforts to build more stable economic and monetary
relationships in an increasingly globalized world.
the economic strengths and scope for further progress in the euro area.
Let’s consider first the international financial architecture
1.
Several complex issues, often inter-related, are currently at stake. On each of them, the Eurosystem
(i.e. the European Central Bank - ECB - and the eleven National Central Banks - NCBs - of the euro
area) have elaborated a common view. It is this common view that I will present to you now as I have
had occasions of  presenting  it,  as the position  of  Banque  de  France, in  the  last  G  VII  meeting,  last
April.
the orderly liberalization of capital movements;
the question of reserve and debt management;
I see five major points that are of systemic interest: 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
the key issue of transparency;
and finally the choice of the exchange rate regime.
the question of the moral hazard associated with private sector involvement;
Orderly liberalization of capital movements
1.1
The liberalization of capital movements benefits both individual countries and the world economy: it
enhances long-term growth potential and improves savings/investments allocation. However, the two
following principles need to be carefully taken into account in order to minimize risks:
– 
the restructuring of domestic financial systems and the strengthening of domestic regulatory
and  supervisory  frameworks  are  preconditions  of  utmost  importance:  emerging  economies
should  bring  their  domestic  financial  systems  into  line  with  regulatory  and  supervisory
minimum  requirements  prevailing  in  mature  economies.  In  that  respect,  the  international
community  plays  an 
the
implementation of standards such as the “Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision”
or  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Programs  developed  by  the  IMF  in  order  to  identify
financial systems’ strengths and vulnerabilities.
the  Financial  Stability  Forum, 
important  role 
through 
1
BIS Review 52/2000
 The  liberalization  process  should  be  carefully  sequenced,  starting  from  the  more  stable
capital flows (e.g. FDI), in line with the progress mode in the financial sector solidity  and
soundness;  recent  crises  illustrated  disruptive  capital  outflows  generated  by  external  debts
highly concentrated on short-term maturities.
Improved reserve and debt management
1.2
To  mitigate  the  volatility  of  capital  flows  and  especially  short  term  flows  and  reap  the  benefits  of
capital account liberalization, one should adopt a risk management strategy that involves a system for
monitoring  and assessing  the risks  and  liquidity  of the  economy  as  a  whole, including  at  a  sectoral
level.
The  international  community  may  assist  in  developing  best  practices  related  to  reserve  and  debt
management:  let  me  quote  for  example  the  more  stringent  publishing  obligations  on  net  foreign
exchange  reserves  adopted  within  the  context  of  the  IMF  Special  Data  Dissemination  Standard
(SDDS) or the IMF and the World Bank initiative to promote good practices in reserve and sovereign
liability management.
As  recommended  by  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  Working  Group  on  Capital  Flows,  an  improved
risk management by the banking sector is desirable, particularly as regards banks in emerging markets
receiving  flows  and  international  banks  extending  cross-border  credit,  with  the  help  of  revised
Guidelines from the Basel Committee on managing liquidity risk.
Let me also note that implementing a strategy assessing the liquidity risk and foreign exposure of the
economy  as  a  whole  calls  for  an  adequate  balance  sheet  information  from  both  the  public  and  the
private financial and corporate sectors.
Transparency and enhanced surveillance
1.3
The  efficiency  of  international  capital  markets depends  on  the  availability  of  reliable  and  timely
information both on debtor countries and market participants.
– 
As  regards  the  public  sector,  many  efforts  have  been  achieved,  such  as  the  IMF  codes  of
good practices on transparency in the field of fiscal policy or monetary and financial policies
or the promotion by the IMF of statistical standards (the so-called SDDS).
  International  Financial  Institutions  have  also  continued  to  proceed  toward  greater
transparency.  Several  initiatives  have  been  launched,  I  will  particularly  point  out  the
participation of 60 countries on a voluntary basis in the pilot experience for the release of
IMF article IV reports.
As far as the private sector is concerned, parallel efforts need to be pursued. Progress may
take  the  form  of  improved  disclosure  on  a  voluntary  basis,  more  demanding  statistical
reporting and extended requirements for non-transparent segments of the financial markets.
Thanks to improved transparency important progress is being made to strengthen IFI’s surveillance in
key areas, including financial sector issues, external debt and capital account developments, exchange
rate policies.
As Prime Minister Fraser has mentioned, the definition of internationally agreed standards and codes
is  also  strongly  impacting  the  IMF  surveillance;  the  implementation  of  these  standards  will  reduce
emerging  market  economies’  financial  vulnerabilities  and  together  with  enhanced  transparency,
improve market discipline and market participants’ ability to better assess the risks of their investment
decisions.
Efforts  have  now  to  be  pursued  as  regards  the  prioritization  of  these  Standards  and  Codes  (the
Financial Stability Forum Task Force on Implementation identified 12 of such Codes and Standards
out of 65) and the development of incentives to implement them. Is there a better demonstration that
we  are  experiencing  globalization  than  to  observe  that  65  global  workshops  including  countries  in
transition  and  emerging  economies  have  worked  out  65  Codes  and  Standards  to  be  implemented
BIS Review 52/2000
2
universally? The commitment of economies to implement Codes and Standards might be reinforced if
market participants reflect information on observance of Codes and Standards in differentiated credit
ratings.
Private sector involvement
1.4
The main objectives of private sector involvement is to avoid moral hazard and other distortions in the
functioning  of  international  financial  markets  and  to  facilitate  more  orderly  adjustments  in  case  of
crisis.
Market  participants  should  be  encouraged  to  assess  adequately  the  risks  involved  in  investment
decisions on the basis of a country’s underlying fundamentals, including the soundness of its financial
system, rather than on the expectation that official flows will possibly support repayments to them in
times of crisis.
We have to promote approaches that permit  appropriate  coordination  among  creditors,  and  between
creditors and borrowers. Appropriate instruments to reach that goal include collective action clauses,
private contingent credit lines, call options on interbank  credit  lines  and the removal  of  put  options
from bond contracts.
I  think  that  pragmatism  should  prevail  as  to  the  form  of  the  private  sector  involvement  in  crises
resolution. But there is a need for general principles to highlight the roles and responsibilities of the
public and private sectors, such as those that have been defined in the framework adopted by the G7 at
the Köln Summit in June 1999. Among these principles, I would particularly stress:
– 
– 
the objective to achieve comparability of treatment between and within a country’s bilateral
official and private creditors.
the focus on the medium term sustainability of a country’s financing position;
Choice of the right exchange rate regime
1.5
The sustainability of any exchange rate regime depends crucially on its consistency with a country’s
domestic macroeconomic and structural policy framework.
This being said, the choice of an exchange rate regime should rest on the following principles:
– 
So-called “corner solutions” are not necessarily the only available options. Free floating rates
may  help  to  accommodate  volatile  capital  flows  and  asymmetric  shocks;  however,  they
might not prevent misalignments leading to balance of payments desequilibrium, they might
prove disruptive for the real sector of small open economies, which often lack the size for
developing  the  necessary  market  infrastructure  to  cope  with  exchange  rate  instability.
Currency boards can be warranted only under very specific circumstances.
  Requirements for sustaining pegs have become very demanding in an environment of high
capital mobility; however, “intermediate solutions” may still remain a relevant option for a
number of countries; particularly for open economies with close links to a partner country or
a partner single currency area that maintains price stability or for countries experiencing high
inflation,  where  anchoring  the  currency  provides  a  simple  and  credible  rule  for  monetary
policy. Needless to say that the intermediate solutions are considered particularly appropriate
in  the  European  framework  where  the  belonging  to  an  exchange  rate  mechanism  plays  a
major role in the preparation to join the single currency.
In cases where countries need to respond to very large capital inflows and related risks of
inflation and real appreciation, greater exchange rate flexibility might become desirable.
Let me conclude these considerations with two observations:
– 
First,  we  should  concentrate  all  our  efforts  on  implementation  of  existing  codes  and
standards. Implementation is the key word at present times. Applying standards and codes in
3
BIS Review 52/2000
all economies of the world, including emerging economies and economies in transition is an
immense, challenging and urgent endeavor.
Second, as regards the private sector involvement, I will recommend being as pragmatic and
as consistent as possible. Pragmatic because a case by case assessment is always needed and
there  is,  in  my  opinion,  no  mechanistic  “a  priori”  approach  which  would  be  advisable.
Consistent, meaning that once the assessment is made by the international community on the
concept of the participation of the private sector in the crisis solution, we have to stick to it.
Let me turn now to the second topic of my presentation which relates to the economic
strengths of the euro zone and its impact on the euro itself
 2.
More specifically, I would like to stress the three reasons which make me confident in the euro zone
and therefore convinced that the euro will significantly appreciate in the future:
– 
– 
– 
European firms are restructuring themselves and entering further into the global competition.
structural reforms are underway so that a strong economic growth will be sustainable;
the euro zone may expect a long phase of steady economic growth;
The euro zone may expect a long phase of steady economic growth
2.1
In the past months, the euro zone has benefited from a strong economic recovery. At the end of 1998
and  more  notably  in  the  first  half  of  1999,  most  European  countries  faced  a  temporary  economic
slowdown, partly resulting from the financial and economic turmoil of East Asia. But since then, the
euro zone has benefited from a strong economic recovery (4% in annual term during the second half of
1999). One important feature of this evolution is the fact that countries whose economic growth had
been lagging so far are now catching up.
This  present  economic  recovery  is  taking  place  in  a  sound  economic  environment.  Inflation  level
remains under control even though the balance of risks to price stability has recently gone up: some
pressures have resulted from recent oil price rises or may result from some capacity constraints that
could be encountered in the course of next years. Needless to say that the Governing Council of the
Eurosystem  has  been  and  will  remain  vigilant  in  order  to  secure  our  primary  objective  of  price
stability.
Besides, the current account is slightly in surplus and fiscal deficits are, in the euro zone as a whole,
on a downward trend.
It is worth stressing that European economies have never been creating so many new jobs so fast. The
past two years (1998 and 1999) have seen very rapid job growth (about +1.5% a year) and a very big
decrease in unemployment. In France, the rise has been sharper since almost 900,000 new jobs were
created  by  enterprises  (excluding  Government  administration)  from  December  1996  to  December
1999 i.e. +6.6% over three years. With the economic growth speeding up, we can expect a further drop
in the unemployment rate which is presently below 10%.
Due  to  this  economic  recovery,  the  growth  differential  between  the  US  and  the  euro  zone  is
progressively to disappear. This gap between the two economic zones in terms of economic growth
has resulted in the past years from the lag between their economic cycles. According to the present
analysts’ consensus, growth differential between the two zones is to narrow this year and practically
disappear  next  year.  According  to  the  IMF  forecasts,  growth  should  reach  3.2%  in  the  US  in  2001
compared to 3.0% in the euro zone.
2.2
Structural reforms which are underway in Europe are likely to permit a sustainable
non-inflationary growth
The undertaking and speeding up of structural reforms is one of the conditions for a complete success
of the euro. In this regard, the Lisbon European Council, held last 23 April, can be viewed as a further
BIS Review 52/2000
4
important step towards the necessary medium term strategy for structural reforms in the Union. The
labor market has become more flexible in the past few  years  in  Europe.  I  would  like  to  give  a  few
examples of this evolution. In all countries, the number of people on fixed-term contracts has quickly
increased;  they  counted  for  a  large  part  of  jobs  created  between  1995  and  1998  and  the  trend  has
continued since then. In  many countries, fiscal measures (for instance  reduction  of  non-wage  costs)
have  given  incentives  to  hire  younger  and  less-skilled  people  (France,  Italy,  Spain  and  Germany).
Another key change is the rapid growth in part-time employment, especially among women.
While Europe has long had a strong tradition of economic regulation, it must be acknowledged that
deregulation is well underway in most countries. The change is particularly noticeable in several key
sectors such as telecommunication (mobile phones in particular), transportation (particularly airlines)
and the power-supply industry (electricity and gas) to only mention a few of them.
Major countries have embarked on an ambitious overhaul of their public sector. In countries with a
large public sector, such as Italy or France, ambitious privatization programs have steadily reduced the
number of state enterprises (banking and insurance sectors, manufacturing sector…). It is noteworthy
that these programs have been carried out by various governments with different political orientation.
In addition to privatization, state enterprises are changing; companies that remain government owned
are becoming more profit-minded (particularly airlines, railways…).
European firms are restructuring and entering further into the global competition
2.3
European firms are going through a deep restructuring. Mergers and acquisitions have hit new records
as companies seek to create national, regional or global market-leaders (M&As close to $1,500bn in
1999 against 500bn in 1997). Venture capital and start-ups are booming as investors and entrepreneurs
become more convinced that Europe can compete with America in knowledge-based industries. Heavy
industries and large conglomerates are restructuring as never before. Finally, new rules on corporate
governance are spreading over.
The outflows of foreign direct investments merely mirror the dynamism of European firms. European
firms were lagging behind US firms in terms of foreign direct investments and they are catching up.
European  firms  have  entered  in  a  “globalization  process”  whereby  they  aim  to  reach  a  global  size
through external purchases.
As a conclusion, I would like to make three remarks: on the global financial markets, on the euro and
on the People’s Republic of China.
– 
On  the  global  financial  markets,  I  will  draw  our  attention  to  one  of  the  most  important
challenges  we  have  to  face  up  with:  the  “herd  instinct”  of  market  participants,  which,  in
certain  cases,  can  amplify  considerably  volatility,  create  or  augment  misalignments  and
induce  large-scale  global  contagion  in  case  of  local  crisis.  The  herd  instinct  is  probably
profoundly enshrined in the functioning of the marketplace. In order to minimize its effects, I
have three provisional conclusions:
• 
Perhaps we should have a second look at the very rapid generalization of day to day
mark to market accountings. Perhaps a better medium term functioning of the market
would  call  for  a  clear  distinction  between  various  market  participants  depending  on
their own time horizons.
  It seems to me that it would also be important to reflect upon the consequences of the
very rapid increase of mutual funds in some major markets. All the managers of these
funds  have  to  prove  permanently  on  a  very  short-term  basis  that  they  are  better
managed than the average. This creates a very powerful potential herd instinct.
Finally, I profoundly think that full transparency is the most efficient tool to counter
the  setting  up  of  a  “herd”  and  to  cope  with  potential  “herd”  behavior.  When  one
knows all about a particular “signature” or about a particular country, there is much
less reason to embark into blind crisis contagion. Here is the motto I would like to be
5
BIS Review 52/2000
  the  quality  and
accepted  globally  by  market  participants:  “Let  us 
creditworthiness of any particular signature upon its own peculiar fundamentals, upon
its own, particular, assets and liabilities”.
judge 
On the euro, I want to stress that the euro zone has adopted a sound macro policy and has
embarked in a fairly comprehensive program of structural reforms. These reforms will take
time to be fully completed. But they have already boosted economic growth, job creation and
the restructuring of firms. I am impressed by what has been achieved during the past years
and National Central Banks as well as the ECB are strongly encouraging governments and
corporate businesses to foster structural reforms and business restructuring in the future.
The  Eurosystem,  which  is  the  guardian  of  the  euro  for  the  sake  of  the  people  of  Europe,
knows that our fellow citizens want the single currency to be at least as solid as were their
previous  national  currencies:  in  France,  to  give  only  one  example,  96%  of  the  people  are
calling for the euro to be at least as solid as the Franc; needless to say that it is the same in
Germany and in all other countries of the Monetary Union. That is the reason why I fully
subscribe to the declaration of our President, Wim Duisenberg, in the name of the Governing
Council:  “European  citizens  can  be  assured  that  the  future  of  the  euro  is  that  of  a  strong
currency, based on price stability and the strength of the European economy.”
A stable, a solid, a strong euro is in the interest of Europe.
On  the  People’s  Republic  of  China,  I  would  like  to  praise  the  highly  responsible  attitude
which has been adopted by Beijing during the Asian crisis. China has played a decisive role
in helping stabilize the full body of the Region and has gained an immense credit not only in
Asia but in the global community as a whole. I entirely share the sentiment of Premier Zhu
on the role of the prudent monetary policy of the People’s Bank of China in that success.
I have been impressed by the quality of the contributions delivered in the occasion of the 21st Century
Forum.
If  there  is  a  lesson  I  draw  from  the  exchange  of  views,  here  under  the  auspices  of  the  National
Committee  of  the  Chinese  People’s  Political  Consultative  Conference,  it  would  be  the  decisive
importance of foreign direct investments in the development of the economy of China. FDI’s are the
best recipe for a successful and balanced globalization.
BIS Review 52/2000
6
