Jürgen Stark: Investing today in the world of tomorrow
Welcoming  speech  by  Dr  Jürgen  Stark,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  for  the
Deutsche Bundesbank Spring Conference 2000, held in Frankfurt on 28 April 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
I am happy to welcome you here at the Bundesbank’s second Spring Conference, also on behalf of the
President who unfortunately is unable to attend. I am glad that you have come, some of you from very
far,  to  join  us  in  a  discussion  of  problems  which  are  of  great  interest  to  academics  and  economic
policymakers  alike.  This  Spring  Conference  is  indeed  designed  to  promote  an  exchange  of  views
between economists and politicians from Germany, Europe and overseas.
Last  year’s  conference,  which  took  place  shortly  after  the  start  of  monetary  union,  focused  on  the
monetary  transmission  process  in  general  and  in  Europe  in  particular.  This  year’s  conference  will
focus on investment.
There are certainly enough reasons for choosing this topic in a world where technological progress and
a modern capital stock are often considered to be the key to prosperity and where the basic investment
conditions are changing in many ways. At the same time it is probably not going too far to say that
many questions as to the behaviour of investors still remain.
If this conference helps us to better understand investors’ behaviour, to judge the significance of some
basic conditions more adequately and to assess more precisely the impact of investment decisions on
economic growth and prosperity in our countries, it will surely have been worth the trouble of coming
to Frankfurt.
Academics  and  economic  policymakers  have  been  debating  the  importance  of  investment  and  its
determinants for a long time. Some of the topics discussed are similar all over the world, for example
implications  of  globalisation  for  the  investment  process.  On  the  other  hand  in  some  respects  focal
points  of  the  debate  in the  US differed from  those  in  Europe.  In  the  US  formerly  an  unsatisfactory
productivity growth and more recently the debate on the New Economy played a key role.
In Europe we had some other main topics. Let me just briefly sketch some of the issues which have
time and again played a role in Germany and in Europe over the past few decades.
After  the  investment  ratio  declined  distinctly  in  connection  with  the  first  oil  price  shock  in  the
mid-1970s,  interrupted  only  by  the  reunification  boom  in  Germany,  low  investment  resurfaced  in
Germany and other countries as a matter of concern. In the second half of the seventies the situation
was given a name in Germany, “investment backlog”, and an improved framework was called for in
order  to  solve  this  problem.  Quite  often  investment  was  discussed  from  a  short-term  perspective
focusing on its contribution to demand. Since then, there has been a growing awareness that the supply
side  plays  a  predominant  role,  where  investment  is  a  guarantee  of  a  sufficiently  high  and  modern
capital stock and is a prerequisite for growth.
In  the  1980s  and  1990s  the  focus  has  again  shifted  somewhat  in  Europe.  Given  the  high  level  of
unemployment, the question now concerns not only the link between investment and growth but also
that between investment and the demand for labour.
Of course the link between investment or the capital stock, on the one hand, and employment, on the
other,  is  complex.  Substitutability  must  be  taken  into  account,  as  does  complementarity.  The
significance of investment for an economy’s production potential, labour productivity and a country’s
international competitiveness are all key issues.
On balance, I believe there is no doubt that sufficient investment is a basic prerequisite for mastering
the labour market problems in Europe. Of course this is not to say that changes in the pool of available
1
BIS Review 38/2000
labour,  such  as  improving  job-seekers’  professional  qualifications,  are  not  necessary  as  well.  And
certainly the relative factor prices must also contribute to solving the problem.
In  this  connection  the  future  problems  of  an  ageing  population  should  also  be  borne  in  mind.
Economists have been warning us about this problem for a long time, and now the general public is
becoming more and more aware of this issue. The resulting challenges can be mastered more easily,
the more productive capital and labour become. This again highlights the key role of investment.
Having  made these brief comments on the significance of investment,  I  do  not  need to  give  further
reasons as to why we have chosen the determinants of investment behaviour to be the main topic of
our conference.
If one asks what the determinants of investment are, a number of variables come to mind: the demand
situation  faced  by  the  enterprises,  financial  factors  including  the  profitability  of  real  investment
compared to other forms of investment, the risks associated with investments, etc.
Let  me  start  with  the  role  of  government,  since  it  affects  investment  decisions  in  many  ways  and
because it is an important topic for economic policymakers - they can make many mistakes but also
quite a few positive contributions in this regard.
Government  regulations  can have  a  variety  of  effects  on investment  behaviour. Tax  legislation  in  a
broader  sense,  that  is  including  write-offs  and  subsidy  provisions,  is  a  well-known  example.  Ever
since  the  studies  by  Hall  and  Jorgensen  in  the  mid-1960s,  if  not  before  then,  economists  have
thoroughly researched these effects on the user cost of capital and hence on investment. What are the
consequences if government amends the legislation governing the user cost of capital or the internal
financing  possibilities?  Relatively  reliable  answers  to  these  questions  must  be  found  before  we  can
turn to the follow-on subject of whether government should pursue such objectives, and if so, how.
In  this  context  we  should  also  give  some  thought  to  the  role  of  inflation  and  price  stability  in
investment, for instance in the case of a biased tax system that leads to the taxation of phantom profits
arising from inflation.
Another  aspect  of this  complex  issue  is  government  itself  in  its  role  as  an  investor.  In  the  last  few
years  we  have  witnessed  a  wave  of  privatisation  in  Europe.  This  development  and  the  associated
deregulation  are  a  response  to  familiar  demands  -  not  least  those  made  by  many  central  banks,
including the Bundesbank - that the state should concentrate on its “core operations”. It is hoped that
private investors will increasingly utilise the leeway thus opened up to bring about a general increase
in prosperity and new dynamism in our economies.
Besides, the fact that such a more deregulated economy based on the principles of free competition
usually facilitates the task of maintaining price stability is, of course, a very welcome feature from the
central banks point of view.
However,  it  also  goes  without  saying  that  government  has  to  make  investments.  It  is  generally
assumed  that  public  investment  in  infrastructural  projects  is  an  important  means  of  raising  the
productivity of private investment. The interesting question as to the extent to which this is the case
and  regarding  which  of  these  investments  are  to  be  seen  in  a  more  positive  or  negative  light  will
certainly also be addressed during this conference. It is of special interest against the background of
structural changes in our economies, which may be facilitated but sometimes also hampered by such
government “input”, particularly if you bear in mind that those investments are not cost-free.
If a central bank had staged a conference on investment in the past the debate would have focused on
the  interest-rate  sensitivity  of  investments.  It  was  frequently  regarded  as  the  hub  of  the  monetary
transmission process. Over the last few years this assessment has changed somewhat. I believe it was
not a coincidence that this issue remained virtually unmentioned - at least not explicitly mentioned - at
the Bundesbank’s conference on the transmission process last year.
There  are  probably  a  number  of  reasons  for  this  development.  For  one  thing,  the  concept  of  the
optimum  conduct  of  monetary  policy  has  evolved.  The  issue  on  the  agenda  today  is  the  search  for
monetary policy rules, transparency and credibility. The sometimes too mechanistic views of the past
on the fine-tuning effects monetary policy has on economic activity have thus taken a back seat. The
BIS Review 38/2000
2
transmission process has also turned out to be much more complex than originally thought and cannot
be  restricted  to  one  or  only  a  few  parameters.  Nevertheless  a  central  bank  must  not  disregard  the
sensitivity of investment when trying to estimate its impact.
In  the  light  of  sometimes  heated  debate  surrounding  the  relevance  of  the  user  cost  of  capital  in
explaining investment behaviour, other links between monetary policy and investment decisions have
gained increasing weight in the last few years. The importance of financial constraints and their main
origins are now being debated extensively. The participants in this conference will surely have a few
things to say on this issue.
In this area the institutional pattern of relationships between enterprises and an economy’s sources of
financing is of major importance.
How significant is it if enterprises borrow funds more through banks or on the capital markets? How
important  is  sufficient  capitalisation  for  enterprises?  What  role  does  the  balance-sheet  structure  of
banks  or  competition  among  banks  play  in  the  willingness  to  grant  loans?  These  and  many  more
questions are vital and are by no means only of theoretical interest nowadays.
It  has  frequently  been  predicted  that  the  structure  of  financial  systems  and  corporate  finance  will
change  in  the  wake  of  the  technological  progress  in  the  financial  markets  and  possibly  also  in
connection with European monetary union.
In the past, bank loans played a predominant role in corporate finance in Germany and in most other
countries  in  continental  Europe.  This  has  changed  somewhat  of  late  and  a  further  development
towards  increasing  direct  financing  through  the  capital  market  is  to  be  expected.  There  is  wide
speculation  as  to  how  this  will  affect  investment.  For  instance,  will  more  direct  access  to  a  broad
capital  market  tend  to  ease  the  financial  constraints  -  or,  conversely,  will  the  investment  process
become more disruption-prone owing to the diminished role of bilateral relationships between banks
and enterprises? Will some enterprises profit by such changes and others be at a disadvantage? And so
on.
Naturally, the structure of the financial system is shaped by many factors, and the legal framework is
only  one  of  many  aspects.  Before  a  decision  is  taken  on  the  actual  formulation  of  these  legal
provisions, the central banks will certainly be consulted. Therefore, it is important for us at the central
banks  to  assess  the  probable  impact  of  a  changed  financial  system  on  investment  behaviour  in  the
corporate sector and on the effectiveness of monetary policy.
In this connection it is also vital for such a legal framework to be reliable. The general relevance of
uncertainty  for  investment  behaviour  has  recently  attracted  quite  some  attention,  and  it  will  be
interesting to observe how events will unfold in this field.
A  “one-size-fits-all”  assessment  of  the  determinants  of  investment  behaviour  would  certainly
oversimplify the issue. Construction investment is only comparable with investment in machinery and
equipment to a limited extent, while stockbuilding is a different matter altogether.
Investment in research and development is becoming a particularly important element in ensuring  a
future-proof  economy.  In  addition,  there  is  good  reason  to  assume  that  this  type  of  investment  is
governed by a different set of rules, either because of the higher risks involved or because it pays off
only after a relatively long time or because investors in this field have few realisable assets to offer to
their  lenders  as  collateral.  Against  this  background,  an  analysis  of  investment  in  research  and
development  would  appear  to  be  particularly  important.  I  am  glad  that  this  conference  will  devote
particular attention to that aspect.
Today’s world is characterised above all by globalisation. National borders are much less of a barrier
for the markets than they used to be. This is a result of technological progress, which enables us to
overcome time and space much more quickly, and of the triumph of the market economy. Nobody can
afford to reject it unless he is willing to make  massive sacrifices in terms of welfare. In Europe we
have actively promoted this already existing trend by creating the single market and by establishing
European monetary union.
3
BIS Review 38/2000
The  innovations  associated  with  investment  have  made  a  crucial  contribution  to  an  increased
convergence of the markets. Conversely, worldwide integration is exerting a strong influence on the
determinants of investment. Competition has become tougher; today investment decisions no longer
depend  solely  on  local  conditions  but  on  international  conditions.  From  the  early  nineties  to  1998
cross-border investment all over the world tripled.
This development has been viewed with concern by some. Domestic investment by non-residents has
sometimes been debated in terms of “selling out the country” and has at times raised fears that such
investment  is  solely  intended  to  eliminate  troublesome  competitors.  In  turn,  investment  abroad  has
raised fears of domestic jobs being lost. Even though these concerns cannot be brushed aside lightly,
and hardships may occur in individual cases, it is important to keep driving home the fact that, on the
whole,  the  integration  of  economies  contributes  to  the  more  efficient  use  of  resources,  the
dissemination of knowledge and the growth of global prosperity.
I think my introduction has spanned a wide range of topics. As you can see, we have many unresolved
issues. Although nobody can expect that all these issues will be resolved once and for all by tomorrow
night, I am confident that  by  the end  of  this two-day  conference  we  will  have  a  clearer idea of the
interdependencies which we will need to monitor especially closely in the future. And maybe one of
these  discussions  will  also  bring  us  closer  to  knowing  that  we  have  a  better  understanding  of
investment behaviour after this conference. With this in mind, I wish us all a successful conference.
BIS Review 38/2000
4
