Mr Carse: The importance of corporate governance in banks
Speech by Mr David Carse, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at The
Year 2000 Millennium Dinner of The Association of International Accountants - Hong Kong Branch,
Hong Kong Bankers Club, Hong Kong, on 17 March 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
I  am  very  pleased  to  be  here  this  evening  to  speak  to  the  Association  on  the  subject  of  corporate
governance in banks. I have chosen this as my theme both because it is highly topical for reasons that I
will explain later and because it should be of particular interest to this audience. The Association plays
an important role in the training and promotion of the accounting profession; and accountants are  a
vital  component  in  corporate  governance  not  simply  in  their  specific  role  as  auditors  but  also  as  a
source of highly trained directors and managers.
I will begin by giving you a brief situation report on the banking sector because this is relevant to the
governance issue. Clearly, the situation is looking a lot better than it has done for the last two years.
As the 1999 results released so far have shown, the performance of individual banks is by no means
uniform.  Some  have  done  a  lot  better  than  others,  depending  on  such  factors  as  the  mix  of  their
business and where they are in the provisioning cycle. But the figures collected by the HKMA for the
local banks’ Hong Kong offices show that, in aggregate, their pre-tax operating profits rose by about
15% in 1999. This compares with the decline of 33% that we saw in 1998. This improvement has been
supported by renewed growth in net interest income. Moreover, the aggregate bad debt charge of the
local banks showed little change in 1999, having increased by 335% in the previous year. It is true that
some banks were obliged to increase their provisions against Mainland related companies during the
course of the year. But the general trend in the latter part of 1999 was that the growth in new problem
loans  began  to  slow  down  as  the  economy  improved.  This  is  supported  by  the  figures  for  problem
loans  in  the  final  quarter  of  1999  which  we  published  recently.  These  show  that  the  ratio  of  loans
classified as “substandard”, “doubtful” or “loss” to total loans fell to 9.8% at the end of December,
compared with the 1999 peak of 10.3% at the end of September. At the risk of tempting fate it does
seem  that the  worst  of  the  bad  debt  problems  for  Hong  Kong  banks  is  over.  Certainly  all  the  local
banks are expecting a significant reduction in the bad debt charge in 2000, which will give a boost to
profitability.
Can we say therefore that life for the local banks is getting back to where it was prior to the crisis? The
answer unfortunately has to be “no”. We are certainly moving into calmer waters for the banks  but
there  are  strong  currents,  and  a  few  sharp  rocks,  underneath  the  surface.  The  fact  is  that  the
competitive environment for banks in Hong Kong is changing radically as it is for all banks around the
world. The current competition in mortgage lending is a case in point. Banks are increasingly prepared
to lend at margins well below prime. We are getting to the point where it is becoming difficult to earn
an economic return from this business once funding costs and other expenses are taken into account. It
can be argued that this in part reflects the current excess liquidity in the market and that margins will
start  to  move  up  again  as  loan  demand  and  the  property  market  recover  in  line  with  the  economy.
There is some truth in this, but it is difficult to see margins on mortgage business recovering too far.
Certainly they will not get back to where they were in the boom years before the crisis. There are too
many active players in the market, both domestic and foreign, to allow this to happen.
What this means is that the banks are going to have to work harder to earn a profit than they have done
in  the  past. They  will  have  to do  this at a  time  when  the last stages  of interest  rate  deregulation  in
Hong Kong are taking place, starting in the middle of this year and finishing in the middle of 2001.
The impact of deregulation cannot be predicted with certainty but the likely impact will be to increase
funding costs and thus squeeze the net interest margin. The banks will therefore have to find ways to
generate income through new products and through new charging policies. You can expect fees for the
1
BIS Review 24/2000
various banking services to rise in the deregulated environment. The banks will also be under greater
pressure to reduce costs through exploiting new delivery systems, re-engineering their processes and
better managing their risks.
Technology  is  at  the  heart  of  these  issues.  It  is  one  of  the  main  forces  which  is  driving  increased
competition and one of the main weapons that the banks are using to respond to competition. How to
harness the  power  of  technology,  and  how  to finance  the  necessary  investment,  constitute  the  main
strategic challenge facing banks in the world today.
This brings me to the main theme of the importance of corporate governance in banks. It will be the
responsibility of the board of directors and senior managers of banks to navigate the way through the
strategic challenges that I have described, and they must ensure that they have the capacity to do so.
Corporate  governance  is  of  course  not  just  important  for  banks.  It  is  something  that  needs  to  be
addressed in relation to all companies. The Financial Secretary recognized this by announcing in his
Budget  speech  that  he  had  asked  the  Secretary  for  Financial  Services  with  the  assistance  of  the
Standing  Committee  on  Company  Law  Reform  to  conduct  a  comprehensive  study  on  corporate
governance  in  Hong  Kong  this  year.  The  objective  will  be  to  plug  any  gaps  in  the  corporate
governance  regime  and  to  become  a  benchmark  in  the  region.  Market  bodies,  professional
organizations and regulators will be asked to help in this task. Your own Association may be able to
contribute.
I do however believe that sound corporate governance is particularly important for banks. The rapid
changes  brought  about  by  globalization,  deregulation  and  technological  advances  are  increasing  the
risks  in  banking  systems.  Moreover,  unlike  other  companies,  most  of  the  funds  used  by  banks  to
conduct their business belong to their creditors, in particular to their depositors. Linked to this is the
fact that the failure of a bank affects not only its own stakeholders, but may have a systemic impact on
the  stability  of  other  banks.  All  the  more  reason  therefore  to  try  to  ensure  that  banks  are  properly
managed.
It is true to say that banks in Hong Kong are already well managed by international and certainly by
regional  standards.  The  fact  that  they  survived  the  financial  crisis  in  generally  good  shape  is  a
testament to this. However, during the financial crisis, the HKMA came across a few individual cases
where the board of directors did not perform as well as might be expected. And this, coupled with the
challenges that lie ahead, has led us to look at ways in which corporate governance among the banks
might be further enhanced.
If I could sum up our objective, it would be to try to reassert the role of the board of directors in banks.
While the day-to-day running of banks should certainly be left in the hands of the management, the
board must play a leadership role in approving the objectives, strategy and business plans of the bank,
monitoring  the  performance  of  management  and  ensuring  that  the  internal  control  and  risk
management systems of the bank are effective. The board must also make sure that the bank conducts
its affairs with integrity and in accordance with high ethical standards. The board is part of the system
of checks and balances that ensures that neither large shareholders nor management abuse their power
and that decisions are taken with the bank’s best interests in mind. If the board does not play its full
part, a vacuum in leadership will be created. This vacuum may be filled by the shareholders becoming
directly involved in running the bank’s affairs, or by the executive management acting more or less in
isolation. In either case, the board of directors is bypassed and checks and balances are lost.
The  HKMA  has  recently  issued  for  consultation  a  draft  guideline  for  banks  and  other  authorized
institutions which sets out what the HKMA expects of them in relation to corporate governance. The
guideline aims to establish minimum standards. It does not itself have the force of law, but failure to
adhere to the standards may call into question  whether the  bank  continues  to  satisfy  the  criteria for
authorization laid down in the Banking Ordinance.
The draft guideline describes the general responsibilities of the board, the legal obligations of directors
and the use of auditors. It then goes on to  specify  detailed  guidelines to  which locally  incorporated
authorized institutions are expected to adhere. Let me summarise these for you. While I will refer to
BIS Review 24/2000
2
the guidelines in relation to  banks,  most  of  them  are  also  applicable  to restricted licence  banks  and
deposit taking companies.
• 
First, the board should ensure that the bank establishes policies, procedures and controls to
manage the various types of risk with which it is faced.
       Altogether the HKMA has identified eight types of risk for the purposes of its supervision.
These are credit,  interest rate,  market,  liquidity,  operational,  reputation, legal and  strategic
risk. The board should approve the relevant policies while management should put them into
effect.  It  is  important  that  the  policies  should  not  exist  merely  for  form’s  sake  -  in  other
words, just to keep the HKMA happy - but should dictate how the institution is actually run
in practice.
Second, the board should ensure that the bank fully understands the provisions of section 83
of the Banking Ordinance on connected lending and establishes a policy on such lending.
While there are no indications that banks in Hong Kong are abusing the rules on connected
lending, there seems to be uncertainty among some banks as to how the rules work. We have
therefore recommended that the board should ensure that the bank fully understands its legal
obligations  under  the  Banking  Ordinance  and  establishes  a  detailed  policy  on  connected
lending.
Third,  the  board  should  ensure  that  it  receives  the  management  letter  from  the  external
auditor without delay together with the comments of management.
We  have  specified  that  the  management  letter  should  normally  be  received  within  four
months from the year-end. Of course, this is not something that is totally within the control
of the bank. I would therefore put in a plea to any bank auditors in the audience to submit the
management letter without delay.
Fourth,  the  board  should  maintain  an  appropriate level  of  checks  and  balances  against  the
influence of management and/or the shareholder controllers in order to ensure that decisions
are taken with the bank’s best interests in mind.
The key issue here is the number of independent non-executive directors there should be on
the board of banks. We recommend a minimum of three to ensure that there is a sufficient
pool  of  independent  directors  to  sit  on  the  various  committees  of  the  board  and  to  cover
absences.
Fifth,  the  board  should  establish  an  audit  committee  with  written  terms  of  reference
specifying its authorities and duties.
We recommend that the audit committee should be made up of non-executive directors, the
majority of whom should be independent.
Sixth, board meetings should be held preferably on a monthly basis, but in any event no less
than once every quarter.
The  board  can  only  fulfil  its  leadership  role  if  it  meets  frequently  enough  and  receives
sufficient  information  from  management  to  be  able  to  monitor  the  financial  position  and
performance of the bank.
Seventh, individual directors should attend at least half of the board meetings held in each
financial year.
We  fully  recognize  that  the  effectiveness  of  a  director  cannot  be  measured  simply  by
attendance  at  board  meetings.  But  equally  it  is  difficult  for  even  the  most  competent
individual to make a contribution if he or she does not turn up for meetings in the first place.
Finally, the HKMA will meet the full board of directors of each bank every year.
It is not the intention that the HKMA should participate in board meetings. Rather, we will
meet with the board with the aim of strengthening communication between the HKMA and
3
BIS Review 24/2000
the board at the highest level. Among other things, this will give us the opportunity to give
the board first hand information on the major findings about the bank that emerged from our
onsite examinations and offsite reviews. It will also give the board the opportunity to convey
its views directly to us, for example on whether we are imposing too much of a regulatory
burden.
As  a  result  of  the  consultation  exercise,  we  have  received  a  number  of  supportive  comments.  It  is
difficult,  after  all,  to  argue  against  the  principle  that  banks  should  be  encouraged  to  raise  their
governance standards. However, a number of concerns have also been voiced. I will not go into these
in detail, but some of the questions that have been raised are as follows: Is the HKMA interfering too
much in the way in which banks choose to manage themselves? Is too much burden being placed upon
the  board,  and  upon  non-executive  directors  in  particular,  in  terms  of  establishing  policies  and
controls? Should there be a distinction between listed and non-listed banks? Is it right to place more
onerous requirements on banks compared with other companies, for example as regards the required
number  of  independent  directors?  And  is  it  going  to  be  possible  to  find  sufficient  independent
directors of the right quality?
I have answered some of these questions already in this speech. We do believe that banks are different
from other companies because they are looking after other people’s money. From this point of view, it
does not matter whether  the  bank  is  listed  or  non-listed. We  also  believe that  banks  are  exposed  to
special risks compared with other companies, and that the board needs to ensure that policies are in
place to manage these risks. This is not to say that the board should actually formulate these policies
itself. That can be left to management. But the policies should certainly be approved by the board. As
to whether we are placing too much burden on the non-executive  directors, it  should  be  recognized
that being a director of a bank does involve heavy responsibilities. Moreover, the criminal sanctions in
the  Banking  Ordinance  apply  to  all  directors,  whether  they  are  executive  or  non-executive.  We
acknowledge that it may not be an easy task to find non-executive directors with the right skills and
degree of independence. We have therefore reconsidered our original recommendations on the number
of independent directors to some extent, particularly in relation to restricted licence banks and deposit-
taking companies, and we are prepared to give institutions which do not already comply more time to
do so if necessary.
Finally,  on  the  complaint  that  we  are  perhaps  being  too  intrusive,  I  would  point  to  our  statutory
responsibilities  under  the  Banking  Ordinance  to  ensure  that  institutions  operate  with  integrity,
prudence  and  competence  and  that  individual  directors  are  fit  and  proper.  Concern  about  corporate
governance falls squarely within these responsibilities. However, let me stress that this is not an area
where we would want to take a narrow legalistic position. We are anxious to work closely with the
banking  industry  to  arrive  at  a  mutually  acceptable  approach  to  corporate  governance  which  is
appropriate to the particular circumstances of Hong Kong. We will be aiming to ensure that the final
version of our guideline embodies this approach.
BIS Review 24/2000
4
