Hermann Remsperger: Euro markets in a global context
Speech by Professor Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Directorate of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the Gulf Euro Summit, held in Dubai, on 8 October 2000.
 I
European  economic  and  monetary  union  (EMU)  has  brought  about  important  changes  in  the
framework  for financial  markets.  This  is  particularly  true  of  the  11  European  countries  which  have
merged their national currencies into a single currency, the euro, and which have been conducting a
common  monetary  policy  since  1999.  However,  these  changes  also  apply  to  market  participants  in
other  countries  which  maintain  economic  and  financial  relations  with  the  countries  participating  in
EMU. They, too, no longer have to deal with different EMU currencies but only with a  single  one.
Thus, non-participating states have increasingly perceived the EMU countries as a single area.
Let me start by saying that the euro area represents a relatively large economy. In economic terms, the
euro area comes close to the size of the United States; both economic areas are far larger than Japan.
Measured in terms of world GDP, the US share is about 20.8%. The share of the euro area amounts to
15.5%. It is significantly larger than that of Japan (7.4%). The population of the euro area, at around
290 million, is larger than that of the United States (270 million) and of Japan (125 million).
The  size  and  capacity  of  an  economic  area  is  of  significant  relevance  to  its  currency  and  to  the
evolution of its financial markets: economies of scale play an important role, especially in determining
the degree to which the money is used. A large economic area generates a large “natural constituency”
for  its  own  currency.  If  a  currency  is  widely  accepted,  this  normally  lowers  transaction  costs,  thus
attracting international customers and spreading the currency even farther beyond its domestic area.
The argument of size is all the more important since the euro area is highly integrated into the world
economy. The euro area accounts for one-fifth of world trade, excluding trade within the euro area.
This is more than the corresponding ratio for the United States, which is 15%, or Japan, which is just
under 9%.1
II
If the three large economic regions are examined with respect to their  different  financing  structures
then it quickly becomes apparent that loan-based financing via the banking sector is still important for
the euro area. The volume of credit which euro-area monetary financial institutions have  granted  to
resident enterprises is, at over 100% of the euro area’s GDP, twice as high as the corresponding figure
for  the  United  States  (47.5%).  In  Japan,  bank  loans,  which  amount  to  92%  of  GDP,  also  play  a
relatively important role in the financing operations between different economic sectors.2
By contrast, the US economy  may be described as a  securitised  economy;  much  of  the  financing  is
done  not  through  the  banking  system  but  directly  on  the  securities  markets.  At  the  end  of  1999
outstanding domestic debt securities in the United States were valued at over US$ 15,000 billion, or
161% of GDP. In the euro area they came to around 90% of GDP and in Japan to 131%, although in
1
2
For the source of these figures, see ECB, The euro area one year after the introduction of the euro: key characteristics
and changes in the financial structure, Monthly Bulletin, January 2000, pp 35-49.
For more on this see also OECD Financial Market Trends No 76, July 2000, Main Changes in the Financial Structure of
the Euro-Zone since the Introduction of the Euro, pp 109-127.
1
BIS Review 86/2000
the latter case it should be borne in mind that many of the debt securities were issued by the public
sector.
It is also interesting to observe the amount of financing which companies obtain on the capital market.
Whereas  euro-area  corporates  have  issued  debt  securities  amounting  to  only  3.5%  of  GDP,  the
corresponding ratio for Japan is four times as high and for the United States eight times as high. The
figures for equity market capitalisation confirm the initial impression that the securitisation of lending
has an upward potential in the euro area. Expressed as a percentage of GDP, market capitalisation in
the euro area is only about half as large as that in the United States or in Japan.
However, while it is true that the financial system in the euro area is still more oriented towards the
banking  industry,  bond  and  equity  markets  have  already  begun  to  play  a  bigger  role.  There  is  also
reason to believe that the presumed dominance of bank loans has been exaggerated and the degree of
equity financing correspondingly underestimated. New data for Germany show that at the end of 1998
the volume of bank loans to non-financial companies exceeded equity financing by a mere 5.3%. In
addition, the aforementioned figures provide only a snapshot at a certain point of time and, as such, do
not reflect changes in their status.
As  far  as  the  euro  area,  in  particular,  is  concerned,  the  introduction  of  a  single  currency  has
contributed  to  a  process  of  adjustment,  which  tends  to  promote  the  securitisation  of  corporate
financing.  Thus  the  volume  of  corporate  bonds  outstanding  in  the  euro  area  has  increased  by
approximately one quarter since the start of EMU. This segment of the euro-area capital market, which
started off on a small scale, now presents one of the highest growth rates.3
Meanwhile, the banking sector remains engaged in a process of consolidation, as it has been for some
time now. In 1999 the number of monetary financial institutions in the euro area declined by around
5%.  The  introduction  of  the  euro,  together  with  technological  innovations  and  the  deregulation,
liberalisation and globalisation of financial markets, have led to even fiercer competition among the
banks.
An  increasing  shift  from  traditional  forms  of  banking  intermediation  towards  the  securitisation  of
assets  and  liabilities  does  not  mean  that  the  “Anglo-Saxon  market-oriented  model”  of  a  financial
system is principally superior to a bank-oriented system. Both systems have their inherent advantages
and drawbacks. This is why the financial system in a particular economy is not based exclusively on
one model or the other. Only the extent to which one financing alternative is preferred to others differs
from one economy to the next. Even so, it seems to me that the relative advantages also change over
time,  depending  on  the  underlying  economic  and  financial  conditions.  This  appears  to  be  precisely
what is happening now in the euro area.
III
The  changes  on  the  euro  financial  markets  would  seem  to  suggest  -  at  least  at  first  glance  -  that
national markets are now converging to form a single market. I would argue, however, that this has
occurred to varying degrees in different market segments.
The greatest degree of integration has been achieved in the euro money market, and within this area it
is best exemplified by uncollateralised inter-bank deposits:4 here the interest-rate differential between
individual  euro-area  countries  is  minimal.  Cross-border  transactions  already  account  for  more  than
one-half of money market operations. And trade volumes have risen significantly, compared with the
period prior to monetary union.
3 According to data released by the ECB, only the issues of “non-monetary financial corporations” are growing at a faster
rate at the present time, having increased at a rate of around 48% up to the end of June 2000.
4
See  Javier  Santillán,  Marc  Bayle  and  Christian  Thygesen,  Impact  of  the  Euro  on  Money  and  Bond  Markets,  ECB
Occasional Paper Series No 1, July 2000.
BIS Review 86/2000
2
It was extremely important for the success of monetary policy in the Eurosystem that a single money
market was established right after the introduction of the euro. Only a well-developed money market is
capable  of  ensuring  a  smooth  distribution  of  liquidity  across  the  euro  area  and  the  efficient
transmission of monetary policy impulses.
The euro bond markets have become “larger” and grown closer together. In order to survive the more
intense  competition  within  the  euro  area,  major  issuers  (especially  the  national  governments)  are
attempting  to  redesign  their  debt  securities  to  make  them  as  attractive  as  possible  to  potential
investors. Thus some euro-area countries have begun to concentrate their issues on specific maturities
in order to increase their liquidity and achieve benchmark status in certain market segments.
Investors have also adapted quickly to the new market conditions and - if the figures for Germany are
any  indication  -  have  invested  heavily  in  the  bonds  of  other  euro-area  countries.  As  a  result,  the
interest-rate differentials for euro-area government bonds have narrowed appreciably. The remaining
small spreads are largely due to differences in liquidity.
The progress that has already been made does not, however, detract from the fact that differences in
the legal systems and settlement systems stand in the way of a more far-reaching  integration of the
bond  and  equity  markets.  In  comparison  with  the  United  States,  for  example,  they  give  rise  to
unnecessary transaction costs. Estimates suggest that a better market infrastructure could reduce the
settlement costs involved in cross-border securities transactions so much that they would then be at a
level comparable to that of domestic transactions.
IV
Now I would like to talk about the euro’s role among the other major international currencies. Here it
is important to distinguish between two separate issues: the market shares which the euro has captured
as an investment and reserve currency and the movements in the euro’s exchange rate.
While it is true that the euro is a new currency, it was able to benefit from the world-wide acceptance
of mainly the DM. This is especially evident in the size of its market shares. The euro is the second
most important international investment and reserve currency, after the dollar, and its market shares
far exceed those of the yen.
Around one-quarter of cross-border bank positions are denominated in euro. The corresponding shares
of the US dollar and the yen amount to somewhat more than 40% and just under 10%, respectively.5
The euro accounts for 30% of the international debt securities outstanding, the US dollar for 48% and
the yen for 10%. If new business alone is taken into account, the euro, since its introduction, has more
or less kept pace with the dollar. If this trend continues, the shares which the euro and the dollar have
in the world-wide market for debt securities outstanding will also converge over the longer term.
The  euro’s  growing  importance  on  the  international  financial  markets  contrasted  sharply  with  its
exchange-rate  movements.  How  could  the  euro  gain  market  shares  on  the  international  financial
markets while losing so much of its value? First, it must be borne in mind that the euro as an issue
currency has benefited from low interest rates. Together with a generally falling euro exchange rate,
the low interest rates for the euro, have served to attract issuers from all over the world.
A look at the past may prove helpful in providing a second explanation. The dollar has always been
able to  maintain  its  position  as  the  leading  world  currency  despite  the  ups  and  downs  in  the  dollar
exchange rate. Apparently, the individual currencies’ positions on the international financial markets
are determined, at least to some extent, by factors other than the exchange rates.
Looking for possible causes for the recent weakness of the euro, it will soon become apparent that the
euro’s exchange rate reacted asymmetrically to macroeconomic events on each  side of the  Atlantic.
5 The figures given for these shares are based on data, which the BIS regularly publishes in its Quarterly Review. See BIS,
International Banking and Financial Market Developments, August 2000.
3
BIS Review 86/2000
Thus, the successful passage of the tax reform bill in Germany was barely acknowledged in exchange
rate movements while the surprisingly large growth in US GDP in the second quarter was reflected
rather  quickly  in  a  corresponding  fall  in  the  euro  exchange  rate.  Apparently,  the  uncertainties
associated with the euro area received more attention than those affecting the US economy.
Exchange rates do not, however, consistently move in only one direction. Cyclical developments may
revive the diversification argument as a strategic consideration. Moreover, empirical studies support
the  view  that  the  composition  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  to  some  extent  reflects  the  structure  of
external  trade  and  financial  ties.  If  the  euro  were  to  become  more  popular  among  private  market
participants, it might also significantly improve its fortunes as a reserve currency.
The role that the euro has so far played as a reserve currency has been rather modest. Although it also
occupies second place in this segment after the dollar, the gap between the two is large. IMF estimates
have set the volume of foreign reserves held in euro at the end of 1999 at 12.5%, compared with a US
dollar share of 66.2% and a yen share of 5.1%.6 However, one could argue that the euro has held up
well in comparison with its predecessor currencies.
V
At this point, allow me to summarise while at the same time casting a glance towards the future. With
the introduction of the euro, the balance of forces within the international financial system has shifted.
A second currency now exists alongside the dollar which - given the size and economic strength of the
euro area’s financial markets - has the potential to become a significant currency with global status.
The  extent  to  which  the  euro  will  actually  realise  this  potential  also  depends  on  political  decisions
taken within the euro area and on the confidence which market participants world-wide place in the
new currency.
Thus  the  first  priority  must  be  to  guarantee  the  internal  stability  of  the  euro.  This  constitutes  the
primary  objective  of  the  Eurosystem,  which  has  already  reacted  to  imminent  inflation  risks  with
several  interest-rate  increases.  However,  economic  and  fiscal  policy  makers,  who  are  capable  of
accelerating economic momentum in the euro area through the appropriate structural reforms, are also
called  upon  to  act.  Much  has  already  been  undertaken  or  set  in  motion,  as  in  the  case  of  taxation
policy. However, the markets have not (yet) rewarded these efforts.
Important  policy  initiatives  still  have  to  be  introduced  in  the  financial  markets  as  well.  The
introduction  of  the  euro  has  succeeded  in  ending  the  segmentation  into  different  national  currency
zones and in intensifying the competition in individual market areas. Some obstacles to the integration
process only really became apparent once this had been achieved. If one is truly to speak of uniform
financial markets in the euro area, priorities for the future will have to include further improvements in
the  infrastructure  of  the  equity  and  bond  markets  and  a  standardisation  of  legal  and  administrative
frameworks.  Transaction  costs  between  two  euro-area  countries  should  not  entail  higher  costs  than
those of purely domestic transactions. Moreover, transaction  costs  within  the  euro  area  must  not  be
higher than the international standard, if the euro is to prosper in international competition with other
currencies.
Let me conclude by emphasising that the financial market trends in the euro area should also be seen
in the light of the developments in the “real” sector of the economy. The financial system not only has
to accommodate the changes in the real sector but it also has to support them. In my view, innovative
financial  services  -  either  provided  by  banks  or  directly  by  markets  -  play  a  key  role  in  creating  a
“New Economy”. In this context banks and insurance companies are sometimes portrayed as a part of
the old economy whereas venture capital firms are mentioned as a driving force for a new economy. It
is my opinion, however, that this division between old and  new is  rather artificial.  In  Germany  last
year 56% of the funds of venture capital investment companies was provided by banks and insurance
6
See IMF, Annual Report 2000, Table I.2.
BIS Review 86/2000
4
companies. Seen in a global context I do believe that the market for venture capital has a big potential
for growth in the euro-area. With this positive outlook on a very special and very important segment of
euro-financial markets I’d like to finish my presentation.
5
BIS Review 86/2000
