Hermann Remsperger: The European financial system
2 years after the start of EMU - developments
and implications for monetary policy
Speech by Prof Dr Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Directorate of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at
the  Joint  Bundesbank/BIS  conference  on  “Recent  developments  in  financial  systems  and  the
challenges for economic policy”, held in Frankfurt, 28-29 September 2000.
 Introduction
Before I came to the Bundesbank two years ago, I had spent almost 20 years with a commercial bank.
As far back as the late 1980s and early 1990s my colleagues and I had been wondering what effect
European monetary union will eventually have on the financial markets and the banking industry. We
came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  introduction  of  the  euro  would  lead  to  an  increase  in  banking
competition while initiating a process of “creative destruction” in the financial markets. At the same
time, however, we found it difficult to isolate the specific impact of the euro from the more general
factors that influence the financial system. Looking back to almost two years of monetary union, I find
that  the  problem  of  identifying  the  particular  euro  factor  is  still  unsolved.  Sometimes  too  much  is
attributed to the euro.
If the changes which the euro has brought about in the financial system are to be precisely identified,
we also have to make sure that the financial system in the period before monetary union is portrayed in
an accurate manner. As far as Germany is concerned, I have some doubts about this. Above all, there
is  reason  to  believe  that  the  dominance  of  bank  loans  has  been  exaggerated  and  equity  financing
correspondingly  underestimated.  The  prevailing  assumptions  concerning  the  extent  to  which  bank
lending  superseded  equity  financing  in  the  past  went  too  far.  Unfortunately,  I  cannot  provide  the
relevant data for countries other than Germany. In the previous financial flows computations, equity
financing  of  German  enterprises  was  identified  exclusively  with  stock  issues.  Such  an  approach,
however, fails to deal adequately with the German corporate structure. The picture presented by the
previous accounting method had to be widened to include participations in private limited companies
and  partnerships.  Shares  in  such  firms  are  now  posted  in  the  financial  flows  account  as  so-called
“other participating interests”.  When  stock  issues  and  other  participating  interests are  added  up, the
result shows that at the end of 1998 the volume of bank loans to non-financial companies in Germany
exceeded equity financing by a mere 5.3%.
Please let me add that we are intensively discussing the euro-induced movement from bank loans to
corporate  bonds.  By  contrast,  enterprises’  internal  financing  -  which  is  not  directly  affected  by  the
introduction of the euro - receives less attention. To that extent, the euro is possibly making less of a
change to monetary policy than would seem to be the case if we focus on the subject of bank loans
versus bond-issue financing. In this connection, I would like to point to the fact that, on an average of
the  years  1991  to  1999,  60.5%  of  non-financial  corporations’  asset  accumulation  in  Germany  was
financed  from  depreciations  and  retained  earnings.  During  the  same  period,  the  share  of  internal
funding in gross capital formation averaged 78.2%.
Although I am against overstressing the influence of the euro, I nevertheless would like to show now
that the new currency has contributed to the expected developments in the  money,  equity  and  bond
markets.  As  expected,  also  the  competition  in  the  banking  industry  has  intensified.  Contrary  to  the
expectations was, however, the performance of the euro on the foreign exchange markets.
1
BIS Review 81/2000
Bonds, equities, money markets
I.
Prior to the actual introduction of the euro, it had been predicted that the new currency would promote
the issuance of corporate bonds and stocks while dampening the advancement of bank loans. Up to
now these predictions have proved true.
The introduction of the euro coincided with an increasing popularity of shares, especially of the “new
economy” companies. On Euro.NM - an alliance of the “new markets” of five European countries -
the number of listed companies grew from 165 at the end of December 1998 to 497 at the end of July
2000.  The  simultaneous  increase  in  market  capitalisation  was  even  more  pronounced  at  670%.1
Overall stock market capitalisation in the euro area went up from 3.6 trillion euros in December 1998
to 6.1 trillion euros in July 2000.2 The issue market was supported by rapidly increasing stock prices in
the  last  quarter  of  1999  and  the  first  quarter  of  2000  but  slowed  down  somewhat  thereafter.
Nevertheless, stock market capitalisation in the euro area is only half of that in the United States taken
as  a  percentage  of  GDP,  it  was  85%  to  181%  in  1999.  Market  capitalisation  differs  greatly  among
European countries.3
The euro immediately gained an important place as a currency of denomination for borrowers in the
bond  market.  It  served  as  a  liability  currency  for  76%  of  corporate  sector  debt  issued  by  euro  area
residents  in  1999.  This  is  to  be  compared  with  an  average  of  50%  in  the  predecessor  currencies
between 1990 and 1998.4 The amounts outstanding by  non-euro  area residents increased even  more
sharply  from  56  billion  euros  to  120  billion  euros  in  1999.5  Consequently,  the  euro  topped  the  US
dollar as an issue currency for international bonds in the private sector for the first time in the same
year.6 Low interest rates and a weakening currency might have stimulated borrowing in euro.
A closer look at debt financing shows that corporate bonds have gained in popularity in the euro area
during  the  past  few  years.  Growth  rates  for  the  outstanding  amount  of  domestic  debt  securities  by
corporate issuers of 23% in 1998 and 14% in 1999 were higher than the increase in bank loans to non-
financial corporations, although the latter had started from significantly higher levels.7 The increase in
bond  issues  was accompanied  by  a  change  in  the  structure  of  issuers.  Whereas  bonds  had  formerly
been  a  financing  instrument  almost  only  for  large,  top-rated  “blue  chip”  companies,  an  increasing
share  of bonds has  been  issued  by  lower-rated  companies  to  capitalise  on  the  growing  readiness  to
accept  credit risk  among  investors  in the  euro  area. The  average  bond  rating  consequently  declined
from  AA+  to  AA-  and  approached  that  in  the  United  States  in  1999.8  To  provide  a  more  complete
picture,  bonds  issued  by  financial  institutions  declined  slightly  in  1999  following  an  expansion  in
1998.9  However,  financial  intermediaries  are  still  the  largest  borrowers  in  the  private  bond  market.
Their debt in the form of bonds amounts up to nine times the domestically issued corporate debt.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Source:  Euro.NM.  The  new  market  segments  in  Europe  in  Belgium,  France,  Germany,  Italy  and  the  Netherlands  are
tailored to the requirements of a group of issuers which carries a high risk, is short on collateral and is in need of large
financial resources. All three characteristics seemed to match investors’ demand in 1999 quite well hence the demand-
driven record issue values.
Source: FIBV.
See BIS (2000a), p 133, for market capitalisation data and Deutsche Bundesbank (1998), p. 58, for European differences.
See BIS (2000a), p 128.
Source: ECB.
See Bis (2000b), p 17.
Sources: BIS, ECB, own calculations. Note that due to reclassifications the growth rates for the ECB bank loans statistic
suffer from comparability for different time periods.
See BIS (2000a), p 130.
Source: BIS, own calculations.
BIS Review 81/2000
2
Looking at differences in the financial structure in the euro area it becomes evident that France has the
highest ratio of direct debt financing with the share of securitised corporate debt being 14% of GDP.
By  contrast,  in  Germany,  corporate  bonds  and  commercial  paper  correspond  to  only  3%  of  GDP,
while bank bonds played a far greater role than in France. In Germany bank bonds account for 33% of
the credit volume, in France for 17%.10 Differences in the size of companies, in bankruptcy law, and in
the intermediation role of banks are reflected in these  percentages.11  In  the  last two  years  corporate
bonds grew faster in Germany  compared  to  France, although  variations in  the  underlying  economic
structure are far from having been evened out.
Starting  with  the  conversion  of  public  debt  from  national  currencies  to  euro,  the  government  bond
market in the euro area surged forward to become the second largest market in the world. Although -
owing to the elimination of currency risk - interest rate spreads have become considerably narrower
across the 11 participating countries, there are still differences amounting up to over 20 basis points
for  equally  rated  borrowers.12  This  may  be  due  to  a  liquidity  premium  on  account  of  the  lower
frequency  and  the  lower  volume  in  trading  such  bonds.  Adopting  the  euro,  governments  have
competed  to  attract  investors  to  enable  bonds  to  gain  benchmark  status.  Transparency  and  liquidity
have been enhanced by means of introducing a pre-announced auction calendar, an increase in volume
per  issue  and  changes  in  issuance  procedures.13  Currently,  German  federal  bonds  enjoy  benchmark
status at the short  end  of the  market  and  for  10-year  maturities,  whereas  French  government  bonds
have benchmark status for medium term maturities.
The decrease in national budget deficit ratios imposed by ceilings due to the Maastricht Treaty and the
Pact  for  Stability  and  Growth  have  led  to  the  share  of  government  bonds  to  overall  debt  securities
declining from 53% to 50% between the end of 1998 and the end of 1999. Bonds issued by private
debtors  filled  the  gap.  Especially  the  telecommunications  sector  was  very  active  in  the  first  half  of
2000 with a share of 30% of overall corporate bond issues in the euro area.14 The fear that the cuts in
deficit  spending  would  endanger  the  benchmark  position  of  German  “Bunds”  has  not  materialised.
Markets are quite aware of different fiscal developments in the 11 countries and therefore correlations
among European government bond yields - although high - are not perfectly positive.
In terms of investment behaviour and portfolio choice, the expectations about the impact of the EMU
were divided. One the one hand, it was assessed that if currency risk had been a true obstacle to market
integration, two  changes  in  portfolio  choice  would  be  seen  after  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  First,
cross-border investment should increase substantially, therefore helping to overcome the home bias in
private  investors’  portfolio.  Monetary  authorities  were  expected  to  hold  a  greater  share  of  foreign
exchange reserves denominated in euro than the aggregated share of the predecessor currencies. And,
second,  investment  strategies should  shift  from  country-specific to  sector-specific  risk  assessment.15
On  the  other  hand,  while  currency  risk  would  disappear,  impediments  to  market  integration  arising
from  differences  in  the  legal,  financial,  and  the  trading  infrastructure  of  the  participating  countries
would remain - and were judged as becoming relatively more important.16
10 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2000a), p 35. Numbers are for 1999.
11 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2000a), pp 38-39, and Friderichs, H, B Paranque and A Sauvé (1999), pp 69-87.
12 For France and the Netherlands spreads to the benchmark German bonds are typically contained within 15 bps, whilst
Austria experienced a spread of over 35 bps just recently.
13 See  Deutsche  Bundesbank  (1998),  pp.  59-60,  for  a  discussion  of  changes  in  issuance  policies  related  to  gaining  a
benchmark position.
14 See  Peterson,  M 
(2000),  p 114,  and  Frankfurter  Allgemeine  Zeitung,  “2000  wird  ein  Rekordjahr 
für
Unternehmensanleihen”, 19. August 2000, No 192, p 25.
15 See BIS (2000a), p 132, and Mayer, C (1999), p 22.
16 See, eg Cecchetti, S G (1999), p 11, and McCauley, R N and W R White (1997), p 3.
3
BIS Review 81/2000
Both predicitions might be considered to have proved correct in different market segments. Whereas
the arrival of the euro and a single monetary policy led to a truly pan-European interbank market and
to more integrated government and corporate bond markets, collateralised money markets and equity
markets have retained their national character to some extent.
The integration of the unsecured money market was supported by the introduction of TARGET, the
large-value funds transfer system. The integration may be witnessed through the continuing tightening
of bid-ask spreads, which has declined by more than 40% in the past five years and fell considerably
by 7% in 1999.17 A significant increase in cross-border interbank loans and deposits allowed a smooth
transfer  of  liquidity.18  Next  to  the  overall  increase  in  cross-border  interbank  activities,  a  shift  from
claims on banks outside the euro area to banks inside the euro area could be noticed. The latter came
close to 50% of the outstanding amount of nearly 2 trillion euros of interbank claims of EMU member
countries  banks  in  1999.19  By  contrast,  the  repo  markets  have  largely  remained  segmented  due  to
collateral settlement problems.20 Foreign demand for short-term securities such as treasury  bills and
commercial paper tends to be low, because they are more commonly used as cash substitutes than for
investment  purposes.  Short-term  securities  holders  therefore  have  no  strong  need  for  international
diversification.
Corporate bond issues are sold on a European scale and government bonds are becoming more easy
accessible  throughout  Europe  as  a  result  of  integrated  trading  platforms.21  However,  the  boom  in
diversification is limited to large-volume issues of big internationally known companies in the private
bond market and to the liquid benchmark bonds in the government bond market.22
Although  alliances  and  mergers  are  under  way  equity  markets  are  not  fully  integrated  to  date.
Securities settlement and trading platforms differ among European countries. There are still significant
differences in the legal, regulatory and taxation environment of equity markets which investors have to
take into account when diversifying their portfolios.23 In the “new markets”, investor protection has
been assigned equally high importance throughout Europe and therefore IPOs in this field appear to
have attracted more foreign investors than small and mid-cap stocks in regular markets.
The introduction of the euro has helped to foster the integration of some markets, but it seems that the
share of international securities in total security holdings  of  domestic  investors  remains  small  when
compared  with  optimal  diversification  proposed  by  portfolio  theory.24  Whereas  the  elimination  of
exchange  risk  and,  accordingly,  of  currency  matching  restrictions  for  institutional  investors  has
facilitated  cross-border  investments,  transaction  costs  arising  from  differences  in  payment  and
settlement systems, varying accounting standards, differences in taxation and in investor protection, as
17 See BIS (2000a), p 124, and Detken, C and P Hartman (2000), p 17.
18 See IMF (1999), table A1.1.
19 See BIS (2000a), p 125.
20 See, eg Santillàn, M Bayle and C Thygesen (2000), p 17.
21 On example is Euro-MTS which started in 1999. Bonds of 8 EMU countries can be traded on this platform so far.
22 See Danthine, J-P, F Giavazzi and E-L v Thadden (2000), p 19, and Santillàn, M Bayle and C Thygesen (2000), p 38.
23
In particular, differences in corporate law are responsible for variations in investor protection and differences in corporate
control  mechanisms.  See,  for  example,  La  Porta,  R,  F  Lopez de  Silanes  and  R  W  Vishny  (1997),  and  Cecchetti,  S  G
(1999), p 11.
24 See Danthine, J-P, F Giavazzi and E-L v Thadden (2000), pp 21-22. For a detailed discussion of the home bias, see Tesar,
L L and I Werner (1995).
BIS Review 81/2000
4
well as information disadvantages for foreign investors are still playing a role.25 And since the home
bias is not caused by exchange risk alone,26 a single currency will not cause its disappearance.
Portfolio rebalancing with respect to sector specific asset classes rather than country-specific factors
has not caused a major shift in company valuation, owing to the persistence of country-specific risk
factors.27  Nevertheless,  euro  area  indices  such  as  the  EuroStoxx  or  the  EuroMSCI  have  gained  in
importance  and  become  benchmarks  -  at  least  for  institutional  investors.  This  coincides  with  the
observation that, in Germany, managers of investment funds open to the general public spread over
50% of their portfolio in foreign securities, whereas for private direct investors this share was below
one-quarter.28 Another indicator for a growing - although not perfect - diversification with respect to
sector-specific  asset classes  might  be  the  increasing  number  of  cross-listings  of  shares.  On  German
stock  exchanges  alone,  the  number  of  listings  of  foreign  companies  rose  by  175%  in  1999.  This  is
likely  to  increase  investments  in  the  shares  of  these  companies  and  therefore  favour  international
diversification, if one follows a study for the United States.29
Currency reserves and foreign exchange markets
II.
At the end of 1999 monetary authorities held foreign exchange reserves equivalent to approximately
US$ 1,750 billion. Most estimates made prior to the start of EMU assumed that the share of foreign
exchange reserves denominated in euro would be larger over the longer term than the aggregate shares
of  the  predecessor  currencies.30  IMF  figures  show  that,  at  the  end  of  1999,  12.5%  of  the  foreign
exchange reserves posted were denominated in euro, compared with a D-Mark share of 12.1% before
the start of EMU.31 Before the introduction of the euro, the dollar share of foreign reserves amounted
to  65.7%  and  one  year  later  to  66.2%.  Although  the  euro  occupies  the  second  place  as  a  reserve
currency after the dollar, the gap between the two currencies is large.
Before  these  data  can  be  properly  interpreted,  however,  various  statistical  effects  that  suppress  the
actual  value  of  the  euro  share  must  be  taken  into  consideration.  First,  since  the  start  of  EMU,  the
external assets of the Eurosystem, when denominated in euro (or in member currencies), are no longer
counted as foreign exchange reserves. Second, during the run-up to EMU, some national central banks
of the member states, which had maintained large D-Mark reserves under the EMS, shifted a part of
their foreign exchange reserves in such a way that it effectively favoured the dollar. Third, it is not
clear  whether  all  countries  have  correctly  assigned  those  foreign  reserves  still  denominated  in  a
national currency of the euro area to the new single currency.
Against this background it hardly comes as a surprise that the euro, in its role as a reserve currency,
has either failed to gain ground beyond that claimed by  the  original  national  currencies or, in  areas
where  it  has  done  so,  has  advanced  only  marginally  in  1999.32  In  addition,  we  have  to  take  into
account that the share of the euro in foreign exchange reserves has been reduced arithmetically by the
25 See Biais, B (1999), p 245.
26 See Cooper, I and E Kaplanis (1994).
27 See BIS (2000a), p 132.
28 Sources: Deutsche Bundesbank (2000b), and capital market statistics.
29 See Smith, K and G Sofianos (1997).
30 See, for example, the figures presented by Masson, P R and B G Turtelboom (1997), pp 207ff.
31 See IMF (2000a), Appendix I, Table I.2.
32
IMF  data  indicate  that  the  euro  might  have  made  slight  gains  in  the  developing  countries.  At  all  events,  its  share  of
foreign currency reserves at the end of 1999 was, at 13.6%, somewhat higher than the combined share of the D-Mark,
franc and the guilder - the only three member currencies that the IMF lists explicitly - before the start of EMU (12.7%).
5
BIS Review 81/2000
lower exchange rate of the single currency. Seen in this light, one could argue that the euro has held up
well in comparison with its predecessor currencies.
The factors traditionally affecting foreign exchange holdings33 (exchange rate regimes, foreign trade
with reserve currency countries, the denomination of foreign debt) continued to be very influential last
year. Thus the external trade and financial ties of the ten largest holders of foreign exchange reserves
(outside  the  Eurosystem)  favoured  dollar  investments.34  While  it  is  true  that  the  euro  serves  as  an
anchor  currency  for  around  50  countries,  it  often  shares  this  function  with  other  currencies,
particularly the dollar. Incidentally, those countries whose exchange rate policy is based on the euro
tend, for the larger part, to have comparatively small foreign exchange reserves. 35
It must also be recognised that international circumstances have made it difficult for the euro to gain a
larger acceptance as a reserve currency. It was difficult to determine the risk-return profile for the new
currency at the start of monetary union. Then, as events later proved, the euro had entered into the fray
with other investment currencies at a time, when, for cyclical reasons, the interest rates in the euro area
were  exceptionally  low  and  the  dollar,  a  major  rival,  was  receiving  sustained  support  from  the
vigorous growth in the US economy.
Since its  introduction,  the  euro  has lost  considerable  ground  on the foreign  exchange  markets. This
development  stands  not  only  in  marked  contrast  to  the  remarkable  internal  stability  of  the  new
currency but is contrary to the expectations expressed by many market participants and experts in the
run-up to monetary union. These expectations were based, in part, on the assumption that the dynamic
growth in the US would cool off in 1999. Many forecasts had the US economy growing at a rate of
only 2% in 1999. The growth rate was, in fact, 4.2%. The slowdown envisaged by these forecasts was
then postponed until the year 2000. Now, the growth rate is expected to be even higher than last year.
In  the  meantime,  however,  growth  prospects  for  the  euro  area  have  improved.  Important  structural
reforms  have  been  introduced.  Bundesbank  estimates  suggest  that  the  euro  is  significantly
undervalued,  at  least  if  long-term  historical  experience  is  taken  as  a  criterion.36  A  number  of  other
authors have reached similar conclusions.37 Somewhat less recent studies by IMF or OECD staff also
find evidence of a significant undervaluation.38
Looking for possible causes for the recent weakness of the euro, it will soon become apparent that the
euro’s exchange rate reacted asymmetrically to macroeconomic events on each  side of the  Atlantic.
Thus, the successful passage of the tax reform bill in Germany was barely acknowledged in exchange
rate movements while the surprisingly large growth in US GDP in the second quarter was reflected
rather  quickly  in  a  corresponding  fall  in  the  euro  exchange  rate.  Apparently,  the  uncertainties
associated with the euro area received more attention than those affecting the US economy.
Exchange rates do not, however, consistently move in only one direction. Cyclical developments may
revive the diversification argument as a strategic consideration. Moreover, empirical studies support
the  view  that  the  composition  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  to  some  extent  reflects  the  structure  of
external  trade  and  financial  ties.  If  the  euro  were  to  become  more  popular  among  private  market
participants, it might also significantly improve its fortunes as a reserve currency.
33 See Dooley, M P, J S Lizondo and D J Mathieson (1989).
34 These ten countries account for more than one-half of the world’s foreign exchange reserves. They are all either Asian or
Latin American countries whose economies are oriented more towards the dollar area than towards the euro area.
35 ECB (1999b), Table C, pp 52-53.
36 See Clostermann, J and B Schnatz (2000).
37 See MacDonald, R (2000).
38 See Alberola, E et al. (1999), and Coppel, J, M Durand and I Visco (2000).
BIS Review 81/2000
6
Banking competition
III.
Before introducing the euro, investors in Europe dealt mainly with banks in their country of  origin.
The market share of branches and subsidiaries of foreign banks as a percentage of total assets of the
banking system was below 11% in most EMU countries.39 This suggests that competition from outside
was somewhat  constrained. The  currency  union  was consequently  expected to  foster  competition in
the banking sector.40 In particular, a reduction in excess capacities and an increase in efficiency was
expected.41
A single monetary policy and a single currency could partly take away some of the informational and
funding  advantage  of  domestic  banks  and  therefore  diminish  the  need  to  maintain  banking
relationships in every country.42 This might lead to a reduction of branches and increased cross-border
competition within the euro area. Whereas there is some evidence that in wholesale  and  investment
banking, a concentration process in under way - even on a European base43 - retail banking seems to
be still confined to the national level. This could be partly attributed to the lack of unified payment and
settlement systems and to prevailing differences in the legal and financial environment.44 On the other
hand,  there  was  a  real  surge  in  takeover  activities  in  the  banking  sector  in  1999.  Record  values  of
mergers and acquisitions amounted to 149 billion euros last year and outnumbered M&A activites in
the United States nearly twice over.45 Nevertheless, consolidation in the financial sector was mainly
limited to the domestic scene. This might be due to the exploitation of cost reductions by trimming
overlapping branch networks and excess capacity within a country and due to the gain in reputation
largely confined within national borders.46 However, mergers tend to cut operating costs and reduce
managerial inefficiencies and therefore might contribute to an increase in competition.47
By  improving  price  transparency  in  financial  services,  the  euro  could  further  enhance  competition
among financial institutions. In fact, banks’ interest rate margins, i.e. the difference between interest
rate received and paid in terms of the balance sheet volume have declined in Germany to 1.28% in
1999  which  marks  a  historical low.48  Concerning  non-interest income,  fees  paid per  unit  by  private
bond issuers for intermediation services declined in 1999.49 This reduction in revenues may very well
reflect  increased  competition  within  the  market.  Moreover  competition  owing  to  price  transparency
has  been  driven  considerably  by  advances  in  information  and  communication  technology  such  as
electronic banking. The narrowing of interest margins and substitution effects on the liability side of
39 See ECB (1999a), p 21. Exceptions are Luxembourg and Ireland with foreign market shares of over 50%.
40 See, eg De Bandt, O and E P Davis (2000), p 1063.
41 See ECB (1999a), p 1.
42 See Hurst, C, E Perée and M Fischbach (1999), p 85; BIS (2000a), p 131, and McCauley, R N and W R White (1997),
p 22.
43 See Santillàn, M Bayle and C Thygesen (2000), p 51, and Casu, B and P Molyneux (2000), p 370.
44 See Cechetti, S G (1999), p 4.
45 See ECB (2000), table 4. However, one should keep in mind that the consolidation process in the United States is already
quite advanced. See BIS (2000a), p 135.
46 See White, W R (1998), p 22.
47 See White (1998), p 21, and Hurst, C, E Perée and M Fischbach (1999), p 99.
48 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2000a), p 45, and Deutsche Bundesbank (2000c), forthcoming. ECB (1999a), table 6.1, and
Danthine, J-P, F Giavazzi and E-L v Thadden (2000), table 5.1, provide European data, albeit only for time periods prior
to EMU.
49 Source: Capital Data. Last year’s decline in France, Germany and Italy was 2, 17, and 15 basis points, respectively, on
US$ issues, which now average about 0.2 per cent of the issue volume and was less pronounced for issues in euro. Note
that this decline does not indicate a lower importance in fee-based income in the banking sector, since the overall level of
non-interest income increased compared with revenues from interest margins. See also BIS (2000a), p 131.
7
BIS Review 81/2000
bank  balance  sheets  together  with  the  increase  in  off-balance  sheet  activities  is  an  ongoing  trend.50
Mutual  recognition  clauses  owing  to  the  Single  European  Market,  favourable  financial  market
legislation, technological progress, as well as the institutionalisation of savings clearly supported the
integrating role of the euro.
Summing up, currency union has contributed to the increasing competition  in the domestic  banking
sectors but leaves scope for future activities to achieve a truly pan-European consolidation of financial
intermediaries.
Implications for monetary policy
IV.
Two  trends  can  be  observed  within  the  European  financial  system,  despite  all  remaining  national
differences  concerning  legislation,  taxation  and  the  financial  structure  of  enterprises.  First,  the
importance of the capital markets has increased compared to bank-based intermediation. And second,
competition among banks - at least on a national level - and between banks and capital markets has
intensified.
Concerning investors, there has been a noticeable increase in the share of wealth of private households
and firms that is both liquid and traded.51 As a result, investors may now be more sensitive to market
movements  in  general.  Expectations  about  future  inflation  rates,  shocks  to  the  real  sector  and  risk
premiums  are  some  of  the  factors  influencing  long-term  interest  rates.  Since  these  factors  are  not
determined  by  monetary  policy  alone,  central  bankers  may  face  greater  uncertainty  in  gauging  the
impact of a monetary policy move.
The  increasing  share  of  tradeable  assets  in  net  wealth  of  private  households  dates  back  to  the
beginning  of the  nineties.  However,  the  movement  has  been  accelerating  considerably  over  the  last
year.  The  broader  distribution  of  equity  holdings,  owing  largely  to  the  boost  of  IPOs  in  the  “new
markets” can be more closely linked to currency union. This could foster wealth effects on consumer
spending. Although the marginal  propensity  to  consume  out  of  wealth  for  equity  holdings  has  been
rather low in European countries,52 the elasticity of consumption with respect to wealth may increase.
At least that is what the development in the United States shows.53 On the financing side, banks still
play an important role as a source of external funds for companies in the European monetary union.
However, monetary policy will have to face the trend towards more direct creditor-debtor relationships
and thus possibly to resulting changes in the strength of different transmission channels.
With the emergence of close substitutes for short-term bank deposits one might fear that the influence
of monetary policy on bank deposit rates would be reduced. For Germany, however, in spite  of the
growth of money market funds and commercial paper, no such loss of influence was found during the
nineties.54 On the contrary, there is some evidence that interest rates on bank loans and deposits adjust
more  readily  to  changes  in  central  bank  rates.  Growing  competition  over  funds  -  resulting  from  a
broader variety of investment opportunities - amplified rather than dampened the impact of monetary
impulses over the interest rate channel.
The impact of the introduction of the euro and recent changes in the financial industry on the credit
channel of monetary policy transmission is ambiguous.55 The increase in competition among financial
institutions might tighten the supply of credit if monetary policy shifts to a restrictive stance. Fiercer
50 See ECB (1999a), pp 10-14.
51 See, for example, Deutsche Bundesbank (2000a), p 44.
52 See Boone, L, C Giorno and P Richardson (1998).
53 See Poterba, J M and A A Samwick (1995).
54 See Domanski, D (1997), p 282.
55 See, for example, Peersman, G (2000), pp 143-144, for an explanation of the way the credit channel works.
BIS Review 81/2000
8
competition  is  likely  to  reduce  the  buffer  function  of  banks  to  a  monetary  policy  contraction.  This
buffer  can  cause  a  delay  in  changes  in  the  borrowing  rate,  which  would  reduce  banks  interest  rate
margins arising from the difference in deposit and lending rates. However, increased competition may
lead to a further decline in the interest rate margin, thus not allowing banks to suffer from higher costs
from isolating the real sector from a contractonary monetary policy. The impact of monetary policy
will consequently be amplified.
However,  growing  bond  and  equity  markets  will  eventually  provide  companies  with  additional
financial facilities. Although, in practice, financial constraints seem to be given by the amount of bank
lending  for  most  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,56  the  favourable  development  of  corporate
bonds and of financing via the “new markets” may lead to a better substitution between both sources
of  funds.  This  reduces  the  importance  of  bottlenecks  created  by  a  shortage  of  bank  credits  and
dampens the impact of the bank lending channel.
Monetary  impulses  might  be  transmitted  differently  on  more  expectation-driven  markets,  which  are
largely  influenced  by  real-sector  developments.  For  example  a  restrictive  monetary  policy  may  not
directly  lead  to  a  reduction  of  financing  facilities  for  companies,  but  might  rather  influence  the
expectations of the future direction  of  real  activity  in the  economy.  This,  in  turn,  might  worsen  the
prospects for the company’s future earnings and therefore reduce the returns of going public or bond
issues.
Finally, monetary expansion or contraction can be strengthened via the evaluation of collateral, which
partly determines the creditworthiness of borrowing companies or households. The cost and amount of
loans are assumed to depend on the net present value of collateral, which again is inversely related to
the  short-term  interest  rate.  Whereas  this  balance  sheet  channel  seems  to  be  particularly  strong  in
bank-dominated financial systems,57 it is not clear how changes on capital markets have affected the
strength  of  this  financial  accelerator  of  the  standard  interest  rate  channel  of  monetary  policy
transmission. A rise in the share of tradeable assets in the balance sheets of companies as well as in the
net  wealth  of  private  households  enables  additional  borrowing  with  rising  asset  prices,  whereas  the
creditworthiness  of  debtors  is  restricted  by  falling  stock  and  property  prices.  Since  tradeable  assets
react more readily to changes in monetary policy, its impact could be reinforced through revaluation of
collateral,  provided  that  asset  prices  move  in  the  “right”  direction,  i.e.  decline  with  a  monetary
contraction. On the other hand a shift towards a more market-oriented financial system may weaken
the transmission process of monetary policy over banks’ balance sheets.58
As capital markets grow and banks become increasingly exposed to competiton, financial instruments
are becoming eligible as closer substitutes and also more tailored to the special needs of investors and
borrowers.  For  example,  external  financing  restrictions  have  been  slightly  lifted  somewhat  on  new
enterprises  with  little  collateral,  due  to  the  boost  provided  by  the  “new  markets”.59  However,  the
development of the financial system might change the allocation of risk among  market participants.
Private  households  and  institutional  investors  now  increasingly  bear  the  risk  of  corporate  bonds.
Markets  can  provide  instruments  to  inform  about  and  hedge  against  these  risks.  Nevertheless,  in
periods  of  change  the  performance  of  these  mechanisms  can  be  poor.  Bearing  in  mind  the
interdependences between bank lending and asset prices,60 it is clear that observing developments on
capital markets and taking into account stability implications resulting from asset price changes goes
56 See  Friderichs,  H,  B  Paranque  and  A  Sauvé  (1999),  pp  83-87,  for  the  case  of  France  and  Germany  and  Deutsche
Bundesbank (2000a), p 40, for Germany.
57 See IMF (2000b), p 102.
58 See IMF (2000b), p 103 for a classification of importance of this channel in countries with different financial systems.
59 See Hellwig, M (2000), paragraph 30,  who  corroborates  the  role  of  the  NASDAQ  for  outside  equity  financing,  but is
somewhat sceptical about the financing role of the newly founded “Neuer Markt” in Germany.
60 See Remsperger, H (2000), p 7, for a more detailed discussion about the interdependence of asset prices and credit risk.
9
BIS Review 81/2000
hand in hand with exerting supervisory duties over the banking sector. Central bankers will therefore
keep a watchful eye on indicators reflecting credit as well as asset price risks.
These  considerations  lead  me  to  the  following  conclusions.  First,  the  euro  has  intensified
developments  in  the  financial  industry  that  argue  in  favour  of  a  broad  mandate  for  national  central
banks. They must ensure price stability and, at the same time, concern themselves with the stability of
the  financial  system.  Secondly  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  the  euro-induced  developments  in  the
financial  markets  might  change  the  relative  importance  of  the  different  transmission  channels  in
monetary  policy.  In  my  view,  however,  it  is  too  early  to  answer  the  key  question  of  whether  the
overall efficiency of monetary policy will be strengthened or weakened by these changes. And finally
let me repeat a point I made at the very beginning. When we concentrate on euro-induced changes in
external financing we should not overlook the fact that in many countries internal funding is the major
source of corporate finance. Against this background, the euro is possibly making less of a change to
monetary policy than would seem to be the case if we only focussed on the substitution between bank
loans  on the  one  side  and  corporate  bonds  and  equities  on  the  other  side.  Nevertheless,  there  is  no
doubt that the euro has worked as a catalyst for changes in the financial markets.
References
Alberola, E et al. (1999), Global Equilibrium Exchange Rates: Euro, Dollar “Ins”, “Outs”, and Other
Major Currencies in a Panel Cointegration Framework, IMF Working Paper 99/175, Washington DC.
Biais,  B  (1999):  European  stock  markets  and  European  unification,  in:  Dermine,  J  and  Hillion,  P
(eds.): European capital markets with a single currency, Oxford, pp 236-62.
BIS (2000a), 70th Annual Report, Basel.
BIS (2000b), Quarterly Review, June 2000, Basel.
Boone, L, C Giorno and P Richardson (1998): Stock market fluctuations and consumption behaviour:
Some recent evidence, OECD Economics Department Working Paper No 40, Paris.
Casu,  B  and  P  Molyneux  (2000):  Efficiency  &  structural  issues  in  European  banking,  Revue  de  la
Banque, 64:370-80.
Cecchetti,  S  G  (1999):  Legal  Structure,  Financial  Structure,  and  the  Monetary  Policy  Transmission
Mechanism, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, 5: 9-28.
Clostermann, J and B Schnatz (2000): The Determinants of the Euro-Dollar Exchange Rate - Synthetic
Fundamentals and a Non-existing Currency, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper 2/00, Frankfurt
am Main.
Cooper,  I  and  E  Kaplanis  (1994):  Home  bias  in  equity  portfolios  and  the  cost  of  capital  for
multinational firms, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 8:95-102.
Coppel,  J,  M  Durand  and  I  Visco  (2000):  EMU,  the  Euro  and  the  European  Policy  Mix,  OECD
Working Paper No 232, Paris.
Danthine, J-P, F Giavazzi and E-L v Thadden (2000): European financial markets after EMU: A first
assessment, CEPR Discussion Paper No 2413, London.
De  Bandt,  O  and  E  P  Davis  (2000):  Competition,  contestability  and  market  structure  in  European
banking sectors on the eve of EMU, Journal of Banking and Finance, 24: 1045-66.
Detken, C and P Hartman (2000): The Euro and International Capital Markets, ECB Working Paper
No 19, Frankfurt am Main.
Deutsche  Bundesbank  (1998):  Structural  changes  in  the  German  capital  market  in  the  run-up  to
European Monetary Union, Monthly Report, April 1998, Frankfurt am Main.
Deutsche  Bundesbank  (2000a):  The  relationship  between  bank  lending  and  the  bond  market  in
Germany, Monthly Report, January 2000, Frankfurt am Main.
BIS Review 81/2000
10
Deutsche  Bundesbank  (2000b):  Wertpapierdepots,  Statistische  Sonderveröffentlichung  9,  August
2000, Frankfurt am Main.
Deutsche  Bundesbank  (2000c):  The  performance  of  German  credit  institutions  in  1999,  Monthly
Report, September 2000 (forthcoming), Frankfurt am Main.
Dooley, M P, J S Lizondo and D J Mathieson (1989): The Currency Composition of Foreign Exchange
Reserves, IMF Staff Papers, Vol 36, No 2, pp 385-434.
Domanski,  D 
ihre
Auswirkungen auf die Rolle der Kreditinstitute - Eine Bewertung aus geldpolitischer Sicht, in: Gahlen,
B, H Hesse and H Ramser (eds): Finanzmärkte, Tübingen, pp 271-90.
(1997):  Disintermediationstendenzen 
im  deutschen  Finanzsystem  und 
ECB  (1999a):  Possible  effects  of  EMU  on  the  EU  banking  systems  in  the  medium  to  long  term,
Frankfurt am Main.
ECB (1999b): The international role of the euro, Monthly Bulletin, August 1999, Frankfurt am Main.
ECB (2000): The euro area one year after the introduction of the euro: key characteristics and changes
in the financial structure, Monthly Bulletin, January 2000, Frankfurt am Main.
Friderichs,  H,  B  Paranque  and  A  Sauvé  (1999):  Structures  of  corporate  finance  in  Germany  and
France:  a  comparative  analysis  for  west  German  and  French  incorporated  enterprises  with  special
reference to institutional factors, in: A Sauvé and M Scheuer (eds): Corporate Finance in Germany and
France, Frankfurt am Main, pp 64-136.
Hellwig, M (2000): Corporate governance and the financing of investment for structural change, paper
presented at the Deutsche Bundesbank spring conference, Frankfurt am Main.
Hurst,  C,  E  Perée  and  M  Fischbach  (1999):  On  the  road  to  wonderland?  Bank  restructuring  after
EMU, EIB Papers, 4:83-103.
IMF (2000a): Annual Report 2000, Appendix I, Washington DC.
IMF (2000b): World economic outlook, Washington DC.
La  Porta,  R,  F  Lopez  de  Silanes  and  R  W  Vishny  (1997):  Legal  determinants  of  external  finance,
Journal of Finance, 52: 1131-50.
MacDonald, R (2000): Concepts to Calculate Equilibrium Exchange Rates: An Overview,  Deutsche
Bundesbank Discussion Paper 3/00, Frankfurt am Main.
Masson, P R and B G Turtelboom (1997): Characteristics of the Euro, the Demand for Reserves, and
Policy Coordination Under EMU, in: P R Masson, T H Krueger and B G Turtelboom (eds): EMU and
the International Monetary System, IMF, Washington DC pp 194-224.
Mayer, C (1999): European capital markets: Competition between systems, EIB Papers, 4: 47-57.
McCauley,  R  N  and  W  R  White  (1997):  The  Euro  and  European  Financial  Markets,  BIS  Working
Papers No 41; Basel.
Peersman, G (2000): The transmission of monetary policy in the euro area, Revue de la Banque, 64:
139-48.
Peterson,  M  (2000):  European  corporate  bonds:  Pause  for  thought,  Euromoney,  June  2000,
pp 106-114.
Poterba,  J  M  and  A  A  Samwick  (1995):  Stock  ownership  patterns,  stock  market  fluctuations,  and
consumption, Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 295-372.
Remsperger, H (2000): Vermögenspreise und Geldpolitik, Vortrag beim Symposium des Instituts für
Empirische  Wirtschaftsforschung,  Berlin,  reprinted 
in:  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Auszüge  aus
Presseartikeln, No 17, 3. April 2000, Frankfurt am Main.
Santillàn, M Bayle and C Thygesen (2000): The impact of the euro on money and bond markets, ECB
Occasional Paper, No 1, Frankfurt am Main.
11
BIS Review 81/2000
Smith,  K  and  G  Sofianos  (1997):  The  impact  of  an  NYSE  listing  on  the  global  trading  of  non-US
Stocks, NYSE Working Paper 97-02, New York.
Tesar, L L and I Werner (1995): Home bias and high turnover, Journal of International Money and
Finance, 14: 467-92.
White, W R (1998): The coming transformation of continental European banking, BIS Working Paper
No 54, Basel.
BIS Review 81/2000
12
