Urban Bäckström: The Swedish economy
Speech  by  Mr  Urban  Bäckström,  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of
Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  to  the  Swedish  Shareholders
Association, in Stockholm on 28 November 2000.
 First a word of thanks for the invitation to talk to you this evening. My topic is the Swedish economy
and monetary policy. Provided nothing unexpected occurs, in my opinion it will soon be time to raise
the repo rate. It is, however, difficult to tell just when this will happen. The Board is made up of six
members, each with their own opinion of what is the most appropriate monetary stance and a say in
the final decision. But this evening I would like to elaborate on why I personally believe it will soon
be time to raise the repo rate.
In order to put the present monetary policy situation in perspective, we need to look back some years
into  the  past.  During  1996,  when  confidence  had  been  established  in  economic  policy’s  overall
commitment to price stability and the consolidation of  the  public  finances had  begun,  the  Riksbank
was in a position to initiate a comparatively marked reduction of the repo rate. This had been preceded
by a period with a tight monetary stance, when the repo rate had reached a high of almost 9%.
When the 2% inflation target was introduced, few observers believed at first that trend inflation would
ultimately land up around 2%. We would do well to remember, however, that people’s perceptions of
the  future  are  often  shaped  not  so  much  by  words  as  by  actions.  So,  after  a  series  of  purposeful
decisions  by  the  Government,  the  Riksdag  (Sweden’s  parliament)  and  the  Riksbank,  economic
policy’s general commitment to macroeconomic stability began to inspire confidence.
Economic policy’s credibility gave the Riksbank greater freedom to act
The  growing  confidence  accordingly  meant  in  turn  that,  without  jeopardising  the  objective  of  price
stability,  the  Riksbank  was  able  to lower  the  repo  rate  relatively  markedly,  from  almost  9%  to  just
over 4%. Interest rates for longer maturities also fell. This led, as we have all seen in recent years, not
just to higher GDP growth but also to a more uniform development of demand in different sectors.
When the cyclical upswing began towards the end of 1993, most of the growth came from the export
sector. However, lower levels of interest rates benefited Swedish households and firms by easing the
heavily  restrictive  effect  of  the  high  level  previously.  This  contributed  to  an  increase  in  domestic
demand  as  well  and  broadened  the  economic  upswing.  That  can  be  said  to  have  instigated  the
considerable reduction of unemployment we have seen in recent years.
Neither the Asian crisis in 1997 nor the turbulence in international financial markets in the autumn of
1998 had much of an impact, thanks not least to a monetary policy realignment in many countries. The
Swedish  repo  rate  was  also  cut,  to  a  low  of  2.90%.  So  despite  these  crises  elsewhere,  growth  in
Sweden remained stable at an average annual rate of 3 to 4%. When the unrest had subsided, the repo
rate was raised to the current level of 3.75%.
The Riksbank has heralded a repo rate increase for some time
During the past year, Riksbank representatives have frequently said that sooner or later, a continuation
of strong economic activity will make a further repo rate increase necessary. This is because an annual
GDP growth rate of 3 to 4% is more than the economy can achieve without generating imbalances.
Higher  economic  growth  is,  however,  feasible  for  a  time  if  there  are  unutilised  resources  in  the
economy. But when tensions arise between total demand and supply, various bottleneck problems are
liable to result in price and wage increases that ultimately threaten price stability.
1
BIS Review 109/2000
Perhaps the best illustration of this is to be found in the labour market. The increase in employment in
recent years has exceeded what demographic factors are contributing to labour force growth by around
40,000  to  70,000  persons  a  year.  Employment  growth  is  in  fact  the  strongest  for  several  decades.
Considering  how  high  unemployment  has  been,  this  is  welcome.  But  sooner  or  later,  such  a
development  means  that  firms  will  have  difficulties  in  recruiting  labour.  Then,  if  not  before,  wage
costs are liable to accelerate and push prices up. The issue of when this will happen does not have to
do with either the actual level of unemployment or the number who were employed when activity last
peaked in the late 1980s. It depends instead on how serious any bottleneck problems are becoming and
how strong those with jobs consider their bargaining position to be in wage negotiations. Briefly, then,
important  factors  in  the  assessment  of  the  risks  of  inflationary  tendencies  are  how  well  the  labour
market is functioning and how quickly resource utilisation is rising.
Monetary policy contributes to stability
In an upward cyclical phase, the move towards a situation where the tensions in markets for goods,
services and labour threaten to gain the upper hand and jeopardise price stability is a gradual process.
That makes it difficult to tell exactly when the  imbalances constitute  a  genuine  problem.  Observers
and those who decide economic policy have to assemble the pieces of this puzzle. In an economy that
is approaching a strained situation in resource utilisation, signs that imbalances are beginning to build
up will appear with increasing intensity and frequency. As more and more pieces of the puzzle fall into
place, they ultimately provide a basis for action. The whole of this process is complicated by the time
lag  before  monetary  measures  elicit  effects.  Our  premise  is  that  the  full  effect  of  an  interest  rate
adjustment  materialises  after  one  to  two  years.  So  measures  taken  today  would  not  have  their  full
effect until some time during 2002.
Monetary policy therefore involves balancing the risks of acting too soon against those of acting too
late.  Acting  prematurely  is  liable  to  lead  to  unemployment  being  higher  than  it  need  be.  If  the
Riksbank acts too late, on the other hand, price and wage increases may already have got under way.
In that case, the economy may ultimately land in a recession, perhaps with even higher unemployment.
Fortunately, it is not a question of either/or. A monetary policy adjustment can be decided gradually,
with stepwise changes in the repo rate. Consequently it is always possible to compare forecasts with
outcomes, assess the policy stance continuously and make the adjustments that are considered to be
necessary.
If monetary policy is successful, a foundation is laid, not only for low, stable inflation in line with the
target  and  the  Riksbank’s  statutory  objective,  but  also  for  a  stable  long-term  growth  of  output  and
employment. Seen from this angle, low inflation, besides being our objective, is accordingly a means
of  trying  to  achieve  a  stable economic  development  in  general.  That  is  something  which  should  be
underscored.
Inflation prospects
In  an  analysis  of  the  situation  in  the  run  up  to  the  next  Inflation  Report,  due  to  be  published  on  7
December, the following can be noted:
• 
The price trend to date is approximately in line with the forecast that was presented in the
October Report.
  As  expected,  there  have  been  signals  that  international  economic  activity  is  tending  to
become somewhat slacker. The pattern is clearest in the United States but even some slowing
of growth in Europe seems likely in the coming years.
In  Sweden,  too,  there  are  indications  that  activity  has  become  somewhat  calmer.  Both
households and firms have become somewhat less optimistic about the future. Car purchases
have fallen. Corporate order books are not being replenished quite as rapidly as before. In
general, this is in line with what we foresaw in the October Report. But domestic economic
BIS Review 109/2000
2
    activity  still  seems  to  be  rising  rapidly,  even  when  allowance  is  made  for  the  signs  of  a
slowdown. That needs to be underscored.
Share prices, as we all know, have been volatile in the past six months but the fall to date is
not a major cause for concern. Private consumption is being sustained in the first place by a
strong development of income that stems from higher employment, a good increase in real
wages and a fiscal stance that is less restrictive than before. It should be borne in mind that
even  including  the  fall  that  has  occurred,  aggregate  stock-market  wealth  has  grown  very
markedly in recent years.
The present round of wage negotiations contains some elements of concern. In a sense, with
a  wage  share  that  amounts  to  approximately  two-thirds  of  the  economy,  that  is  inevitable
when  many  settlements  are  being  concluded  simultaneously.  For  the  path  of  the  Swedish
economy in the coming years, no other single factor is therefore anything like as important
as the total wage trend. The picture of the negotiations that are now beginning is mixed and
tensions  do  exist.  Since  the  previous  survey  in  September,  all  the  interviewed  groups’
expectations of the annual wage rise have been revised upwards for all time horizons. Wage
expectations  are  highest among  the  employee  organisations.  Moreover,  the  wage  demands
that  have  been  presented  are  higher  than  before  the  previous  round  of  negotiations.  It  is
evidently  becoming  more  difficult  to  find  people  with  the  appropriate  competence  for  the
jobs that are advertised. This presumably makes the risk of future wage drift greater than in
previous years. All this could be a sign that we are approaching a situation where, bit by bit,
aggregate  wage  costs  in  the  Swedish  economy  start  to  accelerate,  albeit  from  moderate
levels.
When it comes to judging inflationary pressure in the coming years, a central concept is total
resource utilisation. The available amount of unutilised resources is crucial for the domestic
generation  of  inflationary  pressure,  at  least  as  long  as  inflation  expectations  are  parked
around our 2% target. In the coming years it is highly probable that, for the first time in a
long while, our estimates of total resource utilisation - the output gap - will show that the gap
has  closed  and  the  economy  has  reached  or  even  moved  above  the  capacity  ceiling.  This
accordingly holds even if activity does move into a more subdued phase.
The overall picture of inflation is also complicated by the krona having been weak recently
instead of appreciating as we assumed in October. Moreover, the price of oil remains high.
This may mean that the earlier tendency for import prices to counter what has otherwise been
gradually growing domestic inflationary pressure may not apply to the same extent. In this
respect, then, the outlook is more in line with the risk spectrum we outlined in the October
Report than with our main scenario there.
The composite assessment of the various risks associated with wage formation, the exchange rate, the
price of oil and the possibility of weaker activity is naturally a matter of judgement. In my opinion,
however, inflation prospects in general are now somewhat more troublesome than before. There has
clearly been a gradual increase in resource utilisation. The overall assessment of activity in the coming
years  implies  that  growth  will  continue  to  be  above  the  level  of  2.0  to  2.5%  that  the  Riksbank
considers  to  be  sustainable  in  the  longer  run.  That  applies  even  if  there  is  a  slight  slowdown  in
international activity. There are also the high price of oil, the weakening of the exchange rate and signs
of some disturbing tendencies in wage formation.
To some extent, therefore, the situation for monetary policy has changed. That is also why I began by
saying that the time will soon come to raise the repo rate. Not because I have dramatically revised my
assessment of inflation prospects but rather because resource utilisation is still rising and a shift can be
discerned in the risk spectrum. We will have to bear these things in mind so that the development of
production and employment can remain stable.
3
BIS Review 109/2000
