Lars Heikensten: What can Europe learn from other countries
and former experiences?
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Joint
Bundesbank/BIS  conference  on  “Recent  developments  in  financial  systems  and  the  challenges  for
economic policy”, held in Frankfurt, 28-29 September 2000.
 Let me begin by expressing my thanks for the invitation. I  very  much appreciate the opportunity of
being here.
I should confess that it is not an easy task to be the last speaker in a conference as rich as this one.
Perhaps I should also admit that I was not sure why I was asked to talk about what Europe can learn
from others’ experiences. Just for the record: Sweden belongs to Europe, though not yet to the euro
area.
My guess was that the organisers wanted me to draw on my experience as a policy maker in a country
which certainly did reap some experiences in the 1990s that are relevant for both monetary policy and
financial stability. More, in fact, than any one of us Swedes would have wished. It is not surprising
that my hair turned prematurely grey since I worked first in the finance ministry and then at the central
bank during these turbulent years.
After  the  crisis  in  the  early  1990s  the  Riksbank  had  to  start  more  or  less  from  scratch.  The  earlier
policy was in tatters. In November 1992 the fixed exchange rate simply had to be abandoned, making
it necessary to work out new ways of working in a credible way with a flexible rate. Meanwhile, the
problems in the banking system had to be sorted out, while the Riksbank endeavoured to build up a
future system for oversight and related matters.
Today  I  want  to talk  about two  subjects.  One  is  related  to financial  stability,  the  other to  monetary
policy. I shall be fairly practical and, as I mentioned, speak from the point of view of a decision-maker
rather than an academic drawing on our own experiences. At the same time, the topics are ones that I
know are currently being discussed a good deal in the European Community.
Financial stability
Let  me  first  deal  with  the  management  of  a  banking  crisis.  Some  of  the  previous  speakers  have
touched briefly on this. Our experience demonstrates that an important element in crisis management
is clear-cut rules and structures. Time is short and the risks are huge. I also believe that there is now an
increased  risk  of future crises  being  triggered  by  mistakes  within  banks  under  increasing  pressures.
This  kind  of  crisis  can  emerge  very  rapidly  indeed,  maybe  more  rapidly  than  a  crisis  related  to
macroeconomic problems.
It is sometimes argued that clear-cut rules are liable to create the problem of moral hazard. I do not
deny that the risk exists and should be born in mind when rules and so on are constructed. But to my
mind, the absence of a  well thought-out  position,  with clear  principles  and  rules,  does  not  do  away
with  moral  hazard  problems.  They  are  still  present  under  the  surface.  Ultimately  it  will  be  the
tax-payer who stands to lose if actions are not well-prepared and policy is not coherent. This is our
experience and I know it is also the view of, for instance, my Finnish and Thai colleagues.
The strategy adopted by the Swedish authorities almost a decade ago worked relatively well. But in
the  absence  of  clear  examples  from  other  crisis  management,  it  was  arrived  at  by  improvisation
without any rules to rely on. The fact that the result was so satisfactory and the crisis could be resolved
so quickly was presumably in large measure a consequence of the profound economic crisis generating
a willingness to cooperate, both among politicians and in society in general.
1
BIS Review 85/2000
However, you cannot relay on that kind of spirit of cooperation, which means  that  a  clear  structure
must have been established for managing acute problems. There has to be a clear division of labour
between the competent authorities. The authorities concerned  must  have  thought  about  the  different
situations than can arise and how to cope with them.
In a draft legislation that was presented recently, a specific procedure, called public administration, is
proposed  for  the  reconstruction  and  winding  up  of  banks.  This  should  provide  a  credible  way  of
managing problem banks that could jeopardise the entire system. The general bankruptcy procedure is
not considered credible, because it is not designed to handle systemic risk.1
The  proposal  envisages  that  a  bank  is  to  be  put  under  public  administration  if  it  is  unable,  or  is
expected  to  become  unable,  to  meet  its  commitments  over  a  longer  period.  A  bank  under  public
administration is also to be able to obtain a government guarantee that covers all its commitments. All
this is intended to enable the bank to continue operations during a transitional period without a capital
contribution from the government.
A guiding principle behind the proposed public administration is that, in the event of a crisis, there is
no universal protection of creditors. Better risk management and decreased risk exposure are likely to
result  ex  ante  if  shareholders  are  liable  to  be  hit  by  a  crisis  and  creditors  may  suffer  losses.  The
government guarantee is accordingly proposed to apply only to commitments that are made after the
guarantee  has  been  issued.  In  this  way,  a  bank’s  losses  are  to  be  carried  in  the  first  place  by  its
shareholders  and  after  them  by  the  creditors  whose  claims  pre-date  the  decision  to  impose  public
administration.
A  basic  principle  in  the  management  of  the  Swedish  banking  crisis  was  just  that  no  compensation
would be provided for shareholders if government funds were needed to cope with a bank’s problems.
This  was  important,  of  course,  with  a  view to future  moral  hazard problems  but it  was  also crucial
politically.  Otherwise  it  would  hardly  have  been  possible  to  obtain  political  support  for  the  public
funds  needed.  The  unwillingness  to  adopt  an  equally  strict  approach  in  many  Asian  countries  has
presumably been a major factor behind the difficulties in dealing with the problems there.
The central bank’s primary function in this context is to provide emergency lending for acute needs in
order to avoid a systemic crisis and aid the work of the new authority. The experience from bank crises
clearly demonstrates the importance of incorporating such emergency lending in the general structure
for  crisis  management  instead  of  treating  it  as  a  separate  measure.  This  has  to  do  with  the  great
difficulty in practice of distinguishing between liquidity support and support motivated by problems
with solvency. At the Riksbank we have made very concrete preparations in this field. We have, for
example,  produced  manuals  specifying  who  is  to  do  what  and  how  in  various  conceivable  crisis
situations.
Before  turning  to  monetary  policy,  permit  me  finally  to  underscore  that  I  am  well  aware  of  the
difficulties of various kinds, not least of an institutional and political nature, that exist at the European
level when it comes to composing a clear set of rules of this type. At the same time this conference has
strengthened my belief that a development towards a more integrated European banking system can be
swift.  The  least  we  can  do  is  to  prepare  ourselves  on  the  national  level.  It  will  probably  help  us
managing a crisis at the European level if one would emerge.
Monetary policy
As I mentioned, the work of constructing a new policy with a flexible exchange rate had to start from
scratch  in  the  fall  of  1992.  But  in  a  matter  of  months  the  Riksbank  had  prepared  a  new  target  for
monetary policy. The annual rate of CPI inflation was to be held at 2%, with a tolerance interval of
1
Procedures to handle the same kind of problems exist in e g USA, England and Norway.
BIS Review 85/2000
2
one  percentage  point up  or  down.  The  2%  target  roughly  matched  the  prevailing  rate  and  was  also
considered to be well in line with the ambitions in other countries in Europe.
Since 1993 the way the Riksbank works has been developed quite a bit. This applies to our internal
procedures, the intellectual policy framework and our external communication. Since this has been my
primary task during the last  five  years,  I  could  go  on  speaking  about  it  for  ages  but  I  shall  confine
myself to a set of issues related to the role of the inflation forecasts and policy rules.
In my opinion, the focus on the combination of a specific, symmetric target and published forecasts set
by the policymakers has been important for monetary policy’s credibility. By consistently presenting
our forecasts and acting accordingly, we have created greater freedom of action than would otherwise
have been feasible. It has been a short-cut to credibility. My favourite example is the autumn of 1998.
At that time, in the midst of a fairly lively discussion of interest rate policy, similar to that in the rest
of Europe, we managed to cut our rate in several rapid steps without being accused of political bias.
We could make our point by referring to a very concrete picture of our view on inflation.
It  is  sometimes  said  that  you  need  a  firm  foundation  before  venturing  to  publish  forecasts.  I  don’t
subscribe  to  that.  Admittedly  the  Riksbank  began  by  just  compiling  inflation  indicators.  It  was  not
until  1996  that  we  published  really  comprehensive  accounts  of  economic  tendencies  and  inflation,
followed  in  1997  by  the  first  projections  of  inflation.  However,  I  personally  believe  that  an
understanding of how the Riksbank acts could have been achieved sooner if we had started earlier with
fuller accounts of inflation and stuck to them in policy. In this context the recent Brasilian experience
is interesting.
In time the policy framework was augmented with what could be called a rule of action or a policy
rule. We made it clear that if inflation is expected to exceed the 2% target in the coming one to two
years,  then  we  will  normally  raise  the  interest  rate  and  vice  versa.  This  formulation  reflects  our
judgement that policy’s effects mainly occur after a time lag of twelve to twenty-four months. The rule
of action has made policy even clearer. In principle, by relating new information to our most recent
forecast, market players are in a good position to form a picture of policy’s direction and we can see
that when we compare their forecasts of the repo rate with our own.
However, one should be aware that there is a risk that an unduly simple rule or decision-making model
will  oblige  the  central  bank  itself  to  disregard  other  relevant  information.  Monetary  policy  is  not
mechanics. For this reason we have  elaborated our  view  in  various  respects.  We  have  underscored
that there are also grounds for considering the periods before as well as beyond the 1–2 year horizon
on which we focus. Strictly speaking, it is a matter of optimising over all future time, including both
inflation and output. For a long time now we have also declared that there are transitory factors we
should disregard; more recently we noted that there can be grounds for weighing a prompt return to
inflation’s targeted rate against the risk of avoidable fluctuations in output. Finally, we have said that
departures from our simple rule may be warranted by problems with financial stability.
What is important, however, is our ambition to provide a clear explanation and motivation for such
departures.  Given  our  ambitions  in  this  field  we  would  risk  severe  criticism  if  we  were  to  do  so
without good arguments. I should also say that if our application of the rule would continuously be
modified and altered, much of its communicative and educational value would be lost.
The Riksbank do get suggestions that we should change to an inflation target similar to the one the
ECB uses and aim for 0–2% in a medium-term perspective. In practice, this could very well lead to the
same  decisions  concerning  the  repo  rate  as  the  model  we  have  chosen  and  the  difference  should
therefore  not  be  exaggerated.  That  I  personally  prefer  our  approach  has  to  do  with  at  least  four
different aspects. Besides Goodhart’s argument that it helps us staying on track, doing what we should
to keep inflation at 2%, there are three more arguments.
1. 
The more precise policy formulation has been beneficial for our thinking and the way it has
developed, an aspect that does not usually get a mention in the literature. A clear framework
kicks. Good and clear arguments that can be presented openly are needed for departing from
adopted principles.
3
BIS Review 85/2000
2. 
3. 
Aspects of communication also favour our approach, with published forecasts and a simple
policy rule. When explaining on television to the general public or to the audience at a labour
conference in the north of Sweden, I can rely on exactly the same arguments as when I face
Professor Lars Svensson at Stockholm University.
The  clearer  the  policy,  the  easier  it  is  to  assess  or  evaluate.  These  assessments  are  an
important part of the efforts to generate broader respect for what we do and healthy for our
accountability.
Before  rounding  off  this  discussion  about  monetary  policy,  let  me  also  touch  on  the  question  of
publication of minutes, which was brought up in the discussions earlier today. I think this is an issue
that  has  been  given  too  much  prominence  in  recent  discussions  about  clarity  and  transparency  in
monetary  policy.  Clearly,  there  are  positive  and  negative  aspects  of  publishing  minutes.  It  can
influence the internal discussions in both a positive and negative way. It can also have positive and
negative  effects  on  the  way  in  which  a  central  bank  is  perceived.  I  believe  that  the  publication  of
minutes  has  been  less  important  for  the  acceptance  and  credibility  of  monetary  policy  in  Sweden
during  recent  years  than  the  policy  framework  with  published  forecasts  and  a  policy  rule.
Nevertheless, I do think it was right of us to start to publish ours.
Concluding remarks
Let  me  conclude  by  underscoring  that  there  are  clearly  major  differences  between the problems  we
were  confronted  with  in  Sweden  after  our  crisis  and  those  confronting  European  decision-makers
today.  We started  from  scratch  without  any  credibility,  while  the  euro  was  launched  in  a  relatively
good  setting  drawing  on  the  credibility  of  the  Bundesbank.  But  on  the  other  hand,  we  had  the
advantage of having to manage only one country. After five years in European policy circles, I think I
understand  what  Ottmar  Issing  means  when  he  says  that  every  single  language  reflects  the  unique
circumstances in the country where it is spoken.
Along  the  way  of  trying  to  solve  different  policy  problems  transparency  and  openness  have  been
important features to us and helped us to increase credibility for our actions. The clearer the principles
and rules are that guide policy, also in the financial stability area, the better.
Given the complexity of European policymaking and the many different national aspects involved I
think that the arguments for this clear framework and for rules are even stronger on a European level
although perhaps more difficult to obtain.
BIS Review 85/2000
4
