T T Mboweni: Central bank independence
Speech  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  Reuters  Forum
Lecture, held in Johannesburg, on 11 October 2000.
 “Independence signifies  ignoring  pressures,  whatever its  source. The independence of central  banks
goes, ... beyond independence from political, executive and legislative power. For me it also equates
with  independence  from  private  or  collective  economic  interests,  autonomy  versus  the  short  term,
frequently imposed by capital markets and, finally, freedom of action vis-à-vis the monetary policy of
other central banks.”
Prime Minister Lionel Jospin. Paris, May 2000.
Introduction
1.
I am extremely pleased at this invitation to present this inaugural address in the Reuters Forum Lecture
series.  This  is  an  important  initiative  and  I  wish  you  well  for  the  sustained  success  of  this  lecture
series.
We have chosen to discuss the issue of central bank independence since the topic is both current and
highly significant. Incidentally when the Banque de France organised their bicentennial celebrations in
May this year, they chose the topic of central bank independence as the theme for the colloquium.
At  the  said  Banque  de  France  colloquium,  the  Prime  Minister  of  the  French  Republic,  Monsieur
Lionel Jospin remarked that: “the increased power and influence of central banks, the greater visibility
of  their  role  and  their  leaders,  have  inevitably  focused  attention  on  their  role,  their  efficiency,  the
principles underlying their actions and, in some cases, their place in the democratic way of life.”
Central banking is of cardinal importance in any country because of the legal right normally granted to
central banks to create money. This money can serve as a means of payment, a unit of account and a
store of value. One of the important issues immediately  arising  after  granting  this  right  to  a  central
bank,  is  whether  this  function  should  fall  under  the  ultimate  control  of  the  executive  branch  of
government - the cabinet and its administrative departments - or whether parliament should leave this
responsibility  to  be  freely  executed  by  an  independent,  autonomous  powerful  institution  run  by
unelected people.
Advantages of an independent central bank
2.
The traditional argument in favour of a strong, independent central  bank  is that  the  power  to spend
money should in some way be separated from the power to create money. Numerous episodes in the
world’s  economic  history  testify  to  a  government’s  potential  abuse  of  its  power  to  create  money.
Around the third century AD in the Roman Empire, for instance, the silver coins collected by the tax
authorities were melted and combined with inferior metals, yielding many more coins to spend on the
Caesar’s  priorities  than  the  initial  tax  take.  With  too  much  money  chasing  too  few  goods,  the  end
result was high inflation.
Much the same has happened all too frequently with paper money systems. Many governments have
given way to the temptation to reduce interest rates ahead of elections. This may boost spending and
employment in the short term, but ultimately it usually also causes higher inflation over the long term,
unless  the  capacity  of  the  economy  can  meet  this  higher  level  of  demand.  This  higher  inflation,
however, only becomes apparent a couple of years later. An elected government concerned about its
immediate popularity might be tempted to go for the short-term gains from lower interest rates, even at
1
BIS Review 88/2000
the risk of promoting somewhat higher inflation further down the road, because some other political
party may then have to pick up the pieces.
Central bankers normally operate on a longer-term time scale than politicians and therefore do not face
the  same  temptation  to  relax policy  to  achieve  short-term  objectives.  By  delegating  decisions  about
interest  rates  and  other  monetary  matters  to  such  an  independent  institution,  with  a  clearly  defined
mandate, society can hope to achieve a better inflation outcome over the longer term.
A number of studies have been undertaken to determine whether this argument is valid. These studies
all  seem  to  come  to  the  following  three  conclusions.  Firstly,  they  provided  evidence  of  a  negative
correlation  between  central  bank  independence  and  long-term  inflation.  A  low  inflation  rate  is
therefore more likely to be found in countries with independent central banks than in countries where
the  central  bank  is  subject  to  government  control.  Secondly,  they  showed  that  there  is  a  negative
correlation  between  central  bank  independence  and  the  long-term  budget  deficit  expressed  as  a
percentage  of  a  country’s  gross  national  product.  Countries  with  independent  central  banks  tend  to
have smaller budget deficits than those with government-controlled central banks. Thirdly, the studies
in general did not find any evidence of a correlation between the independent status of a central bank
and  production  growth.  It  therefore does not follow that  production  or employment  will  suffer  as  a
result of the independent status of the central banks over the medium to long term.
Risks of central bank independence
3.
Some  critics  of  an  independent  central  bank  argue  that  although  the  average  inflation  rate  and  the
degree of central bank independence are negatively correlated, this relationship does not reflect any
causal link running from central bank independence to low inflation. They argue that countries where
the  electorate  is  particularly  averse  to  inflation,  are  more  willing  to  keep  inflation  down.  These
countries are also more likely to have made their monetary authorities functionally independent so as
to  help  preserve  low  inflation.  Germany,  affected  severely  by  the  hyperinflation  of  the  Weimar
Republic, is an obvious case in point.
Conversely, countries where the electorate are more tolerant of inflation, are also less inclined to see
monetary policy turned over to an autonomous central bank. These critics claim that average inflation
is  determined  by  history  and the  preferences  of  a  country’s  inhabitants  with  causality  running  from
inflation  to  the  institutional  structure.  According  to  this  view,  attempts  to  impose  an  independent
central bank and with it a more purposeful anti-inflationary stance in a country tolerant of inflation, are
doomed  to  failure.  The  outcry  against  restrictive  policies  would  simply  be  too  great  for  the  central
bank to withstand.
This argument is not very convincing and does not seem to fit, for instance, the recent experience of
New Zealand. For most of the postwar period the Reserve Bank of New Zealand was one of the least
independent central banks in the OECD. However, in 1988 it was transformed into one of the most
autonomous,  with  a  very  clear  mandate to fight inflation. This  helped the inflation  rate  to  plummet
from  double-digit  levels  to  under  2%,  which  strongly  suggests  that  the  structure  of  monetary
institutions together with the determination to combat inflation, can be highly successful.
Another argument against the autonomy of central banks is that they form part of overall economic
policy and that there can be no meaningful separation between fiscal policy, monetary policy, labour
policy, trade policy or for that matter any other policy measures. If such a separation is attempted and
if policies run at cross-purposes, then conflicting objectives will have to be solved one way or another.
In the process, a conflict between the policies may inflict considerable damage on the economy. There
is clearly substance in the argument that a tightly coordinated package of policies has a better chance
of  success  than  a  set  of  conflicting  ones.  It  can  nevertheless  be  argued  that  such  conflicts  may  be
inevitable over the short term, as long as central banks have the primary responsibility for controlling
inflation.  However,  over  the  long  term,  stable  financial  conditions  promote  sustainably  higher
economic growth rates, increased welfare and more employment opportunities.
The  main  criticism  against  making  central  banks  autonomous  entities  is  based  not  so  much  on
economic  as  on  political  arguments.  The  political  argument  is  that  turning  over  decisions  about
BIS Review 88/2000
2
interest rates, exchange rates, the efficiency of the financial system and other monetary matters to a
body  of  unelected  officials,  is  simply  “undemocratic”.  In  a  democratic  society,  it  is  argued,  all
decisions should be subject to scrutiny by the elected members of the legislature and the concept of an
autonomous  central  bank  is  therefore  not  acceptable.  Although  there  are  plenty  of  other  areas  of
national life where decision making is delegated to independent unelected officials - the judiciary is a
prime  example - there  is  a  fundamental  confusion  here  between  being  independent  and  lacking
accountability.  No  central  bank  can be  totally  independent,  in  the  sense that  it is  not  answerable  to
anyone.  Even  the  most  autonomous  central  bank  has  to  report  in  some  form  or  another  to  the
legislature, which in any case also has the ultimate power to  change  the  laws  governing  the  central
bank.  All  the  same,  there  is  a  difference  between  a  situation  where  policy  decisions  are  under
continuous scrutiny, and an arrangement where the central bank reports to the legislature periodically.
The issue of independence and accountability also turns on the nature of the relationship between the
government and the legislature as the political authorities on the one hand and the central bank on the
other.  At  the  same  colloquium  mentioned  above,  Monsieur  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  Governor  of  the
Banque de France, observed that: “respecting independence does not mean a lack of dialogue, on the
contrary. However, it is true that an independent central bank is neither accountable to the executive
power,  nor  to  parliament,  nor  any  other  political  institution.  In  France  this  was  decided  by  the  law
makers,  and  in  Europe  by  the  will  of  the  people  and  the  European  Parliaments,  which  ratified  the
Maastricht Treaty.”
In  the  case  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB), the independence  of the  Bank  is  explained  under
Article 7 of the Statute which says that: “When exercising the powers and carrying out the tasks and
duties conferred on them by this Treaty and this Statute, neither the ECB, nor a national bank, nor any
member of their decision-making bodies shall seek or take instructions from community institutions or
bodies, from any government of a member state or from any other body.”
The  key  issues  here  quite  clearly  are  independence,  accountability  and  dialogue  with  the  political
authorities.
In South Africa the Governor of the Reserve Bank must submit a report annually to the Minister of
Finance relating to the implementation of monetary policy. In terms of Section 32 of the Reserve Bank
Act, the Bank must also on a monthly basis submit a statement of assets and liabilities and annually its
financial statements to the Department of Finance. These reports are then tabled in Parliament by the
Minister of Finance.
Moreover, Section 37 of the Act provides further that if at any time the Minister of Finance is of the
opinion  that  the  Bank  has  failed  to  comply  with  any  provision  of  the  act  or  of  a  regulation  made
thereunder, he may by notice in writing require the Board of the Bank to make good or remedy the
default within a specified time. If the Board fails to comply with such a notice, the Minister may apply
to the Supreme Court for an order compelling the Board to make good or remedy the default, and the
Court may make such order thereon as it deems fit.
Conditions for independence
4.
In view of these risks involved in central bank independence, there are usually three preconditions for
central bank autonomy. Firstly, there should be a clearly spelled out legal and operational framework
in  which  monetary  policy  is  conducted.  In  the  legal  framework,  the  central  bank’s  independence
should be defined to avoid any misconceptions of what the central bank is supposed to achieve. In the
monetary  policy  framework,  the  central  bank  must  indicate  what  it  is  attempting  to  achieve,  what
operational variables it will apply and what monetary instruments it will use to achieve its objective.
Because  credibility  is  usually  not  gained  overnight,  it  is  important  that  a  longer-term  programme
should be drawn up to show how the central bank will fulfil its mission.
A  second  condition  for  greater  autonomy  is  transparency.  The  government  and  the  public  should
continuously be informed of the monetary policy programme followed by the central bank. Regular
discussions  between  the  central  bank  and  the  government  will  be  necessary  and  some  form  of
accountability to parliament will have to be established. It is also important to explain monetary policy
3
BIS Review 88/2000
decisions regularly to the public, together with an assessment of the progress made in achieving stated
objectives.  Priorities in  the  programme  as  well  as  operational  instruments  should  be  clearly  spelled
out, in order to keep the public well informed about developments and changes in monetary policy.
The third condition for central bank autonomy is the creation of an efficient institutional framework
within  which  decisions  on  monetary  policy  and  on  its  implementation  can  be  made,  without  undue
interference by political functionaries. This involves decisions regarding:
(i) 
functional independence, which means the right to decide on all matters regarding monetary
policy and price stability;
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
personnel  independence,  which  covers  the  selection  and  appointment  of  Board  members
with a high professional competence and without an obligation to yield to political and other
pressures;
instrumental  independence,  which  means  control  over  the  instruments  that  affect  the
inflation  process,  including  in  particular  the  prevention  of  any  direct  financing  of
government deficits; and
financial independence, which requires the central bank to have access to adequate financial
resources of its own and full control over its own budget.
Legal and operational procedures in South Africa
5.
The legal framework may provide an important foundation on which independence can be  built,  by
giving clearly defined tasks to the central bank and demanding compliance in carrying out those tasks.
By the early 1990s, when South Africa’s Constitution was being drafted, central bank independence
had  already  become  a  fairly  widely  accepted  element  of  sound  central  banking  in  the  international
debate. This acceptance was shaped by the dismal experience of the many countries that had suffered
high inflation in the 1970s and 1980s. Both the interim and the final Constitution of the Republic of
South  Africa  therefore  provide  for  an  independent  central  bank.  Section  224(2)  of  the  Constitution
states very clearly: “The South African Reserve Bank, in pursuit of its primary object must perform its
functions independently and without fear, favour or prejudice, but there must be regular consultation
between the Bank and the Cabinet member responsible for national financial matters.”
In operating within this legal framework, the Reserve Bank has indicated that its primary goal in the
South African economic system is the achievement and maintenance of financial stability. The Bank
believes  that  it  is  essential  that  South  Africa  has  a  growing  economy  based  on  the  principles  of  a
market system, private and social initiative, effective competition and social fairness. It recognises, in
the performance of its duties, the need to pursue balanced economic development and growth.
In the pursuance of its responsibilities, the Reserve Bank assumes responsibility for:
(i) 
assisting the government, as well as other members of the community of South Africa, in the
formulation and implementation of economic policy;
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
formulating  and  implementing  monetary  policy  in  such  a  way  that  the  primary  goal  of
monetary policy will be achieved in the interest of the whole community;
ensuring that the South African money, banking and financial system as a whole is sound,
meets the requirements of the community and keeps abreast of developments in international
finance; and
informing  the  South  African  community  and  all  interested  stakeholders  abroad  about
monetary policy generally, and the South African economic situation in particular.
As is well known, South Africa adopted a formal inflation-targeting framework for monetary policy in
February of this year. Time does not allow a long discussion of this framework. However, it may be
noted that it makes the aim of monetary policy much clearer, ie the achievement of an average annual
increase of 3 to 6% for CPIX inflation in 2002. The government chose to set the 3 to 6% target level.
The setting of monetary policy instrument values (like the level of the “repo rate”) is entirely up to the
BIS Review 88/2000
4
Reserve  Bank.  Therefore  the  inflation-targeting  variable  chosen  provides  for  the  instrument
independence of the Reserve Bank, but not goal independence.
By  means  of  the  mission  statement  and  an  explanatory  memorandum  about  the  adoption  of  an
inflation-targeting monetary policy framework, the public has been informed about the objectives of
monetary policy. On the basis of this information the public can therefore evaluate the actions of the
Reserve Bank in attaining these objectives.
Transparency of monetary policy
6.
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  also  fulfils  the  second  condition  for  independence,  namely
transparency. Government and the public are provided with a stream of information on the monetary
policy stance. Some of my staff and I regularly appear before the Parliamentary Portfolio Committee
on Finance. We also issue comprehensive statements following each meeting of the Bank’s Monetary
Policy Committee. The Reserve Bank’s Quarterly Bulletin, Annual Economic Report and Governor’s
Address  at  the  annual  meeting  of  shareholders  provide  comprehensive  analyses  of  macroeconomic
events. A six-monthly Monetary Policy Review will soon be introduced, describing in more detail the
decisions  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  Policy  is  also  explained  by  the  Governors  of  the  Bank  and
comments on policy are heard at the Monetary Policy Forum meetings. These meetings are held twice
a  year  in  the  main  centres - at  least  one  in  each  province - and  involve  organised  business,  labour,
politicians, academics and the media.
Institutional independence in South Africa
7.
Finally, the present institutional framework in South Africa in the form of the South African Reserve
Bank Act, Act No 90 of 1989, allows the Reserve Bank a great degree of autonomy in its operations.
The  Reserve  Bank’s  functional  independence  in  monetary  and  related  policies  is  clearly  stated  in
Sections 10 and 35 of the South African Reserve Bank Act. Section 35 empowers the Board of the
Bank  to  make  rules  “for  the  good  government  of  the  Bank  and  the  conduct  of  its  business”.  In
Section 10  the  powers  and  duties  of  the  central  bank  are  spelled  out  in  great  detail.  Most  of  the
functions described in this section are the normal functions that one would expect a central bank to
perform. Section 10(2) also clearly states that “the rates at which the Bank will discount or rediscount
the various classes of bills, promissory notes and other securities, shall be determined and announced
by the Bank from time to time”, plainly giving the Bank the right to determine Bank rate, or rather the
repo rate, in an autonomous manner.
As banker to the government, however, the Bank administers exchange control regulations, monitors
the prudential soundness in the banking system and handles the weekly tenders for Treasury bills and
government securities. The Reserve Bank also takes care of various aspects of South Africa’s dealings
and relations with institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank on behalf
of the government. In performing these activities, the Bank only acts as an agent of government and
the final responsibility and decision-making rest with the Minister of Finance. This kind of activity can
undermine the functional independence of the Reserve Bank.
The personnel independence of the Reserve Bank is determined in Section 4 of the Act, indicating the
conditions of appointment of the Governor, three deputy governors and other Board members of the
Reserve Bank. This section clearly precludes any person actively involved in politics, non-residents or
officials of private banks from becoming a member of the Board of the Bank. Seven of the directors,
including the Governor and three deputy governors, are appointed by the President of the Republic,
and the other seven are elected by the shareholders. By means of these appointments the government,
of course, does, as some would argue, have an effective say in the policies of the Bank. The governors,
however, after their appointment, normally operate independently without fear or favour.
Certain conditions are given in the Regulations under the Reserve Bank Act which will disqualify a
person  for  remaining  a  Board  member,  such  as  conviction  for  theft,  fraud,  forgery  or  perjury.
However,  mechanisms  for  the  dismissal  of  governors  are  not  entrenched  in  the  Act.  Grounds  for
5
BIS Review 88/2000
dismissal and the actual procedure could perhaps be more explicitly stated in legislation to improve
the functioning of the Reserve Bank. Consideration could also be given to lengthening the tenure of
office of the Governor and deputy governors, say to seven years, to improve the autonomy of the Bank
further by separating the five-yearly political cycle from the appointments of governors.
The  instrumental  independence  of  the  Reserve  Bank  is  also  clearly  spelled  out  in  the  Act  and  the
Reserve  Bank  is  precluded  in  Section  13(f)  from  making  excessive  direct  purchases  of  government
stock. This section states that the Bank may not “hold in stocks of the Government of the Republic
which have been acquired directly from the Treasury by subscription to new issues, the conversion of
existing issues or otherwise, a sum exceeding its paid-up capital and reserve fund plus one third of its
liabilities  to  the  public  in  the  Republic”.  This  section  therefore  restricts  the  direct  financing  of
government deficits.
At the same time, the Act also allows the Reserve Bank to provide unsecured loans and advances to
government and companies in which it has acquired shares. Although there are limits on government
borrowing, serious consideration in the revision of the Reserve Bank Act should be given to removing
this potentially dangerous provision.
The South African Reserve Bank is also financially independent from the government because of its
adequate financial resources and full control over its own budget.
Conclusion
8.
In  pursuing  financial  stability,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  is  relatively  well  aligned  with
international  best  practice.  It  operates  autonomously  within  a  legal  framework  which  affords  it  a
substantial degree of independence, while remaining accountable to Parliament. But ultimately it is the
appreciation by the public at large of the importance of financial stability, and their understanding of
and support for the role of the Reserve Bank in this regard, that is needed to entrench and develop the
Bank’s independence. To this end, ongoing communication between the Reserve Bank and all levels
of  society  is  essential.  In  this  connection,  Governor Jean-Claude  Trichet  asked  the  question:  “So to
whom is the central bank accountable? In the end, I think it is accountable to public opinion itself. It is
our great responsibility to communicate with public opinion as a whole, and not just market operators
and investors. This communication must be as direct and precise as possible, in terms as simple as the
subject matter allows while remaining very professional.”
While we are fully aware that we face many daunting challenges, it is gratifying to note the degree of
financial stability that has been attained over the past years. And it is exciting to note that financial
stability provides a sound basis for sustainable strong economic growth and development; more and
more evidence suggests that central bank independence and prudent policies in general are starting to
pay off in South Africa.
BIS Review 88/2000
6
