Christian Noyer: How to combine a deepening
and widening of the European Union
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Oxford University
European Affairs Society, Oxford, 22 November 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is a pleasure for me to come to this prestigious university and to address the
members of the European Affairs Society tonight. As I was told, your Society is an independent forum
for  the  discussion  of  European  issues  within  this  university.  Independence  and  a  certain  level  of
detachment from the everyday political debate, as I know from the experience of the European Central
Bank,  can  indeed  provide  propitious  conditions  for  true  discourse  and  the  free  expression  of  ideas.
This  is  why  I  appreciate  the  opportunity  I  have  tonight  to  address  the  important  topic  of  how  to
combine both the widening and the deepening of the European Union. In so doing, I shall approach the
subject from the specific viewpoint of a central banker and share with you some ideas concerning the
particular role of the euro in the further integration process of a growing European Union. At the same
time,  I  should  like  to  stress  that  it  is  clearly  not  for  central  bankers,  but  rather  for  politicians  and
European citizens to make the necessary “hard decisions” in the coming weeks, months and years.
The challenges of enlargement
European integration was conceived as a project aimed at ensuring peace, stability and prosperity in
Europe. It has remained so throughout the five decades  of its  successful  progress.  At  the  beginning
- owing to the geopolitical circumstances at the time - this new and innovative concept of achieving
reconciliation  and  stability  through  economic  integration  could  only  be  applied  to  western  Europe.
Today, ten years after the “return to Europe” of those countries unfortunate enough to be on the other
side  of  the  “Iron  Curtain”,  we  face  the  challenge  of  extending  the  successful  model  of  European
integration to the whole of Europe, so as to truly overcome the division of our continent. Therefore, I
would regard the forthcoming enlargement of the EU not just as the institutional response to central
and  eastern  European  countries’  application  for  membership.  Rather,  it  should  be  seen  as  the
realisation of the Union’s longer-term objective of providing  a  framework  for  political  stability  and
economic  progress.  Such  a  vision is clearly  underlined  by  the  EU’s  current  political  agenda,  which
treats enlargement to include 12 applicant countries, mostly from central and eastern Europe, not as a
question of “whether or not”, but rather as a matter of “when and how”.
What will the impact be of the European Union almost doubling in size? It is reasonable to expect that
the  forthcoming  enlargement  will  increase  diversity  and  complexity  within  the  Union  to  an
unprecedented extent.
In  economic  terms,  the  proper  fulfilment  of  the  so-called  “Copenhagen  criteria”,  which  require  the
accession  countries  to  be  functioning  market  economies  and  able  to  adopt  the  existing  Community
rules, should help to avoid severe imbalances within an enlarged Union. In this context, it should also
be  borne  in  mind  that  the  combined  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  of  all  accession  countries
- measured in today’s figures - accounts for only 5% of the European Union’s GDP. In addition, the
inherent dynamics of the single market and the “convergence pressure” exercised by policymakers and
financial markets alike are also set to aid a rapid catching-up of the future new Member States. The
evidence  of  real  convergence  provided  by  Ireland,  Spain  or  Portugal  after  their  accession  to  the
European Community gives grounds for confidence in this respect.
In political and institutional terms, however, the EU will indeed be facing great challenges. The sheer
increase  in  numbers  will  make  decision-making  more  difficult  and  the  legitimate  interests  of  the
“newcomers” may diverge significantly from those of the existing members, given the different stages
1
BIS Review 107/2000
of  their  economic  transition  and  development  and  their  specific  historical  experiences  which
undoubtedly shape their views on Europe.
The  Member  States  appear  to  be  committed  to  addressing  these  challenges  in  the  context  of  the
ongoing Intergovernmental Conference on institutional reforms. Let us hope that the IGC can agree on
at  least  those  reforms  which  are  absolutely  essential  to  allow  the  Union  to  function  even  after
enlargement.  Even  so,  it  appears  almost  certain  that  the  forthcoming  Nice  Treaty  will  only  be  a
milestone. It will by no means be the end point of the ongoing fundamental institutional debate on the
future shape of Europe. In this wider debate, many observers have argued that the original objective of
an “ever closer Union” might be somewhat incompatible with the current movement towards an “ever
wider Union”.
Combining the deepening and widening of the European Union
In addressing this altogether intelligible concern that the greater size and heterogeneity of an enlarged
European  Union  might  lead  to  a  standstill  in  integration  or  even  an  unravelling  of  the  degree  of
deepening achieved so far, I would suggest starting with a certain amount of “introspection” aimed at
assessing the depth of integration in the EU today.
I believe there can be little doubt that the EU has already achieved a high degree of integration, both in
economic and political terms: a functioning single market has been complemented by the successful
introduction  of  a  single  currency. The framework  for  the pursuit  of  a  common  foreign  and security
policy  is  being  given  real  substance,  soon  to  be  underpinned  by  a  nascent  military  capability.  In
addition, the scope of common activities now also extends to highly sensitive fields such as internal
security, immigration and asylum.
It is on this premise that  I  should  like  to  put  forward  the following  proposition,  which  I  will try  to
illustrate in the remainder  of  my  presentation:  The  depth  of integration  in  the  EU  today,  which  is
based not only, but especially, on the establishment of Economic and Monetary Union, in itself will,
over time, trigger further integrative steps. These dynamics are at work anyway, and are unlikely to
be derailed by the process of enlargement. Using the metaphor of the “bicycle theory”, which is the
notion that European integration has to progress in order to avoid backtracking on past achievements
- just like a bicycle has to keep going to avoid falling over - I would argue that the future EU, rather
than being diluted, is set to achieve further deepening, even if enlargement increases diversity.
Allow me to illustrate.
EMU as a catalyst for integration
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  in  itself  could  be  regarded  as  a  source  of,  and  catalyst  for,  deeper
integration in Europe - and the fact that both sides in the euro debate in this country use this argument
might be seen as underlining its significance. There is plenty of evidence to support this proposition,
which can be seen from the preparatory phase of EMU (during the 1990s) or in connection with the
actual launch of the euro in 1999. But I believe it is also true from a longer-term perspective.
Over the past decade, the very process of preparing for the introduction of the euro has brought about a
greater  degree  of  integration.  The  aim  of  achieving  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  by  1999  at  the
latest  called  for  the  complete  liberalisation  of  capital  movements  within  the  European  Community,
closer  coordination  of  national  economic  policies,  as  well  as  institutionalised  cooperation  among
monetary  authorities  within  the  European  Monetary  Institute.  An  emerging  “stability  consensus”
among  policymakers  in  Europe  on  the  desirability  of  a  stable  currency  and  sound  public  finances
provided  the  crucial  backing  for  a,  sometimes  painful,  process  of  budgetary  consolidation  and
disinflation, in which domestic policy objectives needed to be brought in line with the need to fulfil
the Maastricht convergence criteria.
If the preparatory phase of EMU could be best characterised as generating common policy objectives
and  a  joint  outlook  among  policymakers  -  albeit  without  changes  to  the  existing  institutions  -  the
BIS Review 107/2000
2
actual  introduction  of  the  euro  on  1  January  1999  certainly  marked  a  quantum  leap  in  institutional
terms.  As  of  that  day,  a  new  supranational  institution,  the  ECB  assumed  responsibility  for  the
management  of  the  single  currency.  Endowed  with  the  necessary  competencies  to  define  and
implement the single monetary policy, given a clear objective to maintain price stability and granted
full independence, the ECB now exercises a core aspect of state sovereignty at the European level.
In  policy  terms,  the  single  monetary  policy  is  by  definition  indivisible  and  aims  to  ensure  the
maintenance of price stability in the euro area  as a  whole,  meaning  that  it  cannot  take  into  account
specific national situations. There is only one key interest rate, a single integrated money market to
distribute liquidity across the euro area, and - what has been a focal point of media reporting - only
one euro exchange rate.
Sharing a common currency implies the need to take a policy perspective which goes beyond the level
of  the  national  economy,  and  this  also  applies  to  policy  fields  other  than  monetary  policy.  The
Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  aimed  at  shoring  up  the  proper  functioning  of  Economic  and  Monetary
Union, requires Member States to observe fiscal discipline and to make their national budgetary plans
subject to the scrutiny  of  other Member  States.  Increasingly,  the  Member  States  are  also  willing  to
take and give advice and to learn from each other in policy areas which have traditionally been - and
will remain - exclusive national domains, such as labour market reform or  the financing  of  pension
liabilities. In all of these areas, closer cooperation in Europe does not mean the forced acceptance of a
uniform  model,  imposed  by  an  ever-more  powerful  and  increasingly  remote  Brussels  bureaucracy.
Rather, such exchanges of views help to identify best practices and provide room for the free play of
competing concepts and policy designs - which is to the benefit of all involved.
Finally, “deeper integration” within the sphere of European economic policymaking could be seen as
no  more  than  the  long-overdue,  political  response  to  market  developments  towards  globalisation
which,  in  any  case,  cannot  be  avoided.  Take,  for  example,  the  increasing  integration  of  financial
markets, driven by the desire of market participants to reap the benefits arising from the introduction
of the euro. Closer cooperation among policymakers and regulators, the setting of common rules and
the promotion of consistent practices merely help to provide the necessary framework for the proper
functioning of a single European financial market, with a depth and sophistication similar to that of the
United States.  It  is  in  such  an integrated  European  financial  market  that resources  will  be  allocated
most  efficiently,  to  the  benefit  of  all,  be  they  individual  savers,  institutional  investors  or  corporate
borrowers.
As I have amply illustrated thus far, the introduction of the euro has undoubtedly marked a significant
step towards the deepening of the European Union. It has also further advanced the emergence of a
unified  EU  economy,  which,  in  turn,  has  contributed  towards  developing  an  external  perception  of
“Europe” as an entity in its own right.
Ladies and gentlemen, having “prepared the ground” on the basis of existing evidence, allow me to
elaborate  now  on  possibly  the  most  controversial  aspect  of  my  aforementioned  proposition,  namely
that Economic and Monetary Union will, in itself, act as an impetus for further deepening.
The internal dynamics of EMU as a source of future deepening
The euro is in a unique position in that it is “a currency without a state”. Historically, the soundness of
money has always been closely associated with the strength and stability of the political structure of
which  it  is  an  expression.  Therefore,  it  is  a  legitimate  question  to  ask  whether  EMU  can  function
without some form of political union.
Allow  me  to  approach  this  question  in  the  following  manner.  To  start  off,  the  concept  of  political
union is not  very  well  defined.  I  am  sure  that  you,  as  attentive  observers  of  the  euro  debate  in  this
country, would agree with me that the term “political union” can mean many things to many people,
often depending on political expediency or the desired public relations impact. From a central banker’s
perspective, that is, “a forward-looking assessment based on all the information currently available”, I
would  argue  that  the  EU  today,  with  its  single  currency,  already  represents  a  highly  advanced
institutional  construction,  combining  both  supranational  and  intergovernmental  elements.  With  the
3
BIS Review 107/2000
introduction of the euro, Member States’ governments, especially those of the euro area, have started
to  jointly  assume  -  together  with  the  European  Commission  and  the  ECB  -  their  “shared  specific
responsibilities for the single currency” (Luxembourg European Council Conclusions). Will the joint
exercise  of  shared  responsibilities  for  an  area  as  pivotal  as  macroeconomic  policy  -  even  if  this
concerns so far only a sub-group of EU Member States - not inevitably lead to a gradual transfer of
competencies to Brussels? Is this what is meant by “political union” - an increasing centralisation of
policy decisions? I should think not. Allow me to give you two examples.
First,  I  would  not consider  it  advisable to  centralise  employment  or  social policies at the  EU  level;
rather, decisions should be taken at the national, regional, or even local level to allow for the necessary
flexibility  to  adjust  in  the  context  of  the  specific  constraints  of  the  single  currency.  Second,  it  is
questionable  as  to  whether  a  centralised  “federal”  fiscal  policy  would  be  the  appropriate  means  to
support  the  ECB’s  single  monetary  policy.  Instead  of  such  Brussels-steered  policies  aimed  at
“levelling out” national or regional differences within the euro area, the current system appears more
appropriate.  Today,  national  fiscal  policies  are  subject  to  basic  common  rules  as  laid  down  in  the
Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  These  rules,  although  constraining,  are  in  fact  a  means  of  preserving  a
certain  margin  of  manoeuvre  in  the  Member  States’  budgetary  policies,  while  at  the  same  time
avoiding undue pressure being exerted on the single monetary policy.
As shown by these examples of economic policymaking, I would argue that making the euro a success
does  not  necessarily  call  for  the  creation  of  a  United  States  of  Europe  or  some  sort  of  “European
superstate”. In fact, the economic governance of the euro area - although there is certainly scope for
improvements in terms of efficiency, effectiveness as well as legitimacy - could be seen as exhibiting
essential  features  of  a  multi-levelled  European  polity.  Such  a  political  edifice  would  be  based  on  a
respect for the subsidiarity principle and a clear assignment of policy responsibilities and objectives.
At the end of the day, and I should like to make this clear once more, the task of shaping the future
constitutional evolution of the European Union, and of determining its “finalité politique” is a matter
for the politicians and the citizens of Europe - and not for central bankers. Having said that, the euro is
certainly one parameter in this process. A currency has always been a powerful symbol of identity, and
this will also be true for the euro. Particularly from the beginning of 2002 onwards, when the euro will
be  in the pockets of some  300  million  European citizens,  our common  currency  is  set  to  become  a
symbol of a shared identity which brings the reality of Europe into everyday lives.
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, I should like to conclude my remarks on a cautiously optimistic note. As I have
illustrated,  a  substantial  widening  of  the  EU  can  indeed  be  combined  with  further  deepening.  One
essential  precondition  will  be  a  successful  conclusion  of  the  Intergovernmental  Conference  at  the
summit meeting in Nice in a few weeks’ time. Once this long and laborious, but altogether necessary,
reappraisal  of  the  EU  internal  functioning  is  successfully  completed  and  the  necessary  institutional
reforms are implemented, the Union should be in a position to look forward to the coming rounds of
enlargement  with  some  confidence.  Our  contribution,  as  the  European  Central  Bank,  to  this
unprecedented endeavour is to help make the euro a success. I am confident that a well-functioning
single  currency,  as  a  unifying  symbol  and  truly  European  point  of  reference,  can  and  will  help  to
provide  the  EU  with  the  integrative  “glue”  needed  to  face  enlargement  and  welcome  the  new
members, and thus to avoid the danger of diluting the integration progress achieved thus far.
BIS Review 107/2000
4
