Antonio Fazio: The relationships between currencies and gold
Speech by Mr. Antonio Fazio, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the World Gold Council International
Conference “The Euro, the Dollar and Gold”, held in Rome on 17 November 2000.
 1.
“If  a  gold  standard had  never  existed, it  might  be  necessary  to invent something  of the  kind”.  This
quotation from a monograph by Dennis Robertson (Money, 1928, p 122) refers to one of the positive
aspects of the gold standard: that of shielding central bankers from pressures to increase the money
supply. After the First World War the return to gold was in fact the overriding objective of economic
policymakers, in order to ensure monetary stability.
The economic disequilibria produced by the war were so pronounced, however, that they made it hard
to re-establish the gold standard. The cost, in terms of welfare, imposed by inflation, rising public debt
and war reparations was so high that it prevented the rapid return to gold.
The Genoa conference of April 1922 laid the foundations for an important innovation: the creation of
the gold exchange standard, under which gold was flanked by convertible currencies and central banks
were granted greater autonomy; this was to be used to stabilize the value of gold, through international
cooperation. However, the new system did not enjoy the same credibility as the earlier regime and, at
the same time, failed to leave the monetary authorities sufficient room for manoeuvre. Culturally still
under the influence of the gold standard, the monetary authorities were in any case little inclined to
cooperate and tended to accumulate gold reserves, thereby exerting powerful deflationary pressure on
the economy.
The monetary disorder of the thirties created the need for a new reform, which was implemented after
the Second World War with the Bretton Woods agreements.
The suspension of the dollar’s convertibility on 15 August 1971 officially cut the link between legal
tender and gold - an epochal change after more than 2,500 years during which money had always been
based explicitly or implicitly on a precious metal, prevalently gold.
2.
The abandonment of a monetary system hinging directly or indirectly on gold was a consequence of
the severe economic disequilibria that developed between the two world wars. The advances made in
monetary theory also exerted a powerful influence.
Ricardo provides us with a clear indication of the main objective of the gold standard: “To secure the
public against any other variations in the value of currency than those to which the standard itself is
subject, and, at the same time, to carry on the circulation with a medium the least expensive…”. He
also noted that: “Experience, however, shews, that neither a State nor a Bank ever had the unrestricted
power of issuing paper money, without abusing that power: in all States, therefore, the issue of paper
money ought to be under some check and controul; and none seems so proper for that purpose, as that
of subjecting the issuers of paper money to the obligation of paying their notes, either in gold coin or
bullion.” The same concepts are to be found some hundred years later in Irving Fisher.
The success of the gold standard was due, among other things, to the broad consensus on metallism
and the classical model; one of the latter’s key features is the self-adjusting ability of the economy.
The restoration rule, which required the gold parity to be re-established after a period of suspension
due  to  exceptional  circumstances,  was  an  essential  part  of  the  gold  standard.  Short  suspensions  of
convertibility made it possible to overcome temporary difficulties. The system allowed discretion to be
1
BIS Review 110/2000
exercised only within very rigid limits. Gold acted as an anchor both for the monetary system and for
the economic system by making maintenance of the parity a constraint on economic policy.
A  commodity  standard,  however,  is  not  without  its  weaknesses,  owing  to  the  impossibility  of
controlling the money stock in the face of exogenous fluctuations in the quantity of metal. Given the
short-run non-neutrality of money, countries suffered substantial welfare costs in deflationary periods,
as in the closing decades of the 19th century. During the heyday of the gold standard several proposals
were  put  forward  to  overcome  this  difficulty:  Jevons’s  revival  of  the  tabular  standard,  Marshall’s
symmetallism and Fisher’s compensated dollar. Wicksell even suggested cutting the link with precious
metals altogether, thus anticipating by a quarter of a century Keynes’s radical approach in the Tract on
Monetary Reform (1923).
England’s ephemeral return to gold in the first half of the 1920s and, just a few years later, the terrible
impact of the Great Depression greatly affected economic and political thinking.
The  discussion  on  monetary  reform  ceased  to  be  confined  to  the  purely  academic  domain.  The
advocates of reform (including, albeit with different approaches, economists such as Keynes, Fisher,
Hawtrey and Robertson) focused primarily on the “artificialness” of the value of gold: demand for the
metal depended crucially, among other things, on the conventions that governed the monetary systems
of  the  various  countries.  While  Keynes  held  that  gold  had  exhausted  its  monetary  role,  other
economists, such as Fisher and Hawtrey, continued to assign it a leading part, although they envisaged
that central banks would neutralize the variations in its value - with the result that gold itself would be
anchored.
Keynes’s  once  heterodox  view  became  widely  accepted,  since  the  malfunctioning  of  the  monetary
system was seen as one of the main causes of the propagation of the Depression.
On the eve of the Second World War, the need to reform the monetary system faced economists with
an intellectual challenge. For the first time in history, experts designed a new monetary “order”, to use
Professor Mundell’s expression.
The Bretton Woods architects set themselves the objective of re-establishing a fixed exchange regime
and  allowing  each  country  to  pursue  a  full-employment  policy  by  means  of  capital  controls.  Parity
changes  were  to  be  permitted  only  in  the  event  of  “fundamental  disequilibrium”,  which  was  not
defined.
In practice the system turned into a fixed-rate dollar standard. The importance attributed to domestic
targets  in the  economic  policy  of  the  United  States  undermined  the  coherence  and  operation  of  the
system,  thereby  preparing  the  ground  for  the  abandonment  of  the  link  with  gold  and  the  move  to
floating exchange rates.
3.
In the decade immediately following the breakdown of the Bretton Woods regime, the world economy
became  prey  to  high  and  variable  inflation.  This  tendency  was  subsequently  halted  when,  after
absorbing the effects of the real shocks of the seventies, monetary policies were directed with greater
determination to restoring price stability. Floating exchange rates proved highly volatile.
In the last 30 years the international monetary system has come to find itself in a position where the
expansion  of  credit  and  the  creation  of  money  have  not  been  constrained,  at  the  global  level,  by
binding  rules.  After  the  about-turn  in  the  monetary  policy  of  the  Federal  Reserve  at  the  end  of  the
seventies,  the  restrictions  imposed  on  the  stock  of  money  in  the  leading  countries  put  a  brake  on
monetary growth. Nonetheless, the combination of fiat money and the possibility of short-term capital
movements  between the  different  parts  of the  world  has led  to a  system  which  does  not  permit  the
expansion of credit to be closely controlled and which is inherently unstable.
In this context price stability is ensured in the leading countries; to some extent their behaviour then
influences that of the world economy.
BIS Review 110/2000
2
Economic  theory  has  taught  us,  rigorously  (consider,  for  example,  the  analysis  put  forward  by
Patinkin), that even with fiat money the price level can be determinate when the central bank exercises
control over the nominal quantity of money.
The creation of important monetary areas - that of the euro alongside those of the dollar and the yen -
contributes to the stability of the world economy, even though many countries remain outside these
areas.
The expansion of credit at the international level is closely connected with the operation and stability
of banking systems and capital markets.
Important steps are being taken to subject countries outside the main monetary areas to standards of
banking supervision that help to ensure the orderly expansion of credit and money.
4.
In the absence of rigorous control over the quantity of money at world level, the last two decades have
seen crises  that,  despite  their  occurring  in just  a  part  of  the  globe,  have  triggered  a  combination  of
inflation and deflation, with the destruction of some of the savings accumulated in banking systems
and  slowdowns in the  growth of  economies. The  crises  have  become  more  frequent  in the  last  five
years and their effects more far-reaching as a consequence of contagion.
The enormous advances made in data processing and telecommunications have fostered a growth in
international monetary flows and total financial assets that has far exceeded the expansion of the world
economy. This has undoubtedly contributed to the growth in productive investment at the global level
in a period marked by low inflation, attributable in part to the increased competition in trade in goods
and services and especially raw materials.
The last five years have been marked by very rapid growth in the stock of financial assets made up of
public and private-sector securities and bank deposits. The expansion began in 1995 at the time of the
decision  to  carry  out  massive  interventions  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets  in  order  to  correct  the
pricing distortions between the dollar and other weak currencies on the one hand and the yen and other
strong currencies on the other. On that occasion sales of yen against dollars amounting to several tens
of billions of dollars were made; at the same time, a policy was adopted aimed at reducing yen interest
rates until they were close to zero.
The expansion of yen-denominated liquidity enabled the dollar and other weak currencies, including
the  lira,  the  peseta  and  sterling,  to  strengthen.  The  global  market  saw  the  start  of  bond  and  share
purchases by highly-leveraged intermediaries; the latter borrowed funds at low cost and then invested
in financial markets, making substantial use of derivative instruments.
The parallel growth of the New Economy in the United States, consisting essentially in an increase in
the  productivity  of  capital  and  labour  connected  with  the  large-scale  application  of  information
technology to production, led to a flow of capital to the United States and a continuous rise in share
prices, which, in five years, roughly tripled.
The ratio of financial wealth - shares, bonds and the money stock - to annual GDP at current prices
rose from 240 to 360%.
The  growth  of  derivatives  makes  it  possible  to  carry  out  transactions  with  very  high  leverage,
increases the velocity of circulation of the money balances used for financial transactions.
Interest rates and the cost of capital have decreased. The recovery of the world economy, under way
since 1999, is connected with these developments.
The  American  economy,  performing  as  a  high-growth  component  of  the  global  economy,  attracts
capital  while  simultaneously  helping  to  sustain  economic  activity  in  the  rest  of  the  world  with  its
imports.
The low cost of capital is helping the expansion of investment in Europe and other parts of the globe.
These  developments  can  be  said  to  have  constituted  an  application  on  an  international  scale  of  the
3
BIS Review 110/2000
process, theorized in the  past  by  Tobin,  of  monetary  expansion  increasing  the  value  of  the  existing
capital stock and thereby stimulating investment.
The process up to now has followed a virtuous course, without excessive inflationary pressures thanks
to heightened competition and productivity gains in the United States. Its Achilles’ heel is the rise in
the prices of raw materials and energy products.
5.
The gold reserves of the central banks today amount to some  32,000 tons, about  one quarter  of  the
world stock.
Like other real assets, gold can appreciate when there is widespread inflation, which remains a threat.
Gold’s  importance  as  a  monetary  anchor  came  to  an  end  with  the  emergence  of  more  rigorous
monetary policies in the 1980s and especially the 1990s. But in periods of crisis gold can constitute a
sort of reserve or guarantee “of last resort” for a country, as Italy demonstrated during the 1970s.
This  view  appears  to  be  shared  by  the  central  banks  of  the  leading  industrial  countries;  when  they
signed  the  September  1999  agreement, they  stated  that  gold continued  to  have  an  important  role  to
play in the management of global reserves.
It is up to economists to analyze whether and to what extent, in an international monetary system that
has surely not yet become fully consistent in many of its parts, reference to gold, which performed a
monetary function for thousands of years, can still contribute, in the decades ahead, to preserving that
fundamental condition for orderly economic activity - price stability.
The  experience  of  the  period  following  the  Second  World  War  shows  that  macroeconomic
stabilization  has  always  provided  the  basis  for  the  growth  of  the  most  successful  economies.
Conserving this stability and the soundness of economies’ fundamentals is one of the principal tasks of
governments and central banks.
BIS Review 110/2000
4
