M R Chatu Mongol Sonakul: Some ideas for the new government in Thailand
Statement  by  Mr  M  R  Chatu  Mongol  Sonakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  British
Chamber of Commerce, Bangkok, on 23 November 2000.
 Chairman of the British Chamber of Commerce and all the chambers here today, distinguished guests,
and ladies and gentlemen. Good afternoon.
Let me begin by saying that it behoves me, and I have to use that word as a career civil servant who
has  taken  his  duty  righteously  for  the  last  35  years,  not  to  comment  on  the  work  of  the  present
government especially during an election period. In any case what they have done is fast becoming
history and we have to take it as facts. A datum from which we will have to operate.
In my career, I have been unenthusiastic in commenting about history, and only study it with a view to
creating the future rather than commenting on it. If I wanted to comment on history, I guess I would
have continued my dual career as a university lecturer which ended abruptly after the first year of my
working life, since I found the responsibility of turning up regularly on time every week for anything
quite unbearable as well as preferring to be on the implementation side rather than a commentator or
analyst.
I shall keep my comments mainly therefore to what the new government should do, be it really a new
government  or  just  the  old  one  in  a  new  bottle,  and  I  shall  refer  only  to  the  present  or  historical
developments only in so far as it is necessary to understand future recommendations.
As this is an after lunch speech, I shall also keep it short and not try to be comprehensive, but only
comment on things that interest me or I think might be useful to the audience.
Let’s  start  with  a simple  concept, the  Credit  Bureau.  One  of  the  reasons the  NPL  could become  so
high, and banks with high NPLs could remain supported by the public, is because in the present law
the concept is that financial transactions are secret and banks are secret places, looked after and owned
and supervised by responsible people.
It  would  be  nice  if  it  were  true,  but  the  banking  industry  is  leveraged  by  a  ratio  of  12:1  and  the
temptation is rather great for the owner to take advantage of other people’s money, people who have
no  right  to  know  what  is  going  on  with  their  money  even  once  a  year  because  they  are  not
shareholders but just depositors. The temptation of the supervisors to evade their responsibilities by
not taking the correct action is also great, as rich people are powerful, and bad political systems over a
long time do not help to make you brave.
This philosophy must be changed. We must go on to the philosophy of transparency where offences
and important financial ratios or numbers are publicised, and peer or investor pressure could be used
to reduce the flow of resources to wrong-doers.
Back to the Credit Bureau, of course, borrowers are very important in all this. Banks shouldn’t lend to
bad borrowers, and banks that lend to bad borrowers are bad banks. But how can banks not lend to bad
borrowers, if they don’t know who they are? There are, of course, alternative remedies, but the best
instrument  is  to  have  an  industry-wide  Credit  Bureau  which  keeps  track  of  the  credit  standing  of
borrowers.
This is not possible at present because the law does not allow you to disclose clients’ information. The
Bank  of  Thailand  has required that  prospective  borrowers  and renewals  must  sign  a form  declaring
that they will allow their credit standings to be disclosed, but this is a feeble alternative. It is very time
consuming  and  argumentative,  with  all  its  consequences.  A  Credit  Bureau  Law  should  be  quickly
legislated, where, as a price for a better society, bad debtors can be identified.
1
BIS Review 108/2000
As to commercial banks, good governance should be put in place. Audit committees are now required.
Independent directors, not voted upon by the major shareholders, are being encouraged. NPL, related
lending and fines and penalties imposed must be disclosed by each bank at the end of every month,
and are published in the BOT’s web.
Directors  must  devote  their  time  to  the  bank,  cannot  be  a  director  of  more  than  three  other
profit-seeking  companies,  as  well  as  disallowing  of  borrowing  where  cross  ownership  is  more  than
one percent of the paid up capital of the borrower.
Of the 92 people involved, 53 have now complied, and arrangements have been made for most of the
others to comply, with the possible exception of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance who
may find that their representatives are not the sort of  people  who  can  devote  that  much  time  to  the
bank  because  they  are  not  part  of  the  ownership  or  operation  of  the  bank,  but  are  just  government
representatives. We are looking into this and will discuss with the Ministry when the time is right.
The  problem  in  fact  is  not  as  innocuous  as  it  looks  as  state  bank  remunerations  are  affected  by
considerations  other  than  just  how  should  directors  be  rewarded  so  that  shareholders’  value  can  be
maximised.
But all this is being done through sanctions and coercion, and in the New Commercial Bank Act the
authority will be explicit.
My last words on commercial banks, the intervened banks might not yet be completely taken care of,
but at least the cost of rescue can now be well estimated. The proper financing of the debt burden is
probably one of the first jobs of the new government.
Temporary or provisional financing is better than none, but a clear-cut schedule on how the very large
debt  should  be  financed  over  the  next  ten  or  twenty  years  must  be  made  if  investors  and  trading
partners  are  to  have  confidence  or  a  clear  idea  of  what  they  are  dealing  with,  and  I  think  that  is
essential.
How  central  banking  will  be  done  is  also  important.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  itself  is  being
revolutionised.  The  pay  system  will  change,  the  promotion  system  will  change  and  career
development  has  been  instituted.  Risk  management  supervision  will  be  instituted  from  the  first  of
January next year.
Simple things such as a letter of transmittal of the supervision team to the manager of the bank will be
required.  This  may  seem  trivial,  but  it  will  put  responsibility  firmly  on  the  supervisors,  which  was
never  possible  before  because  supervision  missions  went  whenever  they  felt  like  it  and  did  not  tell
anybody  except  the  banks.  It  also  makes  job  control  of  the  supervisors  impossible  and  it  is  very
dangerous to allow people with criminal prosecution capabilities to work in this manner.
The most important thing about the new central bank though is probably to keep it really independent.
Thailand is now quite a complicated place, a large economy with considerable sophistication. The role
of the central bank in helping finance development and directing among the sectors of the economy
will soon no longer be possible.
If the central bank could keep the economy stable, that would be a major achievement.
But most forces in the country, especially the political ones, are directed towards higher growth rather
than the sustainability or stable growth, even if in the end stability would probably lead to a better and
higher level of the economy than the roller coaster growth of the past.
To do that, the central bank will have to go against the rest of the economy and the government from
time to time as has been evident in the past year or two. If the central bank is not independent, it will
be very difficult to do this.
In my mind, the best model of central banking is one where the central bank becomes a constitutional
body of parliament just like the Election Commission or The National Frequency Management Board.
This  doesn’t  mean  that  we  have  to  change  the  constitution  because  the  constitution  differs  from
ordinary  law  mainly  in  so  far  as  it  supersedes  ordinary  law  and  the  procedure  for  changing  its
BIS Review 108/2000
2
provisions are rather complicated. By ordinary legislation, we could make the central bank a body of
parliament or the senate which is what other new central bank legislations now usually do.
This doesn’t mean either that the central bank will be operating monetary policy independent of the
economic  and  social  policy  of  the  government.  The  two  must  be  made  to  intertwine  and  clear
legislation  should  be  made  for  the  procedures  for  the  central  bank  at  appropriate  intervals  to  agree
monetary targets with the government and then to be allowed to implement its work independently and
unimpeded.
But I guess there’s no point in talking much about it now. Let’s wait and see what mandate people
give during the election. The only obvious thing is that the present Senate seems to be quite qualified
to take up such an important role as safeguarding the central bank.
Let me continue on  what  the  new  government  has to look  at, for instance the  general  guarantee  on
deposit. This general guarantee cuts across all good banking practices. Banks that misbehave are not
being penalised and those that try to do well are dragged down by those who are capricious with the
general guarantee that the government gives.
The general guarantee will have to be got rid of sooner rather than later if Thailand is to get back on an
even path. Probably, in order to do this, some kind of deposit insurance will have to be in place and
seen to be working.
It does look like a long road for the new government, where sequencing and implementation of many
difficult concepts is still needed before full prosperity returns.
Let’s start on this road to prosperity as soon as possible.
Ladies and gentlemen, let me turn to the general economy because a central bank or commercial banks
alone cannot make the country good very quickly.
It is quite obvious that world grain prices are on the way down. Between the years 1800-1900 when
the West was being opened in the United States, grain prices fell over 30% over a span of a century.
With genetic engineering, something of a similar nature might happen over the next 20 or 50 years.
We have to plan our still agricultural-dominated population for this eventuality.
It does not make sense to base strategy on an expansion of production in a falling market. It  makes
much more sense to base strategy on cost reduction and to add value to the final agricultural products.
A ton of grain may be worth 10,000 baht, but a ton of biscuits is worth 100,000 baht. But to make
biscuits, you need a brand and you need flavours, things which take a long time to develop and endow
to the economy.
As to agricultural finance, the most that is available at the moment is crop finance. But you can’t make
the weather to order. The bad year will kill you, and a mechanism must be developed to finance the
disaster of the bad years from the abundance of the good years rather than leaving it to pot luck or to
the effort of individual farmers as at present.
Again  in  the  same  vein,  resources  must  be  made  available  for  farmers  to  better  their  production
methods or change the nature of their farming so that costs can be reduced or farmers can change to
more  valuable  products  needing  bigger  investments  or  having  larger  gestation  periods.  No  doubt  in
doing this, old debts, being quite considerable and pervasive, will also have to be looked at.
In industry, the problems and the roles of the SMEs are obvious. There is no major industrial economy
without SMEs. I would say that over half the SMEs are NPL. And a lot of the owners have abandoned
their old companies because they don’t need historic records or quota, for instance. They could assume
some other identity and live another life and become SMEs again in a not too difficult way, but it is a
big burden on the banks.
A lot of SMEs can’t do that because they need past performance records. Efforts to prod these SMEs
into  viability  are  obviously  going  to  need  some  government  assistance.  The  problem  is  too  big  for
commercial banks to handle alone.
3
BIS Review 108/2000
The government has made some efforts in improving the technology, marketing and management of
the SMEs. How well it has done this depends on who you ask and I am not really in the field of the
SMEs well enough to know the generality of what most people are thinking.
But in financing, it is quite obvious that the SMEs with NPL have to get some more money or some
guarantees, and  one  or the  other  must  come  from  the  government.  This  happens  to  be  the  one  area
where, for various reasons, there is the least progress. The new government must take a look at this
immediately and bite the bullet and adopt what might well be necessarily a fairly costly solution.
Another important or strategic sector of the economy is probably tourism with Thailand well-situated
in the air routes of the world.
But people don’t want to spend 50 weeks in a year or half of their life, whichever the case, and then
spend  time  in  an  inhospitable  location.  We  have  to  clean  up,  especially  the  visual  environment  of
Bangkok,  and  the  major  historical  sites  of  Ayuthaya,  Sri  Satchanalai  and  Chiengmai.  Putting  the
electric power line for these cities underground, for instance, would be a most expensive investment,
but  worthwhile,  and the new  government  must  immediately  begin to  adopt long-term  solutions  like
these.
The last area of the private sector which  I  would  like  to talk  about today  is  the  Stock  Exchange  of
Thailand.
The  Stock  Exchange  of  Thailand  lacks  sophistication.  It  has  only  just  begun  to  allow  short  selling,
which  is  essential  to  allow  liquidity  in  a  controlled  manner.  Derivatives  are  very  rare,  and  this  is
another area which needs development to reduce the various risks associated with the market, but of
course, one should only do it under well known rules, and personally I think only to a limited extent,
not to the extent that the beneficiaries are mainly the intermediaries as might be the case in a really
large, sophisticated market.
As to the scale of the market, I have been visiting MSCI and other important players in the world. It
really  is  quite  easy  to  improve  our  market  performance.  Presently,  Thai  market  requirements  are
designed  only  to  fit  the  Thai  requirements.  Requirements  that  are  often  self-destructive  and  unreal
leading us into the bubble of 1997.
The market in the Stock Exchange has not been much changed from the bubble days. It’s still doing
the same thing, just without the bubble. Realistically, our rules will have to be changed so that it will
comply with and take advantage of rather than be penalised by international norms.
In government, the Board of Investment (BOI) is probably a crucial instrument. It’s doing a good job
giving privileges on an individual project basis. That has its own limitations and faults. It might well
soon be the time to make operating in Thailand generally viable.
The  original  BOI  philosophy,  in  that  these  are  projects  you  wouldn’t  get  if  you  didn’t  give  tax
privileges  and  therefore  have  no  tax  loss  costs,  is  becoming  more  and  more  untenable.  Generally,
systems  are  working  better  and  the  economy  is  getting  bigger  and  bigger  and  more  and  more
sophisticated; doing exemptions on a project basis, except in very rare cases, will soon hold us back.
The  new  government  should  take  that  last  hurdle  and  make  the  general  system  acceptable,  even  if
minimally  by  lowering  taxes  and  making  improvement  in  civil  service  performance,  probably  by
making the civil service remunerated by output and productivity rather than the tenure system as  at
present.
That leads to my comment on the long term initiatives that the government might carry out that would
help in the long run, which I think is the main strategy for real recovery to take place. Without good
long run prospects, there isn’t much hope to do well in the present.
The government will have to be moved more on to the private sector footing. This doesn’t mean just
selling state enterprises and such things. But it does mean that the government units that are retained
would  have  to  work  for  incentives  in  terms  of  output  and  cost  reduction  and  have  to,  in  general,
compete with the private sector for government budget.
BIS Review 108/2000
4
Generally,  the  private  sector  is  not  necessarily  more  efficient  than  the  government.  The  key  is  that
those  that  are  not  don’t  survive  and  better  ones  expand.  This  doesn’t  happen  in  the  government
because those that are inefficient just ask for some more budget, and this is forcibly collected.
In my own view, large complicated government units are probably not possible in Thailand unless we
get some fantastic new government which is very sophisticated and lasts a very long time, say, 10 or
20  years,  a  prospect,  which  presently  one  should  not  plan  on.  In  this  case,  one  should  then  design
government  units  to  be  small  independent  units,  independently  managed,  and  the  governments  that
come in execute their mandate through budget allocation and legislative changes where necessary.
Interestingly, all over the world for a very long time, the concept has been that civil servants have a lot
of  authority  and  are  not  profit-oriented.  One  should  make  sure  that  they  have  tenure  and  are  well
compensated with pensions after they leave, otherwise they might try to stock up some assets for their
later life.
The philosophy is going  in  the  opposite  direction  everywhere now.  Civil servants  are  powerful and
important  and therefore  they  should not have  tenure.  For that  reason  one  must  make  sure  that  civil
servants  perform  by  giving  them  only  limited  term  contracts,  and  they  will  have  to  perform
responsibly and efficiently to get a new contract.
I  am  inclined  more  towards  the  latter  as  one  can  never  make  sure  of  hiring  or  promoting  the  right
person, and therefore one should plan on an easy change of personnel to get the best results.
Let  me  make  a  controversial  statement  on  the  platforms  of  the  various  political  parties  in  terms  of
spending  more  and  taxing  less.  We  routinely  run  the  general  equilibrium  model  and  the  inflation
targeting model as well as Market Implied Models or MIME, a technical word that is used for trying to
find things out from people’s normal actions that could be captured in a data system.
We also, of course, do single equation estimates as well as pure intuition from graphs and tables and
such things.
Our staff is generally of the opinion that increased expenditure and tax reduction of moderate amounts
will not destabilise the economy.
This is predominantly because the economy is still very docile  with a  capacity  utilisation  stable for
quite  a  while  now  at  58%.  Cost  push  inflation  from  the  exchange  rate  and  the  oil  prices  are  now
substantially absorbed or have been passed on, so cost push also is not presently much of a factor.
The  important  thing  though  is  how  to  make  expenditure  useful  and  constructive  in  the  long  run
without  too  much  leakage.  The  important  thing  is  how  to  make  tax  cuts  reasonable  and  directed
towards the areas where people benefiting from the cuts could utilise it for a spate of new investment.
If  this  were  to  happen  the  debt  to  GDP  ratio  might  not  increase  significantly  due  to  the  resulting
increase in GDP over the long term.
With abundant liquidity and low interest rates, this is not just a time for a general tax cut for its own
sake, but a program must be designed for it to be directed to where investment could best be made. In
a way, this is not as easy as it seems, because generally we have been over investing and have great
overcapacity.
But it’s also not as hard as it might look. There are only a few areas that are really doing well, and
benefits from the cuts could be directed there. The problem is how to make it fairly just, so that not
only the good players that are already there benefit, but new players should be brought in to these all
important areas.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have been giving you some of my thoughts on the economy. Thoughts that
are spotty and veer obviously somewhat to the financial aspects.
The new government must be much more comprehensive. But since this is not a party platform but
only some comments to make more apparent the effect of what might happen in the next few months
in the hope that, as in all things, elucidation and transparency makes for a more stable market, let me
therefore not bother you further with my thoughts and stop at this point.
5
BIS Review 108/2000
Let us hope we will have a good new government, with new ideas to bring Thailand into the future and
take Thailand into that most important next level of development, a more comfortable life, and a more
stable growth.
BIS Review 108/2000
6
