Joachim  Wuermeling:  Digital  transformation  -  opportunities  and
risks for the financial sector
Speech  by  Prof  Joachim  Wuermeling,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank,  at  the  Banking  and  Corporate  Evening  (Banken-  und  Unternehmensabend),
München, 23 May 2019.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
My speech today is about digital transformation. We have all heard about this subject before, and
banks and savings banks are currently in the midst of change – I doubt I need to elaborate on that
for the benefit of anyone in this room.
What  I  would  like  to  do  today  is  raise  a  number  of  questions  that  concern  not  only  individual
enterprises but also the evolution of the sector as a whole and thus its regulatory framework, too.
We have to realise that many of the developments that are still individual projects at present and
are taking place gradually are part of a major upheaval. What is more, it is up to us to help shape
this transition, which some are calling the fourth industrial revolution.
This is challenging, because our objective – successfully shaping digital transformation in the
financial sector – is in flux and the processes involved are complex. So I am not here simply to
lecture you on this topic in my supervisory capacity; rather, I am in favour of all parties involved –
banks and supervisors – working together to think about how this is all going to evolve.
I would like to talk to you today about three aspects of digital transformation:
first, the opportunities;
second, the risks;
and, finally, the matter of the right framework.
2 Opportunities presented by digitalisation
Let’s first take a look at the opportunities. I’m not talking about business specifics here, but rather
developments in the wider context.
The  term  “digitalisation”  is  difficult  to  grasp,  and  the  language  in  which  the  term  is  wrapped
obscures  what  it  is  ultimately  really  all  about:  innovation  that  translates  into  productivity  and
benefit. I say this because, generally speaking, digitalisation and technological progress do not
automatically lead to productivity growth.
In order to unleash a technology’s potential, we need to get to grips with the technology itself,
what we ourselves do with it as well as the environment in which it operates. This is where the
actual  innovation  takes  place.  This  is  what  I  am  alluding  to  when  using  the  term  “digital
transformation”.
Essentially, the idea is to re-evaluate the things we do every day. For the most part, we spend far
too little time doing this. On top of that, it is about rethinking what is possible in technological
terms.
In  the  face  of  the  explosive  surge  in  technological  innovation,  I  see  countless  ways  at  the
economic level to advance the economy as a whole and the financial sector, in particular.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Given the accelerating speed at which information can be exchanged, efficiency on the markets
can be increased further. Just think of the communications cable that was laid between New
York and London for several hundred million euro. Data can now be transmitted back and forth in
60 milliseconds. This is a highly worthwhile investment for high-frequency trading on the stock
exchange, where even very short periods of time may seem like an eternity.
Thanks to digitalisation, markets can also become more international and grow closer together:
nowadays, it no longer matters whether you are transferring a sum of money to your neighbour
or to an acquaintance in Portugal because both payments are handled the same way. Securities,
too, can now be transferred quickly and flexibly to all euro area countries. This means that risks
are  also  transferred  more  easily  and  can  actually  be  borne  by  those  agents  whose  business
models are compatible with such risk-taking.
Digitalisation can also help to reduce information asymmetry – just think of search engines, news
feeds, networks or knowledge platforms such as Wikipedia, for instance.
Taken  altogether,  improved,  faster  and  broader-based  information  sharing  between  market
participants can thus contribute to the more efficient mediation of capital and risk.
Also  –  and  especially  –  from  end  customers’  perspective,  by  which  I  mean  consumers  and
enterprises,  there  are  clearly  opportunities  that  are  reflected  quite  generally  in  higher  quality,
lower  prices,  and  customised  products  and  services.  Furthermore, 
from  enterprises’
perspective,  digital  innovations  are  what  creates  opportunities  and  market  niches  in  the  first
place.
The  opportunities  presented  by  digitalisation  are  also  apparent  when  it  comes  to  making
individual decisions. Using algorithms, it is possible to keep a better check on sources of error in
decision-making processes. After all, digital tools can address weaknesses that make their way
into the financial markets as a result of prejudices, biases or simple human error. For example,
we,  as  human  beings,  regardless  of  how  well  educated  we  are,  tend  to  have  systematic
psychological  biases.  Reason-based  algorithms  embedded  into  an  appropriate  incentive
structure can overcome this problem and play a role in more efficient decision-making.
Banks  are  already  doing  this  today  –  when  making  credit  decisions,  for  instance,  they  use
algorithms  to  objectively  evaluate  available  information.  The  same  goes  for  bank  customers
when making investment decisions.
As  you  might  have  guessed  already,  we  at  the  Bundesbank  take  an  overall  positive  view  of
digitalisation.  Established  banks,  fintech  firms  and  other  enterprises  are  all  in  the  process  of
transforming technologies into innovations.
In economic terms, this is resulting in productivity gains, growth, improved competitiveness, a
more robust economy and, last but not least, greater prosperity. It is also enhancing the stability
of the euro.
As  a  supervisory  authority,  we  want  to  monitor  these  developments  in  a  constructive  way
because, ultimately, they promise cost-saving opportunities as well as new earnings potential for
individual institutions.
But of course, as a supervisory authority, we are also keeping a close eye on the inherent risks. I
see no contradiction here. Quite the contrary: when it comes to innovation, getting a handle on
the risks it poses is key. In 90 years of banking supervision, this has always been the case.
We should not simply equate innovation with novel financial products or processes that provide
no added value in the long run. Innovation needs to be a package deal.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
3 Risks of digitalisation
This brings us to the risks and challenges that arise in the context of digital transformation and
need to be taken into account.
To be clear, tackling digital risk is an enormous challenge. I believe that this can be put down to
three key factors.
First, there are new types of risk. Traditionally, banking supervisors focus on capital and liquidity.
And that will remain the case for new types of risk – in IT, for instance. However, simply wanting
to hold sufficient capital to counter any and every new risk has its limitations. For example, how
can a server outage of several hours, with all its ramifications, be expressed in terms of financial
risk?  How  can  you  put  a  figure  on  the  damage  caused  by  internal  processes  coming  to  a
standstill  and  on  the  losses  that  arise  due  to  nothing  working  anymore  and  no  service  being
available? In many cases, there is no historical parallel or other benchmark for such matters, but
there still exists the need to come to grips with such risks.
Furthermore, there are what are referred to as “unknown unknowns” – risks whose existence
may remain entirely undiscerned until the first time they cause an incident. With that in mind,
banks are now employing innovative technologies such as advanced analytics in certain data-
intensive areas, which examine large data volumes for anomalies and help staff identify the very
existence of certain risks in the first place.
Second, we are faced not just with new risks but also with a shifting risk landscape. I am thinking
in this respect, in particular, about IT.
As long as digital services, hardware and software keep constantly evolving and the complexity
of processes and software generally goes on increasing, there will be technology that is prone to
disruption.  Furthermore,  people  make  mistakes  or  deliberately  exploit  weaknesses.  IT  risks
therefore remain a moving target for the supervisory authorities.
Digitalisation is a moving target for both enterprises in the financial sector and for the supervisory
authorities. In the past few years, we as a supervisory authority have responded to the increased
significance of IT-related risks and specified our requirements more clearly.
However,  the  topic  also  affects  our  day-to-day  supervisory  work.  Our  supervisors’  jobs  have
become  more  challenging. And  this  is  not  just  down  to  the  rate  and  number  of  tasks  to  be
performed  but  also  to  their  complexity.  Ten  years  ago,  IT-related  supervisory  standards  were
fairly manageable. Nowadays, specialisation within this risk category is playing an increasingly
important  part.  Knowledge  of  IT  risks  needs  to  be  updated  constantly.  Information  sharing
between  supervisory  authorities  across  national  borders  has  become  a  major  factor,  and
knowledge management is becoming a key task in this regard.
Added to this is the fact that issues have increasingly taken on an interdisciplinary dimension. To
put it loosely, when it comes to some topics, it is no longer possible for a single person to make
a  comprehensive  assessment.  Supervisory  authorities,  much  like  the  institutions  themselves,
need  to  combine  legal,  economic  and  technical  expertise  in  order  to  evaluate,  say,  the
technology-intensive business model of an enterprise.
A lot of people insist that these are no more than organisational details and that, after all, it mainly
comes down to having good rules. But organisational matters can, of course, become crucial to
the effective enforcement of our regulatory framework.
I would now like to mention a third aspect that is also contributing to the challenging environment.
New enterprises have joined the market – mainly fintechs and bigtechs – which often provide just
one of the process steps that make up a banking service (customer onboarding or credit scoring,
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
for instance) or technical support processes (for mobile payments or for general cloud services,
for example) in partnership with banks. As a result, the boundaries of the sector have become
somewhat blurred.
Many  of  the  new  players  are  not  licensed  as  banks,  financial  service  providers  or  payment
institutions, but may be involved at key stages in processes or the market structure as a result of
outsourcing or other forms of cooperation.
This  is  all  leading  to  a  more  complex  competitive  landscape  and  new  forms  of  cooperation
which, of course, can give rise to new and additional risks.
More generally, this raises the question of how far the legal framework can keep pace with the
transformation of the financial sector. And that is what I would like to discuss next.
4 Outlook for the supervisory regime
The first thing we should note is that the long-established legal framework has remained very
largely  the  same  despite  the  changes  the  sector  has  undergone.  Much  of  this  is  due  to  the
prevailing regulatory approach in Germany and Europe as a whole. This stipulates that the legal
requirements do not apply to particular types of enterprise, but to specific business activities with
a direct bearing on the risks that financial supervisors deal with. The norms can still be applied to
innovative  products  and  business  ideas  by  looking  at  precisely  how  the  enterprise’s  business
idea is supposed to work and how it fits into the legal framework. It doesn’t matter in this context
whether an enterprise calls itself a “fintech”, “bigtech” or “established financial institution” – nor
what technology it uses.
Formulating abstract requirements and standards instead of detailed technical rules has helped
ensure the stability of the supervisory framework. It goes without saying that the IT requirements
have become more diversified and more clearly defined over the last few years, but even so, they
are formulated generically – and for good reason. Since technologies and applications differ over
time and from bank to bank, standards need to remain applicable and instructive in every case.
We  must  nonetheless  consider  whether  our  regulatory  framework  will  still  be  suited  to  the
financial industry of tomorrow. I have already mentioned the blurring of the boundaries between
sectors, as new enterprises that often do not perform a business that requires a licence, but that
play a major role in the system as a whole, join the market. So how does the legal framework
interact with the economic realities in this situation?
Outsourcing activities are a key case in point when considering this question. Banks outsource
certain  processes  to  external  service  providers.  From  a  banking  supervisory  perspective,  the
rules  are  clear.  External  providers  that  do  not  themselves  perform  business  subject  to  the
supervisory rules do not fall within the scope of regulation. It is the supervised institutions that
bear full responsibility for any risks arising from cooperation with an external service provider.
Examples of such risks are a potential default by the external service provider, or the possibility
of reputational risk. The institutions must ensure that the risks remain manageable – for instance,
by  including  relevant  terms  and  conditions  to  this  effect  in  cooperation  agreements  and  by
considering from the outset how they can keep their business up and running if the partnership is
terminated unexpectedly.
So  this  sums  up  the  conditions  de  jure.  But  are  they  always  appropriate  to  the  economic
conditions?
Depending on the individual case, the picture can be very different. Where credit institutions work
with large technology firms, such firms’ negotiating power might be so large, for instance, that
institutions have difficulty effectively imposing their conditions on their contracting partners for the
service being provided. You might call this “the tail wagging the dog”.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  also  have  to  make  sure  that  it  does  not  make  sense  to  outsource  certain  tasks  simply
because  you  can  afford  to  be  more  relaxed  about  dealing  with  the  resulting  risks  outside  the
regulated enterprise.
The more the boundaries between sectors are blurred and the more intensively banks work with
non-licensed enterprises, the more relevant discussions like this will become. My personal view
is that we should discuss to what extent we might take a closer look at supervising individual
activities – activity-based supervision – in addition to entity-based supervision. I am thinking here,
for instance, about services provided by insourcers of a certain size and importance, such as
cloud  service  providers.  However,  this  would  have  significant  repercussions  –  not  least  for
supervisors.
So that’s why it’s crucial that the debate does not take place in a vacuum, but always with a view
to what is necessary and essential in order to tackle the key risks effectively. We are still in the
early stages of this debate. In any case, the entity-based supervisory approach should remain
unaffected. We cannot start to define areas where an institution is relieved of its responsibility for
risks that ultimately affect its own services. This would pose a problem not just from the point of
view of effective supervision, but also in regulatory terms.
I  also  see  a  European  dimension  here.  Europe  is  already  pressing  ahead  with  regulation  for
issues emerging as a result of digitalisation. I am thinking, for example, of the EBA’s recently
issued  guidelines  on  outsourcing  arrangements.  The  Bundesbank  and  BaFin  helped  to  draft
these guidelines. Looking further ahead, I would like to see the European stakeholders set the
right course for the overarching framework of digitalisation.
First,  cross-border  business  will  be  even  more  relevant  in  the  digital  age. A  key  concern  for
banks and finechs is that their innovative products and services can be rolled out across Europe
straight  away.  Here,  the  EU  should  focus  on  counteracting  any  national  fragmentation  of
regulation in its early stages. This is also important for Europe’s global competitiveness in areas
such as artificial intelligence, blockchain technology, video identification or even issues relating to
competition law.
Second,  the  EU  could  set  its  sights  on  objectives  beyond  strengthening  the  single  financial
market. Regulatory issues brought to light by digitalisation often also have a more far-reaching
impact. For instance, the framework for using artificial intelligence also raises ethical questions.
Considering  topics  from  various  angles  appears  to  be  something  the  EU  is  good  at  –  in  any
event, EU regulation is often seen as being very well balanced from outside the European Union.
Other  countries  and  jurisdictions  have  already  chosen  to  model  their  own  projects  on  the
European Data Protection Regulation. I therefore see a very real chance that the EU could end
up playing a leading role in developing the rules for the digital financial sector.
Expectations  of  this  have  already  emerged,  in  fact.  In  the  new  legislative  period,  we  should
therefore be proactive in tackling pressing topics and questions.
5 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
Digitalisation is about to bring about a fundamental transformation of the financial markets. So it
can’t  be  a  matter  of  blocking  or  preventing  developments.  Instead,  it  should  be  the  task  of
legislators, supervisors and market participants alike to shape these developments.
Even if these developments cannot be stopped, digitalisation will ultimately be what we make of
it.
We can encourage and support these developments by:
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
taking a broad-based, open approach to the way we think about and tackle digitalisation;
raising awareness of the fact that risks can change and shift at any time;
and creating a framework for future developments that does not limit potential opportunities
and, at the same time, appropriately reflects risk.
A new debate has begun.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
