Philip R Lane: Monetary policy and below-target inflation
Speech by Mr Philip R Lane, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Bank of Finland conference on Monetary Policy and Future of EMU, Helsinki, 2 July 2019.
 I would like to thank the Bank of Finland for inviting me to speak at this conference in Helsinki
1
today.
In my contribution, I wish to share some thoughts on the conduct of monetary policy in a low-
inflation  environment.  This  is  a  global  topic  that  generates  similar  challenges  for  most  of  the
central  banks  represented  at  this  event.  To  a  significant  extent,  this  sequence  of  low  inflation
rates  reflects  the  prolonged  adjustment  dynamics  that  characterise  the  aftermath  of  a  major
global financial crisis, together with a substantial downward shift in the realisation of shocks to
inflation that we have observed in recent years. At the same time, regardless of the underlying
origins  of  the  current  low  inflation  environment,  some  observers  may  be  tempted  to  query
whether and how central banks will meet their inflation objectives, especially under conditions in
which monetary accommodation is already quite extensive.
To address these concerns in respect of the euro area, I will demonstrate the effectiveness of
the policy instruments that we have deployed to ensure that inflation climbs to meet our objective
over the medium term. As will be explained in the analysis, my assessment is that the evidence
shows  that  our  package  of  monetary  policy  measures  has  been  an  effective  response  to  the
environment that the ECB has faced in recent years. Furthermore, the effectiveness of the policy
toolkit means that we can add further monetary accommodation if it is required to deliver our
objective.
Finally, especially when inflation deviates from its objective for an extended period, central banks
‒ including the ECB ‒ should adopt clear communication strategies that leave no doubt about
their absolute commitment to meeting the inflation objective over the medium term.
The ECB’s instruments and tools
Excellent accounts of the history of ECB monetary policy are provided by Hutchinson and Smets
(2017), Hartmann and Smets (2019) and Rostagno et al. (forthcoming). As a summary device,
Chart 1 shows some key interest rates and developments in excess liquidity in recent years. The
chart underlines the primary role of the deposit facility rate – which has been in negative territory
since 2014 – in anchoring the key EONIA market interest rate in a world in which the money
market operates in conditions of excess liquidity. From mid-2014 onwards, net liquidity provision
from refinancing operations and asset purchases has markedly increased. In part, this expansion
of  liquidity  provision  depended  on  banks  choosing  to  take  up  funding  support  in  refinancing
operations,  especially  conventional  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (LTROs)  and,  more
recently, targeted LTROs (TLTROs). However, the expansion during 2014–18 was dominated by
our asset purchase programme (APP).
 1 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
In recent years, the ECB has deployed an innovative, multi-pronged approach in the design of its
policy stance. While it is always possible to envisage a wider range of instruments, the current
policy mix includes four elements: (i) pushing the policy rate into negative territory, (ii) forward
guidance on the future policy path, (iii) the APP, and (iv) TLTROs. Importantly, these measures
work as a package, with significant complementarities across the different instruments.
I will outline the effectiveness of these four measures. Doing so shows the capacity of our policy
framework to provide the monetary accommodation required to return inflation to the medium-
term goal, even when the policy rate is no longer in conventional positive territory. Furthermore,
the effectiveness of these tools also provides leeway for further easing if it is required.
Negative policy rate (deposit facility rate)
The  2014  decision  by  the  ECB  to  push  the  relevant  policy  rate  (the  deposit  facility  rate)  into
 2 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
negative territory was a crucial policy innovation. Subsequent cuts have taken the deposit facility
rate to its current level of minus 40 basis points.
An important mechanism that reinforces the impact of negative interest rates relates to the way
expectations about the future path of monetary policy are reflected in market interest rates.  At
any point in time, a wide range of future interest rate paths is conceivable and market participants
assign probabilities to different parts of this distribution. The yield and forward curves observed in
the  market  are  the  probability-weighted  averages  of  these  possible  paths,  aggregated  across
market participants.
2
A  perceived  binding  lower  bound  on  monetary  policy  rates  skews  the  predictive  distribution
upward, since it truncates the distribution of conceivable future short-term rates from below: as
the overnight interest rate reaches the lower bound, interest rate paths that would have embodied
expectations  of  a  further  cut  at  a  higher  level  of  the  actual  overnight  rate  are,  by  definition,
eliminated  from  the  set  of  conceivable  outcomes;  conversely,  rates  above  the  lower  bound
receive a higher relative weight and the expected value of interest rates is mechanically pushed
3
up.
While longer-term yields are likely to decline even as the central bank cuts the short-term rate
towards  its  lower  bound,  the  truncated  asymmetric  distribution  of  expected  future  short-term
rates means that they decline by less than they would away from the lower bound. The resultant
tightening  bias,  in  turn,  can  be  quite  costly,  since  it  tends  to  arise  in  situations  of  strong  and
persistent disinflationary pressures and in the wake of a previous sequence of sizeable rate cuts.
A policy of negative interest rates mitigates this tightening bias. In particular, the observation that
a central bank is prepared to take interest rates to levels below zero induces a re-evaluation of
technical feasibility constraints. A salient feature of this re-evaluation is the disappearance of the
qualifier  “zero”  in  the  economic  debate  on  lower  bound  constraints.  Via  this  re-evaluation,
negative rates loosen the perceived lower bound on the future distribution of short-term interest
4
rates.
Through  this  mechanism,  negative  interest  rates  have  a  marked  impact  on  transmission,
particularly in the euro area, as they push down the short and medium segment of the risk-free
curve, which for the most part is the segment of the curve that determines the pricing of loans to
non-financial corporations. It follows that control of this segment of the curve directly influences
the level of lending rates.
To  illustrate  the  effectiveness  of  negative  policy  rates,  ECB  staff  undertook  a  counterfactual
exercise. They constructed the forward curve that would prevail in a scenario without either the
negative interest rate policy or the forward guidance on the future path of the policy rates. As
shown  in  Chart  2,  the  forward  curve  derived  from  the  overnight  index  swap  curve  would  be
pinned at a higher level and would be distinctly steeper (the dashed blue line on the right) than the
forward curve that we observe today (the red curve).
 3 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
While this mainly serves as an illustration, as it is based on a number of assumptions and input
parameters,  it  is  indicative  of  the  sort  of  tighter  interest  rate  constellations  that  the  euro  area
economy would face in the absence of this important policy tool. Our negative policy rate thus
contributes substantially to providing monetary accommodation. At the same time, it is also clear
that  there  may  be  negative  side  effects.  Accordingly,  the  Governing  Council  will  continue  to
assess  the  case  for  mitigating  measures,  which  is  especially  relevant  if  further  rate  cuts  are
envisaged.
Forward guidance on interest rates
5
Our interest rate forward guidance with its state-contingent and date-based legs has become the
principal tool for adjusting the monetary policy stance, especially following the end of net asset
 4 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
purchases.  The  state-contingent  leg  expresses  the  anchor  of  our  policy-setting  expectations:
policy rates will not be raised until we are sufficiently confident that inflation will reach levels that
we consider most consistent with the ECB’s price stability objective. This, in turn, allows interest
rate expectations to adjust dynamically in a data-dependent manner, which results in automatic
easing if the convergence path is delayed.
Through  the  date-based  leg,  the  Governing  Council  affects  interest  rate  expectations  by
expressing its views about the rate path in the near term that, given the outlook for inflation, is
most  conducive  to  reaching  the  objective  over  the  medium  term.  This  removes  unnecessary
uncertainty about the policy orientation over horizons that are not stretching too far into the future
and prevents an unwanted weakening of the monetary policy stimulus.
The  evidence  shows  that  our  enhanced  forward  guidance  has  been  effective.  The  state-
contingent element is clearly understood by investors and is influencing their expectations. Since
the  second  half  of  2018,  when  we  enhanced  our  forward  guidance  on  interest  rates  (and
especially  since  the  monetary  policy  meeting  of  the  Governing  Council  in  March  2019),  the
reassessment  by  investors  of  information  regarding  the  outlook  has  led  them  to  expect  a
somewhat  longer  horizon  over  which  rates  are  more  likely  than  not  to  remain  unchanged.
Accordingly, the EONIA forward curve has shifted down substantially over recent months (see
Chart 3).
 5 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  light  of  this  endogenous  adaptability  of  the  state-contingent  leg  through  investor  behaviour,
occasional  gaps  may  emerge  vis-à-vis  the  date-based  leg,  since  the  latter  can  only  be
recalibrated at each Governing Council monetary policy meeting. In March and June 2019, the
Governing Council assessed that the risks to price stability warranted a recalibration of the date-
based leg, thereby conveying the Governing Council’s updated assessment of the direction that
the  ECB’s  key  interest  rates  will  have  to  follow.  The  Governing  Council  now  expects  to  keep
policy rates unchanged “at least through the first half of 2020”.
It should be fully understood that a change to the date-based leg is not intended to ratify market
views. Rather, it provides information on the Governing Council’s assessment of the rate path
that, given the evolving state of the economy, we view as the likeliest to be realised. Finally, the
inherent flexibility in our forward guidance framework always allows for additional enhancements
to ensure that inflation remains on a sustained adjustment path.
APP
The significant stock of assets purchased through the APP and the subsequent reinvestments
once  net  purchases  ended  in  December  2018  have  been  providing  substantial  monetary
 6 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
accommodation  to  the  euro  area.  My  colleague  Benoît  Cœuré  recently  provided  a  thorough
assessment  and  Chart  4  and  Chart  5  illustrate  the  contribution  of  the APP  to  the  easing  of
financial conditions through the reduction of yields.  According to those estimates, after the last
recalibration of the APP in June 2018, the ten-year bond yield would have been around 95 basis
points higher in the absence of the APP. Moreover, this impact is quite persistent.
6
Asset purchases work through a variety of mechanisms. Of particular importance is the duration
channel. By absorbing duration risk from the market, investors require less risk compensation,
which  pushes  down  term  premia  and  yields.  The  duration  channel  is  complemented  by  the
signalling  channel  through  which  asset  purchases  can  affect  the  expected  path  of  short-term
policy rates.  Importantly, the bonds we have purchased will remain on our balance sheet for a
long time and we continue to reinvest maturing principals (Chart 4). A meaningful stock effect will
therefore continue to prevail and will exert substantial downward pressure on yields (Chart 5),
particularly at the longer end of the curve.
7
The reinvestment horizon is linked to the forward guidance on policy rates: we now say that we
will  “continue  reinvesting,  in  full,  the  principal  payments  from  maturing  securities  purchased
under the asset purchase programme for an extended period of time past the date when we start
raising the key ECB interest rates […]”. This means that any recalibration of the date-based leg
of forward guidance by construction extends the period over which investors expect the ECB to
continue  reinvesting  in  full;  this  prolongs  the  favourable  liquidity  conditions  and  reinforces  the
downward effect of our rate forward guidance on long-term rates by suppressing term premia
(see Chart 5).
 7 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
 8 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
8
If warranted by our policy assessment, net purchases under the APP could be restarted in the
future.  In the event of any resumption of net purchases, associated revisions to the framework
of  forward  guidance  would  have  to  be  considered  in  order  to  make  sure  that  the  different
instruments continue to be tightly linked and that their synergies are maximised.
TLTROs
The Governing Council recently decided to start a third series of TLTROs (TLTRO III) to help
preserve favourable bank lending conditions and support the smooth transmission of monetary
policy. The generous borrowing conditions offered to banks should not only provide a backstop to
the  banking  system  but  also  lower  aggregate  funding  costs,  which  contributes  to  the  overall
accommodative monetary policy stance.
The  funding  cost  relief  is  direct  for  those  banks  that  switch  from  more  expensive  options  to
 9 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
TLTRO  financing.  However,  there  is  also  an  indirect  channel  that  benefits  the  entire  banking
system:  while  looking  ahead  banks  will  have  to  step  up  their  issuance  in  order  to  satisfy
regulatory requirements, the TLTRO programme will help avoid cliff effects by allowing banks
drawing TLTRO funds to cancel or postpone plans to issue bonds in the market. This reduction
in the supply of securities relative to what we would see in the absence of TLTRO III creates a
scarcity channel that puts further downward pressure on bank bond yields, resulting in funding
cost relief across the board. The upshot of cheaper bank funding is higher credit volumes and
lower lending rates to the wider economy via the bank lending channel.9
 10 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
In fact, our experience with previous TLTROs (TLTRO I and II) was that these operations had a
significant effect on funding costs, particularly in more vulnerable euro area countries. Moreover,
the lower funding costs were passed through to customers. Particularly in vulnerable countries,
banks that participated in  TLTROs  cut  their  lending  rates  by  more  than  their  non-participating
peers (see Chart 6).
The policy package
In  assessing  the  impact  of  our  policy  package,  we  must  also  take  into  account  that  the
instruments  were  designed  to  be  complementary  and  mutually  reinforcing.  Overall,  the
transmission of our suite of measures to the financial system has been very effective. This is in
no small part due to the strong complementarities between instruments, which ensure that all
segments of the yield curve are influenced, thereby easing financial conditions more broadly (see
Chart 7).
Let me give two examples to illustrate the role played by complementarities in our policy design.
First, the negative interest rate policy has supported the portfolio rebalancing channel of the APP
 11 / 19
10
BIS central bankers' speeches
by  encouraging  banks  to  lend  to  the  broad  economy  instead  of  holding  onto  liquidity. At  the
same time, the extra liquidity from the APP has dampened volatility at the short end of the curve.
10
11
Second, the APP and its reinvestments have supported our enhanced forward guidance via the
signalling channel.
 Asset purchases provide a strong signal that policy rates will remain low for
an extended period of time. This effect is reinforced by the sequencing of our instruments, which
is embedded in the structure of our forward guidance. At the same time, our forward guidance on
rates reinforces the APP and reinvestments, since it anchors the short end of the risk-free curve
and thereby ensures that the stimulus from the APP and the reinvestments is not offset.
The improved financing conditions have made a considerable contribution to the macroeconomic
performance of the euro area. A counterfactual exercise undertaken by ECB staff shows that
growth  and  inflation  would  have  been  notably  lower  in  the  absence  of  our  non-standard
measures (see Chart 8 and Chart 9).
12
 12 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
 13 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
That  said,  as  the  Governing  Council  has  emphasised  many  times,  in  order  to  reap  the  full
benefits from our monetary policy measures, it is important that other policy areas make a more
decisive contribution. In particular, growth-enhancing and vulnerability-reducing measures would
combine to improve confidence in the long-term potential of the euro area economy, which is a
central  factor  in  determining  assessments  of  steady-state  real  interest  rates.  Moreover,  the
aggregate cyclical stance of fiscal policy plays an important role in determining the amplitude and
duration of economic fluctuations. As noted by President Draghi in his Sintra speech, a cyclically-
appropriate  aggregate  fiscal  stance  may  be  more  easily  achieved  through  a  well-designed
central fiscal capacity.
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  importance  of  effective  communication  in  maintaining  focus  on  the
inflation objective, especially during phases of extended deviations.
Central bank communication
The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union establishes price stability as the primary
objective of the ECB. The ECB strategy makes the primary objective of price stability operational
through the medium-term orientation of monetary policy. This medium-term orientation provides
the  necessary  flexibility  to  combat  excessive  volatility  in  output  and  inflation  in  responding  to
shocks.
 14 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
The medium term refers to a time span that is long enough to be consistent with a central bank’s
capacity to control inflation, taking into account the typical transmission lag. The horizon should
be  short  enough  for  the  public  to  be  able  to  assess  the  performance  of  the  central  bank  in
delivering its inflation goal. At the same time, too long a span of time obstructs accountability.
However,  the  definition  of  the  medium  term  cannot  be  reduced  to  a  fixed  interval:  it  must  be
interpreted as state-dependent. A demand shock that pushes inflation away from its desired level
and output away from potential in the same direction calls for a policy horizon as short as the
typical  transmission  lag:  the  policy  response  to  such  a  shock  is  faster  and  stronger  than
otherwise. By contrast, if the economy is hit by persistent supply-side shocks, for example, the
medium-term interval can stretch well beyond the standard transmission lag of monetary policy.
Furthermore, a medium-term orientation implies that inflation can deviate from our aim in both
directions, so long as the path of inflation can be expected to converge back to the objective.
Maintaining  a  medium-term  orientation  is  facilitated  by  a  credible  commitment  to  the  inflation
goal,  such  that  inflation  expectations  remain  well  anchored  even  during  a  prolonged  phase  of
inflation deviation. One piece of evidence on how expectations are formed is provided by a recent
special  questionnaire  in  the  ECB’s  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters  (SPF),  in  which
participants  were  asked  about  the  factors  that  inform  their  longer-term  expectations,  meaning
four  or  five  years  ahead.
  The  responses  indicated  that  trends  in  inflation  emerged  as  a
substantial driving factor, and it is fair to assume that such trends build to a very large extent on
historical  and  thereby  backward-looking  data  on  actual  inflation.  However,  the  ECB’s  inflation
objective has remained the most important factor informing the longer-term expectations of SPF
participants. Given that trends in actual inflation have clearly weakened in recent years, the role
of the inflation objective as an anchor of expectations has been brought more strongly to the fore.
13
One sign of this is the looser association in recent times of longer-term inflation expectations
with  the  average  of  actual  inflation  calculated  cumulatively  over  the  history  of  monetary  union
(Chart 10). While this average ‒ and the same holds for averages taken over shorter time spans
‒ has come down over the period of low inflation, longer-term expectations have declined to a
much lesser extent. This suggests that participants have not been overly extrapolative in forming
their expectations about inflation.
 15 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
Maintaining  the  medium-term  inflation  goal  as  the  guideline  for  households,  firms  and  market
participants  in  forming  expectations  also  requires  a  consistent  communication  strategy,
especially when the near-term track record of inflation outcomes has deviated from the objective.
In part, this communication strategy is anchored by our forward guidance on policy measures, so
that everyone understands that the conditional future policy path supports convergence to the
aim.  It  is  also  supported  by  demonstrating  agility,  with  the  central  bank  communicating  that  it
stands ready to adjust its policy measures at any time to avoid undue delay in returning to the
inflation goal and combat any adverse shock to inflation dynamics.
It is also crucial to the successful anchoring of inflation expectations that the central bank shows
it is a learning organisation that is committed in its search for the most effective policy tools in
delivering  its  mandate.  This  general  principle  is  especially  relevant  during  phases  when
economic  and  financial  conditions  pose  new  challenges  and  require  novel  policy  responses.
 16 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
Whether through innovations such as the Outright Monetary Transactions programme during the
sovereign  debt  crisis  or  through  the  package  of  innovative  policy  measures  that  have  been
launched in recent years, the ECB has shown itself to be creative and proactive in responding to
new challenges.
In  common  with  other  central  banks,  the  ECB  must  always  be  open  to  new  ideas  and  new
methods,  drawing  from  internal  and  external  research  and  examples  of  best  practice  from
around the world. Of course, not all new ideas withstand sustained scrutiny, but the exploration
of new methods and formulations is essential for successful performance. For instance, albeit
with an orientation to the specific conditions of the US economy, the academic contributions to
the  June  conference  at  the  Federal  Reserve  of  Chicago  show  the  vibrancy  of  current
international research on meeting the challenges of low inflation. Some of these themes were
also identified in President Draghi’s recent Sintra speech. There should be no doubt that the ECB
is committed to ensuring that our monetary policy is built on frontier-level and robust theoretical
and empirical analysis.
Conclusions
Together with the extended nature of macro-financial adjustment in the wake of a major financial
crisis, we have seen a substantial downward shift in the realisation of shocks to inflation in recent
years. In the context of the euro area, the ECB has been active and creative in deploying non-
standard measures, in addition to extending the range for the policy rate into negative territory.
Our  assessment  is  that  this  policy  package  has  been  effective  and  further  easing  can  be
provided if required to deliver our mandate.
At the same time, an extended phase of below-target inflation poses a communication challenge
in  maintaining  focus  on  the  medium-term  inflation  goal.  It  is  obvious  that  it  is  easier  to
demonstrate  commitment  to  the  target  if  the  actual  track  record  of  inflation  outcomes
corresponds  more  closely  to  the  declared  objective. Accordingly,  it  is  essential  that  a  central
bank shows consistency in its monetary policy decisions by proactively responding to shocks
that might delay convergence to the target or move inflation dynamics in an adverse direction. To
this  end,  especially  in  a  world  of  non-standard  measures  and  an  essential  role  for  forward
guidance,  it  is  also  vital  that  a  central  bank  demonstrates  that  it  is  always  seeking  the  most
effective methods to deliver on its mandate.
References
Albertazzi, Ugo; Altavilla, Carlo; Boucinha, Miguel and Di Maggio, Marco (2018), “The Incentive
Channel  of  Monetary  Policy:  Quasi-Experimental  Evidence  from  Liquidity  Operations”,  mimeo,
First Annual RTF Workshop, Frankfurt am Main.
Altavilla,  Carlo;  Canova,  Fabio  and  Ciccarelli,  Matteo  (2016),  “Mending  the  Broken  Link:
Heterogeneous  Bank  Lending  and  Monetary  Policy  Pass-Through”, Journal  of  Monetary
Economics, forthcoming.
Benetton,  Matteo  and  Fantino,  Dadvide  (2018),  “Competition  and  the  Pass-Through  of
Unconventional  Monetary  Policy:  Evidence  From  TLTROs”, Banca  d’Italia  Working  Paper  No
1187.
Bottero, Margherita; Minoiu, Cameli; Peydro, José-Louis;, Presbitero, Andrea and Sette, Enrico
(2019),  “Negative  Monetary  Policy  Rates  and  Portfolio  Rebalancing:  Evidence  from  Credit
Register Data,” IMF Working Paper WP/19/44.
Brunnermeier,  Markus  and  Koby,  Yann  (2018),  “The  reversal  interest  rate”,  NBER  Working
Papers 25406, National Bureau of Economic Research.
 17 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
Cœuré, Benoît (2019), “The effects of APP reinvestments on euro area bond markets”, closing
remarks at the ECB’s Bond Market Contact Group meeting, 12 June 2019.
Demiralp,  Selva;  Eisenschmidt,  Jens  and  Vlassopoulos,  Thomas  (2019),  “Negative  interest
rates, excess liquidity and retail deposits: banks’ reaction to unconventional monetary policy in
the euro area”, Working Paper Series, No 2283, ECB.
Draghi,  Mario  (2019),  “Twenty  Years  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy”,  ECB  Forum  on  Central
Banking, Sintra, 18 June 2019.
ECB  (2019a),  “Twenty  years  of  the  ECB  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters”, Economic
Bulletin, Issue 1.
ECB (2019b) “Taking stock of the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programme after the end of net
asset purchases”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 2.
Eser, Fabian; Lemke, Wolfgang; Nyholm, Ken; Radde, Sören and Vladu, Andreea Liliana (2019),
“Tracing the impact of the ECB’s asset purchase programme on the yield curve”, Working Paper
Series, ECB, forthcoming.
Hartmann,  Philipp  and  Smets,  Frank  (2019),  “The  first  twenty  years  of  the  European  Central
Bank: monetary policy”, Working Paper Series, No 2219, ECB.
Hutchinson, John and Smets, Frank (2017), “Monetary Policy in Uncertain Times: ECB Monetary
Policy Since June 2014”, The Manchester School, Vol. 85.
Lemke, Wolfgang and Vladu, Andreea Liliana (2017), “Below the zero lower bound: a shadow-
rate term structure model for the euro area,” Working Paper Series, No 1991, ECB.
Rostagno, Massimo; Altavilla, Carlo; Carboni, Giacomo; Lemke, Wolfgang; Motto, Roberto; Saint-
Guilhem, Arthur and Yiangou, Jonathan (2019), “A Tale of two Decades: The ECB’s Monetary
Policy at 20”, forthcoming.
Ruge-Murcia,  Francisco  (2006),  “The  expectations  hypothesis  of  the  term  structure  when
interest  rates  are  close  to  zero”, Journal  of  Monetary  Economics,  Elsevier,  vol.  53(7),  pages
1409–1424.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
I would like to thank John Hutchinson for his contribution to this speech.
Another  important  mechanism  through  which  negative  interest  rates  provide  stimulus  is  by  enhancing  the
velocity of circulation of bank reserves.
For a formal documentation of the bias arising under the zero lower bound, see Ruge-Murcia (2006).
For a formal treatment of how a relaxation of the lower bound affects future rate distributions and the yield curve,
see Lemke. and Vladu (2017). For an example of a study that uses loan-level data to confirm that NIRP works
through  a  portfolio  rebalancing  channel  and  also  incentives  banks  to  rebalance  their  portfolios  from  liquid
assets to credit, see Bottero, Minoiu, Peydro, Polo, Presbitero and Sette (2019).
For example, see Brunnermeier and Koby (2018).
See Cœuré (2019).
For a more in-depth discussion of those channels and an empirical assessment, see ECB (2019b).
See Draghi (2019).
For some examples, see the following studies: Albertazzi, Altavilla, Boucinha, and Di Maggio (2018); Altavilla,
Canova, and Ciccarelli (2016); and Benetton and Fantino (2018).
 18 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
10
11
12
13
See Demiralp, Eisenschmidt, and Vlassopoulos (2019).
See Altavilla, Carboni, and Motto (2015).
The macroeconomic impact reported in Rostagno et al. (2019) is broadly comparable with that in ECB (2019b)
over a comparable period.
For more details, see ECB (2019a).
 19 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
