Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Monetary Policy Report
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, Ontario, 9 January 2019.
 Good  morning.  I  am  pleased  to  be  here  to  answer  your  questions  about  today’s  interest  rate
announcement  and  our Monetary  Policy  Report  (MPR).  Before  taking  your  questions,  let  me
offer a short summary of Governing Council’s deliberations.
A  lot  has  happened  since  our  last  MPR  in  October.  For  one  thing,  the  US-led  trade  war  is
beginning to have negative economic consequences. Global financial markets have reacted—
bond yields have fallen, yield curves have flattened even more and stock markets have repriced
significantly.  Here  in  Canada,  lower  oil  prices  have  reached  the  point  where  they  will  have
material consequences for our macroeconomic outlook. And, our housing sector is taking longer
than expected to stabilize.
It is natural to focus on the latest fluctuations in the economic data. But Governing Council also
spent a good deal of time reviewing our starting situation to ensure that these new developments
are put into appropriate context.
Is the world economy moderating? Yes: this has been in our forecast for some time. The US
economy has been growing well above potential because of fiscal stimulus. Our estimates, as
shown in Chart 1 of the MPR, show that US private sector economic growth has been slowing
since early 2018 and will continue to slow this year. China’s economy has also been transitioning
to a more sustainable pace of growth, and recent policy actions are an attempt to counter the
effects of its trade conflict with the United States. In fact, the adverse effects of tariffs on growth
are beginning to show up in the world economy as a whole. Our forecast is for global growth of
3.4 per cent in 2019—the same figure we had in October—but this is a material moderation from
3.7 per cent in 2018.
Is the Canadian economy moderating? Yes: 2017 was a very strong year with 3 per cent growth,
which is well above our potential. Back in October, we were expecting about 2 per cent for 2018
and about the same for 2019. The economy has been operating essentially at its full capacity for
about  18  months  now,  and  inflation  has  been  running  on  target.  The  labour  market  has  been
performing well—not as strong as in 2017, but very solid nonetheless—and unemployment is as
low as we have ever seen it.
Just last Friday we received the December employment report, with a rise of 9,000 jobs—not an
extraordinary number, but solid. However, notice that there were 17,000 jobs lost in Alberta alone,
no doubt due to the recent drop in oil prices. This means that the rest of Canada saw a net rise
of  26,000  jobs  in  December,  which  is  very  encouraging.  Despite  the  strong  labour  market,
however,  we  have  seen  persistent  subpar  wage  growth.  We  have  offered  a  couple  of  new
insights on that in today’s MPR. Quite simply, adjustment to the 2014 oil price decline continues
to hold back wages in oil-producing regions. Elsewhere the picture is brighter. Just to illustrate:
as shown in Chart 8 of the MPR, the Bank’s preferred measure of wage growth rose by 1.8 per
cent in oil-producing provinces in the third quarter. In the rest of Canada, that figure was a more
robust 2.6 per cent.
This trend is likely to continue as we are seeing renewed weakness in global oil prices, which are
about 25 per cent lower than in October. This means that Canada is earning less income from
the  rest  of  the  world.  Of  course,  the  biggest  impact  is  in  oil-producing  provinces,  but  those
incomes are spent on products produced everywhere in Canada, so eventually the impact is felt
more broadly.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Why are world oil prices falling? The supply of oil has been outpacing demand, and some two-
thirds of the increase in global production over the past year has been in the United States. US
production, and the capacity to deliver to market, increased by about 2 million barrels per day
during 2018. At the global level, the job of bringing supply back in line with demand is falling to
OPEC, so it remains to be seen if oil prices will remain as weak as they have been.
Here  in  Canada,  the  situation  has  been  made  more  difficult  because  Western  Canadian  oil
prices have been depressed even more than global prices. Production has been outpacing our
ability to deliver oil to foreign markets. The announcement of mandated production cuts for 2019
caused an immediate correction in domestic prices. This means that, even as our prices return
to their normal relationship with global prices, Canada earns less because of lower global prices
and because of lower production.
Based on what we know today, the impact on our economy is estimated to be about one-fourth
the  size  of  the  2014–16  episode.  The  price  drop  is  much  smaller,  the  oil-producing  sector  is
smaller,  and  our  oil  producers  have  improved  operating  efficiency  considerably  over  the  past
three years. The Canadian dollar has declined with oil prices, helping to buffer the effects. All
other  things  equal,  lower  oil  prices  mean  approximately  0.5  per  cent  less  GDP  by  the  end  of
2020, according to our models. By convention, we use current oil prices in our projection, but
there is considerable uncertainty about future oil prices and their effects.
Governing Council also talked a lot about the Canadian housing market, which is taking longer to
stabilize  than  we  expected.  This  may  be  because  of  the  various  municipal  or  provincial
measures  that  have  been  taken.  Or  it  may  be  that  the  economy  is  more  sensitive  to  the
combined  effects  of  the  new  mortgage  underwriting  guidelines  and  higher  interest  rates.
Homebuyers  are  adapting  by  seeking  smaller,  lower-priced  homes;  home  sellers  are  offering
lower prices; and home builders are adapting to a growing demand for smaller homes. These
adjustments are taking time, so we need to continue to monitor the situation carefully. But we
must keep in mind that the markets in Toronto and Vancouver were exhibiting a degree of froth,
and it is always difficult to judge where the market will stabilize once froth has been removed.
Taken together, the revisions to our outlook point to a downgrade in growth for 2019 to about 1.7
per  cent,  from  2.1  per  cent  previously.  This  results  in  a  modest  reduction  in  our  forecast  for
inflation for 2019, but we expect to be back at 2 per cent by the end of this year. Weighing all of
these factors, Governing Council continues to judge that the policy interest rate will need to rise
over time into a neutral range to achieve the inflation target.
We are fully cognizant of the negative signals being given by financial markets. We believe that
equity and bond markets are priced for downside risks and acknowledge these risks in our MPR.
The trade war is already having negative consequences globally and these will continue to grow if
the situation is not resolved, especially if it escalates. However, we remain of the view that this
risk is two-sided—while this dispute could escalate it could also be resolved—and therefore we
must take into account both possibilities in managing the risks faced by the Canadian economy.
As today’s decision to keep our key policy interest rate unchanged illustrates, we are decidedly
data dependent and will adapt our inflation outlook and interest rate profile to developments as
they unfold. The appropriate pace of rate increases will depend on how the outlook evolves, with
a particular focus on developments in oil markets, the Canadian housing market and global trade
policy.
With that, I will be happy to take your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
