Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Monetary Policy Report
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, Ontario, 24 April 2019.
 Good  morning.  Senior  Deputy  Governor  Wilkins  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  to  answer  your
questions  about  today’s  interest  rate  announcement  and  our Monetary  Policy  Report  (MPR).
Before taking your questions, let me offer a short summary of Governing Council’s deliberations.
It  is  important  that  we  keep  recent  developments  in  context.  The  Canadian  economy  was
operating close to its potential for most of 2017 and 2018, and inflation is at target as a result.
Governing Council is of course preoccupied with the recent slowdown in the economy. If it were
to persist, then we would foresee inflation trending below target in the future.
Our belief is that the slowdown of growth to a below-potential pace will prove to be temporary. It
is important to understand that many disturbances affect the level of economic activity, and as
they  work  their  way  through  the  economy,  the  growth  rate  declines.  Once  adjustment  to  the
disturbances is complete, growth resumes.
Let me apply this idea to the current global situation. All forecasters were expecting the global
economy to slow during the latter part of 2018 and into 2019. This is because the US economy
had accelerated following fiscal actions, the effects of which would fade during 2019. However,
the  world  economy  slowed  more  than  expected  in  late  2018,  and  this  is  persisting  into  early
2019. Although  one  can  point  to  a  variety  of  contributing  factors,  one  common  factor  is  trade
conflict. This is delaying business investment decisions in many economies and slowing trade
further. Once the economy has adjusted, this heightened level of uncertainty will no longer weigh
on growth. An escalation of trade conflicts would of course pose a downside risk to the world, but
progress in resolving these conflicts would represent an upside risk.
Here  in  Canada,  we  are  not  immune  to  these  global  developments.  But  we  also  have  some
issues of our own to deal with. Governing Council focused on four.
First, as discussed in some detail in our MPR in January, Canada’s oil sector remains under
considerable stress. Since January, oil prices have firmed, including those prices received by our
western  producers.  But  limited  access  to  markets  remains  a  significant  source  of  drag  and
uncertainty.  This  has  led  to  another  downward  revision  in  investment  intentions  in  the  sector.
Some  of  this  downgrade  is  likely  more  structural  in  nature,  as  it  represents  the  continued
adjustment of the sector to global oil prices of US$50–60 per barrel, rather than the much higher
prices  of  five  years  ago.  This  adjustment  process  is  also  being  reflected  in  wages  and  other
costs,  and  in  housing  market  developments  in Alberta.  Importantly,  as  investments  in  the  oil
patch are pared back, Canada’s growth slows. But, when those investment levels stop falling,
Canada’s growth will pick up, even if oil sector investment does not, as other areas of growth
come to dominate the data.
Second,  uncertainty  about  future  trade  policies  has  risen  again  in  Canada.  We  have  seen
subdued business investment in most sectors for the past two years, but were hopeful that the
combination  of  the  signing  of  CUSMA  and  the  government’s Accelerated  Investment  Incentive
would lead to a pickup in investment. While the overall effect remains to be seen, doubts about
the  ratification  of  CUSMA  remain  a  downside  risk  to  our  investment  outlook.  Related  to  this,
exports have started 2019 on a very weak note. Although the data are a bit puzzling, perhaps
affected by severe weather, we have taken them at face value in updating our forecast, leaving
room for further growth in future months. For both investment and exports, then, we have reason
to expect more growth in the second half of 2019.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Third,  we  have  been  monitoring  developments  in  the  housing  market  very  closely  in  order  to
understand how the effects of local tax changes, changes in mortgage guidelines and past rises
in  interest  rates  would  play  out.  In  part,  the  analysis  is  complicated  by  the  adjustment  of
previously frothy markets—the greater Toronto and Vancouver areas—to a significant revision in
price expectations. Many other markets across the country—such as Halifax, Montreal, Ottawa
and Winnipeg—are seeing solid activity. This is what would be expected in an economy that is
growing,  with  rising  population  and  a  strong  labour  market.  This  means  that  as  the  situation
stabilizes in Toronto and Vancouver, the Canadian housing sector should return to growth overall
later this year. On top of this, mortgage rates have eased in the wake of a drop in global bond
yields. Related to this, home furnishings and renovations were two bright spots in an otherwise
dim picture for retail sales at the start of the year. It is worth noting that the retail data may also
have been affected by severe weather.
Fourth, there have been several fiscal announcements since our last Report. Initiatives taken at
the federal level and in Quebec and British Columbia will add to Canada’s GDP growth. However,
the lowering of projected government spending in Ontario is sufficient to more than offset all of
these, so that fiscal policy now represents a net downward revision to our growth outlook for
2020, of about 0.2 percentage points.
Governing  Council  is  of  the  view  that  monetary  policy  needs  to  maintain  a  degree  of
accommodation  sufficient  to  offset  these  various  headwinds  until  the  economic  outlook
improves. The economy has slowed and some excess capacity has re-emerged, although this
excess  capacity  is  not  generalized  across  the  entire  economy.  Indeed,  the  service  sector
remains  very  strong  and  is  creating  many  new  jobs,  and  there  continue  to  be  a  lot  of  job
vacancies. Furthermore, global and Canadian financial conditions have eased a good deal since
our January Report. For example, five-year fixed mortgage rates have declined by more than 60
basis points. All of this suggests that there is good reason to believe that the economy will pick
up in the second half of the year.
Governing  Council  therefore  believes  that  this  positive  outlook  is  consistent  with  the  current
interest  rate  setting.  In  our  rate  decision,  we  chose  to  remove  the  reference  to  the  need  for
interest rates to return into a neutral range, which we have revised to 2.25–3.25 per cent. We had
originally added this reference to neutral to remind people what policy normalization could look
like. In the current situation, we feel it is important to emphasize that we will continue to evaluate
the appropriate degree of monetary policy accommodation as new data arrive. In particular, we
are  monitoring  developments  in  household  spending,  oil  markets,  and  global  trade  policy  to
gauge the extent to which the factors weighing on growth and the inflation outlook are dissipating.
With that, Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I will be happy to take your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
