Jacqueline  Loh:  A  coordinated  and  forward  looking  approach
towards ASEAN disaster and climate risk resilience
Keynote address by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of
Singapore,  at  the  NTU-ICRM's  10th  Annual  International  Symposium  on  Catastrophe  Risk
Management, Singapore, 1 August 2019.
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
 Good morning.
Introduction
1.     It is my pleasure and honour to join you today at the 10th anniversary of the NTU Institute of
Catastrophe  Risk  Management  (ICRM)’s  annual  symposium.  Since  its  establishment  in  2010,
ICRM has come a long way to become one of Asia’s leading research institutes in catastrophe
risk modelling and management.
2.     The theme for this year’s symposium - “Towards Viable Disaster Risk Financing Solutions
for  Southeast Asia”  -  is  a  timely  one.  In  the  face  of  growing  climate  and  disaster  risks  in  the
region,  it  is  a  pressing  priority  for  all  of  us  to  come  together  to  tackle  the  widening  natural
catastrophe protection gap, and contribute towards a sustainable and resilient future.
Reaching Boiling Point
3.     Asia has borne the brunt of catastrophe disasters. Over the last 50 years, Asia accounted
for half of the world’s economic losses from natural disasters, amounting to more than US$1.3
trillion.  In  2018, Asia  was  again  the  worst  affected,  beset  by  a  number  of  significant  events,
including:
Typhoon Jebi and Trami, which affected Japan and Taiwan, 
Typhoon Mangkhut, which impacted mainly Hong Kong, China and Philippines; and the
Earthquakes and tsunamis in Sulawesi.
4.     Natural disaster losses are high and rising. Climate change is further amplifying the risks of
extreme weather events and sea level rises, where wildfires, droughts, heatwaves, torrential rain
and coastal flooding would bring to mind grey rhinos, and not just black swans.  Here in Asia,
home  to  many  densely  populated  megacities,  such  natural  disasters  can  inflict  even  greater
damage.
5.     Already, half of the top ten countries which are most impacted by climate risk  in terms of
fatalities  and  economic  losses,  are  located  in  emerging  Asia.  A  large  proportion  of  these
countries’  population  and  economic  activities  are  concentrated  along  coastlines  and  low-lying
areas, which make them  highly  exposed  to  extreme  weather  and  rising  sea  levels.  Moreover,
many  of  these  countries  are  also  heavily  dependent  on  agriculture,  forestry  and  fisheries  for
livelihoods, and which are most vulnerable to climate change.
1
6.     Yet, Asia remains under-prepared and under-protected against natural disasters. Currently,
less than 10% of Asia Pacific’s catastrophe losses are insured, compared to 40% in developed
countries. United Nations has estimated that economic losses due to catastrophe events in Asia
Pacific are set to rise, and could exceed US$160 billion annually by 2030. Against this backdrop,
countries will face a widening protection gap, if no intervention measures are taken. ASEAN and
its governments must act today, and chart a sustainable course to ride out the brewing storm.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
7.     So far, disaster risk financing initiatives in Asia have largely been limited to raising funds on
an  ex-post  basis,  or  post  disaster  response  funding.  Many  countries  have  had  to  reallocate
budgets, issue debt, or rely on foreign aid to finance immediate relief and reconstruction efforts.
Most  have  yet  to  develop  robust  public  disaster  risk  financing  strategies  using  ex-ante  risk
financing  solutions,  which  includes  setting  aside  reserves,  establishing  contingent  credit,  and
tapping on insurance and capital markets.
8.     Several ASEAN countries, however, have made significant strides in the right direction.
For instance, Philippines has put in place a disaster risk management strategy since 2010,
and  implemented  a  parametric  insurance  programme  covering  25  provinces,  which  will
provide  rapid  liquidity  for  the  government  to  enable  rebuilding  and  recovery  efforts  when
disaster strikes. It is now working with the World Bank on a sovereign catastrophe bond to
complement the insurance programme, which will provide cover for more extreme events.
Over  the  years,  Indonesia  has  consistently  increased  its  budget  allocation  for  disaster
management.  Most  recently,  Indonesia  has  adopted  a  new  disaster  risk  financing  and
insurance  strategy,  which  encompasses  the  government  insuring  government  buildings
from this year. 
A Coordinated approach to Disaster Risk Financing
9.     While national disaster risk management efforts are important, ASEAN member states can
achieve even more by taking collective responsibility, and adopting a coordinated approach to
building a regional platform in order to:
Collect good quality, high resolution data, which is necessary to quantify ASEAN’s economic
and insurance exposure to disasters
Enhance  capacity  building,  learn  from  each  other’s  experience  and  consolidate  best
practices, as well as equip policymakers with knowledge on enabling legal and regulatory
frameworks to deploy disaster risk financing solutions; and
Third, develop robust regional disaster risk financing solutions such as regional sovereign
risk pools and catastrophe bond programmes.
10.     Over the past decade, ASEAN has made notable progress to institutionalise disaster risk
management  across  the  region.  Specifically,  it  has  put  in  place  the  necessary  coordinating
platforms  to  manage  disaster  risks  holistically  across  the  entire  value  chain  of  disaster  risk
assessment, disaster risk financing and disaster risk response.
First,  Disaster  Risk  Assessment.  In  2013,  the  ASEAN  Cross  Sectoral  Coordinating
Committee  on  Disaster  Risk  Financing  and  Insurance  (ACSCC)  was  established  to
strengthen regional coordination of disaster risk management. ACSCC brings together 3 key
stakeholder  groups:    Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Banks  represented  by  the  ASEAN
Finance and Central Bank Deputies Meeting (AFCDM); Insurance regulators represented by
the ASEAN Insurance Regulators Meeting (AIRM), and the National Disaster Management
2
Organisations which are represented by the ASEAN Committee of Disaster Management
(ACDM).  Under ACSCC,  the ASEAN  Disaster  Risk  Financing  and  Insurance  (or ADRFI)
programme  was  established  as  the  central  platform  to  coordinate ASEAN-wide  efforts  in
developing and implementing disaster risk financing strategies over 3 phases. Phase 1 was
completed in 2017, which developed a historical loss database of 5 ASEAN countries for
earthquake  and  typhoon  events   ,  initial  country  studies  for  Phillippines  and  Thailand  to
review  their national policy and legislative frameworks, and two workshops on disaster risk
financing.
Second, Disaster Risk Financing. The ASEAN+3 countries have recently come together to
establish  the  Southeast  Asia  Disaster  Risk  Insurance  Facility,  known  as  SEADRIF,  in
3
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
partnership  with  the  World  Bank.  As  the  first  regional  catastrophe  risk  facility  to  be
established in Asia, SEADRIF will provide participating ASEAN countries with climate and
disaster risk solutions. To be incorporated and licensed as a general insurer in Singapore in
September  2019,  SEADRIF  will  start  with  a  flood  risk  pool  to  provide  rapid  response
financing to Myanmar, Laos and potentially Cambodia.
Third,  Disaster  Risk  Response.  Since  2005,  the  ASEAN  Agreement  on  Disaster
Management and Emergency Response (AADMER) has served as a common platform to
jointly respond to disaster events in ASEAN. As part of the AADMER work programme, the
ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on disaster management was set
up in 2011 to be the home of “One ASEAN One Response”. It has since played a key role in
monitoring disasters, raising regional standards in disaster preparedness, and coordinating
ASEAN’s collective response to disasters.
ASEAN Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Programme
1 1 .     Today, I am pleased to announce the official launch of Phase 2 of the ASEAN
Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Programme. ADRFI Phase 2 will be impact-focused,
and  targeted  at  strengthening ASEAN’s  capabilities  in  ex-ante  risk  financing  and  risk  transfer
strategies.  ADRFI  Phase  2  was  approved  by  the  ASEAN  Finance  Ministers  at  the  ASEAN
Finance Ministers Meeting in April 2018 and the 3-year detailed Plan of Action was subsequently
endorsed in April this year.
12.          To  drive ADRFI  Phase  2  forward,  the  Plan  of Action  will  be  implemented  by  a  dual
programme office, to be led by the ASEAN Secretariat and the NTU-ICRM. The dual programme
office will adopt an open architecture structure to support global collaboration with stakeholders
including  policy  makers,  governments,  multilateral  development  banks, 
international
organisations and the private sector.
13.     Allow me to provide an overview of ADRFI’s 3 focus areas over the next 3 years. These
are: (i) Risk Assessment, as I mentioned earlier (ii) Risk Advisory; and (iii) Capacity Building.
Leveraging on their respective strengths, ICRM will lead the Risk Assessment and Risk Advisory
pillars, while ASEAN Secretariat will lead the Capacity Building pillar.
14.     These are upstream activities which will strengthen ASEAN’s disaster risk management
capabilities, and complement the downstream public and private disaster risk financing solutions,
such as the SEADRIF. Let me elaborate further on the 3 key focus areas.
1 5 .     First, Risk Assessment. Good quality data is necessary to quantity ASEAN’s economic
and  insurance  exposure  to  natural  disasters.  Moreover,  countries  are  facing  increasingly
complex threats that compound the negative impacts of disaster and climate shocks, ranging
from  supply  chain  disruptions,  to  population  migration  and  adaptation  issues,  to  the  risk  of
pandemics. Good data and analytical tools will allow policy makers to identify disaster risk zones,
and  to  quantify  the  risks  as  well  as  the  potential  fiscal  impact.  This  will  in  turn,  empower
governments,  regulators  and  industry  to  make  more  informed  decisions  on  disaster  risk
management,  from  infrastructure  planning,  to  the  use  of  disaster  financing  strategies  and  the
development of solutions.
16.     To this end, ADRFI will establish a new ASEAN Data and Analytics Platform, to construct a
high  resolution  and  objective  natural  catastrophe  database  for ASEAN.  This  platform  will  use
remote sensing technologies such as satellite imagery, and advanced extraction techniques, to
produce top down economic exposure data. Such data include building attributes like age and
type of construction, as well as building values, will be fused with bottom-up insurance exposure
and loss data, to form a holistic and more accurate picture of risk. 
17.          You  may  already  be  familiar  with  the  Natural  Catastrophe  Data Analytics  Platform  (or
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
NatCatDAX), also led by ICRM, that is already utilising these new methodologies to bridge the
data gap in Asia. The ASEAN platform, will build on NatCatDAX’s efforts in Thailand, Indonesia
and Philippines, and extend the coverage to other countries to further enhance data availability in
ASEAN.
18.     Second, Risk Advisory. On the demand side, ASEAN member states have varied needs,
due to differences in economic assets, population size, types of hazards and exposures faced,
and the stage of development of their respective disaster risk financing strategies and markets.
On  the  supply  side,  there  is  a  wide  range  of  disaster  financing  solutions  such  as  insurance,
reinsurance,  index-based  products,  parametric  covers,  insurance-linked  securities  (ILS)  and
regional pools; and many solution providers, ranging from private insurance and insurance-linked
securities markets, multilateral development banks, and international organisations. ADRFI can
connect  both  sides  together,  and  play  the  role  of  analysing  countries’  needs,  harnessing  risk
advisory  expertise  of  stakeholders,  and  structuring  optimal  and  cost  effective  disaster  risk
financing strategies under this risk advisory pillar; and
1 9 .     Third, Capacity Building. This pillar will focus on enhancing knowledge of disaster risk
financing  strategies  and  solutions,  and  equip  policy  makers  with  a  good  understanding  of
regulatory,  legal,  administrative  and  technology  pre-conditions  to  deploy  effective  disaster  risk
financing  solutions. ASEAN  Secretariat  will  work  with  knowledge  partners  such  as  the  World
Bank, Asian Development Bank, Insurance Development Forum  and the insurance industry to
develop and implement a 3-year training road map to address ASEAN’s knowledge gaps.
4
20.          By  forging  public-private  partnerships  amongst  various  stakeholders  including  policy-
makers, international organisations and the private sector, ADRFI will play a key role in forging a
robust  and  comprehensive  disaster  risk  financing  strategy  in  the  region.  This  will  help  to
strengthen ASEAN’s disaster risk resilience, and move our economies onto a sustainable and
inclusive growth path.
Conclusion
21.     In conclusion, climate change and natural catastrophes are clear and present dangers in
ASEAN. We must act quickly to fortify our economies by adopting a comprehensive disaster risk
financing strategy. This is a complex undertaking, but we can solve this together through regional
collaboration  and  knowledge  sharing.  ADRFI  Phase  2,  providing  a  focal  point  for  regional
cooperation  in  disaster  risk  financing,  marks  a  significant  milestone  in  our  journey  towards
enhancing ASEAN’s disaster risk resilience.
22.     Singapore, along with our ASEAN counterparts, remains strongly committed to protecting
our societies against the effects of natural disasters. I am pleased that NTU is contributing to this
significant initiative in many ways, and we look forward to the strong commitment and support
from our public and private partners.
23.     Thank you.
1
2
3
4
Global Climate Risk Index 2019
ACDM comprises the national emergency authorities. SCDF is Singapore’s representative.
Thailand, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines and Singapore.
Insurance  Development  Forum  (IDF)  is  a  public-private  partnership  led  by  the  insurance  industry,  United
Nations and World Bank, and aims to enhance the use of insurance to build greater resilience for people,
communities and businesses, and public institutions that are vulnerable to disasters.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
