Norman T L Chan: Monetary policy’s effect on wealth distribution
and a way forward for policymakers
Welcoming  remarks  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority,  at  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary Authority  and  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Joint
Conference, Hong Kong, 23 May 2019.
 1.  Good  morning,  President  Bullard,  Director  Hirtle,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  Welcome  to  this
conference jointly organized by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Hong Kong
Monetary Authority. I would especially like to thank our overseas guests who have travelled a
long way to be with us today.
2.  Over  the  past  40  years,  the  global  economy  has  undergone  impressive  growth  and
transformation.  From  1980  to  2018,  PPP-adjusted  real  per  capita  GDP  in  advanced
economies  and  emerging  market  economies  have  increased  by  94%  and  205%
respectively , driven by globalisation, open markets, technological advancements, and the
general trend of falling inflation.
1
3.  But  the  news  is  not  all  good.  While  the  world  economy  has  done  well  on  the  whole,
economic inequality has widened noticeably at the same time. Just take a look at the Gini
coefficient, which is a commonly cited measure of income inequality. In Hong Kong, the Gini
coefficient has risen steadily from 0.476 in 1991 to 0.539 in 2016, whereas in the US, it has
increased  from  0.449  in  1991  to  0.519  in  2015.   Economic  inequality  causes  social
divisions,  with  the  rise  in  populism  especially  in  the  US  and  Europe  being  one  of  the
unwelcome symptoms, and it also affects development and growth in the longer run. Indeed,
problems  with  income  and  wealth  disparity  have  become  so  acute  that  it  has  recently
triggered a debate on the “crisis of capitalism”. IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde,
when  presenting  her  Global  Policy  Agenda  at  the  IMF  Spring  Meetings  last  month,  also
pointed  out  that  the  rewards  of  economic  growth  have  not  been  shared,  and  called  for  a
“new multilateralism” which will, among other things, foster inclusion.
2
4.  With so much at stake, policymakers simply cannot brush aside the issue of the widening
gap between the “haves” and the “have-nots”. Over the past two years, I have been talking
about,  on  different  occasions,  how  globalisation,  technological  innovation  and  monetary
policy  may  have  affected  distribution  of  income  and  wealth.  Today  I  wish  to  offer  some
further  thoughts  about  the  distributional  consequences  of  monetary  policies:  what  has
happened so far, and the way forward for policymakers.
 
The distributional effects of unconventional monetary policies
5.  While there is no doubt that unconventional monetary policies (UMPs) have helped stabilise
the  financial  system  and  supported  economic  recovery  after  the  Global  Financial  Crisis
(GFC), many have argued that the economic or financial benefits created by UMPs have not
been shared evenly. Some studies have highlighted that UMPs disproportionately enrich the
“haves”, as they tend to hold more assets such as stocks and properties that benefited most
from UMPs.  Hong Kong has been experiencing this trend, especially in the housing market.
With a prolonged period of close-to-zero nominal interest rates and negative real mortgage
rates,  Hong  Kong’s  housing  prices  have  been  rising  for  over  10  years.  This  has  eroded
housing  affordability  and  widened  significantly  the  wealth  gap  between  home  owners  and
those  who  have  yet  to  buy  a  home.  How  should  central  bankers  and  policymakers  think
about this important issue and what can be done about it? We have lined up a couple of
presentations focusing on housing today and tomorrow, which I hope will shed some light on
3
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
policymaking in this area.
6.  Having  looked  at  UMPs’  implications  on  asset  prices,  let’s  now  turn  our  attention  for  a
moment to labour income. To the extent that UMPs have driven aggregate improvements in
the  labour  market  in  terms  of  job  creation,  they  have  nonetheless  failed  to  benefit  some
segments of the workforce that are the most in need. For example, many of the jobs created
are  low-paying  and/or  part-time  in  nature.  To  be  sure,  wage  growth  among  lower-skilled
workers has outpaced that of supervisory staff in recent quarters, in the US at least, but this
is  likely  a  reflection  of  cyclical  labour  shortage  in  the  low-skilled  sectors  rather  than  a
sustained trend. Indeed, it is worth bearing in mind the bigger picture that UMPs did not help
arrest  the  trend  of  a  falling  labour  share  of  income,  which  emerged  in  the  US  since  the
1970s, well before the GFC. It is clear that UMPs should not take all the blame, but it is true
that the combination of stagnant wages, very low interest income and rising asset prices
has fuelled the populist sentiment in many places, especially in the advanced economies.
 
Questions for the future design and implementation of monetary policies
7.  Ladies and gentlemen, as we continue to fortify the global financial system and economy
against downside risks, a crucial question is how monetary policy, in conjunction with fiscal
policy,  may  cause  significant  distributional  effects  on  different  segments  of  the  society.  It
may be worthwhile to rethink how the monetary and fiscal policies can be modified to take
better care of the less privileged or those who have been left behind.
8.  The theme of our conference is monetary policy and heterogeneity, and I am glad that so
many  accomplished  economists  and  researchers  have  assembled  in  Hong  Kong  to
deliberate on issues relating to the distributional consequences of monetary policy. I hope
that the discussions will be fruitful in helping us better understand these important issues.
Thank you.
1
2
3
Source: IMF World Economic Outlook Database, April 2019.
A  Gini  coefficient  of  0  means  everyone  has  the  same  income,  and  1  means  all  disposable  income  of  an
economy is concentrated on one person. The Gini coefficients quoted are based on household income before
taxes and transfer payments. Sources: Census and Statistics Department (Hong Kong) and the Congressional
Budget Office (US).
Domanski, D., Scatigna, M., & Zabai, A. (2016). Wealth inequality and monetary policy. BIS Quarterly Review
(March).
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
