BANK OF BOTSWANA 
 2019 MONETARY POLICY STATEMENT 
 by 
 Moses D Pelaelo 
Governor 
 February 25, 2019  
 Introduction 
Distinguished Guests, I am honoured to welcome you, on behalf 
of the Board, Management and Staff of the Bank, to the launch 
of  the  2019  Monetary  Policy  Statement.  This  is  an  important 
occasion  in  the  Bank’s  annual  calendar  of  events.  We  are 
therefore  most  grateful  to  you,  Honourable  Ministers  and  our 
Distinguished  Guests,  for  having  made  the  time  to  attend 
today’s event.  
 The launch and dissemination of the Monetary Policy Statement 
are  key  elements  of  good  governance,  transparency  and 
accountability  in  the  formulation  and  implementation  of 
monetary policy. This is intended to promote an understanding 
of  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  its  objectives  and, 
accordingly,  guide  the  public’s  inflation  expectations  towards 
convergence with the Bank’s inflation objective; enhancing the 
prospects  for  sustainable  maintenance  of  low,  stable  and 
predictable  inflation.  Specifically,  the  Bank  uses  the  Monetary 
Policy Statement to report on the inflation trajectory and policy 
performance  in  the  past  year;  to  outline  and  convey  its 
prognosis  of  economic  and  other  policy  developments  going 
forward; and, in turn, the prospective monetary policy response 
and implementation in the ensuing year.  
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  Bank’s  monetary 
policy  objective  is  to  achieve  price  stability,  defined  as  low, 
stable  and  predictable  level  of  inflation  that  is  within  3  –  6 
percent.    Monetary  policy  formulation  is  also  aligned  to 
safeguarding the stability of the financial system. In this regard, 
price stability and conducive monetary and financial conditions 
foster  mobilisation  of  savings,  productive  investment,  prudent 
allocation  of  credit  and  international  competitiveness  of 
domestic firms.  In turn, a sound and stable financial system is 
critical  for  effective  transmission  of  monetary  policy  signals, 
facilitating  the  flow  of  funds  and  liquidity,  as  well  as  risk 
mitigation  in  support  of  economic  activity.  Overall,  therefore, 
the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  attention  to  financial 
stability  supports  the  national  objectives  of  employment 
creation and sustainable economic growth. 
 Improvements to the Monetary Policy Framework 
Distinguished  Guests,  you  will  recall  that  when  launching  the 
2018  Monetary  Policy  Statement,  I  shared  with  you  the 
 2 
prospective  refinements  and  improvements  to  the  monetary 
policy  framework  due  for  implementation  in  2018.  Notable  in 
this regard, was the publication of Monetary Policy Reports to 
further  improve  on  communication  of  economic  and  policy 
developments. I am pleased to report that, for the first time, the 
Bank  published  two  Monetary  Policy  Reports  in  August  and 
October 2018. Going forward, the Bank will, in addition to this 
February  Monetary  Policy  Statement,  publish  three  Monetary 
Policy Reports in April, August and October, within seven days 
following the respective Monetary Policy Committee meetings.  
For  the  June  and  December  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
meetings,  detailed  Press  Releases  will  be  issued.  This  is  to 
provide  a  continuous  comprehensive  update  on  inflationary 
developments as well as a context to policy decisions. I must, 
however, emphasise that all the six meetings of the Monetary 
Policy Committee in a year are important and involve a careful 
consideration  of  any  of  the  three  likely  outcomes  and  policy 
signals: that is, either to increase, decrease or maintain the level 
of the policy interest rate, which is currently the Bank Rate.  
 I am also pleased to announce that, the Honourable Minister of 
Finance and Economic Development approved the establishment 
of the Financial Stability Council (the Council) for Botswana in 
April 2018. A Memorandum of Understanding between the four 
constituent  members  of  the  Council,  namely,  the  Ministry  of 
 3 
Finance  and  Economic  Development;  Bank  of  Botswana;  Non-
Bank  Financial  Institutions  Regulatory  Authority;  and  the 
Financial Intelligence Agency, will be signed tomorrow, after the 
first  Monetary  Policy  Committee  Meeting  of  the  year.  The 
formation of the Council is a significant step towards facilitating 
collaboration, cooperation and communication amongst the four 
government  agencies  for  the  purpose  of  implementing  macro-
prudential policy. 
 The  other  important  facet  relates  to  national  contingency 
planning  for  a  financial  sector  crisis,  anchored  on  proactive 
macro-prudential  assessments,  stress  testing  and  a  deeper 
understanding  of  cross-sectoral  interactions  of  firms  and 
financial markets.  Given the nature and construct of financial 
intermediation and, in particular, the structure of balance sheets 
of  banks,  things  will  and  often  go  wrong.    For  these  reasons, 
the strengthening of financial sector safety nets, encompassing 
effective  crisis  management,  recovery  and  resolution  plans  as 
well as a proposal for the establishment of a deposit insurance 
scheme  in  Botswana,  will  form  part  of  the  agenda  of  the 
Financial Stability Council in 2019.   
 On this breath, the Bank of Botswana is gravely concerned by 
the incipient personal greed and reported governance failures in 
some segments of the financial sector, which has the potential 
 4 
to erode fiduciary responsibilities and, consequently, undermine 
public  confidence  in  financial  markets.    I  can  assure  you, 
Honourable  Minister,  and  indeed  the  international  community 
that,  for  its  part,  the  Bank  will  do  all  that  is  necessary,  in 
collaboration with all key stakeholders, to preserve the integrity, 
safety and soundness of the financial system. This will include 
working 
tirelessly 
to  support  Government  actions  and 
programmes, coordinated by the Financial Intelligence Agency, 
in  continuing  to  build  a  robust  and  sustainable  Anti-Money 
Laundering  and  the  Combating  of  the  Financing  of  Terrorism 
architecture for this country. 
 Honourable  Minister,  Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the 
Bank  evaluates  monetary  policy  implementation  framework  on 
a  regular  basis  for  effectiveness,  and  introduces  refinements 
where necessary.  In this respect, during this year, the Bank will 
adopt  what  is  known  as  “Reserves  Averaging”  in  the 
determination  of  Primary  Reserves  Requirement  for  banks  and 
also shorten the maturity of the 14-day BoBCs to seven days.  
Under “reserves averaging”, commercial banks do not have to 
meet the primary reserve requirement daily but, rather, fulfil this 
statutory requirement on an average basis over the maintenance 
period,  in  our  case,  a  calendar  month.  Reserves  averaging, 
which is used in some jurisdictions, has been shown to improve 
liquidity  management  by  commercial  banks,  foster  more 
 5 
effective resource allocation through the interbank market and 
reduce  the  demand  for  excess  reserves  held  for  precautionary 
purposes.   
 The reduction of the maturity period of the primary Open Market 
Operations  tool,  namely,  the  14-day  Bank  of  Botswana 
Certificates (BoBCs), to seven days, should enable shorter and 
simpler forecasting horizon for liquidity management by both the 
Bank  of  Botswana and commercial banks,  with more accurate 
outcomes.  In turn, it is expected to provide a solid basis for the 
starting point of the monetary policy transmission mechanism, 
supporting  the  extension  of  the  policy  signal  along  the  yield 
curve. These enhancements require input and cooperation from 
commercial  banks  and,  in  that  regard,  consultations  with  the 
banks  will  commence  shortly,  with  a  view  to  ensure 
implementation of these measures within a short period of time. 
 In addition, during the coming months, the Bank will consult the 
market on further possible changes to monetary operations and 
the “anchor policy rate”; for example, whether the Bank Rate or 
the BoBC rate is the more proximate to market considerations 
for  policy  transmission  purposes.  The  objective  of  these 
refinements is to enhance the potency of the policy rate in the 
transmission of monetary policy signals as well as its influence 
on subsequent market reaction and posture.  Furthermore, there 
 6 
is  need  to  spur  the  development  and  efficacy  of  the  money 
markets,  for  the  purposes  of  effective  policy  transmission,  as 
well  as  management,  access  and  flow  of  liquidity  among  the 
commercial banks. It is envisaged that these consultations will 
be completed by the middle of the year. 
 Distinguished  Guests,  alongside  these  measures,  designed  to 
ensure  better  structural  alignment  of  short-term  market  rates 
and  desirable  policy  transmission,  any  notional  ceiling  on  the 
issuance of BoBCs  will  be lifted. This  approach allows  greater 
scope and flexibility for unconstrained and, therefore, effective 
liquidity  absorption  by  the  central  bank  in  response  to  market 
developments.    In  addition  to  these  anticipated  changes  to 
monetary operations, the Business Expectations Survey which, 
hitherto,  was  conducted  half-yearly,  will  be  undertaken  on  a 
quarterly  basis.  I  must  heartily  thank  those  businesses  that 
dutifully  participate  in  the  Business  Expectations  Survey  and 
wish  to  appreciate  their  invaluable  support  and  input  into  the 
analysis  of  economic  developments  and  policy  responses.  I 
encourage those that are sometimes reluctant to participate, to 
join  us  in  facilitating  comprehensive  and  informed  data  and 
policy analysis.  
 Honourable Minister, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, allow 
me, at this juncture, to address three other areas, namely, global 
 7 
trends that have influenced inflation in Botswana; highlights of 
the conduct of monetary policy, both internationally and here at 
home;  and,  finally,  provide  the  medium-term  inflation  outlook 
and,  consequently,  offering  a  view  on  the  likely  future  policy 
stance in 2019. 
 External Economic Developments in 2018 
Global  GDP  is  estimated  to  have  increased  by  3.7  percent  in 
2018,  compared  to  3.8  percent  in  2017,  with  mixed 
performance across countries and regions. Among the advanced 
economies,  growth  strengthened  in  the  USA,  influenced  by 
fiscal  stimulus  and  stronger  consumer  demand.  In  contrast, 
performance faltered in the euro area, the UK and Japan. This 
was affected, in the main, by policy uncertainty, adverse impact 
of rising protectionist sentiments on global trade and constraints 
to  implementation  of  structural  and  policy  reforms.    For  the 
emerging market economies, output expansion remained strong, 
although  slowing  slightly,  in  the  context  of  waning  financial 
markets  sentiment,  trade  policy  uncertainty,  weaker  external 
demand and concerns about China’s economic outlook.   
 Global inflation rose from 3.2 percent in 2017 to 3.8 percent in 
2018, mainly due to the increase in international oil prices during 
most of 2018, which, however, was moderated by the decrease 
in international food prices.   In particular, inflation was subdued 
 8 
in  the  Special  Drawing  Rights  (SDR)  countries,  easing  slightly 
from 1.8 percent in December 2017 to 1.7 percent in December 
2018. Inflation in South Africa also decreased from 4.7 percent 
in December 2017 to 4.5 percent in December 2018. Overall, 
average inflation for the trading partner countries fell from 3.1 
percent to 3 percent in the same period. 
 Domestic Economic Developments in 2018 
Domestic output is estimated to have expanded by 5.1 percent 
in  the twelve  months  to  September  2018,  compared  to  lower 
growth  of  2.4  percent  in  the  year  to  September  2017.  This 
expansion was mainly driven by sustained improvement in non-
mining GDP growth and the recovery in mining output.  
 Inflation  was low and  stable,  and  fluctuated  around the  lower 
end of the objective range of 3 - 6 percent for most of 2018; 
and  the  outcome  was  broadly  consistent  with  projections  for 
the year. The low rate of annual price increase was mostly due 
to the decrease in food inflation. Food price inflation decreased 
from  1.1  percent  in  2017  to  a  negative  0.2  percent  in  2018. 
However,  fuel  prices  increased  significantly  by  16.1  percent 
during 2018, due to upward adjustments in May, October and 
November. This compares to a relatively smaller increase of 9.5 
percent  in  2017.  Overall,  the  increase  in  administered  prices 
(including  fuel  prices,  public  transport  fares,  as  well  as 
 9 
electricity  tariffs)  added  1.86  percentage  points  to  inflation  in 
2018. 
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  overall  modest 
increase in prices in  Botswana  was  in the context of subdued 
domestic demand pressures, as a result of the restrained growth 
in  personal  incomes  and  largely  stable  foreign  inflation.  
Monetary  policy  was,  therefore,  conducted  against  the 
background  of  below-trend  economic  activity  and  a  positive 
medium-term  outlook 
for 
inflation  and  moderate 
fiscal 
expansion.  Government  expenditure  grew  by  6.6  percent  in 
2018 compared to a contraction of 6.3 percent in the prior year. 
It should be recognised, in this respect, that beyond the increase 
in  wages,  the  short-term  impact  of  government  spending  on 
domestic demand is moderated to the extent that a significant 
component involves infrastructure and capacity development. In 
the  context  of  Botswana,  this  type  of  spending  tends  to  be 
import  intensive  and  the  economic  benefits  of  such  public 
investments are derived in the medium to long term.  
 Regarding  wage  developments,  it  is  notable  that  government 
recurrent expenditure included a 3 percent salary increase with 
effect  from  April  1,  2018.  However,  nominal  national  wages 
increased  by  2.3  percent,  on  average,  which  was  below  the 
average  inflation  rate  for  the  period.    These  developments 
 10 
suggest a modest impact on domestic demand and inflation. On 
credit  developments,  growth  in  commercial  bank  credit 
accelerated  from  5.6  percent  in  2017  to  7.7  percent  in  2018 
and included a faster increase in lending to businesses, from 3.2 
percent in 2017 to 10 percent in 2018. For households, annual 
credit expansion fell from 7.2 percent in 2017 to 6.2 percent in 
2018, in the context of restrained growth in personal incomes. 
This  included  a  7  percent  increase  in  personal  loans  and  4.9 
percent for mortgages, compared to respective growth rates of 
9.2 percent and 4.8 percent in 2017.  Overall, the rate of credit 
growth  continued  to  be  supportive  of  economic  activity,  with 
minimal risk to financial stability.  
 Global Monetary Policy Implementation in 2018 
Honourable  Minister  and  Esteemed  Guests,  monetary  policy 
implementation  in 2018 varied  at the global level, in response 
to  diverse  economic  performance  and  inflation  developments 
across countries and regions. It was, however, generally amply 
accommodative, with low levels of interest rates and continued 
liquidity  support  to  the  financial  sector  in  the  euro  area  and 
Japan.  However,  policy  rates  were  increased  in  the  United 
States  of  America  towards  normalisation  and,  in  the  United 
Kingdom, in order to get inflation back to target.  
  11 
Monetary policy implementation was also mixed in the emerging 
market  economies,  with  policy  decisions  mainly  driven  by  the 
need to support economic activity. Closer to home, the South 
African  Reserve  Bank  initially  reduced  the  repo  rate  to  6.5 
percent  in  March  but  later  increased  it  to  6.75  percent  in 
November  2018  due  to  elevated  upside  risks  to  the  medium-
term inflation outlook.  
 Domestic Monetary Policy Implementation in 2018 
For  its  part,  the  Bank  of  Botswana  continues  to  conduct 
monetary policy through a forecast-based policy framework that 
informs the appropriate response to deviations of inflation from 
the  desired  objective  range.  The  analysis  also  involves 
assessment of divergence of actual output (GDP) from potential 
output  (technically  known  as  the  “output  gap”),  which  is  the 
primary indicator of the direction of future inflation. The forecast 
incorporates  projections  of  foreign  inflation,  exchange  rate 
movements  and  changes  in  domestic  administered  prices  and 
taxes. In addition, the Bank undertakes a careful evaluation of 
risks associated with the projected outlook. In determining the 
appropriate policy response, the inflation forecast is considered 
alongside indicators of financial stability and economic activity, 
including  relevant  information  from  the  Business  Expectations 
Surveys.  
  12 
As  I  indicated  earlier,  monetary  policy  during  2018  was 
conducted in an environment of below-trend economic activity 
and  a  favourable  medium-term 
inflation  outlook.  These 
developments 
provided 
scope 
for  maintaining 
an 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  in  support  of  stronger 
output growth.  Therefore, the Bank Rate was unchanged at 5 
percent  in  2018.    Consequently,  the  prime  lending  rate  of 
commercial  banks  was  maintained  at  6.5  percent,  while  the 
deposit rates were, similarly, virtually stable.  
 Monetary  policy  was  implemented  with  a  view  to  sustain 
productive  commercial  bank  lending  and  monetary  operations 
conducted to ensure alignment of market interest rates with the 
monetary  policy  stance.  Consequently,  given  the  increase  in 
liquidity  that  needed  to  be  sterilised,  outstanding  BoBCs 
amounted to P8.2 billion in December 2018, an increase from 
P6.3 billion in December 2017. BoBC yields increased modestly 
in 2018, reflecting a continuing process of normalisation in the 
money market interest rate structure. 
 Global Economic Prospects in 2019 
Looking ahead, while global growth remains strong, the pace is 
moderating.  The  global  economy  is  expected  to  grow  by  3.5 
percent in 2019, lower than estimated expansion of 3.7 percent 
in 2018. The projected lower growth is premised on anticipated 
 13 
slower  expansion  in  advanced  economies,  mostly  reflecting 
subdued performance in the euro area. The US GDP growth is 
forecast to decline from 2.9 percent in 2018 to 2.5 percent in 
2019, as the impact of the fiscal stimulus dissipates. Growth in 
emerging market and developing economies is projected at 4.5 
percent  in  2019,  slightly  lower  than  the  4.6 percent  in  2018. 
Overall, risks to the global economic activity are skewed to the 
downside,  with  prospects  for  escalation  of  trade  tensions, 
tightening  financial  conditions,  a  no-deal  Brexit  and  relatively 
weaker growth in China presenting key risks to the outlook.  
 Global  inflationary  pressures  are  forecast  to  be  modest  in  the 
short to medium term, reflecting below-potential output. In this 
environment, it  is anticipated that monetary policy will remain 
accommodative 
in  most  economies,  complemented  by 
measures  aimed  at  facilitating  financial  intermediation,  while 
fostering resilience of the financial sector, to support growth in 
economic  activity.  It  is,  therefore,  notable,  that  the  earlier 
anticipated  monetary  policy  normalisation  (or  increase  of 
interest  rates)  in  the  advanced  countries  is  being  re-assessed 
and restrained with the advent of generalised weaker economic 
performance and heightened policy uncertainty. 
    14 
Domestic Economic Prospects 
Distinguished Guests, as the Honourable Minister of Finance and 
Economic  Development  indicated  in  the  2019/20  Budget 
Speech,  the  domestic  economy  is  forecast  to  grow  by  4.2 
percent in 2019, slightly lower than the estimate of 4.5 percent 
for  2018.  The  main  factors  expected  to  support  growth  in 
economic  activity  include  conducive  financing  conditions 
associated with an accommodative monetary policy stance and 
a  sound  financial  environment.  The  budgeted  3.6  percent 
expansion  in  government  spending  in  2019/20  and  the 
implementation  of  initiatives  such  as  the  doing  business 
reforms,  are  expected  to  further  support  growth  in  economic 
activity and employment creation.   
 The crawling band exchange rate policy framework has served 
the  country  well  and  will  continue  to  complement  monetary 
policy.  This  bodes  well  for  maintenance  of  international 
competitiveness  of  domestic  industries  and  macroeconomic 
stability. As announced at the beginning of the year and broadly 
consistent  with  Botswana’s  trade  pattern,  the  weights  of  the 
constituent currencies in the Pula Basket were maintained at 45 
percent for the South African rand and 55 percent for the SDR. 
An annual upward rate of crawl of 0.3 percent of the nominal 
effective exchange rate is also being implemented in  2019, in 
order to stabilise the real effective exchange rate.   
 15 
Overall,  both  external  and  domestic  pressures  on  inflation  are 
expected  to  be  benign,  and  it  is  projected  that  inflation  will 
remain within the 3 – 6 percent objective range in the short to 
medium term. This forecast incorporates the estimated impact 
of  the  increase  in  public  service  salaries  and  prospects  for 
continued  accommodative  monetary  conditions.  Having  said 
that,  it  is  worth  underscoring  the  point  that  any  upward 
adjustment in administered prices and government levies and/or 
taxes and any increase in international commodity prices that is 
substantially beyond current projections present upside risks to 
the  inflation  outlook.  In  contrast,  downside  risks  to  inflation 
arise from the restrained growth in global economic activity, the 
tendency of the ongoing technological progress to lower costs 
and the reduction in commodity prices. 
 Monetary Policy Stance 
Distinguished  Guests,  based  on  available  data,  the  current 
projections suggest that domestic inflation will, in the medium-
term, remain within the Bank’s objective range of 3 – 6 percent. 
This  favourable  medium-term  outlook  for  inflation  is  in  the 
context of moderate growth in  economic activity and a sound 
and 
stable 
financial 
system.  Therefore, 
prospective 
developments augur well for maintenance of an accommodative 
monetary policy that supports productive lending to businesses 
and  to  households,  for  welfare  enhancements  that  also  drive 
 16 
economic  activity.  The  Bank’s  implementation  of  monetary 
policy will continue to focus on entrenching expectations of low, 
predictable and sustainable inflation, through  timely responses 
to price developments; while at the same time, taking due care 
to  ensure  that  policy  decisions  are  consistent  with  ensuring 
financial  stability  and  supportive  of  sustainable  economic 
growth and employment creation. 
 Conclusion 
Honourable Minister and Distinguished Guests, as I conclude, it 
is  important  to  note  that  the  continuing  success  in  containing 
inflation within the desired 3 – 6 percent medium-term inflation 
objective, to which the Bank remains fully committed, must in 
the  end,  involve  the  cooperation  of  all  key  players  in  the 
economy,  including  Government,  parastatals  and  the  private 
sector. 
 I thank you for your kind attention. 
 17 
