Remarks by Daniel Mminele, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the annual Financial Markets Department cocktail function   
   Johannesburg 
7 May 2019 
  
Introduction  
 
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. 
 
It is that time of the year when we have the pleasure of welcoming you to the Financial 
Markets Department’s (FMD) annual cocktail function. Thank you for joining us. When 
we agreed the date for this function, we did not know that we would be meeting on the 
eve of a rather crucial day for our country. Allow me to remind you that voting is an 
important responsibility of citizenship. 
 
This event allows the South African Reserve Bank (SARB), and specifically FMD, to 
convey our appreciation for the working relationships we have developed with you, our 
counterparties – whether it be through the execution of open market operations or by 
engaging with you on the ever-increasing complexities of financial markets through 
our  regular  meetings  or  access  to  your  research.  These  engagements  make  an 
important  contribution 
financial  market 
developments in support of the formulation and implementation of monetary policy and 
financial stability policy. We also value that we get to network a little less formally at 
this event than at our various official forums.  
 
Allow me to take stock of what has again been a rather eventful year in international 
and domestic financial markets since we last met for the annual cocktail function. And, 
as it has now become tradition, I will also provide an update on some of FMD’s key 
initiatives, especially those that relate to financial market development and thus have 
to  enriching  our  understanding  of 
 Page 1 of 9 
a direct bearing on your work. I will try to be brief, and heed the words of Josh Billings: 
“There’s a great power in words, if you don’t hitch too many of them together.” 
 
The global financial markets backdrop  
 
The past year has been characterised by a mixed environment for asset prices. The 
significant shifts that we have observed were mainly influenced by both the adopted 
and  expected  policy  stances  of  major  central  banks.  Initially,  growing  divergence 
between the US economy and major trading partners, coupled with increasing trade 
tensions and perceived higher geo-political risk, placed upward pressure on the US 
dollar (USD). The USD had also found support from the US Federal Reserve (Fed) 
continuing with its gradual path of monetary policy normalisation, while other major 
central  banks  lagged  behind  by  keeping  policy  rates  constant.  US  equities  also 
outperformed their European and Japanese counterparts.  
 
These developments resulted in emerging markets with relatively weak fundamentals, 
compounded by spill over effects from developments in Argentina and Turkey, seeing 
their currencies and financial assets coming under pressure, South Africa being no 
exception.  There  was  a  discernible  change  in  the  final  quarter  of  2018  when 
indications of slowing economic activity in the US (against the background of already 
weak growth outside the US) led the market to anticipate a slower pace of Fed policy 
tightening and some downward pressure on the USD. Concerns around a stronger 
than anticipated slowdown in global growth, together with geo-political developments, 
then  led  to  a  sharp  increase  in  volatility  and  a  correction  in  equity  markets.  The 
Chicago  Board Options  Exchange  Volatility  Index  rose  to a  nine-month  high  of  36 
index points in late December, while the S&P 500 fell by 9.2% during the same month. 
The  MSCI  All  Country  World  Index,  which  includes  both  developed  and  emerging 
markets, also ended up recording its worst year in a decade by posting an 11.2% loss 
(although it has posted a 14% recovery year-to-date). Around the same period, yields 
on 10-year bonds in the US and Germany declined, the latter to two-year lows as safe-
haven demand increased. 
 
Turbulence in markets, alongside the expected fading effect of US fiscal stimulus, and 
slower growth in the eurozone, contributed to the significant change in monetary policy 
 Page 2 of 9 
forward  guidance  given  by  the  Fed  and  European  Central  Bank  (ECB).  This  has 
resulted in some easing in financial conditions and has been supportive of a rebound 
in risk assets in recent months.  The Fed has pledged to be patient in respect of any 
further interest rate increases (with some market participants predicting the next move 
to actually be a cut), and to adjust the pace of balance sheet normalisation, while the 
ECB  also  changed  course,  delaying  any  previously  envisaged  interest  rate 
adjustments to 2020 and committing to offer banks a new round of cheap loans to help 
revive the eurozone economy. 
 
In addition, multilateral institutions have recently downgraded their economic growth 
projections. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has, in its latest World Economic 
Outlook  report1,  pencilled  in  a  3.3%  global  growth  forecast  for  this  year,  with  an 
expected pickup in 2020 predicated on Chinese stimulus measures, improved market 
sentiment,  dissipating  temporary  drags  on  euro-area  growth,  and  stabilisation  in 
certain stressed emerging market economies. 
 
However,  there  are  still  uncertainties  which  will  keep  policymakers  and  market 
participants  awake.  Policy  and  political  uncertainty  will 
include  geo-political 
developments, a possible disorderly Brexit, escalating trade tensions, and a sudden 
renewed tightening in financial conditions.  The IMF has also flagged vulnerabilities 
stemming  from  China’s  financial  imbalances,  volatile  portfolio  flows  to  emerging 
markets and fiscal challenges in some highly indebted European countries. However, 
the expectation overall, even with the generally limited policy space, seem to be for a 
soft landing of the global economy rather than a recession. 
  
Developments in domestic financial markets  
 
Domestic  financial  markets  have  been  influenced  by  a  combination  of  global 
developments  and  domestic  idiosyncrasies.  The  local  unit  was  not  immune  to  the 
broad sell-off in the emerging market foreign exchange (FX) complex, which began 
last  April  and  accelerated  into  September.  The  rand  reached  a  ‘peak’  of  R15.42 
against the US dollar on 5 September 2018, while the nominal effective exchange rate 
depreciated to an over two-year low of 53.81. 
                                                           
1 See https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2019/03/28/world-economic-outlook-april-2019 
 Page 3 of 9 
 
It is interesting to note that, despite the rand’s depreciation of roughly 16% against the 
US dollar since we last met, the sell-off in domestic bonds was not as pronounced 
relative to the currency depreciation as was the case during previous periods of market 
stress. The yield on the R186 bond has increased by approximately 24 basis points 
since last April. Lower inflation outcomes have gone some way in capping the rise in 
bond  yields,  underscoring  the  importance  of  central  banks  keeping  inflation 
expectations anchored. Moody’s recent credit opinion, stating that it expects South 
Africa’s credit profile to remain in line with those of similar Baa3-rated sovereigns, has 
also provided some relief to local bond markets. However, elevated government debt 
and contingent liabilities related to state-owned enterprises, as well as persistently low 
growth,  are  credit  constraints.  While  the  JSE  All-Share  Index  looks  relatively 
unchanged to when we last met, this masks some volatility, with declines in the latter 
half of 2018 and a subsequent recovery this year.  
 
South Africa has not been immune to the volatility in flows to emerging markets. Non-
residents  sold  R112.4  billion  worth  of  domestic  equities  since  May  last  year,  with 
outflows of R27.5 billion reported on a calendar year-to-date basis. For bonds, net 
non-resident outflows totalled R86.1 billion over the last year, although some stability 
has returned with bond inflows of R26.3 billion since the start of this year. 
 
In response to new developments and changing risks, monetary policy continued to 
keep  its  focus  on  maintaining  inflation  comfortably  within  the  target  range  and 
anchoring  inflation  expectations  closer  to  the  4.5%  midpoint  of  the  inflation  target 
band. 
towards  broader 
macroeconomic  stability  and  protects  the  purchasing  power  of  all  South  Africans. 
While  the  MPC  assessed  the  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  as  more  or  less  evenly 
balanced, the most recent developments in relation to oil prices and the exchange 
rate, along with other previously identified risks, such as electricity and water tariffs, 
and food prices, show that vigilance and data dependency must remain the order of 
the day.  
 
is  a  stable  price  environment  which  contributes 
It 
 Page 4 of 9 
indicated,  appropriate  monetary  policy  settings  need 
As  previously 
to  be 
complemented by prudent fiscal and budgetary policies to help raise potential growth 
and lower the cost structure of the economy. 
 
Key domestic initiatives  
 
Let me now touch on some initiatives undertaken by the SARB to strengthen domestic 
financial markets.  
 
Firstly, I would like to make a few remarks on the reform of  the major interest rate 
benchmarks, which needs to be framed in the context of global developments. Many 
of  you  will  know  by  now  of  the  work  to  reform  interbank  offered  rates,  collectively 
referred  to  as  ‘IBORs’.  For  the  major  IBORs,  reform  efforts  have  focused  on 
strengthening  their  resilience  and  reliability,  including  ensuring  that  they  are 
underpinned by transaction data to the greatest extent possible. But what is perhaps 
most pertinent is the looming 2021 deadline for when the Financial Conduct Authority 
will  no  longer  compel  banks  to  contribute  to  the  London  Interbank  Offered  Rate 
(LIBOR). There are worries about the possible end of LIBOR, the most notable being 
the transition of legacy LIBOR-linked contracts to the new reference rates. Elsewhere 
in Europe, methodological changes have been made to the Sterling Overnight Index 
Average to strengthen the benchmark, while the method used to calculate the Euro 
Interbank Offered Rate will be overhauled by 2020.  
 
Progress  has,  however,  been made  in  identifying  risk-free  rates  (RFRs)  and  other 
alternative reference rates in currency areas reliant on major IBORs. The focus is now 
shifting  to  efforts  to  manage  what  is  bound  to  be  a  complex  transition  to  these 
alternative  reference  rates.  Industry  bodies  such  as  the  International  Swaps  and 
Derivatives  Association  have  been  consulting  with  stakeholders  regarding  contract 
fallback options, with the aim of agreeing ex ante rather than ex post, on any fallback 
arrangements. For cash markets, the Bank for International Settlements suggests that 
floating-rate instruments could be converted to fixed-rate contracts or to an adjusted 
RFR-based term rate, similar to the option for derivatives contracts. We could also see 
some issuers recalling LIBOR-linked debt instruments and replacing them with those 
linked  to  the  new  benchmarks.  Indeed,  the  Intercontinental  Exchange  (ICE)  has 
 Page 5 of 9 
proposed a US dollar ICE Bank Yield Index. ICE Benchmark Administration anticipates 
launching the Bank Yield Index2 in early 2020 should there be a favourable market 
response.   
 
Evidently, a blanket solution for benchmark rates does not exist. The ultimate outcome 
of transitioning may feature the coexistence of multiple rates and/or benchmarks. It is 
important for those of you that have exposures to Libor to not leave it too late in making 
appropriate arrangements.  
 
For South Africa, the SARB’s publication of a consultation paper3 on selected interest 
rate benchmarks last August marked a key step towards the reform of existing interest 
rate benchmarks. The consultation paper proposes the adoption of new benchmarks 
with  the  aim  of  enhancing  transparency  in  the  domestic  money  market  while  also 
enriching  the  framework  for  the  monitoring  and  identification  of  systemic  risk. 
Extensive  research  into  the  robustness  and  sustainability  of  the  Johannesburg 
Interbank  Average  Rate  (Jibar)  and  the  South  African  Benchmark  Overnight  Rate 
(Sabor) had revealed shortcomings. Specifically for Jibar, the insufficient number of 
transactions in negotiable certificates of deposit means that this rate does not meet 
the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions’  requirements  on  data 
sufficiency.  
 
The  SARB  has  decided  to  follow  a  ‘market  choice’  approach  to  identifying  an 
alternative reference rate to replace Jibar. By way of clarification: when we talk about 
reference rates in the domestic market, we mean benchmark rates that are used in 
the pricing of derivative and other financial contracts, while benchmark rates provide 
price  indications  in  the  general  market.  To  facilitate  market  choice,  the  Market 
Practitioners Group4 (MPG) was formed. The MPG is a joint public and private sector 
body, which I have the privilege of chairing, with the aim of guiding final decisions on 
the  choice  of  alternative  reference  rates  and  the  operationalisation  of  proposed 
reforms. The MPG has recently established work streams for the purpose of executing 
                                                           
2 See https://www.theice.com/iba/Bank-Yield-Index-Test-Rates 
3 See http://www.resbank.co.za/Publications/Detail-Item-
View/Pages/Publications.aspx?sarbweb=3b6aa07d-92ab-441f-b7bf-
bb7dfb1bedb4&sarblist=21b5222e-7125-4e55-bb65-56fd3333371e&sarbitem=8722 
4 For further information, see  http://www.resbank.co.za/Markets/MPG/Pages/default.aspx 
 Page 6 of 9 
its  mandate.  These  work  streams  will  also  advise  on  transition  and  other 
implementation issues. 
 
Allow me to take this opportunity to thank those of you who have provided comments 
on our consultation paper. We plan to publish a report on 24 May 2019 reflecting key 
takeaways  from  the  public  consultation  process,  together  with  our  responses  and 
adopted  positions  in  respect  of  the  reforms.  The  SARB  is  as  resolute  as  other 
international regulators and policymakers about the need for reform. 
 
All final decisions regarding the reform project will be published in a technical paper 
later  in  2019,  which  will  detail  the  benchmark  interest  rates  to be published  in  the 
future. Given the identified shortcomings of Jibar, it is our expectation that the reform 
of  Jibar  will  be  prioritised  by  the  MPG  and  its  work  streams.  The  interim  reform 
measure that will ultimately be decided on shall become effective from a future date 
that will recognise all data collection and transitioning considerations.   
 
Another collaborative effort – this time between National Treasury (NT), the Financial 
Sector  Conduct  Authority  (FSCA)  and  the  SARB  –  was  establishing  the  Financial 
Markets  Review  Committee  (FMRC)  to  develop  recommendations  aimed  at 
reinforcing conduct standards in wholesale financial markets. The earlier review by the 
Foreign  Exchange  Review  Committee  had  recognised  room  for  improvement  in 
conduct  and  governance  related  to  the  over-the-counter  fixed  income,  currency, 
commodities and derivatives markets. In September 2018, the FMRC released a draft 
Financial Markets Review5 for public comment. You will be relieved to hear that I do 
not intend to discuss all 43 of its recommendations in this speech, but that I would only 
like to highlight a few which hold particular relevance for this audience.  
 
The  first  is  the  development  of  a  general  code  of  conduct  for  financial  market 
participants  that  would  be  pre-empted  by  the  formation  of  a  Financial  Markets 
Standards Group. This group, led by senior market professionals, would provide a 
forum to discuss compliance issues and to resolve conflicts in standards of market 
practise. Another recommendation is that the necessary data to carry out cross-market 
                                                           
5 See 
http://www.resbank.co.za/Lists/News%20and%20Publications/Attachments/8743/2018%20FMR%200
7.pdf 
 Page 7 of 9 
monitoring and surveillance could be collated via trade repositories, aiding both market 
discipline  and  transparency.  Regulation  covering  conflicts  of  interest  and  market 
abuse will also be considered. And in addition to our review of benchmark interest 
rates,  regulators  may  also  investigate  ways  to  expand  the  repurchase  market  and 
encourage technological innovation to aid the competitive landscape.  
 
A  final  version  of  the  review  is  being  deliberated  and  will  be  handed  over  to  the 
Financial Markets Implementation Committee comprising representatives from the NT, 
FSCA and SARB, to give effect to the recommendations. 
 
Finally, of specific interest to the audience here tonight, may be the progress that the 
SARB has made in accommodating collateral substitution in its operations. Changes 
to our systems will allow banks to replace or substitute assets used as collateral in the 
main  repurchase  auction,  in  line  with  international  best  practice.  In  particular,  the 
SARB will be transitioning the current Master Repurchase Agreements into the Global 
Master Repurchase Agreement (GMRA) to allow for this substitution. System changes 
are in progress, and full functionality for market participants is anticipated around mid-
May. Once the GMRAs have been signed, our counterparties will be able to substitute 
collateral posted at the SARB. Collateral substitution is expected to ease some of the 
demand for high-quality liquid assets through a more efficient use of such assets.  
 
More information on these and other initiatives is contained in the FMD newsletter6, 
accessible on the SARB website, with some printed copies available here as well.  
 Concluding remarks  
 
Let  me  conclude  by  once  again  extending,  on  behalf  of  FMD  and  the  SARB,  our 
appreciation  to  all  market  participants  for  your  continued  support  and  cooperation, 
which has aided the orderly functioning of our markets. A further thank you to those 
who participate in our various consultative structures; taking part in these groups is 
                                                           
6 See 
http://www.resbank.co.za/Lists/News%20and%20Publications/Attachments/9229/FMDUpdate%20Ma
y%202019.pdf 
 
 Page 8 of 9 
crucial  as  we  strive  to  increase  the  transparency  and  efficiency  of  South  Africa’s 
financial markets within an increasingly complex environment.  
 
Last but not least, I would like to thank team FMD for the sterling work they perform 
for the SARB and in the interest of our financial system. We also owe thanks to the 
SARB  protocol  and  events  team,  who  have  temporarily  taken  over  liquidity 
management operations from the FMD.  
 
Please enjoy our hospitality, but do save some energy for casting your ballot tomorrow. 
 Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
 Page 9 of 9 
