Kevin Stiroh: Policy efficiency in supervision
Remarks  by  Mr  Kevin  Stiroh,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution  Supervision
Group of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the conference "Bank Regulation, Lending
and  Growth",  sponsored  by  The  Bank  Policy  Institute  and  Columbia  University’s  School  of
International and Public Affairs, New York City, 1 March 2019.
 As prepared for delivery
Introduction
Good morning.  Thank you very much for the kind introduction.  
I  am  very  happy  to  participate  in  this  conference  on  “Bank  Regulation,  Lending,  and  Growth,”
sponsored by Columbia University and the Bank Policy Institute. The agenda covers a number of
important  banking  issues  and  I  will  talk  about  the  idea  of  policy  efficiency  from  a  supervisory
1
perspective.
Before beginning, let me emphasize that the views I express are my own and do not necessarily
reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
Public  policy  strives  to  be  efficient,  but  efficiency  is  not  a  simple  concept,  particularly  in  the
context of the supervision of large financial firms where the world is complex, the official sector
has multiple objectives, and impact lags are long and uncertain.   For example, supervisors care
about  the  safety  and  soundness  of  individual  financial  firms,  about  the  provision  of  financial
services to support the real economy, about consumer welfare and financial inclusion, and about
financial  stability.    More  generally,  supervision  and  regulation  are  designed  to  both  support
3
productive financial intermediation and limit disruption and financial stability risks.
2
Today, I will talk about a simple framework for one view of policy efficiency in  a  world  of  two
policy objectives – financial intermediation and financial stability.  As in traditional finance theory,
one can think about an “efficient policy frontier” that maps the trade-offs among these objectives. 
One might choose a set of policies that supports a high level of financial intermediation and also
accepts a higher risk of disruption or crisis.  This might be achieved, for example, with relatively
light  oversight  or  low  capital  requirements.   Alternatively,  one  might  choose  a  different  set  of
policies, such as more intensive oversight and stringent capital requirements that likely reduces
risk, but also limits intermediation.
An efficient policy is one that minimizes risk for a desired level of intermediation—it is on the
efficient  policy  frontier.    This  efficiency  idea  is  distinct  from  the  policy  choice  itself,  as  any  of
these policy regimes can be efficient in the sense that risk is as low as possible for a desired
level of intermediation.  I’ll emphasize that this framework is agnostic to the merits of one policy
choice or another.  That is, it is a positive framework and not a normative one, and I won’t look at
this  from  a  normative  perspective.    Policy  preferences  can  vary  and  they  are  set  by
policymakers.
I believe this simple framework is useful when assessing and discussing changes to supervisory
or regulatory policy that can be designed with different purposes in mind.  For example, a policy
change could be designed to increase efficiency and move toward the frontier.  This could entail
changing  rules,  regulations,  or  supervisory  practices  in  order  to  promote  more  financial
intermediation  without  increasing  risk.    Obvious  examples  could  be  eliminating  a  complex
compliance regime for an activity that banks no longer perform or reducing redundancy in data
reporting.  It seems like a good idea to always pursue these types of efficiency gains.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Alternatively, a policy change could be designed to achieve a different risk and return profile.  This
could  be  a  shift  from  a  mix  of  policies  designed  to  achieve  a  low-intermediation  and  low-risk
outcome to a mix of policies designed to support higher intermediation while accepting greater
risk.  Either of these regimes can be efficient and consistent with policymakers’ preferences, but
the expected outcomes would be quite different.
From a public policy perspective, in my view, it is important to be clear and distinguish between
these  two  types  of  policy  change.    For  example,  one  might  expect  a  greater  number  of  bank
failures during stress if there were less effective supervisory oversight or higher borrowing costs
in a world with higher capital requirements.  Those may not be desired outcomes, but they would
be predictable ones.  From a risk management perspective, this might be viewed as an accepted
risk of a particular policy choice.  By contrast, a policy change designed to increase efficiency
might not come with those undesirable outcomes.
4
In  practice,  however,  it  can  be  difficult  to  differentiate  among  drivers  of  policy  change  due  to
measurement  and  assessment  challenges,  the  potentially  long  impact  horizon,  and  different
views from a social and private perspective.  I’ll turn now to describe this efficiency framework
and then discuss some of the practical issues.
Policy Efficiency
As a point of departure, I’ll begin with an idea that I expect is familiar to most of you.  Standard
finance theory suggests that investors face a trade-off between risk and return that outlines the
set of feasible options across portfolios.  An investor can choose a portfolio with higher expected
returns and higher risk, or a portfolio with lower expected returns and lower risk.
I think there is a useful analogy for supervisory and regulatory policy.  On one hand, the official
sector cares about the provision of financial services such as credit, deposit-taking, payments,
and risk transfer, where effective intermediation supports economic growth and consumer well-
being.  This is the basic function of the financial sector and can be thought of as the return on
banking.    On  the  other  hand,  the  official  sector  also  cares  about  reducing  disruption  in  the
provision  of  those  services  and  broader  financial  stability  risks.    It  is  only  a  decade  since  the
financial crisis in 2008–2009 that imposed such an enormous social cost on the U.S. economy,
so those risks remain salient for many of us.
In  this  context,  the  risk  of  disruption  or  a  financial  crisis  matters  because  of  the  potential
reduction of necessary financial services and economic activity in the future.  As I discussed in a
talk at this conference a few years ago, a short-term discussion of the balance between firm
resilience and the provision of financial services may be reframed over a longer horizon as a
dynamic  trade-off  between  the  provision  of  financial  services  today  and  in  the  future.     This
risk/return framework extends that perspective if one cares about the volatility of those financial
services across different states of the world and over time.
5
The  idea  of  multiple  objectives  suggests  a  policy  trade-off  with  an  efficient  frontier.    In  this
framework, an efficient financial sector regime can only realize more intermediation if it accepts a
higher risk of financial instability and less intermediation in the future.  A second premise is that
the official sector can impact outcomes relative to this frontier through a combination of rules,
regulation,  and  supervisory  policies.    For  example,  a  reduction  in  loan  documentation
requirements, risk management reviews and supervisory oversight might allow increased lending
in the short-run, but potentially lowers loan quality and increases risk over time. 
A  particular  set  and  calibration  of  policies  is  efficient  if  the  only  way  to  increase  financial
intermediation is to accept higher risk of disruption or crisis.  Equivalently, an efficient outcome is
one where the only way to reduce risk is to accept less intermediation.  This is not to say that all
components of supervisory and regulatory policy come with this trade-off,  but at some point,
6
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
policy interventions become less effective, intermediation costs rise, and a trade-off is likely to
emerge.  Those points map the efficient policy frontier.  The official sector can either push the
financial sector along a given frontier as policy preferences change or closer to the frontier as
policy becomes more efficient.
To be more concrete, consider the following chart with financial intermediation on the Y-axis and
financial stability risk on the X-axis.  Point A represents the outcome from a conservative policy
mix with relatively low financial intermediation, but also relatively low financial stability risk.  In this
environment,  supervisors  might  impose  tight  lending  standards,  so  projects  with  positive  net
present value and low risk are potentially left unfunded.  You might see high capital charges on
relatively  low-risk  activities,  restrictions  or  prohibitions  on  certain  risky  activities,  or  relatively
frequent exams.  Intermediation and credit growth might be slow on average, but more stable
with less risk of a disruption to financial services or a financial crisis.
By  contrast,  point  B  represents  the  outcomes  from  a  less  conservative  policy  regime  that
supports  more  financial  intermediation,  but  comes  with  a  higher  risk  of  disruption  or  financial
crisis.  In that environment, banks might be more inclined to assume a “risk-on” posture with
looser underwriting standards, so riskier projects are funded.  Oversight would be low and banks
would  feel  less  constrained.    On  average,  greater  intermediation  would  likely  support  more
7
economic activity in the short-run but with a higher probability of disruption later on.
Finally, point C represents an outcome from a policy regime that is not efficient.  A different mix
of policies could increase intermediation or decrease risk (or both) with no associated trade-offs. 
Point  C  is  never  a  good  outcome.    Examples  of  such  policies  might  be  a  burdensome
compliance regime for activities that a bank doesn’t engage in, redundant data requests from the
official sector, or a risk management system that does not address the most material risks.
To summarize, both point A and point B can be thought of as efficient outcomes, where the only
way to support more financial intermediation is to accept higher risk.  To be clear, one point on
the efficient policy frontier is not necessarily better than another, and changes in policy to move
between them reflect policymakers’ choices to promote social welfare.  By contrast, point C is
inefficient,  and  changes  in  the  policy  mix  that  push  outcomes  toward  the  efficient  frontier  are
likely to be welfare-enhancing.  The official sector should always be looking for opportunities to
move the financial sector toward the frontier.
As  a  practical  application  of  this  framework,  consider  the  Federal  Reserve’s  commitment  to
tailoring  and  ensuring  that  supervision  is  scaled  appropriately  to  the  risks  associated  with
different  types  of  institutions.     Recent  examples  could  include  the  stress  testing  distinction
between large, complex firms and large non-complex firms; expanded eligibility for the 18-month
exam  cycle;  relief  from  supervisory  assessments,  stress  testing  requirements,  and  other
prudential measures for bank holding companies with less than $100 billion; the Bank Exams
Tailored  to  Risk  (BETR)  program;  and  the  multi-agency  proposal  to  better  align  prudential
9
standards with the risk profile of large institutions.  
8
Tailoring  allows  different  firms  to  operate  with  different  parameters  of  the  policy  regime.    The
largest, most systemically important firms, for example, impose larger potential risks to society
than  other  firms,  which  implies  a  different  risk/return  trade-off  and  policy  mix  than  for  smaller
institutions.  Without the ability to tailor the regime to reflect the risks associated with different
types of institutions, we would likely be left with a one-size-fits-all approach that is not optimal for
any type of firm or for the financial system as a whole.
Discussion Issues
The simple framework that I just described is just that—simple.  The real world is much more
complicated, and I’d like to spend a few minutes discussing some practical issues.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Understanding the Trade-off
The  chart  presented  above  is  clearly  illustrative  and  actual  policy  analysis  requires  detailed
estimates of the potential benefits and costs of each component and the cumulative effect.  For
example, the Basel Committee published a framework to identify optimal levels of bank capital
and used that framework as an input into the calibration of Basel III capital requirements.
  This
approach considered how the probability of a financial crisis varies with bank capital, the social
costs of banking crisis, the link between bank capital and bank funding costs, and the impact of
higher loan spreads on economic activity.
10
Moreover, this efficient frontier is not fixed and is likely to vary over time as technology, official
sector tools, and bank business models evolve.  For example, technology-driven innovations that
rely on bigger datasets and more sophisticated predictive algorithms might change the risk/return
opportunities associated with certain intermediation services.  Similarly, supervisory innovations
like  stress  testing  or  more  sophisticated  horizontal  assessments  could  make  official  sector
oversight more effective.  Finally, changes in business strategies like a shift to a more diversified
business  model  might  change  the  overall  risk  of  certain  activities.    One  can  think  of  these
changes  as  shifting  the  efficient  policy  frontier  where  there  is  more  intermediation  for  a  given
level  of  risk.   Alternatively,  constraints  on  supervisory  authorities  or  practices  could  shift  the
frontier in the opposite direction if use of effective tools is prohibited.
Given  the  complexity  of  these  relationships,  it  is  not  surprising  that  there  is  a  wide  range  of
estimates  and  theories  about  the  optimal  type  and  level  of  oversight  of  financial  institutions. 
Nonetheless, we need to understand better these relationships in order to make policy choices
more  effective.    This  is  an  area  where  I  believe  the  official  sector,  industry  participants,  and
researchers can all continue to make progress.
Social and Private Perspective
A  second  interesting  issue  reflects  the  perspective  on  risk  and  return.    In  traditional  portfolio
investment problems, it is clearly the risk and return to the private investor.  When thinking about
policy, however, the appropriate perspective of the official sector is for society as a whole, which
likely  differs  from  the  perspective  of  an  individual  firm.    That  is,  the  official  sector  and  private
sector might measure the axes differently—particularly the risk axis—because the official sector
cares about spillovers, externalities, and other market failures that private actors may ignore.
11
 
This broader perspective is a critical part of the supervisory framework for large banks that was
implemented after the financial crisis.  In particular, the official sector recognizes the potential
impact that stress at a large bank could have on financial markets or the real economy.  As a
result,  the  Federal  Reserve  supervisory  program  pursues  two  complementary  goals  for  large
bank  supervision—one,  to  enhance  resilience  to  lower  the  probability  of  failure  or  inability  to
provide  intermediation  services  and,  two,  to  reduce  the  impact  on  the  financial  system  or
economy in the event failure or material weakness does in fact occur.
12
This difference in perspective potentially introduces some divergence in views and assessment
of what an efficient policy looks like.  A set of policies might be socially efficient—that is,  on the
frontier when risk and return are measured for society as a whole – but perceived as inefficient
by the industry or the public, who may focus on the private impact on individual firms or sectors. 
This  can  lead  to  some  debate  about  the  stated  goals  and  assessment  of  the  efficacy  of  a
particular  policy  mix.    I  believe  this  is  an  area  where  better  communication  can  help  and  the
official sector can be clear on expected outcomes and explain any divergence between social
and private perspectives.
Distinguishing Policy Changes
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
A third issue is that it is not always easy to distinguish policy changes that move outcomes along
the frontier from policy changes that move outcomes toward the frontier.  For example, is the
shift to an 18-month exam cycle for community banks or a shift to less frequent stress testing for
some banks an increase in policy efficiency or a shift to a different policy stance with different
risk/return  features?   As  I  mentioned,  both  can  be  defensible  policy  moves,  but  they  do  have
different implications.  Moreover, a given policy change might have both effects as the stance of
policy changes and the policy mix becomes more efficient.  The proposal around the stressed
13
capital buffer, for example, simplifies the capital regime and also relaxes some assumptions.
 
Finally, these policy changes might interact and blend together.
14
How do you know the policy intent?  The most obvious answer is to look at the stated rationale
and  motivation  associated  with  the  policy  change.    For  example,  the  analysis  by  the  Basel
Committee  on  the  long-term  economic  impact  of  stronger  capital  and  liquidity  requirements
accepted the potential costs of higher loan spreads and reduced output levels, so this can be
viewed as movement to the left along a frontier. 
It is also useful to think carefully about the expected impacts—both desired and undesired—and
make ex ante predictions.  What is the likely behavioral response?  How might the balance sheet
and the income statement change?  What might financial markets reflect?
At the risk of taking this simple framework too far, let’s think about what might happen to market
indicators in each of  two  scenarios—a  movement  toward  the  frontier  that  makes  policy  more
efficient and movement along the frontier toward a less conservative policy stance.  If the former
is  really  an  elimination  of  inefficient  constraints  (move  from  C  to  B,  for  example),  one  might
expect equity prices and Sharpe ratios to rise, while CDS spreads or bonds ratings are flat as
opportunities expand and risk doesn’t increase.  By contrast, in a movement along the curve, say
from A to B, one might expect equity prices to rise as intermediation opportunities increase, while
CDS spreads and ratings deteriorate as risk increases.  One might expect to see measures of
increased distress in some states of the world over time. 
Of course, the world is much more complex and risks materialize over long periods of time in
response  to  many  factors,  and  there  are  important  differences  between  social  and  private
outcomes,  but  I  think  it  is  helpful  to  think  through  these  types  of  signals  ex  ante.    By  making
predictions and assessing whether observed outcomes are consistent with those predictions,
we  can  better  understand  the  complex  dynamics  in  financial  institutions  and  develop  better
policy.
Resource Efficiency
15
Finally, I’ll emphasize that I have focused on one specific type of policy efficiency that looks at the
ability to achieve multiple objectives.  Alternatively, one could think about efficiency more directly
in  terms  of  resources  and  burden,  both  on  the  private  sector  and  the  official  sector.    For
example, the Federal Reserve aims to minimize compliance burden while achieving its policy
goals.
   That perspective is about allocative efficiency of scarce resources and the deadweight
loss associated with the misallocation of those resources.  As part of the official sector, we have
an obligation to be good stewards of resources and should always try to achieve a given set of
policy objectives in the least-cost manner.
Conclusions
To  conclude,  I  have  suggested  a  simple  framework  to  help  distinguish  changes  in  policy  to
achieve a different level of intermediation and an acceptable level of risk from changes in policy
to increase efficiency.  The first reflects the preferences of policymakers, and the second should
be a standing goal.  While it is difficult to make this distinction in practice, I believe it is useful to
keep the difference in mind as we discuss and explain our work.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In my view, communication is vital, and we should explain our goals as clearly as possible and
acknowledge all expected outcomes of policy changes.  By recognizing the full set of expected
outcomes, including those that are not desired, I believe we can more effectively communicate
the  goals  of  supervisory  policy,  increase  accountability  and  transparency,  and  better  fulfill  our
mission to promote a safe, sound and stable banking and financial system.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
I would like to thank Jim Bergin, Dianne Dobbeck, Hampton Finer, Robert Fitchette, Lauren Hargraves, Bev
Hirtle, Michael Holscher, Anna Kovner, Don Morgan, Siobhan Sanders, and Katherine TilghmanHill for helpful
comments and discussions.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Supervision and Regulation Report, November 2018 and
U.S. Department of the Treasury, A Financial System that Creates Economic Opportunities, Banks and Credit
Unions, June 2017.
This can be thought of as determining optimal policy that considers the net benefits as in Bank for International
Settlement, An Assessment of the Long-Term Economic Impact of Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements ,
August  2010  or  as  promoting  the  sustained  provision  of  financial  intermediation  across  a  wide  range
macroeconomic  conditions  as  in  Kevin  J.  Stiroh, A  Perspective  on  Supervisory  Objectives,  and  Trade-offs,
February 23, 2017.  See also Anjan V. Thakor, “Bank Capital and Financial Stability: An Economic Trade-off or a
Faustian  Bargain?,” Annual Review of Financial Economics, 2014, 6:185–223 for a review of theoretical and
empirical findings.
In the early 1980s, for example, there is some evidence that a shorter exam cycle contributed to an increase in
the number of bank failures in FDIC, History of the Eighties – Lessons for the Future, 1997.  See Bank for
International Settlement, 2010 on costs and benefits of higher capital requirements.
Kevin J. Stiroh, A Perspective on Supervisory Objectives, and Trade-offs, February 23, 2017.
For example, Thakor, 2014, reports that higher capital levels are associated with higher lending, higher liquidity
creation, higher bank values, and higher probabilities of surviving crises and Beverly Hirtle, Anna Kovner, and
Matthew  Plosser, The Impact of Supervision on Bank Performance, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff
Report  No.  768,  September  2018,  find  that  increased  supervisory  attention  results  in  lower  risk  without
significantly reduced performance.
There may be certain states of the world where the frontier is not upward-sloping, e.g., in a downturn or crisis
period, restricting intermediation might increase financial stability risk.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Supervision and Regulation Report, November 2018; Vice
Chair  Randall  Quarles, Semiannual  Supervision  and  Regulation  Testimony, April  17,  2018;  and  Vice  Chair
Randall Quarles, Supervision and Regulation Report, November 14, 2018.
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System, Federal Reserve Board invites public comment on the
framework that would more closely match regulations for large banking organizations with their risk profiles,
October 31, 2018.
 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2010.
This assumes the official sector preferences reflect society as a whole and does not consider potential gaps
due to issues such as principal agent problems within the official sector or regulatory capture.
Consolidated Supervision Framework for Large Financial Institutions, SR 12–17, December 17, 2012. 
Federal  Reserve  Board, Federal Reserve Board seeks comment on proposal to simplify its capital rules for
large  banks  while  preserving  strong  capital  levels  that  would  maintain  their  ability  to  lend  under  stressful
conditions, April 10, 2018.
For  a  discussion  of  how  rationalization  of  excessively  complicated  regulations  could  “morph”  into  a  more
deregulatory posture, see Daniel K. Tarullo, “Financial Regulation: Still Unsettled a Decade after the Crisis,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33(1), 2019 Winter, 61–80.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
15
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Supervision and Regulation Report, November 2018.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
