Shaktikanta Das: Launch of Complaint Management System
Statement  by  Mr  Shaktikanta  Das,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  on  launch  of
Complaint Management System, 24 June 2019.
 The Complaint Management System (CMS), the application being launched today, symbolizes
RBI’s commitment to improve customer experience in grievance redressal process by ensuring
timely resolution of complaints received at the Reserve Bank. I take this opportunity to seek the
co-operation of all RBI regulated entities with public interface such as commercial banks, Urban
Co-operative  banks,  Non-Banking  Financial  Companies  (NBFCs),  etc.  in  resolving  customer
complaints  in  a  speedy  and  meaningful  manner  to  promote  public  confidence  in  the  financial
system. Sustaining the confidence of consumers in banks and other Financial Service Providers
(FSPs) through prompt and effective grievance redressal, together with empowering customers
through education is pivotal for maintaining trust in the banking system.
2.  CMS  envisages  improved  customer convenience by providing a single window on Reserve
Bank’s  website  for  lodging  complaints  against  any  regulated  entity.  The  complaint  would  be
directed to the appropriate Office of the Ombudsman/Regional Office of the RBI. The application
also 
improves transparency  by  keeping  the  complainants  informed  through  auto-generated
acknowledgements and enabling them to track the status of their complaints and file Appeals
online against the decisions of the Ombudsmen, where applicable. Further, complainants can
also voluntarily share feedback on their experience in obtaining redressal.
3.  CMS  will  be accessible  on  desktop  as  well  as  on  mobile  devices.  The  Reserve  Bank  also
plans to introduce a dedicated Interactive Voice Response (IVR) System for tracking the status of
complaints.  I  am  sure,  with  time,  the  customer  friendly  nature  of  the  CMS  will  be  further
enhanced.
4.  As  stated  earlier,  customer awareness  is  an  enabling  tool  for  strengthening  customer
protection. An alert and aware customer can effectively guard against the risks of mis-selling,
cheating, frauds and such other threats. In our endeavor to spread awareness, we have placed
on  the  CMS  portal,  videos  with  young  role-models,  including  sportspersons,  on  safe  banking
practices and other important customer-centric regulatory initiatives of the Reserve Bank of India.
5.  The benefit to the financial system will accrue from seamless access of CMS to the Nodal
Officers  of  banks  /  Financial  Service  Providers(FSPs).  CMS  can  generate  various  reports  for
monitoring and managing complaints pertaining to each entity. I expect banks / FSPs to use the
data  on  CMS  not  only  for  reducing  their  Turn  Around  Time  in  resolution  of  complaints  and
strengthening their grievance redressal mechanism but also for undertaking root cause analyses
with an objective of understanding their customer pain areas, behaviour and expectations so as
to improve their services for maintaining customer loyalty.
6. Insights from the data available from CMS can, for example, be used by banks / FSPs for
designing  products  which  meet  the  expectations  of  their  customers.  Obviously,  those  entities
who perform better in analyzing the data and using it for creating customer value would be able
to benefit more and have a competitive advantage.
7. Data from CMS can be leveraged by the Reserve Bank for analytics which can be used for
regulatory  and  supervisory  interventions,  if  required.  Various  dashboards  provided  in  the
application will help Reserve Bank to effectively track the progress in redressal of complaints.
8. With the launch of CMS, the processing of complaints received in the offices of Ombudsman
and  Consumer  Education  and  Protection  Cells  (CEPCs)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been
digitalized.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
9. I urge the banks/FSPs to utilize the potential of CMS to the fullest.
My heartiest congratulations to each and everyone involved in developing and implementing the
application.
Thank you!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
