Expectations matter 
Welcoming remarks at the Joint Conference on Household Expectations 
26.09.2019 | Frankfurt am Main | Jens Weidmann 
  1 Introduction
 2 Taking different inﬂation expectations into account
 3 Gaining deeper insights from household surveys
 4 Conclusion
 1 Introduction
Governor Villeroy de Galhau, dear François,
Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues,
It is my great pleasure to give you all a warm welcome to this get-together at the 
Bundesbank guest house to set the tone for our joint conference with the Banque de 
France on household expectations.
In the early 20th century, the world was stunned. Wilhelm von Osten, a German 
mathematics teacher, presented a horse which appeared to be able to correctly perform 
arithmetic calculations. The horse, called “Kluger Hans” (or “Clever Hans”), could also 
read the clock, form sentences and reply to other questions, giving answers by tapping 
his hoof. A public commission was set up to study this intelligent animal, but could ﬁnd 
no evidence of a hoax. It was a young researcher who eventually discovered what was 
going on. After years of training, “Clever Hans” was able to identify tiny changes in the 
questioners’ facial expressions that unintentionally signalled the expected behaviour. 
Without facial contact, the horse could not perform any of the tasks. This shows that 
observers’ expectations can impact the observation.
 [1]
Similarly, our economies are not just mechanical systems combining labour input, 
capital and technology: they are also driven by our expectations. At least since John 
Muth introduced the concept of rational expectations in 1961, it has been the case that 
expectations of economic agents play a key role for both economic theory and policy. 
After the experience of stagﬂation in the 1970s, central banks around the world today 
acknowledge the importance of anchoring inﬂation expectations and preserving the 
 This is also reﬂected in estimates of the Phillips curve 
credibility of monetary policy.
which demonstrate that inﬂation expectations are one of the key determinants of actual 
inﬂation.
 [2]
 [3]
2 Taking different inflation expectations into account
However, there is the question of whose inﬂation expectations matter to monetary 
policy and which indicators should be monitored. In terms of inﬂation pressures arising 
from labour and goods markets, it would be appropriate to consider inﬂation 
expectations across ﬁrms and households which are engaged in these markets. 
Economic experts, meanwhile, may be better informed about monetary policy and 
central bank intentions. And their forecasts could also provide guidance to other 
agents. In contrast to such survey-based indicators, high-frequency data on 
expectations can be extracted from ﬁnancial market indicators such as swap rates or 
break-even inﬂation rates. However, such measures may combine expectations with 
preferences of investors. As a result, indicators extracted from market prices may 
deviate from expected inﬂation from surveys. Moreover, market prices may include 
liquidity premia which blur the picture.
Recently, the ﬁve-year inﬂation-linked swap rate ﬁve years ahead has dropped 
considerably in the euro area. By contrast, long-term inﬂation expectations in the ECB
Survey of Professional Forecasters, for instance, have remained more stable, while 
qualitative consumer expectations as expressed in the European Commission’s survey 
are virtually unchanged.
According to ECB calculations, the recent drop in market-based indicators reﬂects, ﬁrst 
and foremost, a fall in the inﬂation risk premium, rather than in expected inﬂation.
 [4]
As possible reasons, Bundesbank analysis points to differences in liquidity and scarcity 
premia across bonds. Furthermore, the behaviour of speciﬁc groups of investors might 
have contributed to recent developments. For example, life insurers and pension funds 
may face higher risks of interest rate changes arising from their liabilities, as bond yields 
drop. They could respond by investing more heavily in longer-dated bonds, thereby 
aggravating the decline in yields and affecting market-based indicators of inﬂation 
expectations.
Overall, such market-based measures are probably not representative at present, and 
below the inﬂation expectations relevant for our monetary policy. This episode 
highlights that the various indicators have different advantages and shortcomings.
In general, they should not be viewed as substitutes, but used instead as 
complementary information.
 [5]
 [6]
3 Gaining deeper insights from household surveys
Unfortunately, we still lack frequent, detailed and quantitative data on inﬂation 
expectations of households and ﬁrms. There are diﬃculties involved in implementing 
 In particular, it is hard to identify and reach those persons 
surveys at the ﬁrm level.
within a company who are involved in price and wage setting. Surveys of households 
are more straightforward to implement, and have been studied by academics and 
central bankers for quite some time. Moreover, recent work by Yuriy Gorodnichenko 
and our keynote speaker Olivier Coibion has shown that household surveys can, in 
some instances, provide better information about ﬁrms’ expectations than professional 
forecasts or market-based inﬂation expectations.
among ﬁrms about macroeconomic prospects resembles the dispersion of expectations 
among households in terms of its size, persistence and asymmetry.
 For example, disagreement 
 [7]
But household expectations are also of direct importance to the monetary transmission 
process. Households’ inﬂation expectations, for instance, are related to their purchase 
intentions and can therefore affect private consumption. Furthermore, household 
expectations on economic variables other than inﬂation are also relevant to central 
banks. If conducted at the national level, additional household surveys could focus on 
and detect idiosyncratic features. In particular, such data may matter for the national 
mandate of macroprudential policy.
In order to gain a more comprehensive picture, the Bundesbank has carried out a pilot 
study for an internet-based household survey on a monthly basis. The focus lies on 
consumer expectations regarding inﬂation and developments in the real estate market. 
The ﬁeld phase was completed in July. In two sessions of this conference, the ﬁndings 
from several studies by internal and external researchers based on the pilot’s data will 
be presented to a specialist audience for the ﬁrst time.
As an appetiser, I have the privilege of giving you a sneak peek at key results from core 
questions of the pilot survey in advance: First, the median of inﬂation expectations over 
a twelve-month horizon is 2% in all three survey waves. That is lower than in similar US
surveys and indicates that German consumers’ inﬂation expectations are well-anchored. 
Second, only a small fraction of individuals in Germany – namely 3% to 4% – expect 
inﬂation to fall. And the share of very high inﬂation expectations is also relatively small. 
Overall, results vary across socio-demographic categories such as income or the level of 
education in ways consistent with previous studies. Third, most individuals in Germany 
think that house prices will continue to rise sharply. Roughly 70% of those questioned 
answered that they already consider real estate in their neighbourhood to be 
overvalued; nonetheless, more than half of these persons expect prices to rise further. 
Fourth, tenants predict stronger house price increases than owners. This interesting 
difference is consistent with results from our Panel on Household Finances (PHF).
The Bundesbank already conducts the PHF survey of German household wealth and 
debt every three years – in 2017, almost 5,000 households participated. In this third 
wave, the PHF questionnaire was expanded in some areas to include questions on 
house price expectations, for example. The PHF surveys and the recent pilot study have 
allowed the Bundesbank to acquire expertise and experience. Going forward, we would 
very much welcome cooperation with the Banque de France on a high-frequency survey 
focusing on household expectations. In addition, the ECB has recently started to 
develop a new consumer expectations survey. According to the announcement, a pilot 
survey will soon be implemented.
central banks, additional surveys on household expectations would also help to 
promote research. The US is clearly ahead in this ﬁeld, and an important question is 
whether the results obtained there would also be valid for other countries.
 Aside from serving practical purposes within 
 [8]
4 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, the discovery of the “Clever Hans phenomenon” was a major 
breakthrough for experimental psychology and led to further research on the effects of 
expectations. For example, evidence was found that teachers’ expectations could have 
an impact on students’ performance.
 More generally, “Clever Hans” may highlight 
the importance of designing experiments properly in order to avoid biased results. Of 
course, our researchers also took this lesson to heart when they devised their pilot 
study. By resorting to an internet-based survey, they have effectively eliminated any 
possible impact of face-to-face contact.
 [9]
To conclude, I wish you a pleasant evening and a fruitful conference. And, ﬁnally, I am 
very glad to open this joint event together with Governor Villeroy de Galhau. Dear 
François, thank you so much for coming and please take the ﬂoor.
Fußnoten:
1. Samhita, L. and Gross, H. J. (2013). The “Clever Hans Phenomenon” revisited, 
Communicative and integrative biology, 6(6):e27122.
2. Goodfriend, M. (2007). How the World Achieved Consensus on Monetary Policy, 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, pp. (pages) 47-68.
3. Deutsche Bundesbank (2016). The Phillips curve as an instrument for analysing prices 
and forecasting inﬂation in Germany, Monthly Report, April 2016, pp. (pages) 31-45; 
Coibion, O. and Gorodnichenko, Y. (2015). Is the Phillips curve alive and well after all? 
Inﬂation expectations and the missing disinﬂation, American Economic Journal: 
Macroeconomics 7.1, pp. (pages) 197-232.
4. Cœuré, B., Inﬂation expectations and the conduct of monetary policy, speech at an 
event organised by the SAFE Policy Center, 11 July 2019.
5. Apokoritis, N., Galati, G., Moessner, R., Teppa, F. (2019). Inﬂation expectations 
anchoring: new insights from micro evidence of a survey at high-frequency and of 
distributions, BIS Working Papers No 809.
6. Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y., Kumar, S. (Seite), Pedemonte, M. (2018). Inﬂation 
expectations as a policy tool?, NBER Working Paper 24788.
7. Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y., Kumar, S. (Seite) (2018). How do ﬁrms form their 
expectations? New survey evidence, American Economic Review 108(9), pp. (pages)
2671-2713.
8. de Guindos, L., Communication, expectations and monetary policy, intervention at 
the ECB policy panel of the Annual Congress of the European Economic Association, 
27 August 2019.
9. Rosenthal, R. and Jacobson L. (1963). Teachers' expectancies: Determinants of pupils' 
IQ gains, Psychological Reports, 19, pp. (pages) 115-118.
