Cleviston  Haynes:  Redefining  our  "How"  in  Barbados'  financial
services sector
Speech by Mr Cleviston Haynes, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the Domestic
Financial Institutions Conference, Bridgetown, 28 March 2019.
 th
Today we celebrate the 10  seminar for domestic financial institutions hosted this year by the
Central Bank of Barbados and the Financial Services Commission. As regulators, we recognise
that the financial services industry is dynamic and that, together with industry practitioners, we
need  to  constantly  reflect  on  emerging  developments  and  new  challenges.  This  seminar
provides an opportunity for us to exchange ideas, to learn from experts, to learn from each other,
to develop new ideas and to think of solutions for our challenges.
It supports our financial stability initiatives and creates the pathway for building a resilient financial
system that supports economic growth through efficient mobilization and allocation of resources.
 Above all, it promotes our quest to develop more robust stakeholder engagement.
As we meet today, Government is implementing a recovery and transformation programme that
is targeted to restore fiscal and debt sustainability, foster growth and rebuild the foreign reserves.
 It does so in the context of a financial system that features substantial excess liquidity in an
environment of weak private sector credit demand and historically low interest rates. In recent
months, our financial institutions have shared in the economic adjustment through the domestic
debt restructuring. At the same time, implementation of the new IFRS 9 accounting standard has
also  adversely  impacted  the  profitability  and  capital  of  banks  and  insurance  companies.
However, the financial system remains stable and adequately capitalized.
Many  persons  focus  on  the  stabilization  aspect  of  the  programme  but  this  morning  I  wish  to
highlight  that  the  process  of  transformation  particularly  as  it  relates  to  financial  services  has
started. First, the domestic and international banking and insurance sectors each now operate
under  one  act,  the  Financial  Institutions’  Act  and  the  Insurance  Act,  respectively.  This
convergence of legislation represents the first step towards simplifying the regulatory regimes for
these sectors.
Secondly, the Bank and the government are undertaking initiatives to modernise the payments
system as we transition to a more digital economy.  The initial focus is on reducing the use of
cheques and cash in the financial system. Government already makes salaries, pensions and
debt  payments  through  the  electronic  RTGS  system  and  their  goal  is  to  use  the Automated
Clearing House (ACH) and the RTGS for payments to its suppliers.  Apart from enabling greater
efficiency within government, this should allow suppliers to receive payments on a more timely
basis. Extending this initiative to the National Insurance, a major issuer of cheques, should result
in  further  efficiency  in  the  financial  system.   It  is  envisaged  also  that  facilitating  electronic
transfers  to  government  for  the  payment  of  taxes  and  fees  will  enhance  efficiency  and
productivity within both the public and private sectors.
Third, credit unions have become an important element of the financial sector and the Bank will
facilitate  access  to  the  Automated  Clearing  House  (ACH)  for  direct  debits,  subject  to  the
completion of legislative, technological and administrative arrangements. 
Fourth, in the past year, the Bank and the FSC partnered to develop a sandbox arrangement for
companies  interested  in  experimenting  in  new  technologies.  The  first  company  to  participate
featured the use of an electronic wallet.  Growth of this medium, whether by traditional players or
new entrants has the potential to reduce substantially the use of cash and create flexibility in the
choice of instruments available to citizens.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
We anticipate that specific payments legislation and regulation will emerge from our efforts in
these areas.
Finally, we have transitioned to the issuance of government securities in a dematerialized format,
with the expectation that secondary trading of securities will be made easier.  We did have some
initial technology issues, but our team is working to resolve these problems. Arrangements are
now in place to facilitate transfers of securities.
The Bank too is part of this transformation.  My vision is to create a Bank that facilitates business
in the efficient provision of our services.  We have therefore committed to leverage technology to
transform the delivery of the Bank’s services and to enhance our communication about what we
do.  Later this year, we will strengthen our governance model to better align it with international
best  practices  and we  are  in  the  process  of  modifying  our  exchange  control  regime  to  better
facilitate business and bolster long term growth.
It is in the context of these developments that today, I encourage you to reflect on leadership guru
Simon Sinek’s challenge to never lose sight of your why, of your purpose.
As I reflect on our conference theme, “Repositioning the Financial Services Sector”, I conclude
that  while  our why  has  not  changed,  our  what  and  our  how  are  facing  disruptive  challenges,
including:
Internationalisation of services
Technological advances and disruptions
Consumer pressure for cheaper financial products, convenience, and caring service
Tough competition
The demand for simplicity in a world of complexity
Stricter international rules and standards
How can and must we respond to these circumstances?  What must we do to reposition the
sector?   It  is  my  belief  that  we  must  relook  our  business  model.   We  need  a  model  that
reinforces and supports our purpose, our why, and addresses our how and our what; a model
that is customer centric, and technology driven, but which also accommodates the not-so tech
savvy  among  us;  a  model  that  promotes  economic  and  social  transformation,  while
strengthening financial stability; a model that helps us to manage our risks, traditional and the
non-traditional.
We have assembled a cadre of experts to deliberate on these issues. The leaders of two of the
region’s financial behemoths will speak on repositioning the sector and share their companies’
journey to going global, their successes, their experiences, their challenges and their solutions.
And  the  Bank  will  use  the  opportunity  to  describe  the  economic  environment  in  which  the
repositioning will take place.
Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank (Central Bank in Sweden) will explain how his country
automated  its  payments  system.  Sweden  has  eliminated  cheques,  and  70  per  cent  of  the
Swedish population does not use cash.
De-risking remains a bugbear for the financial services and other local industries.   Much of the
focus has been on the loss by regional banks of access to correspondent banking.   This has
resulted  in  domestic  banks  de-risking  some  local  clients  in  what  are  considered  high  risk
industries. We assess the phenomenon in the context of the national and regional discussion
about  legalising  cannabis  for  medical  purposes,  and  the  problems  that  it  poses  for  gaming
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
businesses.
After government’s recent debt restructuring, we must reform the securities market.  Our final
panel will help us to look at the possibilities for reshaping how the market functions, including the
potential  for  strengthening  the  secondary  market.  The  recent  announcement  of  Government’s
intention  to  establish  a  Unit  Trust  and  introduce  new  vehicles  to  provide  more  investment
opportunities for Barbadians will help to redefine the securities and investments space.
Join me in thanking the organisers for designing a rich agenda for the 10  anniversary of the
Domestic Financial Institutions Conference.
th
I welcome you to this conference, and I look forward to the interaction and exchanges on how we
can reposition the financial services sector.
I am confident that together we will redefine our what and our how as we live our why as Simon
Sinek entreats us.
I thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
