     1 
               Road Map: 
Monetary and Financial Sector Policies for 2019 
and Beyond 
      Delivered by 
Dr. Indrajit Coomaraswamy 
Governor 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
2 January 2019 
3 
  1. Introduction  
Your Excellencies, Members of the Monetary Board, Senior Deputy Governor, 
Deputy Governors, Assistant Governors and Officials of the Central Bank, 
Distinguished Invitees, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a pleasure for me to warmly welcome you to the presentation of the Road 
Map of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, which articulates the broad direction of 
monetary and financial sector policies for the period 2019 and beyond. 
I am also pleased to mention that we are continuing with our tradition of 
sharing the future direction of policies through the twelfth Road Map of the 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka. The Road Map is a well received and important policy 
document which delivers several benefits to all stakeholders of the economy. 
We expect that this announcement would guide and shape your own policies 
and plans effectively which will ultimately contribute to the overall economic 
development of the country and better living standards for our people. 
Let me begin by explaining our policy stance and our assessment of the 
economy over 2018. The Sri Lankan economy faced heightened challenges in 
2018, emanating mainly from the global economic, financial and geo-political 
developments that adversely affected the external sector. There were also 
several domestic challenges. Political uncertainties, especially during the last 
quarter of the year, amplified challenges to overall macroeconomic stability. 
Sub-par economic growth continued in 2018 following subdued growth in 2017. 
Favourable weather conditions supported a rebound in the agriculture sector 
while the expansion in services activities has been broad-based.  
 4 
However, industrial activities slowed in 2018 mainly due to the slowdown in the 
construction sector. Consumer price inflation remained low in 2018 in spite of 
temporary ups and downs due to volatile food prices and administrative price 
adjustments. In response to the tight monetary policy stance pursued by the 
Central Bank in the past two years, monetary and credit growth decelerated in 
2018 from the higher levels observed in 2016 and 2017. An adequate expansion 
in domestic credit flows driven by demand from the private sector was 
witnessed during the year.  
Being guided by these developments as well as considering impending risks 
and challenges, we followed a cautious approach in relation to the monetary 
policy conduct in 2018. Taking into account the favourable developments in 
inflation and the inflation outlook, as well as the subdued performance in the 
real economy, the Central Bank signalled the end of monetary policy tightening 
that commenced at end 2015, by reducing the upper bound of the policy 
interest rates corridor in April 2018. Nevertheless, considering the impact of 
global developments that affected external sector stability of the economy, 
the Central Bank maintained a neutral monetary policy stance in the ensuing 
period.  
The sustained high deficits of rupee liquidity in the domestic money market 
compelled the Central Bank to reduce the Statutory Reserve Ratio (SRR) 
applicable on all rupee deposits of commercial banks in November 2018, while 
increasing policy interest rates to neutralise the impact on interest rates due to 
the permanent liquidity injection arising from the reduction in SRR. We 
followed this cautious approach with the broad aim of stabilising inflation at 
 5 
mid single digit levels and anchoring inflation expectations to enable the 
economy to reach its potential in the medium term.  
In the external sector, the growth in export earnings was outpaced by the 
expansion in import expenditure, although earnings from tourism, workers’ 
remittances, foreign direct investment (FDI) and debt related inflows to the 
government helped cushion the balance of payments (BOP) to some extent. 
The BOP experienced significant pressure on account of foreign exchange 
outflows caused by tightening global financial conditions and the 
strengthening of US dollar in view of monetary policy normalisation, 
particularly in the United States, as well as the widened trade deficit. Similar to 
the pressure that was observed in other emerging market economies, these 
developments resulted in a sharp depreciation of the Sri Lankan rupee 
particularly during the second half of the year. The Central Bank intervened in 
the domestic foreign exchange market at times to prevent disorderly 
adjustments in the exchange rate, while allowing demand and supply forces of 
the forex market to determine its level and direction. The government and the 
Central Bank introduced several short-term measures to address the pressure 
in the external sector, although the external sector developments once again 
highlighted the need for structural reforms to boost the tradable sector, 
particularly by enhancing merchandise and services exports in the medium to 
long run. The external sector was also affected by political instability during the 
latter part of 2018. Political developments, compounded by concerns regarding 
fiscal slippage in the lead up to the elections, were significant causal factors in 
the decisions of all three major rating agencies to downgrade Sri Lanka’s 
sovereign ratings. This, in turn, negatively affected investor confidence. 
 6 
However, such downgrading only on the premise of heightened political 
uncertainty and anticipated rather than actual fiscal slippage cannot be 
justified as there was no solid evidence of a deterioration in macroeconomic 
policies or fundamentals. This was evidenced by the good progress made in 
completing the fifth review of the Extended Fund Facility (EFF) of the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) until 26 October 2018. Sri Lanka continued 
to receive the assistance under the EFF and we received the fifth tranche of the 
programme in June 2018. We look forward to the successful completion of the 
IMF EFF programme in 2019. We are optimistic that the staff level agreement 
reached in principle with the IMF on the fifth review will proceed to the next 
level.  
Although the government continued its efforts towards fiscal consolidation, 
the performance on the fiscal front was rather mixed in 2018. Lower than 
expected revenue collection is likely to challenge the achievement of the 
targeted budget deficit for 2018. However, the primary balance is expected to 
record a surplus for the second consecutive year in 2018. This would be only 
the third time since 1955. Continued fiscal consolidation remains essential to 
build on the achievements already realised in the fiscal sector and to support 
the conduct of monetary and exchange rate policies without any fiscal 
forbearance.  
As announced in last year’s Road Map, the Central Bank is progressing towards 
implementing flexible inflation targeting (FIT) as its new monetary policy 
framework by 2020. We have taken several policy initiatives to facilitate the 
transition to FIT during 2018. While maintaining appropriate policy coordination 
 7 
with the government, we initiated the drafting of necessary legal amendments 
to strengthen the mandate of the Central Bank to maintain low inflation, while 
strengthening its autonomy, transparency and accountability.  
During 2018, we were also able to implement several policy measures with a 
view to maintaining a stable financial system with subdued macroprudential 
concerns, while increasing the resilience of the financial system to global and 
domestic shocks. In order to strengthen the legal and regulatory framework of 
the financial institutions, a new Banking Act is being drafted, while also 
initiating amendments to other legislation related to the financial sector. 
Resolution actions for distressed companies were taken in the form of 
imposing stringent regulatory actions such as restriction on business as well as 
suspension and cancellation of licences. Consolidation will be encouraged both 
in the banking and non bank sectors through steady increase in capital 
requirements. Priority will be attached to achieving sustainable structures in 
both the banking and non bank sectors in an orderly manner. It is our intention 
to send out the clearest possible signal that there will be no regulatory 
forbearance.   
We also continued to take measures to strengthen the payment and 
settlement infrastructure in line with our statutory responsibility of developing 
an efficient and stable national payment and settlement system capable of 
catering to the country’s growing payment needs. To promote digital payment 
mechanisms in the country, a national standard for QR code based payments 
was introduced during 2018, while progress was made in establishing the 
National Card Scheme. The Central Bank also continued to perform its currency 
 8 
management function to facilitate smooth transactions in the economy, while 
taking measures to preserve the quality of currency notes in circulation. 
Priority was also attached to strengthen the Central Bank’s agency functions in 
2018. Public debt management was carried out in a way that the government’s 
financing requirements were met at the lowest possible cost with a prudent 
degree of risk, while aiming to maintain debt sustainability. There was 
continued focus on sustaining the transparency and efficiency of the auction 
system for Government securities as well as on developing a viable medium 
term debt management strategy. In consultation with government, we also 
initiated actions to implement liability management exercises on future debt 
obligations based on the newly enacted Active Liability Management Act 
(ALMA).  
The liberalisation of foreign exchange transactions was advanced with the 
introduction of the Foreign Exchange Act No. 12 of 2017 (FEA). Procedures for 
inward capital flows were further simplified and streamlined for smooth 
transferring of funds for investment, while limits for outward capital flows 
were enhanced in selected areas giving local investors access to a wider global 
market.  
As a facilitator, the Central Bank continued its development finance and 
regional development activities during 2018 with the broad aim of enhancing 
inclusive and balanced economic growth and financial inclusion in the country. 
Progress was made in formulating the National Financial Inclusion Strategy. 
Further, the Central Bank worked towards improving Sri Lanka’s global position 
with regard to the implementation of Anti-Money Laundering and Countering 
 9 
the Financing of Terrorism regulations and we entered into new MOUs with 
several government bodies and institutions during 2018. We are working 
towards Sri Lanka being removed from the Financial Action Task Force’s (FATF) 
‘grey list’ by mid 2019. 
A number of measures have also been taken in the pursuit of greater 
accountability and transparency. In particular, following the recommendations 
of the Presidential Commission of Inquiry to Investigate, Inquire and Report on 
the Issuance of Treasury Bonds, measures are being taken to strengthen 
several laws applicable to the Central Bank. Measures were also taken to 
reform the operations relating to the issuance of government securities, 
introduce a new investment policy framework for the EPF, strengthen internal 
audit and introduce the code of conduct for employees and the members of 
the Monetary Board. The procurement process for several forensic audits is 
underway, and forensic audits are to be conducted by entities with global 
practice.  
In a challenging global and domestic environment, the Central Bank is steadily 
improving its policy frameworks to mitigate possible risks and thereby achieve 
its broad objectives of economic and price stability and financial system 
stability. Our actions would be effective and yield desired outcomes only if 
certain conditions are met, especially the commitment of the government to 
macroeconomic stability. Given the prevailing low growth trajectory, growth 
promoting policies and structural reforms are much needed priorities for the 
government. This must, however, be done without disrupting the fiscal 
consolidation process.  For this to happen, the enabling environment must be 
 10 
created for the private sector to play a more active role. We need consistent 
and predictable policies from the government and a more dynamic and 
entrepreneurial mindset from businesses.  
Government’s initiatives aimed at improving the economic and social 
infrastructure of the country, enhancing productivity, up- scaling skill levels of 
the labour force as well as expanding domestic production capacity are vital 
elements to support an accelerated and sustainable level of economic growth, 
while maintaining a continued low inflation environment. Timely 
implementation of consistent and coordinated policies in a coherent manner is 
also essential to ensure the realisation of the expected outcome of such 
policies. In this context, this Road Map intends to set the basis for strong 
policies and credible frameworks to achieve macroeconomic stability with the 
support of the government and private sector stakeholders.  
 The outline of the Road Map 2019 is as follows: 
Section 2: The Central Bank’s monetary policy strategy and policies for 2019 
and beyond 
Section 3: The Central Bank’s policies related to the financial sector 
performance and stability in 2019 and beyond 
Section 4: Policies Related to Ancillary and Agency Functions 
Now, let me elaborate further on these aspects. 
    11 
2.  Monetary Policy Strategy and Policies for 2019 and Beyond 
 The Central Bank conducts monetary policy in an increasingly forward looking 
manner with the aim of maintaining inflation at low and stable levels in the 
medium term thereby supporting the economy to reach its potential.  
In 2018, the Central Bank conducted its monetary policy in a challenging 
environment with rapidly evolving adverse global conditions as well as several 
upside and downside risks on the domestic front. New developments in the 
global economy in the wake of rate hikes in the United States and the 
economic normalisation in most advanced economies have demanded 
monetary authorities around the world to adjust their monetary policies 
accordingly. The Central Bank of Sri Lanka also had to consider domestic 
developments, such as the depreciation pressure on the currency due to 
capital outflows and the widening trade deficit, subpar economic growth, 
deceleration in monetary aggregates and credit, moderate levels of inflation as 
well as continuing deficit liquidity conditions in the money market. 
The tight monetary policy stance pursued by the Central Bank, since end 2015, 
by way of raising the Statutory Reserve Ratio (SRR) and policy interest rates 
yielded the desired outcomes, especially on demand driven inflation and trends 
in money and credit aggregates compared to 2016 and 2017. Such 
developments, in particular, the favourable developments in inflation, inflation 
outlook and the trends in the monetary sector, in an environment of lackluster 
growth performance, induced the Central Bank to signal the end of the 
tightening cycle in early April 2018, by way of reducing the Standing Lending 
Facility Rate (SLFR) by 25 basis points. Nevertheless, global economic 
 12 
conditions and the pressure on the exchange rate has compelled the Central 
Bank to maintain a neutral monetary policy stance since April 2018. 
In the conduct of monetary policy, market based policy tools, particularly policy 
rates and open market operations (OMOs) were widely used, while the SRR 
was also used as a tool of injecting liquidity to the market on a permanent 
basis. In view of the large and persistent shortage in rupee liquidity, the 
Monetary Board decided to reduce SRR applicable on all rupee deposit 
liabilities of commercial banks to 6.00 per cent from 7.50 per cent in November 
2018. The reduction in SRR released a substantial amount of rupee liquidity to 
the banking system, which could have led to a reduction in interest rates and 
excess aggregate demand. Therefore, in order to neutralise the impact of the 
SRR reduction and maintain its neutral monetary policy stance, the Central 
Bank raised policy interest rates simultaneously.  
Since the announcement of the transition towards FIT, we have broadly 
maintained low levels of inflation in spite of some occasional upticks and 
downturns due to various demand and supply shocks stemming from the 
external and domestic fronts. Benefiting from prudent and proactive monetary 
policy measures that were also supported by several macroprudential 
measures, monetary expansion was contained at desired levels, thereby 
supporting the maintenance of low levels of inflation during 2018.  
As you all know, the Central Bank has an unblemished track record of 
maintaining single digit inflation continuously for a decade. This also shows the 
Central Bank’s strong commitment to price stability, which it considers to be of 
utmost importance to create an enabling environment for the economy to 
 13 
achieve an accelerated trajectory of economic growth, to uplift the standards 
of living of the people. The Central Bank will be resolute in preserving this 
achievement of a low inflation environment going forward irrespective of 
domestic and international challenges that we may face in future. 
This is the prime reason why the Central Bank has embarked on a mission to 
upgrade the monetary policy framework with a view to strengthening the 
ability of the Central Bank to deliver sustained price stability amidst a rapidly 
evolving environment characterised by elevated uncertainty. During the year 
2018, significant progress was made towards the transition to FIT in terms of 
initiating necessary amendments to the Monetary Law Act (MLA) with a view 
to establishing a strong Central Bank mandate, building effective fiscal-
monetary coordination and further improving technical and institutional 
capacity.  
Let me elaborate on a few important areas in relation to the progress towards 
FIT. Last year, we highlighted the need and the importance of strengthening 
the existing mandate of the Central Bank to perform its key tasks related to 
price stability. It is widely accepted that a strong legal mandate is an essential 
prerequisite for the successful adoption of FIT as it is considered the linchpin 
that holds the entire framework together. Hence, as an important step, the 
approval of the Cabinet of Ministers was obtained in principle to introduce 
comprehensive amendments to the MLA, particularly in the areas of 
strengthening Central Bank independence and facilitating the adoption of FIT 
as the monetary policy framework, in addition to other amendments to 
improve governance of the Central Bank, strengthen financial sector oversight 
and also to boost fiscal-monetary coordination. Accordingly, the Central Bank, 
 14 
assisted by legal experts from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), is in the 
final stages of drafting the revisions to the MLA, which will address long 
standing concerns, such as the focus on non-core and quasi-fiscal activities, 
monetary financing as well as limits to Central Bank autonomy by way of clearly 
demarcating the powers and functions related to monetary policy. In addition, 
the remit of price stability will be elevated to the status of the prime objective 
of the Central Bank. The revised legislation will also facilitate institutional 
arrangements for setting inflation targets and improvements to monetary 
operations, as well as macroprudential tools. These legislative amendments 
would not only improve the overall focus of the mandate but would also boost 
the credibility of the Central Bank through an enhanced governance 
framework and autonomy as well as greater accountability and transparency of 
the Central Bank. We expect to submit the amended MLA to the Cabinet of 
Ministers and the Parliament for approval this year. 
Another important element in our transition towards FIT is improving the skills, 
capabilities and capacities of our staff as well as the systems and procedures to 
establish a solid framework for forward-looking monetary policy conduct. A 
key step towards this advancement was when we partnered with the IMF,  
4 years back, to develop a comprehensive, model-based Forecasting and Policy 
Analysis System (FPAS) to enhance the monetary policy decision making 
process. Substantial progress has been made in this regard, yielding a marked 
improvement in the modelling and forecasting capacity of the Central Bank, 
thereby enhancing the forward-looking monetary policy decision making 
process. The details of this modelling framework are in the public domain now. 
Going forward, the Central Bank will focus on devoting resources towards 
 15 
further improving technical capacity and infrastructure, which would help 
generate timely and reliable model-based projections for macroeconomic 
analyses. The Central Bank has already planned to launch a number of new 
surveys and compile an array of new indicators to support monetary policy 
analysis. We continuously endeavour to improve the existing data collection 
and compilation efforts. These include several production trends related early 
warning indicators, upgraded price indices, extension of PMI surveys to sectors 
that need focused attention, and several digitalisation initiatives. We are also in 
the process of further expanding the household sector Inflation Expectations 
Survey (IES) beyond the Colombo District through the Country-Wide Data 
Collection System (CWDCS) with the intention of improving its coverage and 
precision.  
 As we have highlighted on many occasions, strong commitment and the 
support from the government is essential towards adopting FIT as the 
framework for monetary policy. It is heartening to note that the government 
has recognised FIT as the prospective monetary policy framework for Sri Lanka 
and it has been adopting policies aimed at fiscal consolidation in the medium to 
long run. We welcome government’s efforts related to revenue based fiscal 
consolidation, which is aimed at raising revenues, while rationalising 
expenditure of the government. We expect that implementing the new Inland 
Revenue Act, improving tax administration supported by the full roll-out of the 
RAMIS system and improving tax compliance will be instrumental in raising 
revenues.  In addition, introducing measures to rationalise expenditure, 
strengthen public debt management through the enactment of the Active 
Liability Management Act, No. 8 of 2018 (ALMA) and introduce required 
 16 
reforms to State Owned Enterprises (SOBEs) as well as reinforce the Medium-
Term Debt Management Strategy (MTDS) aiming to contain the exposure of 
foreign currency liabilities were all encouraging moves by the government.  
Similar to other country experiences, the inflation target in the FIT framework 
is expected to be decided jointly by the government and the Central Bank. 
Hence, the FIT framework requires these two institutions to work together, as 
there should be no misalignment between fiscal and monetary policy.   
The Central Bank will continue to resort to active OMOs to manage liquidity in 
the money market, thereby guiding the short-term market interest rate, which 
is the key operating target to navigate inflation in the targeted range. I wish to 
emphasise the fact that OMOs are a strategy to manage market liquidity to 
align short term market interest rates with the policy stance and not a 
mechanism to print new money by purchasing or holding Treasury bills by the 
Central Bank as wrongly interpreted by some analysts. A clear distinction must 
be made between such OMOs, widely practiced by central banks, and 
monetising the fiscal deficit through the central bank purchasing Treasury bills 
issued on behalf of the government. Further, we have implemented several 
measures to provide more information to market participants thereby 
facilitating an efficient price discovery process in the financial markets. The 
Central Integrated Market Monitor (CIMM) system was introduced, in January 
2018. The system captures vital market information from the call money, the 
government securities and the foreign exchange markets. Daily liquidity 
estimation was further improved with the implementation of the liquidity 
reporting system through the CIMM. Further, a policy intervention by way of 
restricting non- bank primary dealers from participating in OMO auctions was 
 17 
made in the money market with a view to strengthening the signaling effect of 
OMO auctions. Non-bank primary dealers continued to enjoy access to 
standing facilities and the intra-day liquidity facility. Meanwhile, at the most 
recent policy rate adjustment, we narrowed down the policy rate corridor to 
100 basis points with a view to reducing the volatility in overnight interest 
rates.   
Looking ahead, we are in the process of exploring the feasibility of a single 
policy rate instead of the current corridor system to give clearer signals on the 
interest rates, reduce volatility in the call money rate and increase the 
transparency in the monetary implementation process. Also, the hair cut policy 
relating to the pricing of securities will be reviewed in line with international 
best practices to ensure smooth operations in the money market. We will be 
looking into expanding money market activities in a comprehensive manner by 
introducing new instruments such as Interest Rate Swaps (IRS) and non-
deliverable forwards (NDF).  
In order to improve the competitiveness of the banking sector, the Central 
Bank is also planning to introduce a more cost reflective alternative benchmark 
interest rate, which will be based on the marginal cost of banks. 
Although we do not consider the exchange rate as an objective of monetary 
policy conduct, a market-based exchange rate remains key instrument to 
facilitate the inflation targeting framework. To this end, the Central Bank will 
continue to follow a more market-based exchange rate system, allowing the 
exchange rate to act as the shock absorber in the envisaged FIT framework.  
The FIT framework brings about a qualitative change in the pass-through of the 
 18 
effects of currency deprecation onto the overall rate of inflation. By adopting 
forward looking and proactive monetary policy formulation, the cost-push 
effects of depreciation can be countered by managing aggregate demand 
through interest rate adjustments to ensure inflation remains within the 
targeted range.   
Being guided by this principle, since September 2015, we have allowed greater 
flexibility in the exchange rate. However, during 2018, we saw a significant 
depreciation of the exchange rate amidst global market conditions, particularly 
with the surge in capital outflows, increased pressure on the current account 
as well as excessive speculation in the market. During such times, we need to 
ensure orderly adjustment in markets. Hence it was necessary for the Central 
Bank to intervene in a prudent manner without sacrificing much of our 
reserves. Going forward, the Central Bank will continue to adopt an exchange 
rate policy, with cautious interventions at times of excessive volatility in the 
forex market. This policy is also designed to maintain the competitiveness of 
the exchange rate and support the rebalancing of the current account, thereby 
supporting a gradual buildup of foreign exchange reserves as an external 
buffer. 
Due to the reversal of foreign capital flows in view of rising global interest 
rates, the country’s ability in financing the current account deficit through 
financial flows, while strengthening reserves, would be a challenging task. 
Without achieving a sustainable deficit in the current account and attracting 
long term, non-debt creating financial flows in the form of foreign direct 
investments (FDI), the external sector will remain vulnerable even in the 
medium and long term. Hence, a rapid boost in exports and FDI should be the 
 19 
priority for policymakers, without which the external sector will remain 
vulnerable to short term domestic and external shocks. A significant growth of 
merchandise exports of at least 10 per cent with annual FDI flows in the range 
of US dollars 2 to 3 billion, supported by healthy earnings in the services sector 
and continuing contributions from workers’ remittances are needed to ensure 
a gradual rebalancing of the current account and a strong financial account. 
Hence, sustained measures are needed to improve investor confidence to 
ensure that short term vulnerabilities are not translated into long term 
structural deficiencies. 
Foreign reserve management activities of the Central Bank will continue to be 
based on a model based Strategic Asset Allocation (SAA) framework, which 
was developed with the support of the Reserve Advisory and Management 
Program (RAMP) of World Bank. This methodology is expected to ensure that 
foreign reserves are managed with the objective of ensuring an adequate level 
of liquidity, a reasonable return in comparison to the benchmarks and to 
exploit any active strategies with the view of making an excess return if the 
market conditions permit. Further, the Central Bank is in the process of 
introducing a superior alternative USD/LKR reference rate for the benefit of all 
stakeholders, including foreign investors. 
As you are aware, in view of the deterioration in the BOP and to support the 
government’s reform agenda, Sri Lanka obtained a three-year Extended Fund 
Facility (EFF) from the IMF, in 2015, and we have already received five tranches 
of this Facility. Although the developments over the past weeks have delayed 
the progress that Sri Lanka has been making under the IMF Programme, we 
hope to keep the IMF Programme on track this year. While this will 
 20 
categorically support the country’s external sector, the reforms would also 
help boost investor confidence and productivity of the economy. These are key 
drivers in enhancing growth of the economy. 
As inflation targeting involves managing and anchoring inflation expectations 
effectively, transparency of monetary policy, particularly in terms of plans, 
objectives and decisions, is of utmost importance. Hence, as transparency is 
achieved through effective communication, as a prospective inflation targeter, 
the Central Bank is very conscious of the need for a well devised 
communication strategy.  
Accordingly, a number of initiatives have already been taken by us to enhance 
the communication strategy. We have enhanced the analytical value of the 
regular monetary policy press releases with the support of the IMF, while 
maintaining clarity, simplicity and enhancing the forward looking approach. In 
addition, we have initiated programmes on educating, particularly journalists 
and other stakeholders, regarding FIT.  Further, several measures are in the 
pipeline, including the issuing of regular Monetary Policy Reports, which will be 
developed into Inflation Reports in the future and expanding the public 
awareness outreach programme, which will be implemented during next two 
years as set out in the road map for FIT. 
As another important step, we re-commenced publishing an advance release 
calendar for regular monetary policy announcements last year. Continuing this 
practice, we wish to present the advance release calendar for monetary policy 
announcements for the year 2019 as set out below.  
  21 
Monetary Policy Announcements in 2019 
Announcement No. 
Date of Announcement 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
22 February, Friday 
10 April, Wednesday 
31 May, Friday 
12 July, Friday 
23 August, Friday 
11 October, Friday 
15 November, Friday 
27 December, Friday 
 Currently, although the global economy is somewhat less robust than it was in 
the first half of 2018, the pace of global growth remains strong pointing to 
further normalisation of monetary policy in major economies.  This has 
necessitated most emerging market economies to adjust their monetary policy 
in view of addressing economic imbalances associated with capital flows, 
currency depreciation, trade wars, etc. Taking such trends into consideration 
and responding to domestic economic developments, we will continue to 
remain vigilant in formulating our monetary policy to ensure sustained 
economic and price stability in Sri Lanka. 
   22 
3. Financial Sector Policies for 2019 and Beyond 
 In fulfilling the responsibilities entrusted by the MLA, the Central Bank 
continues to foster a vibrant, resilient and strong financial sector, which 
facilitates economic growth through efficient allocation of resources. In pursuit 
of this, the Central Bank acts as the apex regulatory and supervisory institution 
of the financial system. It seeks to promote dynamic and stable financial 
institutions, while facilitating an efficient payment and settlement system.   
In 2018, the financial sector performed well amidst challenging market 
conditions in the domestic as well as the global environment. Asset growth of 
the banking sector was at favourable levels with the improvements in liquidity 
and capital levels, while financial outreach also strengthened during 2018, 
despite the slowdown observed in the non-bank financial sector.  
Strengthening the regulatory and supervisory framework of the banking sector 
remains at the centre of our financial sector policy. During 2018, the regulatory 
and supervisory framework pertaining to licensed banks was further 
strengthened with the introduction of an array of policy measures in line with 
international standards and best practices. During 2018, the Central Bank 
issued Directions on Basel III liquidity standards and Directions on leverage 
ratio. The Directions on leverage standards are also being issued. In addition, 
the Central Bank issued Directions on foreign currency borrowings by licensed 
banks with a view to promoting transparency and further strengthening risk 
management aspects of foreign borrowings by banks.  
 23 
Meanwhile, to strengthen risk management, the Central Bank issued Directions 
on financial derivative transactions of licensed banks. A regulatory framework 
for appointment of agents was also issued. The Direction largely focuses on the 
approval and selection process of agents, responsibilities of banks, permitted 
activities, risk management and oversight, customer protection and dispute 
resolution. Further, adoption of Sri Lanka Financial Reporting Standards 9 on 
financial reporting of financial instruments is another progressive policy 
measure adopted in line with international best practices. The Central Bank 
also issued guidelines to banks on the adoption of SLFRS 9 in consultation with 
the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka for consistent and prudent 
application of standards. 
The Central Bank has already initiated drafting a new Banking Act with a view 
to further strengthening the regulatory framework pertaining to licensed 
banks. The overall mandate for supervision and regulation, strengthening 
corporate governance, digital banking, consolidated supervision, resolution, 
monetary penalties/fines, ring-fencing, mergers, acquisitions and consolidation, 
subsidiarisation of foreign banks and differentiated regulatory frameworks for 
a tiered banking structure are the key policy aspects to be factored into the 
proposed Act. In addition, the Banking Sustainability Rating Index (BSRI) will 
be implemented from 2019 for risk based supervision and planning the 
supervisory calendar.  
As banks are frequent targets for cyber-attacks and other information security 
threats, a road map and a consultation paper were issued to improve 
technology risk resilience in the banking sector in line with international 
 24 
standards and best practices. A Banking Direction in this regard will be issued in 
2019. 
As the regulator, we believe that share ownership in banks needs to be broad-
based to strengthen corporate governance and to avoid ownership 
concentration, dominance in the boards, conflict of interest and risks 
associated with related party transactions. Therefore, the existing 
requirements on share ownership will be reviewed and certain additional 
measures will be brought in. In addition, fit and proper assessment criteria for 
appointment of Directors, CEOs and Key Management Personnel of banks will 
be strengthened further to appoint the most suitable and qualified individuals 
to the top positions in banks. Only persons with proven track records of good 
conduct and financial integrity would be considered for such appointments. 
Moreover, a broad-based policy on employment of expatriate staff considering 
the needs for external expert contribution will be introduced. Considering the 
significant developments in the banking environment and the professional 
accounting/auditing landscape, the minimum criteria for appointment of 
external auditors has already been reviewed and the panel of Qualified 
Auditors will be amended accordingly. 
With a view to further strengthening the market conduct and practices of 
treasury operations of licensed banks, the Central Bank intends to establish a 
new regulatory framework to ensure that treasury operations of licensed 
banks are carried out prudently and in line with the international best practices. 
The Central Bank will also formulate a crisis preparedness plan for the banking 
 25 
industry, to minimise the adverse impact on troubled banks and mitigate 
spillovers. A consultation paper will be issued to banks in this regard. 
As we firmly believe in the need for strengthening inter-regulatory cooperation 
and collaboration, a Memorandum of Understanding was signed between the 
Central Bank, Securities and Exchange Commission and Insurance Regulatory 
Commission on risk based consolidated supervision where the Central Bank will 
be the lead regulator. 
As we have reiterated on many occasions, market driven consolidation will be 
facilitated with the objective of promoting strong and dynamic banking and 
non-bank financial institutions to meet financial needs of the economy more 
effectively, while safeguarding the stability of the financial system. 
The performance of Licensed Finance Companies (LFCs) and Specialised 
Leasing Companies (SLCs) slowed down significantly during 2018 due to low 
credit growth, declining profitability and increasing nonperforming loans. The 
slowdown in the sector was also a result of moderate economic growth and 
the impact of natural calamities, such as floods and drought conditions that 
prevailed in 2017 and the first half of 2018. Policy measures taken to curb 
excessive demand for vehicle imports also impacted the sector significantly. 
Several regulations were introduced to strengthen non-bank financial 
institutions during 2018. A financial customer protection framework was 
introduced to protect customer interests and to strengthen customer 
confidence in the sector. 
 26 
A new capital adequacy framework for LFCs and SLCs was implemented with a 
view to fostering a strong emphasis on risk management and to encourage 
ongoing improvements in the risk assessment capabilities of the sector. In 
terms of the new framework, companies with assets over Rs.100 billion are 
required to maintain higher capital adequacy ratios.  
Moreover, a new Direction on Outsourcing of Business Operations was 
introduced to standardise outsourcing arrangements. A Direction was issued to 
regularise the valuation procedure of the LFCs and SLCs regarding immovable 
properties. In the interest of depositors and stability of the system, several 
resolution actions were taken in relation to distressed companies during 2018, 
including cancellation of some licences and introducing regulations on winding 
up LFCs.  
Going forward, the sector needs to cope with enhancement of the minimum 
capital requirement and higher loan loss provisioning with the introduction of 
Sri Lanka Financial Reporting Standards 9. Further, the change in the regulatory 
posture of the Central Bank will result in early interventions against non-
compliant, distressed and high risk LFCs. This will include regulatory actions, 
such as the restriction of business through deposit and lending caps as well as 
suspension and cancellation of licences. Further, guidelines are expected to be 
issued applicable for financial reporting of LFCs and SLCs. We will also consider 
issuing directions on the ownership limits. 
Also, capital levels of the sector are expected to be strengthened as a result of 
enhanced capital requirements. The LFCs and SLCs, which are unable to 
comply, will be encouraged to consolidate on a voluntary basis. Non-
 27 
compliance will result in restrictions on deposit and business expansion and, 
where necessary, winding up of businesses. Therefore, it will be necessary for 
LFCs to give priority to capital augmentation plans in the near future. There will 
be no regulatory forbearance in this respect. 
Initiatives are being taken to resolve remaining distressed companies, as per 
the provisions of the Finance Business Act (FBA), No.42 of 2011. Licenses of two 
distressed companies were cancelled and the settlement of the liabilities of 
existing depositors under the Sri Lanka Deposit Insurance and Liquidity 
Support Scheme (SLDILSS) is currently underway. Amendments are proposed 
to the FBA to facilitate expeditious resolution actions in respect of distressed 
finance companies.  
During 2018, the Central Bank continued its efforts to strengthen the payment 
and settlement infrastructure of the country, while developing an efficient 
national payment and settlement system, which is capable of catering to the 
growing payment needs of the economy.  
Let me mention some of these initiatives briefly. Approval has been granted to 
LankaClear (Pvt) Ltd to implement a National Card Scheme (NCS) under the 
brand name 'LankaPay' in partnership with an international card scheme. This 
system was launched 2018 with a licensed commercial bank commencing to 
issue LankaPay cards. 
As a result of the emergence of new payment technologies across the globe 
and the interest shown by local institutions to keep abreast of these 
technologies, the National Payments Council, which is the consultative 
 28 
committee on payment and settlement systems, appointed two committees to 
study developments in the Financial Technology (FinTech) sector and 
Blockchain technology. As per the recommendations made by the FinTech 
Committee, a National Quick Response (QR) Code Standard for Local Currency 
Payments branded as “LANKAQR” was issued to all financial institutions and 
operators of mobile phone based electronic money (e-money) systems to 
facilitate QR code based payments. Similarly, with regard to Blockchain 
technology, an inter-industry working committee is preparing a framework for 
a Blockchain based shared know-your-customer (KYC) solution. 
Further, the Central Bank appointed a taskforce to study on virtual currency 
schemes to examine regulatory steps that need to be taken to ensure system 
stability and the safety of public funds. In addition, several regulations were 
issued, in 2018, to ensure safe and efficient payment and settlement systems in 
the country. 
As for future plans and policies, the Central Bank will focus on promoting 
digital payment mechanisms to establish a less-cash society with a view to 
reducing cash management costs while enhancing safety and convenience. 
Accordingly, we will facilitate the implementation of a National Transit Card 
and Infrastructure Framework for ticketing and fare collection for the purpose 
of introducing a nationally accepted transit card for the country to be used in 
bus and rail transport. We will also continue to adopt measures to promote the 
usage of digital payment mechanisms by way of encouraging financial 
institutions to enable digital payment methods and creating awareness among 
general public on digital payment options and their benefits.  
 29 
It is also planned to establish a regulatory sandbox to enable introducing 
innovative FinTech products, while ensuring compliance with regulatory 
requirements.  
It is expected that these policies and measures will create the necessary 
environment for Sri Lanka to move into virtual banking and benefit from 
advanced technologies. We therefore, invite financial institutions to join these 
initiatives without delay. 
It is also a notable fact that the Sri Lankan financial system has become more 
interconnected and complex than ever before and more susceptible to shocks. 
Accordingly, the Central Bank recognises the importance of a more 
comprehensive macroprudential approach, which goes beyond supervision at 
individual firm level to look at broad market and economic factors that could 
have a material impact on the overall financial stability of the country. 
As we have already mentioned, stability of the financial system was preserved 
in 2018 amidst challenging market conditions with the help of timely 
macroprudential measures in addition to microprudential supervision and 
regulation. In this regard, a number of measures were taken by the Central 
Bank and the government to address the emerging systemic risks affecting 
financial system and macroeconomic stability. The imposition of Loan to Value 
(LTV) ratios on motor vehicle related lending, imposing margins on Letters of 
Credit (LC) on the importation of selected vehicle categories and non-essential 
items were among the policy measures taken by the Central Bank to mitigate 
emerging risks. The Central Bank will continue to resort to macroprudential 
measures to stabilise the overheating sectors in the economy, which can 
 30 
undermine system stability. We expect to incorporate provisions for a stronger 
macroprudential framework into the proposed amendments to the Central 
Bank law. 
There are new areas that we are looking to operate under the macroprudential 
surveillance framework of the Central Bank. These include analysing trends in 
banking sector and non-banking sector exposure to the corporate sector, 
assessing the impact of dynamic provisioning frameworks on the banking 
sector, analysing financial sector exposure to the household sector, evaluating 
the possibility of introducing Escrow accounts to safeguard the residential 
property buyers and to achieve long term stability of the real estate market as 
well as commencing multivariable stress tests for LFCs covering credit, market 
and liquidity risks. 
We have recognised risk management as a key strategic priority of the Central 
Bank, and we are in the process of implementing an Enterprise-wide Risk 
Management (ERM) Framework, which is intended to promote a culture of 
informed risk-taking at all levels. Accordingly, the Risk Governance Framework 
and the Risk Management Policy of the Central Bank were approved by the 
Monetary Board in 2018, and relevant committees were formed and meetings 
were convened to make the framework functional. We expect to develop Risk 
Registers and implement an Incident Reporting Mechanism in 2019. With 
regard to financial risk management, we will further strengthen the risk 
management framework of the fund management activities.  
With the growing priority being attached to achieving the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) as well as promoting greener and climate friendly 
 31 
growth activities by providing productive and sustainable investment, the 
Central Bank initiated a process of promoting sustainable finance practices in 
Sri Lanka in 2017. Accordingly, with the view of providing policy direction to the 
financial sector, the Central Bank is in the process of developing a ‘Road Map 
for Sustainable Finance in Sri Lanka’. For this process, we are obtaining the 
technical assistance from International Finance Corporation of the World Bank 
(IFC-WB) and financial assistance from the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP). Going forward, we intend to launch the ‘Road Map for 
Sustainable Finance’ during 2019 which would serve as a reference for all 
stakeholders in formulating their own sustainable finance policies. 
 32 
4. Policies Related to Ancillary and Agency Functions  
 In addition to our core functions, we have effectively performed several 
ancillary and agency functions as well. We have performed these functions to 
support the smooth functioning of the economy and the financial system, thus 
contributing to strengthen the broader economy. 
 Currency Management 
The Central Bank has the exclusive right to issue currency notes and coins on 
behalf of the government. During 2018, we continued to perform this function 
as per our mandate. In spite of increased use of technology driven non-cash 
modes of payment, demand for currency notes and coins increased in 2018 in 
line with the expansion of the economy. In 2018, we launched a new coinage 
and issued a commemorative currency note and a coin.  Further, we have 
introduced policy measures against willfully altered, defaced or mutilated 
currency notes in order to preserve the quality of currency notes in Sri Lanka. 
We also conducted an array of awareness programmes for the general public 
on our clean note policy. 
Going forward, to improve currency operations and processes, the 
construction of a new secure storage facility has been initiated at the Centre 
for Banking Studies premises in Rajagiriya. The facility is expected to be 
operational from 2019. As a medium-term solution to improve operational 
efficiency and increase processing capacity of currency notes, we are planning 
 33 
to redesign the current operational flow with the introduction of new 
machinery and equipment. We plan to issue a new note series, in 2021, with a 
view to enhancing the quality of currency notes. We are also planning to 
establish a proper mechanism to distribute coins and to introduce coin vending 
machines. Further, we intend to enhance contingency storage capacity for 
currency with selected Regional Offices, while introducing a stronger 
monitoring system for Cash in Transit (CIT) companies. 
 Public Debt Management 
As the fiscal agent of the government, we continued to issue, service and 
manage public debt during 2018 with transparency and prudence and initiated 
several policies to ensure that the government’s financing requirements are 
met at the lowest possible cost with a prudent degree of risk, while ensuring 
debt sustainability. 
During 2018, we encountered several challenges in government debt 
management due to interest rate normalisation in the US, the skewed 
government financing requirement as well as uncertainties in the political 
sphere. These factors affected the government’s borrowing cost and imposed 
pressure on achieving targets under the Medium-Term Debt Management 
Strategy (MTDS), particularly towards the latter part of 2018 with the upward 
adjustment in yield rates and market preference for short to medium term 
maturities.  
 34 
The new Treasury bond issuance system, which was introduced, in July 2017, 
was reviewed at the end of first quarter of 2018 taking into account the 
performance of the issuance system and the feedback from market 
participants to further enhance the efficiency and transparency of the issuance 
process of government securities. Several improvements, including an 
enhanced market based acceptance arrangement as a prerequisite for the 
activation of phase III are to be introduced to the Treasury bond issuance 
system, by the end of the first quarter of 2019. 
Further, the auction calendar for Treasury bonds and Treasury bills was 
published by the Central Bank on a rolling basis with the view of improving 
transparency and predictability of the primary auction process and the 
government securities market in general. 
We are contemplating taking several measures to develop market and debt 
management practices in 2019. With the passage of the Active Liability 
Management Act (ALMA), in March 2018, we have laid the groundwork for 
liability management exercises in the domestic and foreign market. In 
consultation with the Ministry of Finance, we have already earmarked actions 
to implement liability management techniques on future debt obligations and 
the proceeds mobilised would be maintained in a ring-fenced arrangement to 
meet future debt liabilities. 
With the view of enhancing the transparency and tradability in the secondary 
market, measures are being taken to introduce a new primary issuance system 
for Treasury bills. A distinct electronic trading platform, with a central counter 
party (CCP) arrangement for government securities, along with required legal 
 35 
reforms to deepen and broaden the secondary market for Treasury bills and 
Treasury bonds, as well as a mechanism to disseminate secondary market 
information on debt instruments through the proposed e-trading platform and 
a clearing house are to be established.  
In addition, the Medium Term Debt Strategy (MTDS) is to be further 
streamlined with the assistance of multilateral agencies. Further, we will 
introduce amendments to the Local Treasury Bills Ordinance (LTBO) and 
Registered Stock and Securities Ordinance (RSSO) to ensure smooth and 
efficient functioning of the debt management system. 
In view of the increased volatility in global financial markets, we also intend to 
reduce the threshold for foreign investment in rupee denominated 
Government securities from 10 per cent of the outstanding Government 
securities stock at present to 5 per cent. 
Management of the Employees’ Provident Fund 
In discharging powers and duties vested with the Monetary Board in relation to 
the largest superannuation fund in Sri Lanka, Employees’ Provident Fund (EPF), 
the Central Bank has strived to improve the services provided to its 
stakeholders, while ensuring the enhancement of the return to members and 
the safety of the Fund. 
During 2018, the EPF continued its fund management activities to enhance 
returns by aligning the investment strategy with market conditions. Also, 
several measures were taken to improve the overall risk management 
framework of the EPF with a view to enhancing accountability and the 
 36 
transparency of investment activities. As a part of this process, new 
Investment Policy Statement and Investment Guidelines were introduced. The 
governance structure of the EPF risk management was also strengthened 
through the establishment of an EPF Investment Oversight Committee in 
addition to the EPF Investment Committee to monitor investment activities.  
With the assistance of the Asian Development Bank (ADB), EPF carried out a 
Business Review with the objective of streamlining and improving its current 
activities. In addition, the actions pertaining to procuring a new ICT system to 
automate EPF activities were continued with the assistance of Word Bank. 
With a view to facilitating web based services, we developed the EPF website 
and it is expected to be launched shortly. Real time validation of member 
details and the member account updating procedure were continued through 
online banking systems of LCBs in 2018. 
Going forward, EPF expects to generate the highest level of risk adjusted 
return through different investment strategies, while adhering to the new 
Investment Policy Statement and Investment Guidelines. The Fund, as a long 
term institutional investor, is seeking to capitalise on new market opportunities 
and instruments through a comprehensive investment diversification process.  
 Foreign Exchange Management 
The liberalisation of foreign exchange transactions was advanced with the 
introduction of foreign exchange Act No. 12 of 2017 (FEA). Accordingly, 
procedures for inward capital flows by foreign investors were further simplified 
and streamlined while limits on outward capital flows by residents were further 
 37 
broadened in selected areas. The new regulatory measures also include the 
relaxation on foreign exchange transactions, which enable general permission 
to Authorised Dealers to transfer enhanced eligible migration allowance in 
order to overcome procedural delay. 
We are in the process of reviewing stakeholders’ feedback on the new 
regulations, orders and directions issued in 2017 under the FEA and intend to 
revisit those with a view to further simplifying the regulations to improve 
clarity.  
We intend to take actions to revisit liberalised capital transactions based on the 
analysis of macroeconomic dynamics supported by policy oriented research. 
We also plan to review the criteria in granting permission for money changing 
businesses to increase healthy competition among market players and reduce 
informal market activities. The monitoring function will be strengthened 
further by developing a new real time foreign exchange reporting and 
monitoring system to capture data on foreign exchange sales and purchases. 
With a view to obtaining all data pertaining to cross border and internal 
transactions in foreign currency, we intend to put in place a comprehensive 
International Transactions Reporting System (ITRS). 
Meanwhile, as there are no clear provisions under the FEA to combat 
unauthorised and unlawful activities involving foreign exchange, several 
enforceable sanctions are expected to be introduced into the FEA to enable 
the Department of Foreign Exchange to strengthen its surveillance of 
unauthorised foreign exchange market activities. 
 38 
Financial Intelligence Unit 
We will also act towards strengthening the national Anti-Money Laundering 
and Countering the Financing of Terrorism policy framework of the country.  
Considerable progress has been made in completing the Action Plan agreed 
with the FATF, and our expectation is that Sri Lanka will be taken off the FATF’s 
‘grey list’ by mid 2019. 
 We have also expanded our reach by way of entering into Memoranda of 
Understanding with several agencies such as the Securities and Exchange 
Commission, Insurance Regulatory Commission and the Department of Motor 
Traffic. Moving ahead, several progressive policies will be adopted with the 
coordination of all stakeholders to deepen financial intelligence services.  
 Regional Development 
With a view to enhancing inclusive and balanced economic growth through 
effective credit delivery and financial inclusion in the country, we continued to 
develop and implement new development finance policy strategies during 
2018.  
We continued to coordinate, facilitate and implement various refinance, 
interest subsidy and credit guarantee schemes, while providing a range of 
credit supplementary services. Individuals and the Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises (MSME) scattered across the country were served by providing 
affordable finance through these schemes.  
 39 
To increase the level of financial inclusion, a series of financial literacy and skill 
development programmes were also conducted, with a special focus on those 
who have not accessed the formal financial sector. We intend to continue 
these initiatives in 2019 as well.  
Most importantly, we initiated actions to develop a National Financial Inclusion 
Strategy (NFIS) for Sri Lanka with the aim of promoting a more effective and 
efficient process to improve financial inclusion across the country. In this 
regard, the Central Bank signed a Cooperation Agreement with the IFC in 
January 2018. As a part of the NFIS, an island-wide survey was conducted to 
understand the overview and landscape of the current level of financial 
inclusion and financial literacy across the country. 
NFIS is expected to be launched by Mid-2019 to bring in financially excluded 
segments to the formal financial sector thereby promoting inclusive and 
balanced economic growth, while encouraging MSMEs in Agriculture, Industry 
and Services sectors by ensuring access to affordable financial services for 
production oriented economic activities. 
      40 
5.  Concluding Remarks 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
We have come to the conclusion of my speech. 
At the outset, I mentioned that our country faced several difficulties during 
2018 which threatened macroeconomic stability. However, in retrospect, I can 
record that the Central Bank and the government decisively intervened and 
implemented several policy measures to mitigate the impact of such challenges 
and uncertainties. It is evident that these measures have helped us to 
withstand certain shocks that we faced and to ensure broader stability of the 
economy in spite of some sectoral imbalances. Nevertheless, we do 
acknowledge that several challenges and threats still prevail and there is a 
plethora of impending risks that may exert further pressures on overall 
macroeconomic and financial system stability. We believe that preemptive and 
effective policy measures would help us to mitigate those challenges and guide 
our economy and the financial sector in the right direction and ultimately 
achieve the price, economic and financial system stability to create a conducive 
enabling environment to improve the living standards of our people. We stand 
ready to pursue policies and introduce any course corrections if they become 
necessary in today’s volatile and uncertain world.    
Before I conclude, it is my solemn duty and responsibility to convey my deep 
sense of gratitude and appreciation to several individuals and parties who 
constantly supported the efforts of the Central Bank.  First and foremost, I am 
extremely grateful to His Excellency the President and the Honourable Prime 
 41 
Minister for their leadership and guidance. I would also like to thank 
Honourable Minister of Finance for his support, especially to strengthen the 
independence of the Central Bank while ensuring the close coordination 
between the Ministry and the Central Bank.  
Further, I owe a special debt of gratitude for the ample support and fruitful 
discussions and inputs from the Members of the Monetary Board of the Central 
Bank. My sincere appreciation goes to Secretaries to the Treasury who served 
as ex-officio members of the Monetary Board during 2018. I am also grateful to 
Mrs. Manohari Ramanathan, Mr. Chrisantha Perera and Mr. Nihal Fonseka 
whose unstinting support, as members of the Monetary Board, was extremely 
invaluable and substantive. I am also grateful to Senior Deputy Governor Dr. 
Nandalal Weerasinghe, and the Deputy Governors, Mr. K D Ranasinghe, Mr. S R 
Attygalle and Mr. H A Karunaratne. Their support and contribution in terms of 
highly professional advice and excellent technical expertise helped me to 
effectively discharge the duties as the CEO of this iconic institution. I would 
also like to acknowledge the extraordinary service rendered by former Deputy 
Governor, Mr. C J P Siriwardana, who retired from the Bank service last year. 
I am also thankful to the members of the Monetary Policy Consultative 
Committee, Financial System Stability Consultative Committee as well as the 
Monetary Board Advisory Audit Committee for their valuable views and 
suggestions, which helped us immensely in better calibrating our policies and 
operations. 
  42 
Last and most importantly, I would also like to express my sincere gratitude to 
the Assistant Governors, Senior Heads and Heads of Departments, particularly 
the Director of Economic Research and the Staff of the Economic Research 
Department for their effort in producing this policy document. It is my pleasure 
to acknowledge my colleagues in the Governor’s Secretariat who support me 
on a day-to-day basis. I would be lost without their assistance. 
In my view, the greatest asset of the Central Bank is its staff without whom we 
cannot deliver our tasks and achieve our objectives for the nation. I thank all 
Staff of the Central Bank who serve the nation with professionalism, technical 
excellence and integrity and more importantly with vigour and enthusiasm 
even amidst turbulences.  
I would like to conclude by quoting Ben Bernanke, Professor of Economics and 
former Chairman of the U.S. Federal Reserve's Board of Governors: “The more 
guidance a central bank can provide the public about how policy is likely to 
evolve the greater the chance that market participants will make appropriate 
inferences” 
I believe that policies and plans unveiled in relation to the monetary and 
financial sector would be instrumental in ensuring continued stability in our 
economy. The effectiveness and the success of those policies cannot be 
realised without your support as stakeholders, and I am sure, as in the last year 
and in the past, you would continue to extend your maximum support going 
forward. 
Thank you and I wish you all a Happy and Prosperous New year 2019. 
 43 
