François Villeroy de Galhau: Twenty years after the introduction of
the euro, what are the economic prospects for Europe?
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at The Bridge Forum
Dialogue conference, Luxembourg, 10 January 2019.
Accompanying slides of the speech.
 I would particularly like to thank Olivier de Bandt, Chahinez Benmissi, Laurent Ferrara, Rémy
Lecat,  Bérengère  Rudelle,  Giulia  Sestieri  and  Édouard  Vidon  for  their  help  in  preparing  this
speech.
Ladies and gentlemen,
I am delighted to speak before you this evening here in Luxembourg, one of the founding capitals
of Europe and a bridge between France and Germany for 180 years. I would like to extend my
warmest  thanks  to  my  friend  and  colleague  Gaston  Reinesch  for  his  invitation  to  the  Bridge
Forum Dialogue. I stand before you as a committed European: this month – January 2019 – we
celebrate  20  years  of  the  euro,  the  common  currency  of  340  million  Europeans.  The  three
principles  on  which  we  have  built  this  success  (I)  must  guide  us  in  addressing  Europe’s
challenges in the face of 2019’s uncertainties and in working towards the progress that we still
need to make (II).
 I. The euro’s success was built on three principles that are now more vital than ever
As to whether the euro has been a success; there are few among us this evening who would
have any doubts. It is more interesting to look back on the reasons for this success, which, to my
mind,  was  built  on  three  founding  principles:  the  Eurosystem’s mandate  of  maintaining  price
stability;  the means employed to carry out this mandate, i.e. independence; and the spirit that
drives its action – general European interest.
A - The mandate: price stability
The Eurosystem has been entrusted with a very clear mandate by the European treaties:  its
primary  objective  is  to  “maintain  price  stability”,  in  other  words  to  avoid  prolonged  periods  of
excessive inflation – as seen in Germany after World Wars I and II – or deflation – seen following
the  crisis  of  1929  –,  which  have  consistently  negative  effects  on  the  economy.  Price  stability
preserves household purchasing power; and more than that, it builds confidence in the value of
the  currency  and  consequently  reinforces  the  confidence  of  economic  players  in  all  their
decisions for the future, from investment to contract conclusion. Some observers would have
preferred a “dual mandate” to target both inflation and growth or full employment, as is the case
with  the  US  Federal  Reserve  (the  Fed),  for  example.  However,  this  would  be  politically
unattainable given German culture and not particularly different in economic practice.
1
In 1998, the ECB established a quantitative definition of price stability that it went on to clarify in
2003:  to  maintain  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  Other  major
central banks such as the Fed and the Bank of Japan followed the example of the ECB, in 2012
and  2013  respectively,  and  also  adopted  the  same  2%  inflation  target.  This  “conceptual
convergence”  is remarkable. Incidentally, even though exchange rates are not a monetary policy
target, we should note that the euro traded at USD 1.17 on 1 January 1999 and at USD 1.14 at
the end of December 2018, with an average rate of USD 1.21 between 1999 and 2018.
2
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
With regard to our mandate, the results are tangible [slide 1]. During the 20 year period prior to
the introduction of the euro (1979-98), average inflation in the euro area was at 4.9%, compared
with only 1.7% during the 20 years that have followed. What’s more, better controlled inflation
means  lower  financing  costs  as  risk  premiums  are  reduced.  Interest  rate  differentials  and
sovereign  spreads  have  consequently  narrowed  significantly  [slide  2].  The  France-Germany
spread fell from an average of 1.9% between 1986 and 1992 – the period of the single market
without a single currency, between the Single European Act and Maastricht – to 0.4% in 2017-18.
The Italy-Germany spread has narrowed by 3 percentage points. If, theoretically, one of these
countries wished to leave the euro, it would in all likelihood experience an immediate at-least-
equivalent  increase  in  its  public  financing  costs  as  well  as  its  private  financing  costs  to
households and businesses.
Furthermore, in terms of growth [slide 3], euro area per capita GDP has improved almost as
rapidly as in the United States since the euro was introduced (an annual average of 1.1% in the
euro  area  between  1999  and  2017,  compared  with  1.2%  in  the  United  States),  with  the  gap
between the two only widening slightly during the 2011-12 European crisis.
B - The means: independence
3
The  means  employed  to  carry  out  this  mandate  is  the  independence  of  Eurosystem  central
banks. Beyond the initial example of the Bundesbank, this independence became established in
economic research  after the Great Inflation of the 1970s: governments hope that by accepting a
little too much inflation they can prolong the growth cycle; but this hope is illusory as economic
4
players  rationally  anticipate  this  “inflationary  bias”  –  and  thus  amplify  it.  Empirical  evidence
confirms  that  as  a  country’s  central  bank  is  granted  greater  independence,  its  inflation
decreases.  Nevertheless, independence  is  still  contested  in  our  democracies,  starting
unfortunately with the greatest of them all. Independence only has real value if there is a clear
mandate  –  price  stability  –  and robust performance-based accountability  to  the  country’s
citizens  and  their  representatives:  every  year  the  President  of  the  ECB  is  summoned  to  four
hearings before the European Parliament and gives eight press conferences (i.e. twice that of
the Fed up to this year), while the Governing Council has published its accounts since 2015. At
the same time, the ECB must take heed of economic and social players.
Independence is not only secured in legislation, but also by the people that have embodied it for
the past 20 years: Wim Duisenberg, Jean-Claude Trichet, and today, Mario Draghi. I would go so
far as to talk of a threefold independence: from national governments of course, but also from
pre-existing camps (the hawks and the doves) or schools of thought, even if all three of them
have  their  own  well-established  economic  background.  Consequently,  they  have  been  able  to
take  a  pragmatic  approach  to  innovation:  for  example,  when  Jean Claude  Trichet  addressed
bank liquidity risk through the Fixed Rate Full Allotment in 2008 or introduced the first security
purchases with the SMP in 2010; and of course when Mario Draghi gave his “whatever it takes”
speech  in  July  2012  or  began  expanding  non-standard  instruments  in  2014.  And  finally,
independence from trends in the media and short-termism, which I shall come back to later. 
C - The spirit: general European interest
These  three  men  have  also  upheld  the  European  spirit,  through  their  culture  and  their
convictions. Far from being a technocratic arrangement, initially the euro was actually a political
aspiration  advocated  by  Helmut  Kohl,  Jacques  Delors  and  François  Mitterrand  in  parallel  with
German  reunification.  And  it  is  now  supported  by 75%  of  euro  area  citizens,  the  highest
approval rating since 2003, and as much as 85% of Luxembourgers and 81% of Germans [slide
4]. This popular support is our greatest success and our greatest asset. And it proves that the
concept  of Europe is popular as long as it stops being abstract and takes the form of
concrete projects. 
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
However, during the past 20 years, the euro area has essentially forged ahead through crises,
with the creation of the European Stability Mechanism – located in Luxembourg – to help Member
States following the Greek crisis in 2012 or the Banking Union in 2014 in response to the Spanish
or  Irish  crises. As  it  appears  that  a  financial  crisis  is  increasingly  distant,  general  European
interest has now waned. This is a serious problem: until now, we have not been able to properly
take advantage of the more favourable economic climate in order to prevent a new crisis. And
this takes me to our challenges for 2019. 
II. Our challenges in the face of 2019’s uncertainties
5
A - A slowdown rather than a downturn, in a more fragile environment
A  word  first  on  the economic environment. At both the global and European level, activity is
decelerating, but we are still a long way from experiencing a downturn. In 2019, global growth
should at best be in line with 2018’s level – 3.7% according to the IMF – subject to a downside
risk.  In  the  euro  area,   according  to  our  latest  projections,  growth  should  come  out  at  1.7%
compared  with  1.9%  in  2018.  Although  revised  downwards,  our  baseline  scenario  remains
relatively  favourable.  That  said,  at  the  start  of  2019,  we  face  three  challenges:  uncertainty,
impatience and isolationism.
The  most  immediate  one  is the uncertainty over the outcome of the Brexit vote. Even if we
don’t want it, prudence requires that we prepare ourselves for the possibility of a no-deal Brexit,
the impact of which would be more significant for the United Kingdom than for the euro area.
However, any consequences for financial stability must and can be managed. But there are also
considerable uncertainties outside Europe. The US cycle appears to be reaching maturity after
an  expansionary  phase  that  began  in  mid-2009,  but  it  is  still  far  too  early  to  worry  about  a
recession. Growth should remain robust at around 2.3% compared with 3% in 2018, although at
the expense of an ill-timed fiscal stimulus. There are greater uncertainties overshadowing the
Chinese  economy.  The  latest  activity  indicators  have  been  weak.  An  escalation  in  trade
tensions  could  lower  Chinese  GDP  growth  by  up  to  1.5  percentage  points   over  a  two  year
horizon. The slowdown could also encourage authorities to stimulate the economy, leading to
increases in already high levels of corporate debt (155% of GDP compared with 106% in the
euro area)  and in the risks to financial stability.
Our  second  challenge  is impatience.  Thirty  years  ago,  independence  was  conceived  as  a
response to the temptation to make trade-offs between growth and price stability. But the real
temptation, which is even stronger today, is to trade off long-term interests in favour of the short
term.  Financial  markets  are  frequently  characterised  by  short-termism  and  bouts  of  extreme
volatility.  But,  more  importantly,  there  is  a  political  pressure  towards  it,  driven  by  populist
impatience that would like to have a lot, right away. For a number of years this impatience has
been hindering long-term efforts in the form of fiscal consolidation and structural reforms, and
these have unfortunately slowed in G20 countries. When we compare the performances of our
different European Member States, it is clear that debt and public spending are not the engines of
growth. There is a need today for fiscal stimulus in those countries that have surpluses, and for
structural reforms across the board: without this there can be no sustainable growth. On this
issue, I would just like to say a word on France, which has stood out as a positive exception over
the past two years: the gilets jaunes (yellow vest) crisis provided justification for an emergency
“package”  to  bolster  purchasing  power;  but  I  do  not  think  it  should  or  even  could  halt  the
transformation efforts already underway.
Lastly,  and  this  is  our  third  challenge, isolationism,  characterised  by  the  escalation  of  trade
tensions, constitutes the biggest short-term threat to global growth. Even before the tariff hikes,
the  uncertainty  caused  by  protectionist  stances,  essentially  on  the  part  of  the  United  States,
already appears to be threatening growth via its impact on business investment. More broadly,
uncooperative economic strategies – including within Europe – are on the rise. If each country
6
7
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
seeks only to protect its own national interests, then everyone risks losing out – a phenomenon
economists  call  “the  prisoner’s  dilemma”.  According  to  a  Banque  de  France  study,  a  more
collective fiscal and structural strategy could have boosted euro area GDP growth by between 2
8
and 3 percentage points in the 2011-13 period.
B  -  Achieving  a  gradual  normalisation  of  our  monetary  policy,  based  on  our  three
fundamental principles
Against this backdrop, I am convinced that the normalisation of our monetary policy – which has
already  begun  –  remains  desirable.  But  it  must  be  gradual,  and  consistent  with  the  three
principles that have sustained us for the past 20 years.
1  -  We  need  to  keep  our  options  open  in  the  face  of  the  current  uncertainty:  we  are
predictable, but not precommitted. This is also an aspect of our independence, at a time when
many are pressing us to provide further details 
For the past 3 years, we have published guidance roughly every 9 months on how we intend to
conduct our net purchases over the subsequent 12 months, and we have always stuck to this
forward guidance. As a result, the end of our net purchases at the start of January, despite being
a  major  decision,  caused  no  negative  reaction  whatsoever  in  the  financial  markets.  Our  past
credibility gives us a certain amount of freedom with regard to the future. 
I would also add that we have now clearly outlined the sequencing of our normalisation: first a
rise in key interest rates, which will not come until at least through the summer, and in any case
for as long as necessary to ensure sustained convergence of inflation towards our target – I shall
come back to this later; then, and only then, after an extended period, a gradual reduction in the
reinvestment  of  the  stock  of  acquired  assets.  In  my  view  therefore,  we  do  not  need  to  give
additional guidance on the timing or other details of the process until next spring, when we could
be more precise about the sequencing according to the latest economic data. 
Nor do I see any need at present to review the future operational framework of our monetary
policy: because this question will only arise once we have actually achieved normalisation, and
because  the  tools  of  our  monetary  policy  are  already  well  known.  The  range  of  tools  was
expanded considerably over the course of the crisis; we will no longer use them all once we have
reached the "new normal", but it is in our interest to keep them all to hand. Clearly, our monetary
policy will remain accommodative for as long as necessary to achieve our inflation target.
2 - A better understanding of the path of inflation
Of  course,  our  main  focus  remains  price  stability.  In  2019,  the  fall  in  oil  prices  will  have  a
significant  downward  impact  on  inflation.  After  peaking  at  2.2%  in  October  2018,  euro  area
inflation could fall to around 1% in some months of this year, before rising again gradually to 1.8%
in 2021 according to the latest Eurosystem projections.
Beyond these temporary fluctuations, the key trend to watch is core inflation. The improvement in
the  labour  market  has  already  led  to  a  substantial  acceleration  in  wage  inflation.  Growth  in
average compensation in the euro area has thus risen from 1.2% in 2016 to 1.6% in 2017 and
will probably reach 2.2% in 2018. However, this wage inflation has not yet been passed through
to core inflation [slide 5]. Until now, the acceleration in the inflationary pressures linked to unit
labour costs since the fourth quarter of 2017 has been offset by the improvement in terms of
trade and the decline in corporate profit margins. In our forecasts, these downward factors have
a temporary lagging effect: core inflation should gradually increase towards a rate of 1.8% in
2021 (after 1.0% in 2018, 1.4% in 2019 and 1.6% in 2020).
However, certain observers have stressed that this lagging effect appears to be durable, and has
caused inflation to fall repeatedly short of Eurosystem projections. Inflation excluding energy and
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
food remained subdued at 0.9% in November, as well as in December according to the Eurostat
flash estimate. This possible weakening in the link between wage rises and price rises could be
attributable to more structural factors, which are also being discussed in the United States: we
shall pay close attention to how data on this issue evolve.
3 - Relentless efforts towards a stronger Europe
Monetary policy cannot be the only game in town. I understand and share German concerns on
this... and that is why we need to push relentlessly for a strengthening of our Economic Union.
Allow me to mention a great Luxembourger, Pierre Werner. At the end of the 1960s, he dared to
suggest in his report that the monetary area needed a common budget, that its decisions should
be  endowed  with  democratic  legitimacy  or  that  unions  should  be  given  an  active  role.  In  this
respect,  the  advances  made  by  the  Eurogroup  in  December  2018  constitute  limited  progress
that needs to be extended. With regard to the Banking Union, its success will be predicated on
the  establishment  of  a  solid  and  effective  resolution  mechanism,  more  than  on  the  deposit
insurance scheme. We need to pave the way for the backstop to be implemented as soon as
possible.  Moreover,  in  the  interests  of  financial  stability,  we  should  consider  extending  the
maturities  on  the  credit  lines  and  reach  a  definitive  agreement  on  how  to  make  emergency
decisions. Unfortunately, there was almost no progress at all on the Capital Markets Union in
the  4  December  agreement.  It  is  more  important  than  ever  that  we  make  concrete  headway,
notably on harmonising bankruptcy regimes and strengthening the role of ESMA as a supervisory
authority.  More  broadly,  I  can  only  express  my  regret  that  the  reinforcement  of  the  ESAs
proposed by the Commission has been blocked by the Council.
The Banking Union and Capital Markets Union are the key components for a genuine “Financing
Union for Investment and Innovation”: I have put forward this idea as a way of better channelling
our abundant resources – our EUR 350 billion private savings surplus – towards the concrete
needs of the economy: the energy transition, SMEs or digital innovation. Jean-Claude Juncker’s
investment plan was a first successful step towards this. With regard to the ESM, it’s not just
about managing crises ex post, but about preventing them from happening in the first place by
reinforcing  our  precautionary  tools:  the  principle  of  ex  ante  criteria  and  the  absence  of  an
assistance programme are both welcome elements. However, we need to avoid having ex ante
criteria that are so strict that in practice they prevent the ESM from being used preventively, as is
the case today.
Beyond these institutional reforms, and with the United States and China increasingly asserting
their dominance, it is vital that the European Union be given genuine strategic autonomy. Our
currency, the euro, already plays a significant role at the international level, and this could be
expanded even further [slide 6]. Despite being the world’s second most important currency, it is
still used to a far lesser extent than the dollar. It accounts for 20% of global currency reserves
compared with 63% for the dollar; by contrast, 36% of the total value of payments (including intra-
euro  area  payments)  is  settled  in  euro,  compared  with  40%  for  the  dollar.  This  is  why  the
European Commission’s communiqué in December was particularly opportune. The initiatives
promoting  the  role  of  the  euro,  notably  in  the  energy  sector,  need  to  be  examined  carefully.
Europe has built its monetary sovereignty thanks to the euro; it needs to preserve its sovereignty
with regard to trade; and we still have a long way to go to build our economic sovereignty, so
that we can meet the challenges of innovation in artificial intelligence or of the energy transition.
 I would like to conclude my speech with this almost prescient quote from Pierre Werner in 1965:
“Any economic union involves periods of flagging, of disaffection, of misunderstandings [...]. But
we  are  also  aware  that,  in  these  situations,  we  need  to  hold  onto  the  progress  made,  [...]  to
concentrate  firmly  on  the  formal  commitments  already  entered  into  [...],  in  other  words,  to
persevere.”   Far  from  discouraging  us,  the  scale  of  the  challenges  and  uncertainties  facing
9
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Europe at the start of this year should motivate us to persevere in our ambitions. That is my wish
for Europe for 2019. Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
See Article 127 of The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
Jean-Claude Trichet, 2014: “Central Banking in the Crisis: Conceptual Convergence and Open Questions on
Unconventional Monetary Policy” Business Economics, Palgrave Macmillan; National Association for Business
Economics, Vol. 49(2), pp. 74–84, April. www.perjacobsson.org/lectures/101213.pdf
Kydland, F. and E. Prescott (1977) “Rules rather than discretion: The inconsistency of optimal plans”, Journal of
Political Economy, 85(3), pp. 473–92.
Alesina, A.  and  L.  Summers  (1993)  “Central  bank  independence  and  macroeconomic  performance:  Some
comparative evidence”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 25(2), pp. 151–162.
December 2018 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area.
OECD Economic Outlook, November 2018.
Bank  for  International  Settlements:  Credit  to  non-financial  corporations  from  all  sectors  at  market  value  –
Percentage of GDP. March 2006 – June 2018 (unconsolidated data).
“The  cost  of  deficiencies  in  euro-area  economic  policy  coordination” Quarterly  Selection  of  Articles No.  46,
Banque de France, summer 2017.
Address given by Pierre Werner, Luxembourg Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, on 30 September 1965 to the
Belgian Chamber of Commerce in New York.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
