Gent Sejko: Comments on cooperation extension between Albania
and Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs
Speech  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of Albania,  at  the  ceremony  of  signing  the
Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  the  Swiss  Government's  SECO  and  the  Bank  of
Albania, Tirana, 1 March 2019.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
 Today  we  start  the  second  phase  of  the  cooperation  with  the  State  Secretariat  for  Economic
Affairs  (SECO),  which  provides,  on  behalf  of  the  Swiss  Government,  technical  assistance  to
support, among others, central banks.
I  take  this  opportunity  to  extend  our  profound  appreciation  and  gratitude  to  the  Swiss
Government, which has continuously provided assistance to the Bank of Albania – either directly
or through other financial institutions – in the areas of payments, financial inclusion and monetary
policy.  Today,  we  are  signing  a  new  cooperation  agreement  with  regard  to  perfecting  our
analyses and decision-making processes. The development and the continuous enrichment of
scientific  capacities  of  our  talented  staff,  and  the  implementation  of  research  and  analysis
methodologies to support the decision-making and policymaking processes are a priority for the
Bank of Albania.
In this context, it is a pleasure and honour for me, as the Governor of the Bank of Albania, to sign,
together with H.E. Ambassador Maître, this agreement between our two institutions. At the Bank
of Albania, we are very enthusiastic about this cooperation. The signing of the agreement today,
follows  the  conclusion  of  a  similar  and  very  successful  cooperation  in  the  period  2013–2018,
which improved significantly our analysis, research and technical capacities. I can proudly and
confidently  say  that  the  programme  has  accomplished  all  the  goals.  It  addressed  three  key
aspects for the central bank: research, monetary policy and financial stability. It contributed not
only  to  enhancing  the  knowledge,  the  expertise  and  the  application  of  contemporary
methodologies for economic and financial analyses, but also to materialising a concrete product
to improve and expand evaluation, forecasting and analysis models. These models play now a
significant role in the decision-making process at the Bank of Albania.
Under this cooperation programme, the Bank of Albania benefited technical and financial support.
Some statistics from the implementation of the first phase illustrate the extent and impact of this
programme.  In  the  period  2013–2018,  we  realised  30  different  activities,  involving  360  staff
members from the Bank of Albania. Moreover, around 270 employees attended 18 workshops on
dedicated topics for the Bank of Albania. In addition, representatives from the Bank of Albania
participated  in  8  academic  conferences  in  which  87  members  from  its  staff  presented  their
research  and  received  valuable  comments  for  further  improving  their  work.  Three  employees
have  been  able  to  visit  The  Graduate  Institute  Geneva  to  attend  post-university  studies  for  a
period  up  to  six  months,  and  develop  their  research  projects  under  the  supervision  of  and
assistance by renowned professors of the Institute.
The Bank of Albania is responsible for the formulation and implementation of the monetary policy,
regulation and supervision of the banking system, regulation and development of the payment
system, and promotion of financial stability. In the framework of the cooperation with SECO, it
benefits not only in academic but also in concrete terms. The developed forecasting and analysis
models enable the monetary policy to play a more proactive role, as testified in the successful
management of appreciation pressures  on  the  exchange  rate  in  the  previous  year.  Thanks  to
SECO-funded cooperation projects, the Bank of Albania has adopted contemporary models and
methodologies  for  evaluating  the  adequate  level  of  the  foreign  currency  reserve  –  currently
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
standing  at  EUR  3.3-3.4  billion,  managing  liquidity  in  the  banking  sector,  and  withstanding
adverse  scenarios.  Also,  the  study  of  various  phenomena  related  to  the  functioning  of  the
financial system has prepared the ground for the drafting and approval of a series of regulations,
which – among others – have accelerated the process for the reduction of non-performing loans
and  will  create  a  safer  and  more  efficient  regulatory  environment  with  regard  to  managing
financial shocks. Lastly, the cooperation with SECO has generated a number of projects, which
are being currently implemented in the field of payment systems. One particular example is the
national  strategy  for  promoting  the  use  of  retail  payments,  which  serves,  among  others,  to
lowering their costs, promoting remittances and boosting financial inclusion.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
The new agreement, similarly to the previous one, enables the Bank of Albania to be part of a
rich,  deep  and  diverse  programme  of  bilateral  assistance  and  capacity  building  for    central
banks. Through qualifications and capacity building, the goal of the cooperation agreement is to
perfect the analysis, the decision-making and, consequently, the policy-making processes at the
Bank of Albania. I think that we have already established firm foundations that guarantee an even
stronger partnership for the second phase.
Expected  outcomes  from  the  implementation  of  the  second  phase  include:  monetary  policy
decision  making  sustained  by  improved  forecasting  capacities,  macro-prudential  policy
formulated  based  on  a  larger  body  of  knowledge  about  various  risks;  and  research  further
enriched with the best research methodologies and practices. These goals form the core of our
medium-term strategy.
The Bank of Albania aims to increase the impact of research results on decision-making, extend
research to other departments, and adopt highest standards on ethics and rigorous research,
which renders it one of the priorities of the cooperation.
Many of the current developments and challenges in certain countries or regions may appear as
distant and alien to us, but globalisation and economic integration disregards borders and their
effect and impact may spill over into our economy. The problems that persist from the financial
crisis, the continuation of quantitative easing programmes and the new normal for the monetary
policy affect the functioning of the central bank. On the other hand, challenges and opportunities
introduced by technological development for central bank policies and decision-making, financial
inclusion and financial instruments, are phenomena that affect not only the central bank but also
the rest of the society. It is, therefore, necessary to study, analyse and address such phenomena
based on facts and best scientific analysis. We value international cooperation in these fields as
a very important contributor to coping with such challenges and undertaking visionary policies.
Notably, the selected format for providing technical assistance enables the output objectives of
the cooperation to be tailored to the characteristics of the Albanian economy and dedicated to the
Bank of Albania and its decision-making and operational framework. The technical assistance
consists  of  a  set  of  activities  that  include  all  the  phases  and  methods  of  learning  and,  at  the
same time, contributes to all concrete and flexible policy-making processes at the central bank.
Activities under the programme range from lectures to practical implementation of the knowledge
and application in specific projects, in accordance with the priorities of the Bank of Albania.
The  selection  of  a  serious  partner  is  another  important  aspect  for  the  success  of  this
agreement.  The Graduate Institute Geneva has become an important partner for the Bank of
Albania, contributing with its academic staff as well as collaborators it selects among renowned
professors and experts of economics, finance and banking.
This  agreement  between  the  Bank  of Albania  and  SECO,  the  centre  of  expertise  for  all  core
issues relating to economic policy, in Switzerland and not only, helps the Bank of Albania to fulfil
the objectives, to carry out its duties and to withstand future challenges. 
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
I would like to thank once again Mr Maître and the State Secretariat for Economic Affairs for the
contribution to the Bank of Albania.
I look forward to the fruitful and successful cooperation under the new agreement
Thank you!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
