Anita Angelovska Bezhoska: Efforts for further development of the
financial education and improving the financial literacy among the
population
Address by Ms Anita Angelovska Bezhoska, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of
North Macedonia, at the Meeting with the Teaching Staff on the Occasion of the European Money
Quiz, Skopje, 22 February 2019.
 Dear  Deputy  Minister  of  Education  and  Science,  dear  President  of  the  Macedonian  Banking
Association, dear teachers, dear guests,
First of all, please allow me to greet and welcome all of you here in the National Bank. This is the
first such meeting, which I hope will become a regular practice in the future, within our efforts for
further  development  of  the  financial  education  and  improving  the  financial  literacy  among  the
population in our country. 
The global financial crisis that arouse from the deficient regulation of the financial system, as well
as  from  the  poor  financial  knowledge  of  the  population,  clearly  emphasized  the  necessity  for
additional efforts in the financial education segment.  Therefore, in the global context of the post-
crisis period, the policy-makers, including central banks, undertake numerous activities, making
financial education an integral part of central banking operations.
Being aware of the importance of financial literacy, both for each individual and for the society as
a whole, the National Bank has been undertaking activities in the field of financial education for
the younger population for many years, and many students from primary and secondary schools,
of  course,  together  with  their  teachers,  have  already  visited  our  bank.  This  enables  to  gain
broader knowledge about our operations (what are the main goals and tasks of the central bank,
what  are  the  instrument  we  use  for  their  realization  and  the  challenges  for  achieving  and
preserving the macroeconomic stability). Through our publications and interactive games in the
field of finance, we try to attract the interest of the youngest generations to get acquainted with
terms such as saving, investment, inflation, etc., while through the rich collection of coins in our
Numismatic Museum, to get acquainted with the history of our money.
In the future we will continue to enrich the spectrum of activities in the field of financial education,
by including the elderly population, as well. Within these frameworks, we are particularly pleased
with the exceptions engagement of the banks in the field of financial education of the youth in the
country, as a relatively new area of activity and one of the recent challenges in the financial area.
More active involvement of banks in this area verifies their increased social responsibility, which
should be certainly welcomed. 
In  this  context,  on  December  17  2018  we  signed  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  with  the
Macedonian Banking Association (MBA), covering wider scope in the field of financial education
and financial inclusion. Within this cooperation  (besides the organization of the Money Quiz), we
plan  joint  activities  in  coordination  with  banks,  which  should  provide  better  information  to  the
population and greater availability of banking services, which would enable larger inclusion of the
population  and  use  of  the  advantages  banking  services  provide. At  the  same  time,  we  plan
activities  that  should  increase  the  awareness  of  the  population  about  possible  risks  in  the
banking services domain as a very important aspect for the bank clients.
We especially welcome the initiative for organizing the European Money Quiz for the youth of our
country, which will be organized for the first time this year, hoping that it will become a traditional
one.  This  way,  we  believe  we  will  encourage  greater  commitment  among  young  people  on
financial issues, and consequently, it will contribute to raise the level of their financial literacy. In
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
this context, I would like to emphasize that the National Bank supports the process of preparing
students by supplying them with various educational materials, by holding today’s training for the
teaching staff, and later by organizing special preparatory activities for the national winners. It is
of  great  importance  that  the  European  Money  Quiz,  an  initiative  of  the  European  Banking
Federation,  unites  us  all,  the  financial  regulators  and  the  banks,  MES  and  the  educational
institutions in the country, in order to attain a very important goal, that is improvement of the skills
of the youngest in the area of finance, which contributes to improving their knowledge and ability
to  face  future  working  and  life  challenges. At  the  end,  it  certainly  contributes  towards  having
educated and capable youth, with wide knowledge in the contemporary era, ready to grow into a
capable work force, a driver of the economy in the coming years.     
What is particularly pleasing to me about the preparations of the European Money Quiz is its
massiveness.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  number  of  registered  classes  is  much  higher  than
expected.  It  is  assessed  that  about  3,000  students  aged  13–15  years  will  participate  in  the
internal testing phase. Such an approach envisaging testing of entire classes, enables all these
students to become familiar with the issues of financial education, with aspects related to the
operations of the central bank, commercial banks, securities markets. It is a significant benefit,
which is probably, the goal of the initiator – the more massive scope, the wider education. Of
course,  some  will  be  more  successful  and  continue  in  the  next  stages  of  the  competition,
however  it  is  a  great  benefit  that  all  participants  will  have  the  opportunity  to  expand  their
knowledge in finance and economy, which is our common goal.  
In the end, let me once again express the readiness of the National Bank to actively support the
overall process of preparation, both for the national and international competition in Brussels. I
wish you the mentors, a successful work with the students, best luck to all, and of course, let the
best students win!
Thank you!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
