The Relevancy of good Corporate Governance 
 Presentation by Mrs. Leila Matroos-Lasten, 
Acting-President of the  
Centrale Bank van Curaçao en Sint Maarten,  
given to the Supervisory Board of the LAAD Americas N.V. 
 Willemstad - March 7, 2019 
  Good morning ladies and gentlemen, 
First  of  all,  allow  me  to  thank  you  (the  Board  of LAAD  Americas  N.V.)  for  having  invited  me  to 
introduce  this  morning  the  very  important  topic  which  is  the  Relevancy  of  Good  Corporate 
Governance. 
As  the  Regulator  of  the  financial  sectors  of  the  monetary  union  comprising  the  countries  Curaçao 
and Sint Maarten, the Centrale Bank van Curacao and Sint Maarten (the Bank) is entrusted, amongst 
other, with the supervision of the banking and credit institutions. As such, its supervision is primarily 
geared  towards  the  promotion  of  the  stability,  integrity,  efficiency,  safety,  and  soundness  of  the 
financial  sectors  of  the  countries  in  general and  the  safeguarding  of  the  interest  of  stakeholders  of 
the  banking  and  other  credit  institutions  in  particular.  The  key  for  the  success  or  failure  of  the 
entities supervised by the Bank is at the end of the day - Corporate Governance. 
Corporate Governance, according to the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and as adopted 
by the Bank, can be defined as a set of relationships between a company’s management, its board, its 
shareholders  and  other  stakeholders  which  provides  the  structure  through  which  the  objectives  of 
the  company  are  set,  and  the  means  of  attaining  those  objectives  and  monitoring  performance.  It 
helps  define  the  way  authorities  and  responsibilities  are  allocated  and  how  corporate  decisions  are 
made.  Thus,  Corporate  Governance  is  the  driving  force  of  every  company,  whether  a  bank  or 
production company. 
Corporate Governance  became even  more  important following the financial crisis which unfolded, 
after  the  collapse  and  scandals  surrounding  several  renowned  financial/  banking  institutions  and 
companies such as Lehman Brothers, Bear Sterns and Barings Bank in the period 2007/2008. 
As a result, the “Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development” (OECD) updated its 
widely accepted and long-established principles for good corporate governance to assist governments 
worldwide in their efforts to evaluate and improve their frameworks for corporate governance and to 
provide guidance for participants and regulators of financial markets. 
The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  responsible  for  the  international  standards  and 
guidelines  on  banking  supervision,  which  has  adopted  the  OECD  principles  of  corporate 
governance,  also  updated  its  own  set  of  Corporate  Governance  guiding  principles  for  banks 
worldwide to assist Banks and Supervisors further. 
The  Bank,  having  a  keen  interest  in  sound  corporate  governance  has  therefore  adopted  the 
internationally  accepted  Basel  committee’s  guiding  principles  of  good  corporate  governance  in  its 
admission  requirements  for  local  and  international  banks  and  its  Corporate  Governance  Guidance  Notes  for  the 
Supervisory Boards of Supervised Financial Institutions by choosing for a two-tier board model consisting of 
a Managing Board and a Supervisory Board. This despite the fact that our General Law on 
companies  permits  a  one-tier  board.  (which  will  be  elaborated  later  upon  by  Mrs.  Hammoud  and 
Mrs. De Windt). 
According to the Bank, an institution's Supervisory Board is ultimately responsible for the conduct 
and affairs of the supervised  institution. It is the Supervisory Board’s duty to oversee management 
affairs  and  to  monitor  the  institution's  direction  and,  hence,  its  adherence  to  its  overall  policy.  By 
doing this, the Supervisory Board determines how the institution will conduct its business in the long 
term. In general, the Supervisory Board establishes or approves and monitors the policies by which 
Management will operate. 
The Supervisory Board should set the “tone at the top” and oversee management’s role in fostering 
and maintaining a sound corporate and risk culture. 
In favorable times  the Supervisory Board contributes by  setting the  tone and direction, it oversees 
and supports Management’s efforts by testing and probing their recommendations before approving 
them. The Supervisory Board should also ensure that adequate systems and controls are in place to 
identify and address problems before they become a threat for the viability of the institution. 
In adverse  times the Supervisory Board should be even  more  actively  involved with the institution 
assisting it with the undertaking of the necessary corrective  actions and, when  needed, to keep  the 
institution on track until effective management can be reestablished. 
The Supervisory board is considered therefore by the Bank as an extension of its supervision within 
the  regulated  entities  because  well-governed  banks  contribute  to  an  efficient  and  cost-effective 
supervisory process which permits the Bank to place more reliance on the bank’s internal processes 
which may result in less need for supervisory intervention. 
In  this  respect  we  consider  communication  as  key  for  an  adequate  supervision  of  the  institutions 
supervised  by  the  Bank.  Therefore,  we  applaud  the  contribution  of  LAAD  in  its  communication 
towards the Bank by having annual presentations of LAAD’s results, where a representative of the 
Managing Board is always present to explain the results and developments in the markets. 
The  Bank  furthermore  welcomes  periodic  exchange  of  information  between  the  Bank  and  the 
Supervisory Board of LAAD (for example on the strategy, risk assessments performed, Statement of 
compliance etc.) as this will assist the Bank further in its supervisory task. 
To  keep  up  with  worldwide  Corporate  Governance  developments,  the  Bank  is  continuously 
enhancing its risk-based supervision framework. Its Corporate Governance Notes (which date back 
to 2001) are currently being updated to reflect the tasks and responsibilities of the Supervisory Board 
more clearly. With actualization of the National Ordinance on the Supervision of Banking and Credit 
Institutions  at  the  end  of  2015,  the  supervisory  framework  of  the  Bank  was  further  strengthened 
allowing  it  to  impose  fines  and  penalties  in case  of  non-compliance  with  our  laws  and  regulations. 
With the institution of the Conduct Supervision department, more emphasis is being 
placed by the Bank on the supervision of the behavior of the institutions boards in the execution of 
their responsibilities. 
I hereby conclude my introductory remarks and pass the word now to Mrs. Mayesi Hammoud who 
will  elaborate  further  on  Corporate  Governance  aspects  as  established  by  the  Corporate  Law  of 
Curaçao.  I  wish  you  further  a  pleasant  stay  on  our  island  and  hope  that  the  discussions  of  this 
morning will be very fruitful. 
