    
 
Payments:  A platform for innovation 
 
Speech given by 
Victoria Cleland, Executive Director; Banking, Payments & Innovation 
 SIBOS, London 
Tuesday 24 September 2019 
  With thanks to Sara Ward and Emma Playford. 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
1 
    
 
It is a great pleasure to be speaking today at the ‘UK payments infrastructure – renewing for growth’ event at 
Sibos.  This year’s event is exciting for two reasons.  First, it’s National Inclusion week here in the U.K.1  
And, it’s a great coincidence that SIBOS has fallen during this week: at the heart of its agenda are 
discussions around how change and diversification in payments could lead to a more inclusive financial 
system.  Second, this is the first Sibos conference to be held in London – and it is certainly an exciting time 
for so many global payments experts and innovators to be here.   
 London has a long history at the heart of the global financial system.  It continues to build on this expertise 
and is one of the leading fintech hubs in the world.  It is home to an incredible pool of the world’s best and 
brightest talent, with 44,000 people already working in fintech, more than in Silicon Valley or New York.2  
Investment into the UK’s fintech sector continues to grow and reached a record level of $2.9bn in the first 
half of 2019, which was nearly 85% of the 2018 total.3  And we can see that the UK fintech sector is 
maturing, evidenced by the size of increased investments. 
 Payments are vital to any real economy and in total nearly 40 billion payments were made in the UK in 
2018.4  They are also at the heart of the financial system. This makes London the perfect location for a 
payments conference, which is focused on “thriving in a hyper-connected world”.  Payments are innovating, 
fast.  From the infrastructure and the messages that support each transaction, to new players entering the 
market and consumers seeking new ways to pay for goods and services.  
 Future of Finance, Future of Payments 
 While the core mission for the Bank of England is maintaining monetary and financial stability, we also seek 
to enable innovation and empower competition in the financial system.  To support our forward looking and 
dynamic approach we recently commissioned and responded to the Future of Finance report.5  It considered 
how financial services might evolve over the next decade, and what this could mean for each of us: for users, 
the system and the Bank itself. 
 The report highlighted that a new economy and new demographics demand a new financial system.  This 
system must be resilient, fair and dynamic.  We have prioritised five areas of work: we are enhancing the 
payments system for the digital age; we will champion a platform to boost access to finance for small 
businesses; we will support the transition to a carbon-neutral economy; we will develop a world-class regtech 
and data strategy; and we will facilitate firms’ use of technology. 
                                                       
1 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2019/victoria-cleland-national-inclusion-week-launch-event-at-house-of-lords 
2 https://files.londonandpartners.com/business/resources/london-fintech-scene-2017.pdf 
3 https://www.innovatefinance.com/news/uk-fintech-investment-flying-high-in-h1-2019/ 
4 https://www.ukfinance.org.uk/system/files/Summary-UK-Payment-Markets-2018.pdf 
5 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/report/2019/future-of-finance 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
2 
 
2 
   
 
Today, I will focus on how the Bank will support a more resilient, innovative and competitive payments 
system for UK households and businesses: we have a vision that payments will become cheaper, 
instantaneous and more seamless, including across borders.  At the heart of this is the UK’s Real-Time 
Gross Settlement (RTGS) service which settles around £650bn of payments each working day, close to a 
third of the UK’s annual GDP.  Not much business can be done without it, and most consumers are 
ultimately reliant on it.  I will tell you shortly about our leading-edge work to renew this service, but this is not 
all we are doing.  We are also pursuing a number of even more far-reaching strands which together have the 
potential to transform the current payments landscape.  I want to share a few of these with you today. 
 First, cross border payment is for many a long standing frustration - often badged as slow; inefficient and 
expensive for both financial institutions and end users.  In 2018 we published a summary of our joint 
collaboration with the Monetary Authority of Singapore and the Bank of Canada to explore opportunities to 
make cross-border payments more efficient.  But we want to take this further and play a leading role in 
supporting effective change in this area.  We have started new work to understand what the frictions are and 
how we can work with our central banking colleagues globally to push forward this agenda, to deliver prompt 
settlement in different currencies and empower private innovations in cross-border finance.  
 Second, we will continue to champion the Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) as a globally recognised and unique 
identifier for all businesses.  The global LEI system contributes to many financial stability objectives such as 
improved risk management in firms, better assessment of micro and macro prudential risks, facilitation of 
orderly resolution, and enables higher quality and accuracy of financial data overall. 
 In addition to financial stability benefits, LEIs provide valuable data and support anti-money laundering and 
combating the financing of terrorism efforts.  They could, if linked to portable credit files, improve access to 
the domestic and global financial system, support greater choice and competition for business finance.  The 
LEI could also act as the unique identifier for a digital ID, which could help the two-step verification process 
required for a more secure system.  For all these reasons, the Bank is supporting the specific 
recommendation on the use of LEI in payment messages made by the Financial Stability Board in its May 
2019 report on LEI implementation.6 In this context, we welcome the report issued by the PMPG on adoption 
of LEI in payments messages and its recommendations that firms should adapt their business processes to 
ensure that LEIs are captured whenever a new counterparty or customer record is set up.7  And importantly 
we are integrating the LEI in the ISO 20022 messages used in CHAPS (the Bank-operated High-Value 
Payment System). 
 Third, we will consult in 2020 on the appropriate level of access for payments service providers to the Bank’s 
infrastructure and balance sheet, including necessary safeguards.  This is important to ensure that the right 
balance is struck between access, maintaining financial and monetary stability and protecting public money 
                                                      
6 https://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P280519-2.pdf 
7 file:///C:/Users/331016/Downloads/pmpg_lei_paper.pdf 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
3 
 
3 
   
 
from undue risks.  We will reach out to key firms and the users of payments services in the next couple of 
months, to understand the needs of market participants and the barriers that still exist to competition and 
innovation.  This dialogue – along with detailed analysis of the potential benefits and impacts for monetary 
and financial stability - will feed into a consultation paper in 2020.  We look forward to learning from the 
industry and will welcome your engagement in this process. 
 RTGS Renewal 
 Crucially, to deliver these priorities, and to facilitate innovation, we need strong, resilient foundations.  That is 
why the Bank is undertaking an ambitious and exciting Programme to renew RTGS. For those not familiar 
with RTGS, it is a critical piece of national infrastructure and the backbone of UK payments.   
 Our vision is to develop an RTGS service which is fit for the future, increasing resilience and access, and 
offering wider interoperability, improved user functionality and strengthened end-to-end risk management of 
the UK’s High-Value Payment System. This is a challenging but necessary Programme which is a key 
priority not just for the Bank but for the UK payments industry as a whole.  The way payments are made has 
changed dramatically in recent years, reflecting changes in the demands of households and companies, 
changes in technology, and an evolving regulatory landscape.  We need to respond to this and, in 
collaboration with the industry, develop the next generation of RTGS that delivers a world-leading payments 
service. 
 Innovation can only thrive when firms and end users are confident they are operating in a safe and secure 
environment.  So at the heart of the Programme is the desire to make the new service materially stronger 
and more resilient to an increasingly complex and sophisticated environment.  Our current system has, and 
meets, targets of 99.95% availability.  This must continue regardless of the shocks, whether traditional BCP 
or cyber.  We are building a system that will be flexible to protect against the threats we understand today 
and the ones we will need to withstand in the future.  
 The renewed service will provide a platform for private sector innovation and one which can respond to and 
shape a fast changing environment.  We will harness leading edge technology to deliver this, coupled with 
changes to our policies to support growth and resilience.  Key features will include:  
  The renewed service will have a flexible and modular architecture, making it easier to change 
components of the service or add new components.  This will enable us to respond quickly to 
market changes and continued innovation in payment technologies both from new fintechs and 
established players.  Ultimately, we want to future-proof RTGS to interface with firms and 
technology that may not exist today.  
  The renewed service will not be built on a Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) but firms who use 
DLT will be able to connect to the service. We have completed a Proof of Concept to understand 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
4 
 
4 
     whether our renewed service could be capable of supporting settlement in systems operating on 
innovative payment technologies. The punchline was that it could.  We continue to engage with 
fintech firms to maintain our understanding of technology developments. 
  While we currently plan to start operating the new service with the existing hours for CHAPS, the 
new service will have near 24x7 capability, and so when there is clear demand we expect, in 
consultation with industry, to extend operating hours.  This flexibility means we can respond quickly 
to changing demands and an increasingly globalised economy. 
  We will also provide Application Programming Interface (API) access to users to enable read 
and write of payments data.  The Bank has committed to providing an exposed API to allow external 
participants to develop sophisticated and automated real-time tools for accessing RTGS 
transactional and liquidity data.  We plan to announce in a few months our initial thoughts on the 
approach and implementation.    
 And with a visionary new system, we want more participants to be able to benefit from it.  In 2018 we 
expanded direct access to non-bank payment service providers, making it possible for a broader set of 
firms to compete with banks.   
 Five non-bank payment service providers currently hold accounts in RTGS and many more firms are 
exploring the possibility of joining.  In addition, the renewed RTGS service will further reduce barriers to entry 
for new players – for example on-boarding will be quicker and testing will be streamlined making joining 
speedy and efficient.  For CHAPS, we expect to be able to meet demand from dozens of new participants a 
year, rather than a handful as currently.  
 There are two clear benefits from expanding access.  First, increasing the number and diversity of firms that 
can directly access central bank money helps to reduce financial stability risk from events such as market 
wide shocks or a single firm failure.  Second, it promotes competition and innovation in payments. Firms that 
have direct access to payment systems can benefit from faster transaction times and reduced individual 
transaction costs.  By extending these benefits to a wider range of firms, the Bank hopes to encourage a 
greater diversity of players in the payments market, thereby encouraging innovation and competition through 
development of new business models, new products and services and ultimately cheaper and more efficient 
payments.   
 This is an ambitious Programme - and rightly so.  The Bank is on track against published milestones. Having 
defined the Programme scope, with input from the payments industry, we are now running a competitive 
procurement process under the Official Journal of the European Union to appoint a Technology Delivery 
Partner.  They will work with the Bank on the design and build of the core settlement engine.  We plan to 
enter the contract with the Technology Delivery Partner in May 2020.   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
5 
 
5 
   
 
We then move to delivery, with the first technology changes in the first half of 2022. In light of other 
international migration plans, the Bank is revisiting its approach to the introductory phase of ISO 20022 
implementation in 2022 – in particular on how we can support early adopters of enhanced ISO 20022 data.  
We are conducting industry engagement to inform our decision and would welcome input from interested 
parties. And the most significant moment is when we replace the core RTGS service, planned for 2023.  
Additional functionality will be delivered in 2024, to further drive innovation and change.  For example we will 
introduce read/write APIs and are exploring the ability to synchronise the settlement of a payment in sterling 
central bank money to be coordinated with the transfer of one or more assets.  The Programme is expected 
to close in 2025.  It will be an exciting few years! 
 ISO 20022 
 One way in which RTGS Renewal can promote resilience and efficiency is through greater interoperability 
across payment systems.  Could, for example, CHAPS be used as a contingency mechanism in the event of 
a retail payment system outage?  Key to this is the introduction of a new payment messaging standard for 
UK payments, ISO 20022: the emerging global standard.   
 Following a consultation in 2018,8 the Bank and Pay.UK will introduce a Common Credit Message across 
CHAPS, Bacs and FPS which will bring greater message harmonisation for the UK’s main interbank payment 
systems. The Bank is also engaging with other High Value Payment System operators to ensure the 
standard is compatible with the emerging international consensus.  This is an exciting and important initiative 
which will bring significant and long term benefits for a wide range of firms.    
 A recent key milestones towards implementing ISO 20022 in the UK was the publication of the CHAPS ISO 
20022 draft messages schemas and market guidance for making CHAPS payments.  Draft messages and 
market guidance have been provided for the expected implementation phase of the ISO 20022 migration and 
we are seeking comments, via the Bank’s website,9 until 3 October 2019.  And I would encourage all firms 
with an interest to review and comment to inform the final schema specification.   
 Final specifications for the  implementation phase of the ISO 20022 migration will be available by the end of 
2019 – allowing firms to kick start their planning and preparations for ISO 20022 implementation in CHAPS.   
 RTGS Renewal – engagement with the payments industry 
 We have from the very start of the Programme – even before it could be described as a Programme - been 
working with industry to design and prepare for this change.  This input is vital so we can shape and deliver 
                                                      
8 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/payments/rtgs-renewal-programme/iso-20022/iso-20022-consultation-
paper.pdf?la=en&hash=BC6A2A1018A7AC4AEF13FEB47F5D7C8C86571799 
9 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/payment-and-settlement/rtgs-renewal-programme/consultation-on-a-new-messaging-standard-for-
uk-payments-iso20022 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
6 
 
6 
   
 
the change industry want to see.  We have a number of strategic and working level channels that allow us to 
seek input and advice from across the payments industry.  These include the RTGS Renewal External 
Advisory Body, the Standards Advisory Panel and the CHAPS Strategic Advisory Forum.10  Membership 
spans current CHAPS direct and indirect participants (and not just the traditional large banks) and trade 
bodies, UK authorities, software vendors and corporate end users.   
 We also work closely with some of the organisations sharing the stage with me today, aiming to get the best 
result and to minimise the burden on industry.   We work extensively with Pay.UK who are working to deliver 
change across the retail payment schemes through their New Payments Architecture Programme.  Together, 
we are tackling issues such as whether we could build a shared Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) for UK 
payments.  And of course payments globally continue to change apace, so we thrive on our engagement 
with other central banks on key topics such as standards harmonisation, where our close collaboration is a 
crucial part of how we can collectively transform the payments landscape.  Working together provides the 
opportunity to learn, share insights and collaborate on common challenges.   
 Conclusion  
 Just as payment systems are at the heart of the economy, industry engagement must remain at the heart of 
the Programme.  User input enables us to create the platform and capability that industry needs to innovate:  
the building blocks to transform the payments landscape.  But as we mobilise delivery at the Bank, we need 
industry to mobilise too.  We are on track against our plan and we need firms to develop theirs – so the 
payments industry is ready to transition safely to the new service and maximise the opportunities for 
innovation and transformation promised.   
 We are developing a strategy to work closely with Direct Participants to provide information, monitor key 
milestone completion, undertake testing and seek assurance that they are each ready to implement 
changes.   
 Together, we can build and promote a resilient and thriving financial system, and so I look forward to 
continuing to engage with many of you here – be you users, end users, suppliers, innovators, peers - to help 
shape and deliver a resilient and innovative payment ecosystem.   
                                                         
10 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/payment-and-settlement 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
7 
 
7 
 