Luís  Máximo  dos  Santos:  Financial  inclusion  and  education  for
Central Banks of Portuguese-speaking Countries
Opening address by Mr Luís Máximo dos Santos, Vice-Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the
3rd  Meeting  on  Financial  Inclusion  and  Education  for  Central  Banks  of  Portuguese-speaking
Countries (BCPLP) , Lisbon, 6 July 2017.
As prepared for delivery.
 1. Welcome to Portugal, to Lisbon and to Banco de Portugal. Welcome to the 3rd Meeting on
Financial Inclusion and Education. 
I would like to warmly greet the central banks of São Tomé and Príncipe, Timor-Leste, Brazil, the
West  African  States,  Cabo  Verde,  Mozambique,  Angola,  as  well  as  all  the  distinguished
members of each bank’s delegation. Your presence honours us all, thank you. 
It  is  also  my  pleasure  to  greet  every  one  present  today  and  to  welcome  for  the  first  time  the
Alliance for Financial Inclusion, represented by its Executive Director. 
2. These meetings were started not a moment too soon, in 2013, resumed in 2015 and today we
gather to open the third. It is not only our privilege but also a pleasure to host this event. 
In fact, financial inclusion and education are increasingly seen as a priority in the international
agenda  on  account  of  their  impact  on  the  promotion  of  financial  stability  and  economic
development. 
These meetings on financial inclusion and education show how important it is for central banks
of  Portuguese-speaking  countries  to  share  their  knowledge  and  experience  of  initiatives  to
promote financial inclusion and education.
The  wealth  of  experiences  and  best  practices  shared  at  the  first  two  meetings  led  to  the
publication of reports on the initiatives undertaken to promote financial inclusion and education in
Portuguese-speaking  countries.  I  am  certain  that  the  past  two  years  have  brought  us  many
developments  on  this  subject,  in  the  various  countries,  which  will  be  presented  and  analysed
today and tomorrow, meriting a third report to be published with the conclusions of this meeting. 
Every time, these meetings delve deeper into the topic under analysis: 
1.  At the first meeting, in 2013, we took stock of what part central banks should play and of the
best international practices to promote financial inclusion and education; 
2.  At the second meeting, in 2015, we debated financial education in schools, distance learning
and the importance of partnerships for the success and sustainability of financial inclusion
and education policies. 
In  this  third  meeting,  besides  taking  an  in-depth  look  into  financial  education  in  schools,  a
strategic  pillar  of  education  for  population  in  general  and  for  young  people  in  particular,  new
topics will be discussed, such as the assessment of financial education initiatives and education
to ensure the proper use of financial products and services through digital channels. 
I  would  like  to  underline  that  one  of  the  greatest  assets  of  sharing  our  experiences  at  these
meetings is the diversity of approaches. Though we pursue a common goal, to increase people’s
financial literacy and inclusion levels and ultimately their well-being, the path to reach that goal
may  –  and  certainly  will  –  differ.  Therefore,  it  is  important  for  us  all  to  learn  about  different
approaches, take advantage of the diversity of experiences and adapt them to each country’s
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
economic, financial and institutional background.
The debate on these topics is quite stimulating on account of their complexity, but there is also
an especially gratifying side to it because we know how these initiatives can improve the lives of
real people. These would be more than enough reasons to look forward to two excellent days
working together and sharing. But there is another reason that makes it even more pleasurable:
we will do so in Portuguese, a language that instantly brings us closer and reminds us that our
countries are players in a global world that is also expressed and felt in the rich variations of a
language shared by us all. 
3.  Financial  inclusion  is  an  essential  component  of  social  inclusion,  since  it  leads  to  a  more
efficient  management  of  personal  finances,  and  gives  people  conditions  to  manage  a  family
budget better, use of payment means more efficiently, make savings using adequate products
and be safer when applying for a loan. 
In fact, one must not forget that financial inclusion also helps fight inequality, a paramount issue
in today’s economies. Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, underlined a few
days  ago  when  he  met  with  students  at  a  university  in  Lisbon  that  inequality  is  a  highly
destabilising phenomenon for all areas of society, including financial stability. 
Traditionally, major barriers to financial inclusion are connected to geographical proximity factors,
such as low density of credit institutions making it difficult to access the formal financial sector.
These  barriers  lead  to  the  existence  of  an  informal  sector  that  provides  competing  financial
products and services, which though unregulated are more easily accessible. Other exclusion
factors are high costs of financial services in the formal sector or the credit institutions’ failure to
offer products that meet the needs of consumers with low income / low levels of education. 
Yet,  the  fact  that  financial  services  are  increasingly  digital  brings  about  new  opportunities  for
promoting financial inclusion, overcoming some of these obstacles, since digital channels make
access easier and less costly. The sale of financial products and services using digital channels
makes them accessible to people, even if they are not close to the service providers, as such
products are generally simpler and more standardised. 
However, digital channels also come with new risks. Starting with risks related to secure access
and use of digital channels and the need to take adequate action to prevent fraud. Then there is
the risk of a less considered purchase of financial products and services, for instance borrowing
without due clarification of associated financial conditions and of the consequences of default. In
addition, digital channels are not a solution to include the most vulnerable groups, such as elderly
people, who generally find it more difficult to use technology. 
Therefore, though digital channels open up new opportunities, we must take into account the new
risks.  And  likewise  recognise  that  many  of  the  traditional  challenges  of  promoting  financial
inclusion remain the same. Which also happens with the need for the financial inclusion strategy
to be based on three pillars: 
1.  Policies to promote financial inclusion; 
2.  Appropriate regulation of financial products and services; and
3.  Initiatives to increase people’s financial education. 
4. Financial education is essential for the proper financial inclusion of people that presently have
no access to the financial system and, particularly, to a bank account. Financial education gives
people basic knowledge and raises awareness for the need to be prudent when accessing and
using bank products. One of the challenges of providing education for financial inclusion is to
reach the audience that actually needs it, generally the more vulnerable population groups. One
example  in  Portugal  is  the  challenge  posed  by  promoting  minimum  banking  services,  which
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
consist of a basic bank account and basic payment services. Institutions are required to provide
such  minimum  banking  services  for  a  lower  cost,  but  people  in  general  are  unaware  of  their
existence, and even more so, those that are excluded from the financial system and who could
benefit the most from it. 
Naturally, financial education is not only important for those excluded from the financial system,
but also for people in general, as it promotes a responsible and efficient use of financial products
and  services,  raising  awareness  of  advantages  and  risks  associated  with  the  products  and
services provided by credit institutions and of financial consumers’ rights and obligations. Greater
understanding  of  financial  products  and  of  the  financial  system  empowers  people  to  make
financial decisions and choices that meet their needs better. 
The  promotion  of  financial  education  faces  important  challenges,  one  of  them  being,  as  I
mentioned before, the challenge of reaching everyone, when our population is not homogeneous
and has diverse features and needs. Therefore it is very important to define, from the start, the
topics and means that best reach each population group, to choose messages that are correctly
understood by the target audience and to find the right partners to work that audience. Another
side we cannot ignore is the cost of financial education initiatives, which is why we need to make
a gradual approach and to assess the initiatives to find out how effective they are, so as to bet on
the most suitable education initiatives. 
5. Banco de Portugal has committed itself to promote financial education for several years now.
A few years back, at international fora, we debated the importance of central banks and financial
regulators becoming involved in financial education initiatives. This is no longer an issue, as it is
widely accepted that it should be so. More financial literacy helps citizens choose more suitable
financial  products,  thus  contributing  to  maintain  financial  stability  and  sustained  economic
growth. 
Nine years ago, Banco de Portugal launched the Bank Customer Website, marking the beginning
of a more effectively structured strategy to promote financial education. Since then, it published
booklets and leaflets with information on banking products and services and set up countless
financial education workshops, supported by the bank’s regional branches. 
In addition, teaming with the other financial supervisors, Banco de Portugal launched the National
Plan  for  Financial  Education,  which  since  2011  has  had  many  initiatives  that  will  certainly  be
referred to specifically throughout this meeting. Such initiatives are carried out using partnerships
with public and private entities, involving schools, companies and local authorities, among other. 
6.  We  would  like  these  two  days  to  ensure  that  everyone’s  interest  is  kindled  for  the  fourth
meeting. At  Banco  de  Portugal,  besides  sharing  our  experience,  we  are  all  very  interested  to
learn about recent developments in your countries in the initiatives to promote financial inclusion
and education, so that we can all make the best use of the experiences to be shared here. It has
always been our belief that by joint reflection and cooperation we could reach our goals more
effectively. 
Allow me a final word to thank all the effort put in by all the staff of Banco de Portugal who worked
to make this third meeting a reality. Among them I wish to give special thanks to the Banking
Conduct Supervision Department, herein represented by its Head Ms. Lúcia Leitão, which put its
heart and soul into this event.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
