Yves  Mersch:  Competitiveness  of  Europe  and  European  financial
markets
Panel contribution by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank,  at  the  30th  edition  of  the  workshop  "The  Outlook  for  the  Economy  and  Finance",  Villa
d'Este, Cernobbio, 6 April 2019.
 To increase competitiveness is the main driver for higher potential growth. Member states have
to pursue politics and establish institutions that stimulate the dynamics of a competitive private
sector.
In  most  euro  area  countries  potential  growth  has  remained  too  low,  however.  Labour  market
rigidities  and  inefficient  business  environment  conditions  seem  to  be  major  impediments.  In
particular, labour supply is held back by policies which do not sufficiently motivate to take up jobs
and  do  not  tackle  skill  mismatch  or  labour  shortages.  Moreover,  investment  could  be
strengthened  through  fostering  competition,  improve  the  business  environment  and  reduce
uncertainty e.g. through improving the quality and efficiency of public institutions more generally.
Despite  favourable  economic  and  financing  conditions,  structural  reform  progress  has  been
rather limited, including in several of the weakest countries.
The trend of insufficient structural reform implementation observed in particular since 2014 has
continued during the last year. Only a few countries have engaged in more far-reaching structural
reforms, most notably Greece and France. Some countries even reversed recent reforms that
had been designed to improve the smooth functioning of the economy, most notably in the areas
of  labour  markets  and  pension  systems.  Overall,  reform  efforts  were  not  in  line  with  reform
needs.
These policy areas concern national competencies, but in a single markets cross-border spill-
over  effects  are  generated.  Governments  therefore  need  to  act  at  national  levels,  enhanced
through procedures, rules and harmonization at EU level.
Against the background of limited reform effort and in spite of the robust cyclical upswing, overall
risks and vulnerabilities in many cases have only moderately declined since last year.
The  Commission’s  annual  assessment  of  country  specific  recommended  reforms  finds  only
1
limited progress.
The progress made is evaluated using five categories: “no progress”, “limited progress”, “some
progress”,  “substantial  progress”  and  “full  implementation”.  “No  progress”  means  that  the
Member State concerned did not even “credibly announce” measures that would aim to address
the policy recommendation.
Out  of  73  country  specific  recommendations  (CSRs),  none  saw  full  implementation,  and
substantial progress was made in only two cases. For the overwhelming majority of CSRs (more
than 90%), the Commission found that Member States made at best some or limited progress.
On  two  CSRs,  no  progress  was  made.  Most  concerning,  despite  being  very  vulnerable,  the
countries experiencing excessive imbalances did not make significantly more reform progress
during  the  last  year  than  the  EU  average.  The  same  is  true  for  the  countries  experiencing
imbalances. Overall, progress on reforms this year was as weak as last year.
The international role of the euro
But also on the European level there is not only a role to harmonize national action in order to
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
reap the benefits of the Single Market. Where competence has been transferred to the EU level,
the need to spur competitiveness is at the EU level.
The European Commission presented a set of action points to strengthen the euro’s global role.
More recently, the COM has underscored the increasing relevance of capital markets union in
supporting the international role of the euro amid geopolitical changes (e.g. Brexit and US foreign
and trade policy).
To  this  end,  the  euro  should  become  even  more  compelling  as  a  means  of  payment  and  a
trustworthy investment currency. Without prejudice to the ECB’s independence, we took note of
the Commission’s support for our initiatives on market infrastructure and payments, which help
to increase efficiency and financial market integration in the euro area.
International trade
It  was  important  to  resist,  the  temptation  to  gain  competitive  advantage  or  create  national
champions by tilting the system in one’s favour (e.g. in the area of tax, privacy, cyber security
and fintech policies).
The costs of fragmentation of global trade would be high. IMF staff simulations of a global trading
system that had been fragmented into three trading blocs show that in such a scenario, each of
the blocs was overall worse off, although individual countries within the bloc may actually gain.
These issues would also apply to other areas like the international flow of data and access to the
global payments system.
There are five dimensions where progress is needed:
1.  consensus on how to address social and economic grievances;
2.  a rethinking of the appropriate mix of domestic policies;
3.  strengthening and updating of the international rules of the game;
4.  adequate management of global public goods;
5.  securing the global financial safety net.
Payments systems
The  ECB’s  responsibility  for  promoting  the  smooth  operation  of  payment  systems  indirectly
supports  the  international  standing  of  the  euro.  The  Eurosystem  has  contributed  to  reshaping
and  consolidating  the  infrastructure  for  large-value  payments,  for  post-trading  services  for
financial instruments and, most recently, for instant retail payments.
Over the next two or three years we aim at
taking measures to consolidate TARGET2 and TARGET2-Securities (T2S), in particular
by delivering a centralised liquidity management function;
developing  a single collateral management system that will be capable of managing the
assets used as collateral in Eurosystem credit operations for all euro area countries.
Harmonization agenda
More harmonization is necessary to achieve a safe and efficient European post trade landscape.
The European  Post  Trade  Forum  (EPTF)  Report  identifies  barriers  which  have  not  yet  been
dismantled (formerly known as “Giovannini Barriers”), as well as new bottlenecks which need to
be  addressed  to  promote  more  efficient  and  resilient  market  infrastructures  in  the  EU.  These
include:
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Inefficient withholding tax collection procedures
Legal inconsistencies and uncertainties
Fragmented corporate actions and general meeting processes
More harmonisation of national insolvency rules is needed to make European resolution more
effective. The recently agreed proposal (December 2018) is a minimum harmonization directive
allowing member states to go further when transposing the rules into national law.
European issuance
An important element in a well-functioning capital market is the smooth interplay between
issuance on the primary market, investors and secondary markets. In Europe, the issuance
and distribution of securities is still complex and operational cost are elevated. Securities are
still issued along different national rules, standards and habits.
Central  Securities  Depositories  (CSD)  play  a  pivotal  role  in  this  process.  Today,  issuers
usually issue in one CSD. All other CSDs, and their national customer base, need to access
these securities by connecting to this initial one. This chopped-up process is complex and
relatively expensive. Investors and issuers alike see scope for improvements.
1
The progress made is evaluated using five categories: “no progress”, “limited progress”, “some progress”,
“substantial progress” and “full implementation”. “No progress” means that the Member State concerned did not
even “credibly announce” measures that would aim to address the policy recommendation.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
