Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Luis
de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 24 January 2019.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council,
which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the key  ECB
interest rates unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at their present levels at least
through the summer of 2019, and in any case for as long as necessary to ensure the continued
sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium
term.
Regarding non-standard monetary policy measures, we intend to continue reinvesting, in full,
the  principal  payments  from  maturing  securities  purchased  under  the  asset  purchase
programme  for  an  extended  period  of  time  past  the  date  when  we  start  raising  the  key  ECB
interest rates, and in any case for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity conditions
and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.
The  incoming  information  has  continued  to  be  weaker  than  expected  on  account  of  softer
external demand and some country and sector-specific factors. The persistence of uncertainties
in  particular  relating  to  geopolitical  factors  and  the  threat  of  protectionism  is  weighing  on
economic sentiment. At the same time, supportive financing conditions, favourable labour market
dynamics and rising wage growth continue to underpin the euro area expansion and gradually
rising inflation pressures. This supports our confidence in the continued sustained convergence
of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Significant monetary
policy stimulus remains essential to support the further build-up of domestic price pressures and
headline  inflation  developments  over  the  medium  term.  This  will  be  provided  by  our  forward
guidance on the key ECB interest rates, reinforced by the reinvestments of the sizeable stock of
acquired assets. In any event, the Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments,
as  appropriate,  to  ensure  that  inflation  continues  to  move  towards  the  Governing  Council’s
inflation aim in a sustained manner.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Euro
area  real  GDP  increased  by  0.2%,  quarter  on  quarter,  in  the  third  quarter  of  2018,  following
growth of 0.4% in the previous two quarters. Incoming data have continued to be weaker than
expected  as  a  result  of  a  slowdown  in  external  demand  compounded  by  some  country  and
sector-specific factors. While the impact of some of these factors is expected to fade, the near-
term growth momentum is likely to be weaker than previously anticipated. Looking ahead, the
euro  area  expansion  will  continue  to  be  supported  by  favourable  financing  conditions,  further
employment gains and rising wages, lower energy prices, and the ongoing – albeit somewhat
slower – expansion in global activity.
The risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook have moved to the downside on account of
the  persistence  of  uncertainties  related  to  geopolitical  factors  and  the  threat  of  protectionism,
vulnerabilities in emerging markets and financial market volatility.
Euro area annual HICP inflation declined to 1.6% in December 2018, from 1.9% in November,
reflecting  mainly  lower  energy  price  inflation.  On  the  basis  of  current  futures  prices  for  oil,
headline  inflation  is  likely  to  decline  further  over  the  coming  months.  Measures  of  underlying
inflation  remain  generally  muted,  but  labour  cost  pressures  are  continuing  to  strengthen  and
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
broaden amid high levels of capacity utilisation and tightening labour markets. Looking ahead,
underlying inflation is expected to increase over the medium term, supported by our monetary
policy measures, the ongoing economic expansion and rising wage growth.
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) growth moderated to 3.7% in November
2018,  after  3.9%  in  October.  M3  growth  continues  to  be  backed  by  bank  credit  creation.  The
narrow monetary aggregate M1 remained the main contributor to broad money growth.
The annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations stood at 4.0% in November 2018,
after  3.9%  in  October,  while  the  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  households  remained  broadly
unchanged at 3.3%. The euro area bank lending survey for the fourth quarter of 2018 suggests
that  overall  bank  lending  conditions  remained  favourable,  following  an  extended  period  of  net
easing, and demand for bank credit continued to rise, thereby underpinning loan growth.
The pass-through of the monetary policy measures put in place since June 2014 continues to
significantly  support  borrowing  conditions  for  firms  and  households,  access  to  financing  –  in
particular for small and medium-sized enterprises – and credit flows across the euro area.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from the monetary analysis confirmed that an ample degree of monetary accommodation is still
necessary for the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close
to, 2% over the medium term.
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute more decisively to raising the longer-term growth potential and reducing vulnerabilities.
The  implementation  of structural  reforms  in  euro  area  countries  needs  to  be  substantially
stepped  up  to  increase  resilience,  reduce  structural  unemployment  and  boost  euro  area
productivity and growth potential. Regarding fiscal policies, the Governing Council reiterates the
need for rebuilding fiscal buffers. This is particularly important in countries where government
debt  is  high  and  for  which  full  adherence  to  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  critical  for
safeguarding sound fiscal positions. Likewise, the transparent and consistent implementation of
the EU’s fiscal and economic governance framework over time and across countries remains
essential  to  bolster  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  economy.  Improving  the  functioning  of
Economic and Monetary Union remains a priority. The Governing Council welcomes the ongoing
work and urges further specific and decisive steps to complete the banking union and the capital
markets union.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
