Yakiv  Smolii:  National  Bank  of  Ukraine  press  briefing  –  monetary
policy statement
Speech  by  Mr  Yakiv  Smolii,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Ukraine,  at  a  press  briefing  on
monetary policy, Kyiv, 14 March 2019.
 Dear colleagues,
Please be informed that the NBU Board has decided to maintain its key policy rate at 18% per
annum.
We  believe  that  the  tight  monetary  conditions  continue  to  be  an  important  prerequisite  for
gradually reducing inflation to the 5% target in 2020.
What inflation developments followed the last key policy rate decision?
Inflation continued to decelerate in the early months of 2019, effectively staying on the
trajectory  the  NBU predicted  in  its January 2019 Inflation Report. By the end of February,
inflation  had  declined  to  8.8%  yoy,  with  core  inflation  down  to  7.8%  yoy,  indicating  that  the
underlying inflationary pressure is easing off as anticipated.
The NBU’s tight monetary policy contributed to the lower inflation, including by being one of the
reasons for the strengthening of the hryvnia. Other factors that made the hryvnia stronger:
favorable global prices for Ukrainian exports, in particular, agricultural and metals exports,
and stable exports earnings
the approaching deadline for annual tax payments to the state budget, which encouraged
businesses to sell foreign currency more actively
weak growth in imports of goods, and low volumes of repatriated foreign currency dividends
net sales of foreign currency by households.
The excess of FX supply over demand in the interbank market enabled the NBU to buy foreign
currency to replenish international reserves without throwing the exchange rate off the course
determined by market forces. The NBU has made USD 625 million in net FX purchases since
the  year  started.  Favorable  FX  market  conditions  were  another  factor  that  helped  keep
international reserves above USD 20 billion despite sizable public debt repayments.
The stronger hryvnia affected the prices of imported goods and goods that have a substantial
import content.
In  addition,  the  consistency  of  the  monetary  policy,  which  aims  to  tackle  inflation,  and  the  FX
market conditions contributed to the gradual improvement of inflation expectations. This raises
interest  rates  in  real  terms  and  thus  ensures  tight  monetary  conditions  necessary  to  reduce
inflation.
What will be the future trajectory of inflation?
In 2019, in line with the January forecast, inflation will decelerate to 6.3%, and return to
its target range of 5% ± 1 pp early next year.
This forecast still holds, despite new factors emerging since the NBU Board last met to discuss
monetary policy.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the one hand, increases in social payments, as well as the monetization of utility subsidies
are planned for the coming months.
Although the effects of these individual factors are insignificant, their combined impact on inflation
expectations could be substantial, on the back of greater uncertainty arising from presidential and
parliamentary elections.
On  the  other  hand,  a  more  noticeable  strengthening  in  the  hryvnia  exchange  rate  than  is
envisaged in the current forecast, is helping curb inflation.
That  said,  the  risks  to  inflation  decreasing  mentioned  by  the  NBU  in  its  January
macroeconomic forecast continue to persist.
What will the NBU’s monetary policy stance be in future?
After balancing the need to bring inflation back to its target against the risks that could prevent
inflation from decreasing, the NBU Board has decided to leave the key policy rate unchanged, at
18.0% per annum.
Although leaving the key policy rate unchanged, the NBU Board said that it could cut it in
the future.
How  soon  the  NBU  will  adopt  an  easing  cycle  will  depend  on  how  steadily  risks  of  inflation
decrease and inflation expectations improve. Looking ahead, any changes to the key policy rate
will be based on the NBU’s updated macroeconomic forecast that will be published in April.
A  summary  of  the  discussion  by  Monetary  Policy  Committee  members  that  preceded  this
decision will be published on 25 March 2019.
The next meeting of the NBU Board on monetary policy issues will be held on 25 April 2019.
Thank you for your time!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
