 SPEECH 
BY GOVERNOR LARS ROHDE AT THE ANNUAL 
MEETING OF DANISH AUDITORS 
  
 
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
   
 
10 September 2019 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak here today. 
My topic is trust and transparency in the financial system. 
This topic is always current, but it became particularly relevant in connec-
tion with the financial crisis. It was a substantial breach of trust when cen-
tral governments in large parts of the western world had to use taxpayer 
funds to save the financial sector.  
In recent years, the topic has surfaced again following a number of unfor-
tunate issues that have accumulated since the financial crisis. For a long 
time we may have thought that this was primarily a problem that existed 
outside Denmark's borders. But then cases emerged in Denmark too. 
There have been money laundering cases, there have been deliveries of 
very large banknotes to bureaux de change, and incorrect advice has 
been provided in connection with investment products. The financial sec-
tor has been involved in transactions that have drained the government 
coffers of many billions of kroner in dividend tax. And I am sure we could 
find more examples.  
What these examples have in common is that they contributed to under-
mining trust in the financial system. Trust is low at the global level. That 
has been documented by the Edelman Trust Barometer. In fact, one of 
the key messages in the Edelman analysis is that the financial sector is the 
sector that people trust the least. Danish surveys also point to low trust 
in the financial sector. 
 Page 1 of 8 
  How can we learn more about the present and about how to shape the 
future? One way is to look back and learn from history. So I would like to 
start with two examples from the past.  
I will begin in the 18th century. More specifically with the Rothschild fami-
ly dynasty. It was founded by Mayer Amschel Rothschild. He was the head 
of a poor family comprising his wife and 10 children. The family lived in 
Frankfurt in the late 18th century. Good ideas combined with unusual 
willpower gave Mayer Rothschild a point of departure for forging busi-
ness relationships with powerful men in the area. He also dispersed his 
sons across Europe. The sons established their separate trading firms 
and were successful. Especially the son in London was doing well. He 
soon became so rich that he could lend money to the Duke of Wellington. 
In 1814, this son became the British government's secret banker for fund-
ing the Napoleonic wars.  
The family established a close network throughout Europe, with links to 
ship owners, transport companies and financers, among others. News 
spread very fast through this network. After Napoleon's defeat at Water-
loo, the Rothschild family received the news – before the British govern-
ment! They purchased British government bonds, and when news of the 
victory arrived, prices rose, making the Rothschild family even wealthier.  
At the core of the family's success was the foresight of Mayer Rothschild, 
which led him to conclude a partnership agreement with his sons at an 
early date. This agreement was aimed at ensuring a strong family-owned 
business based on the father's solid reputation as a businessman. The 
family was to benefit from the reputation that Mayer Rothschild had built 
up.  
Furthermore, Mayer and his sons were to share the profits from the busi-
ness empire, which meant that they took an interest in each other's af-
fairs and the partnership as such. In other words, the business empire 
was based on the principle of everyone having something at stake. 
 My other retrospective example relates to a period of around 30 years in 
mid-19th century USA. Before this period, every single bank in the USA 
had to have a charter through special legislation for that specific bank. 
However, this changed when many states began to introduce state char-
ters describing the general requirements to be met by banks that wanted 
a licence to operate. This period has been called the "free banking" era 
Page 2 of 8 
  because anyone meeting the relevant state's banking requirements could 
establish a bank.  
A bank was typically established by selling shares – "subscriptions" – and 
by using the funds received to purchase government bonds. If you want-
ed to operate a bank, you had to deposit government bonds to back the 
banknotes issued by the bank. The banknotes were used by traders, and 
there were "banknote reporters" who prepared lists of counterfeits and 
listed the prices of the various banknotes. 
Later generations have interpreted this period in different ways. A num-
ber of banks failed, so initially it was investigated whether they misused 
their special position, e.g. by having insufficient backing for the bank-
notes issued. In the literature, these banks were referred to as "wildcat 
banks". Later, the view of the period changed, and focus is now on mar-
ket discipline during this period. This was reflected in the market's ability 
to price the risk on the banknotes from the individual banks, which was of 
paramount importance to the bank's reputation. There were banks that 
failed, but they did so because the market was able to price the risk. 
People voted with their feet. So there was a high degree of market disci-
pline. 
 What can we learn from these two historical examples? Firstly, I note that 
the people involved also took on the risk – they all had something at 
stake. It was their own money – or their close business partners' money – 
that was lent. That gave them an incentive for sound risk management. 
They were focused on behaving in such a way that their good names and 
reputations and their wealth were not jeopardised. That is no longer the 
case. Today's banks are so large that no individual or small group of 
people can own and operate a big bank. This means that there is no 
longer a close link between those bearing the risk, the owners, and the 
day-to-day management. When shares are as widely dispersed as they 
are in most Danish banks, everyone is responsible, which ultimately 
means that no-one takes on the responsibility. Being owned by everyone 
is the same as being owned by no-one.  
Secondly, I note that the market plays an important role. It is good if cli-
ents vote with their feet.  
You might ask whether things had been different today if we had learnt 
more from history.  
Page 3 of 8 
   Now I will turn my attention to something more recent – the financial cri-
sis. It is already more than 10 years since the financial crisis erupted.  
The financial crisis made it very clear that we had created a system in 
which the banks reaped the gains in good times, while society and the 
taxpayers had to foot the bill when things went wrong. Distressed west-
ern banks were saved by means of government funds. That was also the 
case in Denmark. There was simply no other option. It was necessary to 
intervene to support financial stability. That was important in order to be 
able to continue the functions within the financial system that are critical 
to the real economy. Households, firms and authorities all depend on 
services provided by the institutions. Default within the financial system 
would interrupt these critical functions, which would have considerable 
negative consequences for the financial system and the real economy. 
 After the crisis, crisis management regimes were introduced for banks 
worldwide. In the USA, Dodd-Frank was passed. And at the EU level the 
Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, BRRD, was adopted to prevent a 
similar situation in the future.  
The BRRD requires all banks and mortgage banks to prepare and update 
recovery plans and also requires the authorities to prepare resolution 
plans. These plans are the point of departure for the crisis management 
in the institutions and authorities.  
Besides these two requirements, the BRRD includes another key element: 
it lays down a framework for the authorities' management of a failing in-
stitution or an institution that is likely to fail. There are rules stating who 
is to bear the losses. Institutions must observe a minimum requirement 
for own funds and eligible liabilities. This requirement is referred to as 
the MREL. The purpose of the MREL is to ensure that it is possible to re-
solve the individual firm in a crisis. The bail-in tool is of particular signifi-
cance in this respect. I will get back to that.  
The MREL has two components: a loss-absorption amount and a recapi-
talisation amount. The loss-absorption amount corresponds to the losses 
the institution can be expected to have to absorb. The recapitalisation 
amount is to ensure that the chosen resolution strategy can be imple-
mented. If the group is to continue as a viable business after having been 
distressed, it must be possible to recapitalise it at a level whereby it 
Page 4 of 8 
  meets the capital requirements and enjoys sufficient trust in the market. 
By the way, that is the resolution strategy for the systemically important 
financial institutions in Denmark. So we are no longer in a situation where 
we either save them all or do not save any.  
The BRRD has introduced a new layer in the creditor hierarchy. This is 
non-preferred senior debt, which can be used for loss absorption and 
covers losses before senior unsecured creditors are affected. The price of 
this new type of debt is a sensitive indicator of the soundness of a bank.  
In that way, there is no risk that taxpayers, rather than investors and 
creditors, will bear the costs of handling a failing institution. The idea is 
that losses should be borne by those who incurred the risks and those 
who get the prospect of profit. That is known as bail-in. Bail-in helps to 
ensure that the institutions have an incentive to run their businesses pru-
dently and that investors and creditors monitor the activities of the insti-
tutions in order to prevent excessive risk-taking. 
The BRRD is the most significant regulatory initiative in the financial area 
in Europe in recent times. We now have a set of rules that reduces the 
risk that institutions will suffer serious financial problems, while also en-
suring that the authorities have the tools required to handle the situa-
tion, should the institutions nevertheless become distressed. Like other 
firms, banks can fail without passing the bill to society and its citizens.  
But the BRRD cannot stand alone. There is a need for regulation of finan-
cial companies. For example, capital and liquidity requirements must ap-
ply. The requirements as to how much capital banks and mortgage banks 
must hold have evolved considerably over the last 30-40 years. Seen from 
today's perspective, starting with Basel I, it included very simple rules re-
garding the capital required if a bank was to lend money. There was a 
fairly rough breakdown by loan risk, which meant that loans were 
weighted according to their riskiness. 
The belief that it was possible to estimate the loss profiles of various cus-
tomer and loan types, and hence to calculate the capital requirements for 
unexpected losses on loans, led to Basel II. 
As we all know, it did not stop there. We now have Basel III, and complex-
ity has increased. Fortunately, the capital requirements have also in-
creased. 
Not only capital has been regulated. There are also rules on liquidity, fit 
and proper rules for management and rules on investor protection now. 
Page 5 of 8 
  And many more. All these rules and measures address important issues. 
And they have been necessary because there were insufficient incentives 
to ensure that the financial sector behaved. 
We cannot and should not regulate all aspects of the financial sector in 
detail to prevent things from going wrong. It would simply not be possi-
ble to formulate such rules and it would also be virtually impossible to 
observe them. The banks' managements must have a certain degree of 
freedom to run their businesses.    
I am not in favour of further detailed regulation. And perhaps we should 
consider whether the fence poles are in the right place or whether we 
have fenced in some areas too much. So I am on the side of simplifying 
and streamlining rules and regulations if possible. And as I have said, that 
is possible now because the BRRD ensures that irrespective of the size of 
a bank, we can manage it in a crisis situation. The critical functions will be 
continued, and investors and creditors will foot the bill – not the taxpay-
ers. In other words, the BRRD is a prerequisite to do away with some of 
the detailed regulation. If we do so, it may give managements and 
boards more space to actively consider the business model and ethical 
principles on which their business is to be based. It is a task for manage-
ment to create a culture based on responsibility and decency and to en-
sure that employees contribute actively to that agenda.  
In Denmark, we basically trust our institutions and firms and each other. 
But when this trust is broken, we cannot simply lean back and wait for it 
to be restored. That requires an effort. Trust is something we earn. And in 
this respect the financial sector has its task cut out. It is by no means all 
banks that misbehave, presumably it is only a few and perhaps only in 
certain respects. But a breach of trust rubs off on the whole sector.  
 Lenin said, "trust is good, control is better". I prefer to say that trust is 
good – in fact it is a precondition – but control is necessary. That is why 
the quality of such control matters. And you, the auditors, play a special 
role as the trusted representatives of society in general. That role must 
be undertaken with credibility and integrity as the whole purpose of con-
ducting audits is to support trust in the information published. So you 
have a very important role. 
There is a price to be paid if the quality of an auditor's work is not good 
enough. And we all know that that is sometimes the case. We have seen 
cases where the Disciplinary Board on Auditors (Revisornævnet) has im-
Page 6 of 8 
  posed fines on auditors for having acted contrary to good auditing prac-
tices.  
Sometimes there may be a discrepancy between, on the one hand, gen-
eral expectations regarding an auditor's work and, on the other hand, 
legislative requirements. In a court of law it can be difficult to prove that 
an auditor has not observed good auditing practices. It can only be 
hoped that the scope and quality of audits in the vast majority of cases 
go well beyond the legislative requirements. In this respect self-checks 
and quality controls by the authorities are both important tools for ensur-
ing trust in auditors. It is also important that you, the auditors, stay fo-
cused on your core task – audit – and do not give lower priority to audit 
quality in favour of consultancy services – although they may appear to 
be more profitable in the short term. 
The relationship between a firm and its auditor is a client relationship. 
This involves an inherent conflict between the auditor's wish to meet the 
customer's expectations and the role as the trusted representative of so-
ciety in general. Your task is to take a critical view of what you see in 
firms. You must challenge management and point out practices that are 
not in accordance with the rules. And you must communicate clearly if 
they are not brought in order. That is your task. If you do not do that, 
you are doing your clients a disservice in the long term. If you lose clients 
on that account, you should see it as a necessary cost of maintaining in-
tegrity and the respect of society – your other clients. 
Your organisation, FSR – Danish Auditors, has prepared an action plan to 
strengthen the quality of the sector in Denmark. I note that it includes 
strengthened public sector control of auditors, new tools for measuring 
the quality of the work performed and enhanced self-checks. Might I sug-
gest that you also consider the role of auditors in relation to the ethical 
foundations and culture of a firm? I would like to see auditors play a role 
in relation to reviewing whether the targets for ethical behaviour set by 
the board are also implemented in practice. 
 We must learn from history and consider whether we have the right in-
centives. The task is to keep your own houses in order. That applies in 
the financial sector and among auditors. I can say for certain: once the 
crisis hits, there is no-one you can call! At least I can say; We do not pick 
up the phone. The financial institutions – their creditors and investors – 
must suffer the consequences. Just as the BRRD envisages. So when you 
Page 7 of 8 
  audit financial enterprises, I hope you keep in mind that it is an honour to 
be the trusted representatives of society in general. And I hope that the 
trust placed in the employees and managers of the financial enterprises is 
rewarded with responsible and decent performance of their tasks. 
Thank you. 
 Page 8 of 8 
