Sabine  Mauderer:  Structural  changes  in  financial  markets  and
implications for monetary policy implementation
Speech by Dr Sabine Mauderer, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at
the DZ Bank International Capital Markets Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 29 August 2019.
WELCOME & INTRODUCTION
Ladies and gentlemen,
 Welcome to the Bundesbank’s Regional Office. It’s a real treat for me to speak to you today.
“When the going gets tough” – this conference title was wisely chosen by DZ Bank earlier this
year.
Looking at the latest ructions in financial markets, the going has already got tough.
“Navigating the challenges” is the order of the day, and not just for market participants.
The same goes for policymakers – especially when it comes to fiscal policy or monetary policy.
As far as central banking is concerned, “navigating the challenges” is broad in scope. It includes
drawing the right conclusions from financial market signals.
The relationship between monetary policy and financial markets is not a one-way street.
Stock and bond prices reflect expectations on future growth and inflation, but also on monetary
policy.
These market expectations, in turn, provide valuable information for policymakers.
But things have become even more multi-layered. On the one hand we face increasing market
complexity and changes. On the other hand we see new players, products and trading patterns.
To  be  honest,  keeping  tabs  on  the  relevant  changes  is  anything  but  easy.  We  have  to  keep
asking ourselves which elements of change have an impact on monetary policy and which do
not.
So what I am going to do is present some of these changes in the first part of my speech.
It  would  be  a  bit  of  a  “long  shot”  to  always  call  them  “structural”,  since  their  longevity  is  not
entirely clear.
Then I’ll use the second part of my remarks to point out what these changes mean for monetary
policy implementation.
Admittedly, I´ll give you rather a rough sketch than a finished painting, so some items might be
left unresolved.
Fortunately, we will have the opportunity to delve a little deeper into some of the issues later on
tonight.
But for starters, let’s take a look at my selection of recent changes in financial markets.
A – STRUCTURAL CHANGES IN FINANCIAL MARKETS
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
I based my choice of changes on how strongly they impact on market dynamics.
The  first  change  is  a  shift  in  the  relative  importance  of  banks  and  non-banks  in  the  financial
system. This is true for the euro area, but also on a more global level.
On  the  one  hand  we  see  a  prospering  asset  management  industry  and  growing  financial
markets. But on the other hand banks have been reducing the size of their trading books, partly
as a result of stricter regulation.
This shift in market forces is not a major issue when times are good and markets are quiet.
But market liquidity can be a bottleneck in times of stress, when many investors are scrambling
to square their positions at the same time.
In the past, banks had the balance sheet capacity to absorb a good deal of the assets on offer.
In terms of market functioning, there are strong indications that this kind of buffering mechanism
cannot be relied upon anymore, at least not to the same extent.
Market liquidity may evaporate when it is needed most.
The second change is the rise of new players and products within the non-bank financial sector,
alongside growing investment demand.
We observe two important developments sometimes framed as diametrically opposed forces:
the very active world of high frequency trading (HFT) and the seemingly calm world of passive
investment represented by exchange traded funds (ETFs).
The  rise  of  these  market  players  or  strategies  has  a  potentially  far-reaching  impact  on  how
financial markets respond to new information.
HFT  improves  liquidity  under  normal  market  conditions,  it  would  appear.  But  during  cycles  of
market volatility, this positive effect on market liquidity seems to not only disappear, but even turn
negative as a result of directional investment strategies.
The picture is just as mixed for ETFs. Their net effect on market liquidity in a “normal” market
environment  is  positive.  But  their  behaviour  under  financial  stress  might  also  warrant  market
liquidity concerns – particularly when leverage is part of the game.
Crucially, then, both HFTs and ETFs have a procyclical impact on market liquidity. And we have
good reason to assume that their influence is here to stay.
Let  us  look  at  client  needs  now:  Competition  in  the  asset  management  sector  has  been  a
catalyst  for  new  investment  strategies  in  response  to  changing  client  needs.  This  is  the  third
change.
Many  investors  want  to  combine  search  for  yield  with  the  desire  to  limit  downside  risks  and
volatility.
Among  those  who  increasingly  aim  to  earn  (so-called)  alternative  risk  premia  are  multi  asset
funds.
Multi asset funds have been around in various guises for quite some time now, but they have
been attracting renewed interest in the current low yield environment.
Let’s not forget that there are also other players with more explicit links to volatility. These include
commodity trading advisors (CTAs) with momentum-driven strategies;
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
funds that have volatility targets or (so-called) volatility caps and
risk parity funds.
Many of their approaches rely on systematic investment strategies.
These strategies promise outperformance or superior risk management by eliminating human
bias. They largely lean on automated market data analysis.
But  they  also  imply  correlated  investments.  When  volatilities  are  low,  the  strategies
systematically  increase  riskier  investment  positions,  and  vice  versa.  Here  too,  procyclical
influence on market liquidity is a central concern.
One factor which many, if not all, of these developments have in common is the relentless drive
towards digitalisation.
Big data, machine learning and artificial intelligence have become indispensable for many market
participants in the fields of forecasting, investment management and trade execution.
So in a nut shell, we see a lot of changes in the market. These changes will alter the information
that is being sent to us. The overall question is how are we going to interpret these signals?
Just think about traditional benchmark rates and also the shape of the yield curve.
No matter which yardstick is taken: 
A superficial reading may suggest that the US yield curve is sending strong warning signs about
growth and inflation expectations.
In the same vein, the economic outlook implied by the Bund curve seems to look only marginally
better.
For all the concerns which the yield curves continue to attract, there are many voices pointing to
special factors which dilute the reliability of this indicator.
Increasing demand for high quality assets seems to play an important role – be it from large-
scale institutional investors, market participants in need of collateral, or banks aiming to satisfy
regulatory requirements.
The dampening impact of monetary policy on term premia is often mentioned as an influence
factor as well. I will come back to this point shortly.
Turning to other segments, reliability concerns have also cropped up surrounding market-based
inflation expectation indicators such as inflation swaps.
I will not go into an in-depth analysis, the jury is still out on what has been driving down longer-
term market indicators.
1
All the related issues are being continually reassessed by the Eurosystem .
2
Another challenge is to correctly interpret volatility indices like the VIX .
Over the last years, we have seen rather long stretches of low volatility readings.
A  common  conclusion  from  these  readings  is  that  market  participants  expect  smooth  sailing
ahead.
But we have to take into account that volatility targeting strategies and related products are a
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
more important part of the game now.
Volatility readings could have been more suppressed than in prior periods. As a result, market
participants face relatively more extreme spikes during a repricing of risk.
So  we  are  talking  about  the  abruptness  and  magnitude  of  index  movements,  rather  than  the
movements themselves.
B – IMPLICATIONS FOR MONETARY POLICY IMPLEMENTATION
Now what is the impact of these changes on monetary policy implementation?
Just like asset management, monetary policy is about taking the right decisions.
That’s  why  it  matters  a  great  deal  to  have  a  sound  grasp  of  what  economic  indicators  are
actually telling us – including financial market indicators.
The  yield  curve  has  long  been  used  by  market  participants  to  gauge  markets’  aggregated
expectations on the economic outlook.
Getting a grip on inflation expectations touches on the core of our price stability mandate.
But market-based indicators of inflation expectations are just one set of indicators, which can be
relevant in this context.
The  notion  of  financial  conditions  is  another  factor  that  has  gained  in  importance  for  central
banks as a means of assessing their policy impact.
Consider  that  volatility  is  an  important  component  of  practically  any  measure  of  [risk  and]
financial conditions – and you’ll see why there might be a problem.
Therefore,  one  important  task  for  central  banks  is  to  separate  market  technicalities  from
fundamental information.
And  that,  in  turn,  is  why  central  bankers  also  need  to  cross-check  financial  market  signals
against other indicators, monetary as well as real economic ones.
Inaccurate or incomplete information might lull us into complacency in one situation or drive us to
take potentially unnecessary or premature action in another.
At  this  stage,  let  me  briefly  recap  on  how  monetary  policy  itself  impacts  on  financial  market
indicators.
Financial market prices play an important role for monetary policy transmission.
In this context, it is also important to understand the Eurosystem’s concept of market neutrality
for the public sector asset purchase programme (PSPP).
It  implies  that  while  we  are  looking  to  affect  prices,  we  do  not  want  to  suppress  the  price
3
discovery mechanism .
That is why a high degree of transparency around the asset purchases and close monitoring of
their impact on liquidity and collateral availability are still fundamental pillars of the Eurosystem’s
concept.
Against this background, we also have to be aware of “informational feedback loops”, also known
4
as the “reflection problem” .
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Overall, concrete measures are the result of weighing the pros and cons with regard to achieving
the price stability target.
CONCLUSION
Ladies and gentlemen,
Let me conclude with a few remarks on this assessment.
The task of the ECB’s Governing Council, remember, is to achieve price stability in the euro area
in the medium term.
Therefore, the inflation outlook is key for monetary policy decisions. One important element here
are inflation projections which will be updated by ECB staff for the September meeting.
After the July meeting, the relevant Eurosystem committees have been tasked with examining
different policy options for the case that the Governing Council sees need to act.
The questions they are exploring touch upon the set of policy instruments, their intensity and their
timing.
And the Bundesbank is actively contributing to the discussions at all the relevant levels.
As always, a crucial part of decision making will be to correctly interpret financial market signals.
In a constant state of flux, we face the difficult task of filtering out the informational content of
market indicators that is relevant for monetary policy.
They cannot be taken at face value, but should be treated as the raw material for monetary policy
decisions.
And the word “raw” is certainly worth stressing here, because indicators have to be handled with
a great deal of caution. They have to be qualified, quantified and cross-checked.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
Mario Draghi (25 July 2019): “(…) as I’ve said on another occasion, the informational content of market-based
inflation expectations has to be assessed, taking into account certain technical conditions of these markets.”
The VIX volatility index measures the volatility of the S&P 500 expected by the market (implied volatility). A high
value indicates a volatile market. The VIX is therefore also referred to as the “fear index”. However, it does not
indicate the direction of change (rising or falling stock prices).
Benoît  Cœuré, 
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/sp150310_1.en.html
Embarking 
sector 
public 
on 
asset 
purchases, 
10  March 
2015,
www.bis.org/publ/work692.pdf
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
