 THE BATTLE FOR RELEVANCE* 
  
 
Assalam-o-Alaikum and a very good morning to you all. 
 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  today  to  this  international  banking 
conference. I would like to start by expressing my deepest gratitude to His Highness 
the  Amir  Sheikh  Sabah  Al-Ahmad  Al-Jaber  Al-Sabah  for  his  patronage  of  this 
conference. It is the guidance and wise leadership of His Highness that has enabled 
us to build one of the region’s safest and most robust financial systems, which has 
played a vital role in the development of our economy. 
 
I  would  like  to  thank  all  the  honorable  governors  of  central  banks,  heads  of 
regulatory authorities, heads of financial institutions and other distinguished guests 
for  joining  us  today.  And  I  am  grateful  to  all  the  distinguished  speakers  who  are 
participating in this event, our local banks who have partnered with us to support 
this conference and my dedicated colleagues at the Central Bank of Kuwait (CBK) for 
their efforts in organizing this conference. 
 
The banking industry has enjoyed exceptional growth over the past half century, and 
despite  some  shortcomings,  it  has  played  a  critical  role  in  supporting  economic 
growth around the world. During normal times, one would expect banks to continue 
operating  as  they  have  in  the  past,  with  perhaps  a  greater  focus  on  product 
innovation or operational efficiency. 
 
But we are not living in normal times. Today, the global banking industry is at a major 
inflection  point,  facing  several  internal  and  external  challenges  that  are  coming 
                                                           
* Keynote speech delivered by H.E. Dr. Mohammad Y. Al-Hashel, Governor, Central Bank of Kuwait at CBK 
International Banking Conference: Shaping the Future, September 23rd 2019, Four Seasons Hotel, Kuwait City – 
Kuwait. 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 2 - 
together to create a perfect storm. Certainly, the industry will not be able to weather 
this storm by holding on to the same course it has pursued for decades.  
 
Rather it must reinvent itself for the future. That is why CBK is organizing this event 
under the theme  of ‘Shaping the Future’.  We believe that all  stakeholders in the 
banking industry need to take a proactive role in shaping the way banks operate in 
the future, rather than continuing along the well-trodden path, no matter how well 
that path had previously served them. 
 
Taking this opportunity, I would like to share a few thoughts on our vision for the 
evolution  of  the  banking  industry.  I  will  begin with  a brief  overview  of  the  major 
challenges that the industry faces today. Second, I will reflect on the key areas that 
banks will need to focus on in order to stay relevant. Finally, I will touch upon the 
role that enabling stakeholders need to play to support the banking industry through 
its transformative journey. 
 
 
1-Challenging Operating Environment 
 
So,  let  me  start  with  a  brief  discussion  on  the  key  challenges  that  the  banking 
industry faces today.  Three challenges are particularly worth highlighting: the state 
of  the  global  economy;  the  revolution  in  financial  technology;  and  the  rapidly 
evolving needs and expectations of customers. 
 
i. Global Economy 
 
First, let us look at the global economy where headwinds are intensifying. The IMF 
has twice lowered its global growth projections for 2019 to 3.2%, with developed 
economies expected to grow at a much slower rate of 1.9%1. 
 
A key driver of this slowdown is the economic uncertainty brought about by rising 
trade tensions and protectionist policies. If trade tensions continue, the  IMF may 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 3 - 
further revise down its economic growth projections. The Bank of England estimates 
that a 10% increase in tariffs between the US and its trading partners could lead to 
a reduction of 2.5% in US GDP, and 1% in global GDP excluding the US.2 
 
In its recent publication, the Institute of International Finance (IIF) also highlighted 
economic policy uncertainty as a key risk to business sentiment. The IIF estimates 
that economic policy uncertainty in both the US and China is at a record high, and 
its impact is being felt in terms of reduced investments and lower consumption.3 
 
We  have  already  seen  the  impact  of  trade  disputes  and  attendant  economic 
uncertainty on markets across the globe. Prominent indices such as the Dow Jones 
Industrial Average, S&P 500, Nasdaq Composite, FTSE 100 and the Nikkei 225 have 
declined by an average of around 7% in mid-August, from highs in July. 
 
Another  factor  linked  to  the  economic  outlook  is  the  role  of  monetary  policy. 
Economic  growth  in  the  last  decade  has  mainly  been  driven  by  the  use  of 
unconventional monetary policies. While these policies have supported economic 
recovery  following  the  global  financial  crisis,  by  ensuring  a  low  interest  rate 
environment,  they  have  led  to  other  unintended  consequences  like  fueling  debt 
levels across the globe. Thanks to low interest rates, global debt has ballooned to 
over $246 trillion, nearly 320% of global GDP.4 
 
While household debt has seen a gradual increase (3% growth per annum), the real 
growth  in  debt  lies  with  governments,  financial  institutions  and  corporates.  In 
particular, government debt has doubled since 2008, from $32 trillion to $67 trillion, 
especially with governments in developed economies having borrowed heavily over 
the past few years. Among OECD countries, Japan, Greece, Italy, Portugal, Belgium, 
France, Spain and the UK now all have government debt that exceeds their GDPs.5 
 
This extended period of historically low interest rates has also enabled corporates 
from around the world to take advantage of cheap debt. Global corporate debt has 
also  nearly  doubled  over  the  past  decade,  from  $37  trillion  to  $73  trillion,  even 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 4 - 
surpassing the increase in government debt. But contrary to government debt, two-
thirds of the growth in corporate debt has come from developing countries. This 
poses  a  serious  risk  to  these  economies,  especially  where  the  debt  is  in  foreign 
currencies. 
 
We have also seen the quality of borrowers deteriorate. Bonds rated BBB- and below 
now account for half of global corporate bonds, compared to just a quarter in 2007, 
before the financial crisis. 
 
Global debt over the past 20 years has grown on average by 6% annually. If these 
rates continue, and global GDP grows by 3.5% per annum as projected, we could see 
global debt over the next 20 years reaching $780 trillion, or 500% of GDP. This is 
clearly unsustainable, and requires urgent action by both governments and financial 
institutions. 
 
More  critically,  the  low  interest  rate  environment  has  curtailed  banks’  profits  in 
some of the advanced markets, jeopardizing their longer-term viability.  And record 
high debt levels are likely to pose increasing risk of defaults once monetary policy 
tightening  takes  course,  potentially  hurting  the  quality  of  banking  assets. 
Collectively, these trends have serious implications for financial stability in general. 
 
Beyond banking, there is increasing risk of  policy inaction amid weakening global 
governance,  as  evident  from  trade  disputes.  During  the  global  financial  crisis  of 
2008,  advanced  countries  joined  hands  to  fend  off  depression  through  a  well-
coordinated  and  robust  policy  response.  In  the  face  of  a  similar  threat  to  global 
economy today, as highlighted by the increasing risk of a looming US recession in 
the  next  12  months,  expectations  of  a  unified  and  powerful  international  policy 
response  remain  low,  amid  all  the  bickering  over  trade  issues  and  growing 
nationalism. Such developments have further elevated the risks to global economy, 
particularly in the backdrop of rising geo-political tensions. 
 
 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 5 - 
ii. Technology 
 
The  second  challenge  we  need  to  consider  is  the  impact  of  technology  on  the 
banking  industry.  The  latest  digital  technologies  are  transforming  the  economic 
landscape and are disrupting many traditional industries along the way. Banking is 
no  exception,  where  financial  technology  is  fast-evolving  and  being  adopted  at  a 
breathtaking pace. 
 
Cutting edge technologies such as digital payments, mobile banking, data analytics, 
artificial  intelligence,  and  blockchain  are  changing  the  way  banks  operate  and 
interact with customers. 
 
FinTech firms are beginning to eliminate the role of many traditional intermediaries 
in the financial services industry. According to McKinsey, five major banking business 
segments are particularly at risk: consumer finance; mortgages; SMEs; payments; 
and wealth management. McKinsey estimates that this could put up to 40% of bank 
revenues at risk by 2025.6 
 
Part of the reason is that FinTech firms can provide access to financial services in a 
more efficient and cost-effective manner. For example, some FinTech lenders have 
up to a 400-basis-point cost advantage over banks because they have no physical 
distribution costs. Another example is the execution of payments; transactions that 
used to take 3 to 5 days to process can now be completed in 3 to 5 seconds, and for 
less than one-tenth of the original cost. 
 
Although  banks  have  generally  been  slow  to  innovate,  they  have  sought  to  stay 
ahead of the game by  partnering  with or  acquiring  FinTech firms. According to a 
recent  PwC  report,  over  54%  of  banks  surveyed  have  already  established 
partnerships with FinTech firms, and 82% expect to increase such partnerships in 
the next 3 to 5 years.7 
 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 6 - 
While banks can potentially manage the onslaught by the  FinTech firms, the real 
challenge  will  be  posed  by  the  Big  Techs.  What  would  happen  when  the  likes  of 
Facebook, Amazon, Whatsapp, and Alibaba start competing with banks to provide 
financial services? These technology giants come with large and captive user bases, 
low online acquisition costs, and a better understanding of their customers through 
their  utilization  of  big  data.  Moreover,  they  don’t  face  the  same  regulations  and 
associated costs that banks do. 
 
Tech firms have had their eyes on the banking industry for quite some time. Over 20 
years  ago,  Bill  Gates  compared  banks  to  dinosaurs  that  could  be  bypassed  and 
argued that “we  need banking, but we don't need banks anymore.” That was an 
early warning for the industry. Today, we see technology firms actively entering the 
banking space, most recently with the introduction of the Apple Card from Apple or 
the planned launch of Libra, a crypto-currency from Facebook. 
 
Banks could find themselves sidelined by the Big Techs if they fail to actively adopt 
and fully utilize the available technologies. To prevent this from happening, banks 
will need to go back to basics and revisit the core utility of their institutions rather 
than becoming constrained by existing processes and legacy systems. 
 
iii. Consumer Expectations 
 
Thirdly, the industry needs to meet the challenge of rapidly shifting customer needs 
and expectations. Today, we live in a world where digitally empowered consumers 
expect  ‘on-demand  services’  that  allow  them  to  access  products  and  services 
wherever and whenever they desire. 
 
This is particularly true of the growing number of millennials who will soon become 
the 
in  Kuwait, 
approximately  58%  of  the  population  consists  of  millennials  and  younger.  Their 
behavior and characteristics can be very different to those of previous generations.8 
largest  customer  segment  for  the  banking 
industry.  Even 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 7 - 
9 10 11.  Around 57% of millennials say they would change their banks for a better 
digital platform. 
 
But  it  is  not  just  millennials  who  are  using  digital  platforms  to  access  banking 
services. In 2018, 72% of all bank contacts from customers were digital, and 82% of 
consumers first go online if they are looking to buy a new product or service. In short, 
banks will need to either go digital or risk being sidelined. 
 
Failure to meet changing consumer expectations can have serious implications for 
banks. The recent history of the mobile phone industry is a case in point. 
 
In 1997, 60% of the mobile phone market belonged to the specialist mobile phone 
producers like Nokia, Motorola and Sony Ericsson. Today, that same market share 
has been captured by Samsung, Apple and Huawei. Not only are the current market 
leaders  three  entirely  different  firms  but  they  are  essentially  electronics  and 
computer companies, unlike the past firms that specialized in manufacturing mobile 
phones.12 
 
The incumbent mobile phone companies of the 90s failed to recognize the evolving 
needs of their customers. Ultimately, their complacency saw them being pushed to 
the fringes of a market they once dominated. 
 
Something similar could happen to the banking industry. Unless it pays attention to 
and serves the changing needs of its customers, it might be sidelined by telecom 
companies or technology firms as primary providers of financial services. 
 
Take the example of Ant Financial, WeChat Pay and M-pesa, which are firms that 
were  launched  by  technology  and  telecom  companies.  All  three  have  enjoyed 
tremendous growth to become the largest providers of financial services in their 
respective  markets.  By  leveraging  technology  and  adopting  a  customer-centric 
approach, they have surpassed the largest banks in their markets. 
 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 8 - 
In the process, they have not only attracted existing customers but also promoted 
financial inclusion by serving millions of otherwise unbanked customers. In the last 
seven years, financial inclusion in China has increased from 64% to 80%, and from 
42%  to  82%  in  Kenya,  in  large  part  due  to  the  emergence  of  these  now  FinTech 
providers.13 
 
Any of the three major challenges described – the difficult economic environment, 
growing role of technology or the changing customer expectations – would by itself 
have been a lot for the industry to address. But taken together they are leading to a 
perfect storm that the industry can no longer afford to ignore. 
 
 
2- Shaping the Future 
 
For  the  banking  industry  to  continue  growing  and  serving  its  core  utility,  it  must 
transform itself. But for a well-established industry that has served us for centuries, 
where should this journey of transformation begin? 
 
To me, it seems that banks must conquer a number of battles if they are to survive. 
The most crucial of these battles are: 
 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
the battle for customer loyalty,  
the battle for value,  
the battle for efficiency,  
the battle for resilience, and  
the battle for talent. 
 
Let me discuss each of these in turn.  
 
 
 
 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 9 - 
i. Battle for Customer Loyalty 
 
The first of these battles is for customer loyalty. Banks must decide whether they 
aim to be central to their customers’ needs or they are content to be merely balance 
sheet providers, where someone else owns the relationship with the customer. In 
the  second  scenario,  banks  would  have  no  brand  affinity  or  loyalty  from  their 
customers and would be easily replaceable. 
 
As  things  stand,  the banking industry  is  surely  struggling  on  this  front. Today,  no 
bank is placed among the top twenty global brands in terms of value. Even banks 
which were there a decade ago have since slipped off the list. 
 
Banks  must  work  hard  to  ensure  that  they  remain  the  first  choice  for  their 
customers, and that means taking a much broader view of their relationship with 
customers.  Banks  need  to  consider  how  they  can  help  solve  their  customers’ 
problems  and  improve  their  lives,  while  being  cognizant  of  their  broader  social 
purpose to promote inclusive, sustainable prosperity. 
 
After all, banks can no longer take customer loyalty as a given. A recent banking 
consumer study conducted by Accenture found that 40% of customers expressed 
decreased dependence on their bank as their primary financial services provider and 
42% said they had used non-bank providers for financial services in the past year. 
 
A good example of non-banking providers displacing traditional banks is Kakao Bank 
in South Korea. Kakao Bank was launched in 2017 as a digital bank by Korean Internet 
company  Kakao,  which  also  owns  the  popular  free  mobile  messaging  service 
KakaoTalk. The bank proved incredibly successful, leveraging its brand affinity and 
customer loyalty to acquire over 300,000 customers within their first 24 hours, one 
million within five days, and reaching six million customers within a year. 14 
 
Thus, within a year of opening, Kakao Bank had a third of the number of customers 
of  Shinhan  Bank,  the  largest  bank  in  South  Korea.  This  was  despite  the  fact  that 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 10 - 
financial inclusion in South Korea was already at 95% at the time. You can imagine 
how long will it take for Kakao Bank to become the largest bank in the country. 
 
This example  demonstrates  that banks cannot take customer loyalty for granted. 
They need to ensure that customers engage with them not because they have to, 
but  because  they  want  to.  And  the  only  way  to  ensure  that  is  by  not  only 
understanding customers, but also becoming central to their evolving needs. 
 
ii. Battle for Value 
 
To win the battle for customer loyalty, banks must provide value, which is the second 
battle. Winning this battle requires banks to adopt a more proactive approach when 
positioning themselves with respects to their customers. It is not enough to be on 
the sidelines as, say, a purely auto financing or mortgage provider. Banks need to 
position themselves at the center of the ecosystem, providing their customers with 
the best products, services and advice as and when customers require. 
 
According  to  the  Accenture  study,  48%  of  customers  said  they  wanted  relevant 
advice and product information from their banks as they go about their daily lives. 
They  also  want  banks  to  play  a  supporting  role  in  the  purchasing  process  for 
products such as a house or new car, and even related services such as insurance. 
 
Banks need to focus on providing long-term value for customers, rather than viewing 
them  as  a  short-term  opportunity  for  sales.  We  have  already  seen  the  harmful 
impact  of  this  ‘short-term’  outlook  that  led  to  the  subprime-mortgage  crisis,  as 
banks sold mortgages to customers who couldn’t afford them. Banks’ profits surged 
in  the short term, but  everyone suffered in the end; not only customers and the 
broader economy but also the banks. 
 
Banks therefore need to revisit their value propositions towards their customers in 
order  to  ensure  that  they  are  truly  providing  the  products  and  services  their 
customers  need  while  keeping  the  interest  of  their  customers  and  the  society  in 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 11 - 
mind. It will be helpful for the industry to reflect upon its ultimate objectives – to 
ensure inclusive prosperity and put the welfare of society on a sustainable footing. 
 
iii. Battle for Efficiency  
 
To win over customers and provide value, banks must operate in an efficient and 
intelligent manner, with their limited resources optimally deployed. 
 
The battle for efficiency is the third of the battles that banks need to win. A critical 
front  in  this  battle  is  the  leveraging  of  technology  and  data.  Banks  need  to  use 
available data to improve their predictive analysis, not just for operational efficiency 
and planning, but also for insights into customer behavior and preferences. 
 
What  is  particularly  surprising  to  me  is  that  banks,  though  custodians  of  vast 
quantities of customer and transactions data, are not utilizing it effectively. Banks 
will need to change the way they segment customers, not by their income levels or 
types of accounts, but potentially by their life cycle, growth potential, and behavior 
patterns.  Data analysis can  provide a bank with actionable insights into  multiple 
factors that impact its business, allowing it to improve its strategic and operational 
decision-making. 
 
Moreover,  banks  will  need  to  overhaul  their  operations,  accelerate  end-to-end 
digitization,  modernize  their  technology  infrastructure,  and  transition  towards 
digital channels. McKinsey estimates that banks worldwide could save more than 
$400  billion  a  year  in  direct  costs  by  shifting  traditional  customers  to  digital 
platforms, reducing the service cost by 80 to 90%. 
 
By winning the battle for efficiency, banks will not only be able to better engage with 
customers and achieve higher satisfaction rates, but also curtail operational cost. 
 
 
 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 12 - 
iv. Battle for Resilience 
 
Winning the battles for customer loyalty, value and efficiency will help banks to grow 
and remain relevant. But that growth should not compromise banks’ soundness or 
sustainability. 
 
This bring us to the fourth battle: the battle for resilience. Once again, this is an area 
where technology, data management and analytics can  help banks enhance their 
risk management functions and strengthen their resilience. 
 
Banks need to ensure that they have robust capital and liquidity levels, as reflected 
in a traditional stability matrix, to absorb shocks and effectively manage their risks. 
But they can further enhance their risk identification and management by analyzing 
economic, market and customer data in real time. Institutions will no longer have to 
wait for analysts to review the market at monthly or quarterly intervals and  then 
map this back to the customers, assets or the bank’s off-balance sheet exposure. 
 
Through artificial intelligence, machine learning and predictive analysis, banks can 
remain  up-to-date  on  risks  and  exposures  in  real  time,  from  detecting  individual 
cases  of  fraud  to  overall  balance  sheet  exposure  across  products  and  business 
functions. As the market moves and news breaks, tools based on data analytics can 
immediately  update  executives  on  the  potential  impact  of  these  events  on  their 
business. 
 
v. Battle for Talent 
 
None of the battles can be won without the right people. People are at the core of 
everything we do, and they are the ones who will bring everything together. 
 
This brings us to the fifth battle: the battle for talent. As the banking industry goes 
through a radical transition, banks will need to widen their talent pools and attract 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 13 - 
a broader range of skills, in line with their shifting business models and changing 
customers’ preferences. 
 
Staff at banks of the future will no longer be limited to mostly finance professionals. 
Instead,  the  role  of  data  scientists,  visual  designers,  digital  marketing  and  media 
experts, software developers and customer experience professionals will become 
more significant. Banks might even need to recruit psychologists, philosophy majors 
and other professionals with diversified skills that can bring in new perspectives. 
 
These  people  will  be  very  different  from  traditional  bank  recruits,  with  different 
expectations for their roles, work environments and contributions. And banks will 
be in direct competition with technology firms, leading corporates and start-ups to 
hire them. 
 
Banks  will  need  to  overhaul  their  entire  process  around  acquiring,  managing, 
deploying and retaining talent. Like technology companies, they will need to invest 
in their talent pools to leverage their expertise and creativity. They will also need to 
transform their corporate culture into one which promotes agility, collaboration and 
responsible risk-taking when it comes to delivery of solutions. 
 
The banking industry needs to succeed on all of these battle fronts: customer loyalty, 
value, efficiency, resilience and talent. Failure to win on any front could have dire 
consequences, regardless of a bank’s size or market share. 
 
We can  take lessons from companies in other industries that have ignored these 
lessons and suffered as a result. A prime example is Kodak, which was the dominant 
name in the photography market for over a century. At its peak, Kodak’s share of 
the photographic film market was over 80% in the U.S. and around 50% globally. 
 
Kodak was making significant profits from the sale and development of camera films 
and  expected  this  trend  to  continue.  While  the  arrival  of  digital  cameras  was 
changing  industry  dynamics,  Kodak  didn’t  want  to  risk  cannibalizing  their  own 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 14 - 
camera film business and failed to see the potential of new technology and the risk 
from  new  competitors.  Instead,  it  chose  to  stay  in  its  comfort  zone,  conducting 
business as usual, failing to understand the evolving needs of their customers. That 
led to its ultimate demise, as Kodak filed for bankruptcy protection in 2012. 
 
Contrast  this  with  Apple’s  launch  of  the  iPad.  Despite  the  iPad’s  potential  to 
cannibalize  its  own  computer  business,  Apple  went  ahead  in  order  to  serve  the 
needs of its customers.  It was not afraid to embrace change, even at the cost of its 
traditional business and products, and the iPad proved to be one of Apple’s most 
successful products. 
 
Equally critical is to timely identify and act upon valuable opportunities amid shifting 
market preferences. Microsoft missed such an opportunity to dominate the mobile 
operating system. The void that Microsoft could have filled was soon captured by 
the Android operating system.  Bill Gates termed it as his “greatest mistake ever” 
which cost Microsoft $400 billion. 
 
So, by focusing on the five key battles – customer loyalty, value, efficiency, resilience 
and talent – the banking industry can transform itself for the future and avoid the 
fate of Kodak. 
 
3-The Role of Enabling Stakeholders 
 
We have seen the importance of customers, technology and data for the future of 
banking. But it is important to recognize that this is not a journey that banks can take 
alone. Rather, they need the support of key stakeholders; otherwise they will only 
succeed  in  making  minor,  superficial  changes  rather  than  achieving  a  genuine 
transformation. The role of two key stakeholders is worth highlighting; educational 
institutions and regulators. 
 
i. Educational Institutions 
 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 15 - 
Let us consider first the critical role of educational institutions. They need to ensure 
that they are preparing graduates for future jobs in the banking industry, jobs that 
not  only  require  traditional  studies  of  finance,  economics  and  business,  but  also 
encompass new skills around financial and technological innovation. 
 
It is increasingly evident that jobs in the future will be fundamentally different from 
jobs today. According to a recent report by the World Economic Forum (WEF) on 
the future of jobs, 75 million jobs may be displaced by 2022, while 133 million new 
roles may emerge.15 
 
Are we preparing our graduates for such a shift in the labor market? This is an equally 
pertinent question  for the banking industry.  According to  the WEF  study,  56% of 
bank  employees  will  need  to  be  re-skilled.  Talent  and  resources  in  a  number  of 
functions  will  need  to  shift  towards  analytics,  with  fewer  resources  likely  to  be 
involved in manual work. New staff will need to be data scientists with expertise in 
AI, machine learning, etc. And business staff will be required to have the ability to 
translate such data insights into business actions. 
 
The WEF has reported that the largest barrier to embracing technology in banks, 
identified by 74% of financial institutions surveyed, was a lack of skill sets in the local 
labor market. If this is the case today, what will happen in the future? This is why 
the  banking 
industry  needs  to  build  strong  partnerships  with  educational 
institutions, to ensure that they are preparing the graduates the industry will require 
for its transformation. 
 
ii. Regulators 
 
The other key stakeholder in the banking industry’s transformative journey is the 
regulator.  Regulatory  authorities  need  to  strike  a  balance  between  protecting 
consumers, establishing standards for sound regulatory and supervisory practices, 
safeguarding  financial  and  monetary  stability,  and  at  the  same  time  facilitating 
growth and innovation in the industry. 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 16 - 
 
But as the industry goes through  its transformation,  we the  regulators  must also 
consider how  we should operate in the future.  We need to  take a proactive and 
dynamic approach to promote innovation, and act as a catalyst for the industry. We 
need  to  promote  collaboration  and  share  our  experiences  with  each  other  to 
develop frameworks that will fit the needs of our societies. And we need to focus on 
capacity  building  to  ensure  that  our  staff  can  meet  the  future  challenges  of  the 
industry. 
 
We  at  the  CBK  firmly  believe  in  innovation,  collaboration  and  capacity  building; 
principles that are the driving force behind many of our recent initiatives to fulfil our 
role as an enabler and catalyst for the industry. 
 
In terms of innovation, the CBK is playing its part to support the banking industry. 
Last year, we launched our FinTech Regulatory Sandbox. Globally, 36 innovation labs 
and 48 regulatory sandboxes have already been introduced by different regulators. 
Regulators  are  using  these  tools  to  create  a  safe  space  for  experimentation  in 
innovative  products  and  services,  thus  ensuring  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the 
financial system but without stifling innovation.16 
 
We at the CBK are also preparing the infrastructure for future aspirations that would 
enable a truly digital economy. We are developing a state-of-the-art infrastructure 
project, the Kuwait National Payment System. This will be made up of eight systems 
that enable real time payments in a safe, secure, reliable and efficient manner and 
are ready for FinTech deployment. 
 
Internally,  we  are  re-engineering  all  processes  in  regulations  to  enhance  data 
gathering and analysis, and fully digitizing processes in all supervisory functions. This 
will  be  a  pre-requisite  for  our  future  implementation  of  artificial  intelligence  and 
SupTech. 
 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 17 - 
In  addition,  we  are  working  on  other  initiatives  such  as  the  Open  Banking 
Framework,  which  will  provide  clients  with  comprehensive  information  on  their 
financial standing across multiple banks. We are also in the process of rolling out our 
E-KYC framework, which will allow anyone to open an account electronically, easily 
and  efficiently.  In  2014,  Kuwait  issued  the  Electronic  Transaction  Law,  which 
provides the legal foundation for electronic payments and made digital signatures 
legally binding. 
 
In terms of collaboration, the CBK has undertaken a number of initiatives to increase 
cross-border cooperation with other regulators in the region. For example, we are 
working with more than 20 countries on developing the Arab Payment System, in 
addition to the GCC Real Time Gross Settlement System. 
 
In addition, the CBK is spearheading a GCC-wide cybersecurity framework to allow 
for seamless security information-sharing across the region, in order to safeguard 
GCC banking institutions and mitigate cyber threats. 
 
Within Kuwait, we also engage closely with different government institutions such 
as the Capital Markets Authority, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry and the 
Communication and Information Technology Regulatory Authority. 
 
And  finally,  the  CBK  is  focused  on  continuous  capacity  building  to  ensure  the 
development and sustainability of our team and to provide technical support to the 
industry. Through the Kuwait Institute of Banking Studies (KIBS), we are supporting 
sophisticated programs tailored for specific areas of focus to equip our teams as well 
as the banking industry with the latest tools and know-how. KIBS is playing a critical 
role in promoting capacity building in Kuwait, having provided training to over 4,700 
banking staff in the last year alone. 
 
I am delighted to announce the launch of the “Kafaa” initiative, in collaboration with 
the Kuwait Institute of Banking Studies and Kuwaiti banks. Kafaa provides advanced 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 18 - 
programs  to  financial  sector  employees  including  post  graduate  studies,  cyber-
security, risk management, Shariah audit, etc. 
 
In  addition,  we  are  proud  that  Kuwait  hosts  and  sponsors  the  IMF’s  Middle  East 
Centre for Economic and Finance (CEF), that provides training for candidates from 
across the Arab world. Last year, 1,477 candidates benefited from programs run by 
the Centre, at a total cost of $9.1 million. 
 
With  the  support  of  enabling  institutions  such  as  educators  and  regulators,  the 
banking  industry  can  transform  itself  for  the  future  and  play  its  rightful  role  in 
supporting inclusive, sustainable prosperity. 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
I think it is quite clear that the banking industry can no longer afford to continue 
conducting business as usual and ignore the issues that I have highlighted. 
 
The  banking  industry  must  take  stock  of  the  external  challenges  it  faces  today, 
including a very difficult economic environment, the impact of evolving technologies 
and the shift in customer expectations. It must focus on winning customer loyalty, 
providing value, operating efficiently and resiliently, and attracting the right talent. 
In  addition,  the  enabling  institutions  such  as  educators  and  regulators  need  to 
provide the necessary support  if  the industry is to succeed in this transformative 
journey. 
 
The industry is clearly at a crossroads and needs to make proactive decisions now to 
remain relevant in the future. There are two paths that the industry can take. 
 
If the banking industry continues to operate the way it has in the past, ignoring the 
many challenges that it faces today, it would lose its dominant position. Competition 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 19 - 
will  increase  from  different  institutions  such  as  telecom  operators,  technology 
companies and FinTech firms, and customers will flock to these solutions, as we have 
already seen in some markets. Banks, as a result, will be pushed to the fringes of the 
industry, if not removed altogether. 
 
But if the industry manages to evolve, then the picture could be different. By winning 
the battles for customer loyalty, value, efficiency, resilience and talent, banks can 
remain the dominant players in this space. The bank of the future will be completely 
unrecognizable  from  that  of  today.  It  will  be  closer  to  its  customers,  digitally 
enabled, and ahead of the curve when it comes to anticipating customer needs. It 
will be more efficient, more resilient and better able to address the economic and 
social challenges of the future. 
 
 
In the end, only collectively, we as the key stakeholders in this industry can take the 
difficult yet necessary steps required to shape the future of the banking industry. 
 
As Einstein said: “A new type of thinking is essential if mankind  is to survive and 
move toward greater levels.” 
 
 
Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
 
2 Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England - Speech: The Global Outlook – February 2019 
 
3 Institute of International Finance – Weekly Insight – August 2019 
4 Institute of International Finance – Global Debt Monitor – July 2019 
5 McKinsey Global Institute – Briefing Note – September 2018 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
 - 20 - 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
6 McKinsey & Company –FinTechnicolour - 2016 
7 Price Waterhouse Coopers – Global FinTech Reports - 2017 
8 Accenture - Global Distribution & Marketing Consumer Study: Banking Report -2017 
9 Deloitte – Millennials and Wealth Management - 2018  
10 Ernst & Young - Global Consumer Banking Survey - 2017 
11 Fidelity Information Services – Performance Against Customer Expectations (PACE) - 2018 
12 Statista – Mobile Phone Market Share data 
13 World Bank – Databank  
14 Kakao Bank – Company Website 
15 World Economic Forum – Future of Jobs Report - 2018 
16 United Nations Secretary-General’s Special Advocate for Inclusive Finance for Development - Early Lessons on 
Regulatory Innovations to Enable Inclusive FinTech - 2019 
 Central Bank of Kuwait - Public    
ماع
 يزكرملا تيوكلا كنب
- 
 
