Kevin Stiroh: Opening remarks - Community Bankers Conference
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Kevin  Stiroh,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution
Supervision  Group  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Community  Bankers
Conference, hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 4 April 2019.
As prepared for delivery
 Welcome to the 17th Annual Community Bankers Conference.  We are very glad that so many of
you  from  community  banks  in  the  Second  District  joined  us  today  for  our  conference  about
what’s “On the Horizon for Community Banks.”  I am also pleased to welcome my colleagues
from  other  regulatory  agencies,  including  Doreen  Eberley  from  the  FDIC,  who  is  our  keynote
speaker.
Before  proceeding,  let  me  emphasize  that  my  remarks  are  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily
1
reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
It has been more than 10 years since the financial crisis, and over that time we have seen the
industry change in material ways.  Ten years ago there were 7,479 community banks nationwide.
Today that number is 5,320, a 29% decline.  Some of this decline was due to failure, and some
through  consolidation  or  acquisition.    Your  financial  institutions  remain  today  as  a  result  of
prudent  risk  management  practices,  resiliency,  and  the  ability  to  successfully  weather  those
stormy years.  
Today, the data show, on average, strong metrics for the balance sheets of community banks in
the Second District.  The quality of loans has improved due to more prudent underwriting and
capital levels appropriately support the risk profile.  As of 4Q 2018 on average, Second District
ratios were slightly above the national peer average for tier 1 and total risk-based capital ratios. 
In terms of profitability, return on average assets was 0.95% in 2018 for community banks in the
Second District, only slightly trailing the national average of 1.1% for all community banks.
Another  relevant  metric  is  the  more  diversified  loan  mix  on  the  balance  sheets  of  community
banks. Commercial Real Estate (CRE) is a major source of asset growth, and in our geography,
real  estate  continues  to  be  in  high  demand  and  continues  to  outperform  certain  parts  of  the
country.  For example, in the Second District non-owner occupied CRE concentration remains
higher than the national peer average.  Our examiners, however, have noted more robust risk
management practices and oversight, and commensurate levels of capital as mentioned earlier.
As  supervisors,  we  will  continue  to  stress  to  the  region’s  bankers  that  a  financial  institution’s
decision  to  assume  certain  types  of  risk  is  a  decision  for  the  Board  of  Directors  and  senior
management.  Also, as supervisors, we will continue to expect to see the appropriate level of risk
management  in  place  to  manage  and  mitigate  the  risks  assumed.    This  means  having  the
appropriate expertise on the management team, robust information systems and technologies to
monitor and manage those risks, proper controls and oversight, reasonable limits, and an action
plan to take corrective measures when necessary.  All business decisions have risks and there
must be mitigating strategies in place to manage adverse occurrences.
Hearing your input and perspectives on these issues is an important part of the process for us,
and I am fortunate to have the opportunity to meet with many community bankers in the Second
District.    Some  of  the  most  common  themes  I  hear  include:  an  appreciation  for  the  recent
regulatory reforms implemented such as the streamlining of the Call Report; the extension of the
examination  cycle  to  18-month  for  firms  under  $3  billion  in  total  asset-size;  and  the  current
discussions around capital simplification.  The comment period on capital simplification will close
on April 9th, and I hope you all shared input to influence that important policy decision.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
One area where we receive mixed feedback from bankers is the issue of off-site examinations.
 Some bankers love that idea, while others have stated they like the face-to-face interaction as it
reduces the risk of miscommunication, misinterpretations or ambiguities.  Still others prefer a
hybrid approach with certain portions of examination work conducted on-site and others off-site.
 All felt critical meetings should be conducted in person.  Today’s technology makes all of these
options possible, and we will continue to exercise judgment and thoughtful communication with
bankers  to  determine  the  best  option.   At  the  end  of  the  day,  our  shared  goal  is  a  fair  and
accurate assessment for your institution, and we will continue to work together to accomplish
this.
Turning to today’s conference theme of “On the Horizon for Community Banking,” I have a few
observations that I’d like to share.  These observations, in part, preview the day’s agenda and I
look forward to the continued conversation on these important issues.
First,  our  country  and  the  banking  industry  have  benefitted  from  steady  economic  growth,
modest inflation, and low unemployment in recent years.  These are all positive and welcome
outcome, but not all regions have benefitted equally here in the Second District.  Some portions
of upstate New York have benefitted from an influx of technology companies and other industries,
while other regions remain challenged due to a lack of population growth.  Later today we will
hear from two of our economists who will share national and regional economic trends.
Also in the spirit of looking forward, I can share some views on what community bankers can
expect from the supervisory process.  Examiners are keenly focused on emerging trends around
funding costs and liquidity risks.  Bankers consistently share with us the challenge of raising core
deposits to fund loan growth.  Community banks compete not only with other community banks
for deposits, but also with credit unions and larger institutions.  And, these larger counterparts
are actively courting customers through direct mailers and offering competitive rates.  Data in the
Second District show cost across most deposit categories have increased with a slight uptick in
the  higher  cost  funding  sources  such  as  borrowings.    Data  for  the  largest  banks  exhibit  a
comparable trend, but they control a larger market share.
I  expect  another  area  of  focus  during  the  examination  process  will  be  interest  rate  risk  and
related challenges.  Bankers have shared with us that customers are demanding higher rates on
deposits, yet those same customers are reluctant to pay higher rates on their loans.  What is a
banker to do in trying to maintain a productive, long-term relationship?  We are seeing signs of
lower net interest margins (NIM), where the average NIM in the Second District is 3.47 percent
compared to the national peer average of 3.71 percent.
Examiners will be reviewing initiatives by community bankers to partner with “fintech” firms.  We
know there is competition from non-bank providers who have the capacity to provide automated
loan pre-approvals in minutes and loan closings within days after approval.  Today, you will hear
from a panel of your peers on how fintech is changing the way their firms do business, and how
they mitigate the risks associated with outsourcing.  In my view, new innovations from the fintech
space have the potential to fundamentally transform the provision of financial services.  As I’ve
2
said elsewhere, this disruption brings both opportunity and risks and that need to be managed.
A third forward-looking topic is the coming implementation of accounting changes for reserves,
known as the “current expected credit loss” approach or CECL. One of our colleagues from the
Board of Governors will join us later to address a common question raised by our bankers on the
challenge of gathering loss data in a historically low loan loss environment.
We will also discuss the challenges you share around keeping abreast of consumer compliance
requirements.  During today’s luncheon, our head of consumer compliance will share remarks
on recent enhancements to the examination process.
I’d  like  to  close  with  a  few  words  about  a  specific  topic  that  is  core  to  the  community  bank
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
business model, namely attracting new customers and growing deposits.  I believe success in
the area will be increasingly linked to a willingness to invest in technology and new processes.
  Customers  today  seem  to  prefer  online  banking,  and  millennials  favor  alternative  banking
options.  This suggests both an opportunity and a strategic imperative.  There may be no better
time  than  now  to  reimagine  transformation  through  investments  in  innovation,  improved  multi-
channel delivery, more fintech partnerships, and expansion of digital payments.  Technologies to
enable  transformation  are  more  powerful,  readily  accessible,  easily  implementable,  and
economical than ever before.  Of course, these new activities bring risk management and legal
issues and challenges to consider—vendor management, data privacy, consumer protection and
cybersecurity to name just a few.
To conclude, and again to echo the “on the horizon” theme of the conference, I believe we all
need to be mindful of this new financial landscape as community banks strive to retain control of
the  customer  experience.    This  is  critical  to  the  relationship-based  business  model  of  many
community banks and reflects the unique local knowledge of the market and customer needs.
 As the industry evolves, this poses some challenges but also opportunities.  This is new territory
for us all and I expect it will be part of the ongoing supervisory dialogue in the years ahead.
Thank you for your attention and for joining us today at the New York.  I will be available during
today’s lunch session to discuss further, and I hope you enjoy today’s conference.
1
2
I thank Jacqueline Fenton for assistance drafting these remarks.
Kevin J. Stiroh, Introductory Remarks at the New York Feds first Fintech Research Conference, March 22, 2019.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
