Lynn  Patterson:  Economic  progress  report  -  sensible  shifts  in
household spending
Remarks  by  Ms  Lynn  Patterson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Hamilton
Chamber of Commerce, Hamilton, Ontario, 7 March 2019.
 Introduction
Good afternoon.
I’m happy to be here to give you an update on the Canadian economy and discuss the decision
we made yesterday to keep our key policy interest rate unchanged.
This  decision  hinged  on  a  number  of  factors.  One  was  the  slowing  momentum  in  the  global
economy. It is increasingly clear that ongoing trade tensions and associated uncertainties are
having an impact. I’m sure many of you here in Hamilton can relate to that as you deal with the
steel tariffs.
Another  factor  was  the  performance  of  the  Canadian  economy  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2018.
While we had been anticipating a slowdown, coming primarily from the oil sector, it was sharper
and  more  broad-based  than  expected.  This  is  despite  strong  employment  and  labour  income
growth and core measures of inflation that have continued to hover near 2 per cent.
Part of that sharper slowdown came from weakness in household spending in Canada. That’s
what I’d like to spend the bulk of my time talking about today. But first, let’s step back and take a
look at how the economy evolved to this point over the past couple of years.
As many of you may recall, 2017 was a very strong year—growth came in at 3 per cent, with
notable contributions from investment, exports and household spending.
The growth in household spending was supported by employment gains, which fed into a healthy
rise in disposable income growth of 4½ per cent. Income tax cuts and the Canada Child Benefit
provided a further boost to spending. And in an environment of steady house price appreciation
and favourable conditions for borrowing, spending on housing continued to increase. With growth
above potential, the slack in the economy diminished and inflation was approaching 2 per cent.
So in mid-2017, we began to move our policy rate.
For 2018 as a whole, the economy grew by 1.8 per cent. While this moderation in growth had
been  anticipated,  it  was  shy  of  our  forecast  in  the  January Monetary  Policy  Report  (MPR).
Growth in 2018 was again broad-based, with solid contributions from exports, investment and
household  spending,  the  latter  of  which  eased  to  a  more  realistic  pace  last  year  from  the
unsustainable rate in 2017. Our forecast is that this easing in household spending will continue
throughout 2019–20.
As for inflation, it rose from about 2 per cent at the beginning of 2018 to peak at 3 per cent mid-
year, reflecting the transitory impact of higher gasoline prices and airfares. By mid-autumn, oil
prices began to fall, contributing to the return of inflation to 2 per cent by the end of the year.
While there was a bit of volatility through the year, inflation remained near target and all three
measures  of  core  inflation  were  around  2  per  cent.  This  was  in  line  with  our  view  that  the
economy was operating close to capacity.
Looking  ahead—and  consistent  with  the  numbers  we  recently  received  for  January—we  are
forecasting inflation to be slightly below 2 per cent for most of 2019. This is largely the result of
temporary factors, including the decline in oil prices since last October, and a wider output gap.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Given  this  context,  let  me  now  turn  to  household  spending.  It  is  always  an  important  topic
because it makes up more than half of the economy. But it’s even more so today as we think
about how high levels of household debt are affecting spending decisions. I’m going to discuss
what household spending includes, what influences it and, most importantly for monetary policy,
the  factors  that  have  contributed  to  the  moderation  in  spending  that  we’ve  seen  over  the  last
year.
Defining housing and consumption
Let me start by defining where different kinds of purchases end up in our forecasts.
Statistics  Canada  considers  the  construction  of  a  new  house,  renovations  and  the  costs
associated with buying an existing house part of a category termed residential investment or, for
our purposes, housing.
In  contrast,  consumption  is  defined  as  spending  on goods  and  services,  which  are  typically
consumed by the household within the year they are purchased. Goods account for about 45 per
cent of consumption and cover everything from cars to clothing, groceries to gardening tools.
The remaining 55 per cent is services. These range from haircuts to childcare, tuition, restaurant
meals,  vacations  and—the  biggest  part—rent  and  utility  bills.  Rent  is  defined  as  either  the
amount you pay as a tenant or, if you own a house, a portion of the cost of living in it. This portion
is roughly equivalent to what you would be paying if you were renting.
Slowing housing and consumption
Canadians  dialed  back  their  spending  in  2018.  Consumption  growth  moderated  by  about  1½
percentage  points  from  2017,  and  housing  by  almost  5  per  cent.  This  resulted  in  an  overall
contribution of household spending to annual gross domestic product (GDP) that was about 1¼
percentage points lower than it had been in 2017 and is a bit softer than we projected in our
January MPR.
We  have  been  expecting  an  adjustment  for  some  time.  Last  March,  my  colleague  Deputy
Governor  Timothy  Lane  noted  in  our  first  economic  progress  report speech  that  housing
investment  and  consumption  would,  over  time,  contribute  less  as  exports  and  business
investment contribute more. This is partly because in mid-2017 we had begun to remove some
of the policy accommodation that had been in place for many years. Since then, we’ve increased
our policy rate from 0.50 per cent to 1.75 per cent in October of last year. 
Our  policy  rate  is  transmitted  to  the  economy  through  various  channels.  It  affects  returns  on
savings and investments as well as borrowing rates. It also has a small direct effect on inflation
from higher mortgage interest costs. Thus, it affects decision making by households and firms,
influencing spending and borrowing patterns.
After  the  global  financial  crisis,  low  borrowing  rates  led  households  to  take  on  debt,  primarily
through  the  housing  market.  The  ratio  of  household  debt  to  disposable  income  rose  and
vulnerabilities related to the household sector increased.
We  have  been  closely  monitoring  these  developments  for  some  time.  Research  in  this  area
clearly showed that households would be more sensitive to interest rate movements than in past
cycles, with the highly indebted most affected.  In 2017, we adjusted our models to account for
this increased sensitivity.
Housing
1
Turning to the housing market, a combination of factors—some new and some already in place
—affected it throughout 2018.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
First, additional mortgage guidelines were introduced in January. They were aimed at improving
the  future  resilience  of  new  household  debt.  The  guidelines  introduced  a  new  stress-test
requirement for low-ratio mortgages. For some households, this meant a reduction in the amount
that they could borrow. Borrowers can adjust through various channels. They could choose to
purchase a smaller home, buy in a different neighbourhood, rent rather than buy, or delay their
2
purchase by saving for a larger down payment or waiting for prices to adjust.
The guidelines are having their intended effect. The quality of new borrowing has improved, with
3
far fewer households taking out a mortgage with a debt-to-income ratio above 450 per cent.
Second, rules were put in place over the past three years by various provincial and municipal
governments  to  curb  speculative  activity  and,  in  British  Columbia,  these  rules  were  further
augmented.
And  third,  mortgage  interest  rates  continued  to  rise.  In  mid-2017,  the  average  five-year  fixed
mortgage rate was 2.7 per cent. By the end of last year this rate had moved to around 3.7 per
cent.
These factors caused all facets of housing to moderate. As a result, the housing market remains
in a state of adjustment and flux, with wide regional differences. It is important to keep in mind
that we’ve seen many housing markets moderate in countries such as Australia and the United
Kingdom as the level of investor activity declined.
The  bulk  of  the  slowdown  has  come  from  lower  resale  activity  in  the  greater  Vancouver  and
greater Toronto areas. In Calgary, the volume of home sales is off by 17 per cent from a year
ago, likely reflecting the decline in the oil sector. In contrast, over the same period we’ve seen a
pickup of sales in cities like Winnipeg, Ottawa and Montréal. Overall, house prices rose by 4 per
cent in 2018, consistent with the pace of national labour income growth.
In  many  major  markets  we  are  also  seeing  shifts  in  construction  from  single-family  detached
homes to condos and other multi-family units, reflecting demand shifts as well as geographic
constraints. For example, in the Greater Toronto Area, by the end of 2018, starts of single-family
detached  houses  had  fallen  by  more  than  half  to  their  lowest  level  since  1995,  while  the
construction of multiples had increased by about 25 per cent in 2018. We are seeing the same
pattern in Calgary, Montréal and here in Hamilton.
So, in general, complex adjustments, which do take time, are underway in housing markets, with
significant  variability  across  regions.  At  the  Bank,  we  are  tracking  these  changes,  given  the
importance of the housing market to the economy.
Consumption
Now let’s look at consumption.
About  35  per  cent  of  our  household  spending  is  relatively  stable.  That’s  because  the  largest
portion—roughly 20 per cent—is rent or an equivalent cost if you own your house. Both tend to
tick up a little every year. Spending on other necessities, such as on your water bill or toothpaste,
also contributes to the stability of consumption. You tend to pay your bill and brush your teeth
regardless of your debt levels and the state of the economy.
But  some  spending  is  more  optional,  such  as  on  new  cars,  travel  abroad,  recreation  and
restaurant meals. It is in these categories where we are seeing some shifts in spending habits.
Let me start with cars.
When Canadians have the money or can borrow it, a new car is often a priority. From the Great
Recession until last year, more people were buying new vehicles each year. In 2017, the pace of
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
new car buying hit its highest share of consumption in 14 years. But sales of new cars began to
soften last year, falling by 1.7 per cent from 2017 levels. That’s not a huge surprise, given that
people generally don’t buy a new car every year. At the same time, higher interest rates and the
slowing  economy  likely  also  had  an  impact.  In  the  energy-producing  regions,  which  normally
account for roughly 15 per cent of the total, sales fell by 6 per cent.
Some other categories of discretionary spending also slowed in 2018. For example, the growth in
spending  on  vacations  softened.  And  while  many  households  still  went  out  for  dinners  and
entertainment, spending growth in these areas fell from around 3 per cent in 2017 to close to 1
per cent last year.
While we know that higher interest rates play an important role in these declines, there are other
influences as well:
1.  The first is income effects. As the prices of some of the products we export—such as oil—
decline, it reduces our national income. Oil and other commodity prices retreated over 2018.
And disposable income, which grew at a pace of 4½ per cent in 2017, slowed to about 3½
per cent last year.
2.  Then  there  are  wealth  effects—when  house  prices  and  stock  markets  are  rising,  people
tend to feel good and spend more. The reverse is also true, and that was the case last year.
3.  And lastly, confidence effects. Whether you are directly affected by the trade actions going
on,  or  your  neighbour  is,  uncertainty  continues  to  hang  over  the  economy,  weighing  on
confidence.
In  the  end,  it’s  some  combination  of  these  elements  that  is  weighing  on  consumption  and
causing Canadians to be more cautious about their spending.
The state of household finances
Most  Canadians  are  managing  the  higher  carrying  costs  of  their  debt  by  scaling  back  their
spending  in  some  of  the  areas  that  I  have  just  highlighted,  as  well  as  in  housing.  In  addition,
Canadians have cut back on their consumer financing. We have seen a slowing in the combined
growth of personal loans and credit cards from about 4 per cent in December 2017 to about 2
per cent in December 2018.
We are also seeing very low levels of arrears rates and insolvencies across the country. While
there may be increases of both in certain sectors or regions, they are rising from a low base and
remain near historically low levels. That’s not to say that for some individuals, struggling to keep
up with their payments isn’t demanding painful adjustments. Overall, however, the data suggest
that the majority of households are managing their debt levels.
Factors behind our decision
Let  me  turn  now  to  our  interest  rate  decision  yesterday  and  the  main  points  of  Governing
Council’s discussions. I’ll start with a few comments about the global economy.
As we noted in our MPR in January, there has been a slowdown in global economic activity. This
reflects in part some temporary factors, including the US government shutdown and production
adjustments made by European car manufacturers. However, some of the slowdown is related
to ongoing trade tensions and negotiations, and therefore may be more persistent. We’ve seen
evidence  of  this  in  some  of  the  recent  data  from  China,  as  well  as  from  other  emerging
economies. Meanwhile, the US economy is moderating, as expected, and we anticipate that it
will continue to slow to a pace closer to its potential. 
Some  major  central  banks  have  changed  their  communications  in  recognition  of  softer  global
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
economic  momentum.  Their  shift  in  tone  has  contributed  to  an  easing  in  global  financial
conditions—many  equity  markets  have  rebounded  from  earlier  lows  and  credit  spreads  have
narrowed.
Of course, the main source of uncertainty in the global economy continues to be the future of
trade policy, notably the current talks between the United States and China. While there have
been some promising signs in those negotiations, trade uncertainty on a global basis remains a
two-sided risk—an escalation or expansion of trade actions could have serious consequences
for  the  global  and  Canadian  economies.  On  the  other  hand,  successful  resolution  of  trade
tensions would remove a significant source of uncertainty and provide a major lift.
Here  at  home,  Canadian  data  are  reflecting  this  slower  global  momentum.  In  that  regard,
Governing Council spent a lot of time discussing the national accounts data for the fourth quarter
of  last  year,  which  were  published  on  Friday.  In  our  January  MPR ,  we  said  that  we  were
expecting weakness in the fourth quarter of 2018 and the first quarter of this year. This was due
to  the  decline  in  oil  prices  late  last  year,  coupled  with  production  curtailments,  which  had  an
impact on the energy sector. We projected that growth would then pick up, starting in the second
quarter.
As it turned out, the slowdown in the fourth quarter was sharper and more broad-based than we
expected.  This  came  despite  strong  growth  in  employment  and  labour  income.  While  the
anticipated  slowdown  from  the  energy  sector  was  fairly  aligned  with  our  projections,  other
categories  surprised. As  such,  and  given  that  the  data  present  a  mixed  picture,  I’m  going  to
spend a bit more time on the national accounts numbers we received last week.
Let me walk through the main economic categories, starting with business investment. For 2018
as a whole, investment grew by 2 per cent, which was less than we had expected. This reflected
weakness  in  both  the  third  and  fourth  quarters.  So  what  might  explain  this?  While  many
companies were relieved to see the successful negotiations to replace NAFTA with the Canada-
United States-Mexico Agreement, they continue to wait for the deal to be ratified. It’s possible that
some companies are delaying investments amid the uncertainty. And, of course, the uncertainty
isn’t limited just to the new NAFTA—global concerns, particularly on the US–China trade front,
are clearly hurting confidence and leading firms to delay investment decisions. 
Another  possible  explanation  for  the  weakness  in  investment  is  timing.  The  accelerated
depreciation tax changes announced late last year by the federal government are welcome news
for corporations, and it’s possible that in anticipation of the changes, investment decisions were
postponed. If so, we should begin to see a pickup in the first quarter of this year, which would be
consistent with recent quarterly readings from our Business Outlook Survey. We will have an
updated survey to further inform our April decision.
Next up is exports, where the profile was also weaker than expected. One bright spot in exports
was services, which grew by more than 6 per cent in the quarter, led by commercial and travel
services.
I’ve  already  talked  a  fair  bit  about  housing,  and  the  biggest  negative  surprise  in  that  category
during  the  fourth  quarter  came  from  renovations.  As  I  noted  before,  there  are  significant
adjustments  occurring  in  housing  markets,  and  it  will  take  time  for  these  adjustments  to  be
completed. Nevertheless, the national rate of mortgage credit growth increased slightly, also in
the fourth quarter, and we’ll see what happens with sales once spring rolls around.
And I’ll end on the topic of my speech today—consumer spending. It, too, was lower than we
expected  in  the  fourth  quarter,  with  categories  more  sensitive  to  interest  rates  continuing  to
soften. We are aware that many purchases in the consumption category would be linked to a
purchase of a new home, so that’s likely a contributing factor. But to better determine the factors
at play, we will need more data.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
Although we figured the economy was in for a detour at the end of last year, that detour may wind
up being longer than we had expected. It now appears the economy will be weaker in the first half
of 2019 than we had projected in January. However, we still expect Canadian economic growth
to pick up later in the year, supported by ongoing strength in employment and rising wages. We
will  have  more  to  say  in April,  when  we  will  have  a  new  economic  projection,  as  well  as  our
annual updated estimates for economic potential and the neutral interest rate.
At yesterday’s decision, Governing Council judged that the outlook continues to warrant a policy
interest rate that is below its neutral range. Given the mixed picture that the data present, it will
take time to gauge the persistence of below-potential growth and the implications for the inflation
outlook. With increased uncertainty about the timing of future rate increases, Governing Council
will be watching closely developments in household spending, oil markets and global trade policy.
I would like to thank Sharon Kozicki and Eric Santor for help in preparing this speech.
1
2
3
See “Box 3: The Impact of Rising Interest Rates on Mortgage Holders,” Bank of Canada Monetary Policy Report
(July 2018): 15–16.
The Bank estimates that the B-20 guidelines would lower the level of GDP by 0.2 per cent by the end of 2020.
See “Box 4: The Impact of Policy Changes on Mortgage Lending,” Bank of Canada Monetary  Policy  Report
(October 2018): 13–14.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
