  12.03.2019 
 Roundtable: “Sustainable Finance as the driving force of the ecological 
transition” 
Banco de España 
Margarita Delgado 
Deputy Governor 
 
  It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  to  the  Banco  de  España  for  two  reasons.  First, 
because I believe the Bank should be a forum for discussing and bringing closer to society 
those financial matters that bear on and affect the well-being of all. The second reason has 
to do with the matter I shall broach today, which I consider to be particularly important and 
which  is  none  other  than  the  role  finances  can  and  should  play  in  relation  to  combating 
climate change.  
As you all know, this is not a new objective. Indeed, at least since the 1992 Río de Janeiro 
United  Nations  summit,  combating  climate  change  has  been  a  recurrent  objective  of 
international institutions. So, what has changed in the wake of the 2015 Paris agreement, 
and why has climate change also begun to be part of the financial authorities’ agenda?  
Mark  Carney  talked  about  the  so-called  “tragedy  of  the  horizon”,  in  the  sense  that  the 
horizons  used  in  the  evaluation  of  financial  risks  are  shorter  than  those  that  should  be 
applied to evaluate climate change. Yet these risks may be said to have moved onto our 
horizon; both the physical risks owing to the effects of climate change, and above all, the 
risks of transition towards a sustainable economy.  
The Paris agreement marked a turning point regarding the feeling of urgency in the fight 
against  climate  change.  Along  with  reflecting  the  risks,  the  agreement  explicitly 
acknowledges how important the financial system should be for efficiently channelling the 
resources needed to transform our economy towards a sustainable model.  
These two factors, namely the risks and the opportunities and incentives associated with 
the change in economic model to combat climate change, have grown in significance on 
international financial agencies’ agendas. Allow me to mention, non-exhaustively, some of 
these initiatives:  
 the work on sustainable finance during the last three mandates of the G20,  
 the establishment of responsible investment principles by the United Nations,  
 the  creation  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board’s  Task  Force  on  Climate-related 
Financial Disclosures,  
 the establishment of the OECD green finance and investment centre,  
 the Sustainable Banking Network established by the World Bank,  
-  within the EU, the European Commission’s action plan on sustainable finance  
 in  the  central  banking  and  banking  supervision  environment,  the  work  by  the 
Network for Greening the Financial Sector (NGFS), of which the Banco de España 
is a member. 
 In sum, the Paris agreement message to involve the financial sector has hit home and is 
prompting numerous courses of action. 
 3/5 
 You will be discussing many of these initiatives at length in the ensuing roundtable. But in 
the rest of my speech I wish to briefly set out the role the Banco de España, as a central 
bank and as a supervisor, can perform regarding this collective challenge. 
Both the effects of climate change and of the measures geared to sustainably transforming 
our economy affect credit institutions directly. First, these risks bear directly on the valuation 
of  some  of  the  assets  on  bank  balance  sheets.  Further,  they  have  macroeconomic 
consequences which, evidently, likewise affect balance sheets. In either of the two cases, 
banks’  solvency  under  our  supervision  might  be  affected  by  processes  which,  as 
supervisors, we should monitor.  
In this respect the Banco de España, as one of the guarantors of financial stability, should 
contribute to fomenting the correct valuation by banks of these risks and mitigation of their 
financial effects. These measures may vary in nature, including aspects such as:  
-  urging banks to develop risk models that envisage climate change;  
-  developing stress tests based on different scenarios of ecological transition;   
-  gathering detailed information on aspects such as the physical location of assets or 
the efficiency strategies of firms that receive financing.  
As to the role of banks ahead of this challenge, let me stress that if in the near future banks 
properly identify, quantify and mitigate these risks, this would not only be a contribution to 
ensuring the stability of the financial system as a whole; moreover, banks themselves would 
indirectly be acting as a catalyst for change by helping financing reach those activities that 
most  contribute  to  the  sustainable  transformation  of  our  economy.  They  would  also  be 
discouraging those activities potentially most harmful to the environment, by having hitherto 
hidden environmental costs passed through to the price of financing. 
Also,  as  supervisors,  we  should  move  to  develop  models  that  envisage  macroeconomic 
effects in the face of different ecological transition scenarios. The aim hereby is to become 
familiar  with  the  potential  impacts  of  climate  change  on  specific  economic  sectors, 
industries and even firms, and on more aggregate variables, such as growth and inflation.  
Naturally, the implementation of many of these initiatives requires considerable international 
coordination. Hence the importance of our active participation in the NGFS, the supervisors’ 
and central bank network I mentioned earlier, set up in early 2018. In the short time since 
its  creation,  the  NGFS  has  managed  to  bring  together  more  than  30  central  banks  and 
supervisory authorities. The aims of this network include analysis of supervisory practices, 
of  macroeconomic  and  financial  risks,  and  the  means  for  smoothing  financing  for  the 
transition to a sustainable economy. Undeniably, the implementation of all these aspects 
with some degree of harmonisation will be a difficult task. But you will agree with me that 
we are all facing a fundamental challenge and that, as such, we must spare no effort.  
Allow  me  to  refer  briefly  also  to  the  role  financial  markets  can  play  in  this  process  of 
ecological transition. In capital markets we have seen some positive discrimination in the 
valuation of firms with a lower degree of exposure to climate change, albeit limitedly so. 
Logically,  and  as  in  the  case  of  banks,  the  markets  should  act  as  a  catalyst  for  change 
4/5 
  towards certain sustainable activities, while discouraging investment in particularly polluting 
industries.  
Evidently, the attractiveness for investors of issues of green bonds is a sign of the growing 
concern  over  the  effects  of  climate  change.  Yet  for  the  aforementioned  transmission 
mechanisms to work properly, the volume of securities traded on these markets must reach 
a critical mass and be consistently catalogued. To achieve this, the initiatives developed 
within the European Commission are essential: these include most notably the taxonomy 
for determining the activities that contribute to sustainability in environmental terms, and the 
“ecological” labelling of financial products. We need a common language that can be used 
both by debt issuers and potential investors, so that these markets may be developed. 
On this point of financial investments categorised as “green”, it is worth recalling that we as 
central  banks  are  also  active  investors  in  financial  markets,  both  in  monetary  policy 
operations  and  in  portfolio  management  relating  to  reserves.  In  this  connection,  as 
acknowledged in the report by the network of central banks and supervisors, and as recently 
indicated by Mario Draghi, we are aware that environmental risks are not yet being built into 
most of this portfolio’s ratings, whether internal or devised by rating agencies.  
Accordingly, in the Eurosystem, a thorough review of these risk valuation processes is under 
way. The aim is to ensure us that all the relevant factors, including environmental ones, for 
the  prudent  management  of  the  portfolio  held  by  the  central  banks  are  being  taken  into 
account. In addition, I should point out that, like the ECB, we resolutely support the initiative 
recently launched by the European Securities Markets Authority (ESMA). As the regulator of 
rating agencies, ESMA is seeking to establish guidelines so that these entities make public 
the way in which they incorporate sustainability elements into their valuations.  
To conclude, allow me to reiterate the importance and scale of the challenge we face. It may 
sound clichéd; but it is nonetheless true that we are not only talking about our well-being, 
but  the  well-being  of  future  generations  who  may  be  left  with  little  leeway  if  we  are  not 
sufficiently ambitious. The challenge extends to all agents and sectors, and proof of this is 
the  broad  and  varied  representation  here  in  this  room  today.  The  financial  sector 
undoubtedly  has  a  notable  responsibility  in  this  challenge.  In  our  capacity  as  financial 
authorities  and  under our  mandate,  we  can  and  must  do  everything within our  power  to 
properly  value,  manage  and  mitigate  the  risks  associated  with  climate  change.  The 
challenge is paramount and the need for coordination – with other national and international 
authorities  –  enormous.  But  I  believe  that,  if  we  have  been  capable  of  structuring  an 
appropriate regulatory response to the international financial crisis, we will also be capable 
of rising to the challenge here.  
I think that the measures rolled out from Europe will ultimately be an international reference 
and standard. And we will in this way manage to make the financial sector contribute actively 
and efficiently to the sustainable transformation of our economy.  
I  trust  the  following  discussions  will  prove  interesting  for  you.  We  will  talk  about  the 
important  work  by  European  institutions  under  way,  about  how  financial  institutions  are 
adapting and about the way in which the adverse effects the energy transition may exert 
should be accommodated, in what has come to be known as the “fair transition” debate.  
Thank you.  
 5/5 
