Shaktikanta  Das:  Global  risks  and  policy  challenges  facing
emerging market economies
Speech by Mr Shaktikanta Das, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the event “Governor
Talks”  on  the  sidelines  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund-World  Bank  Spring  Meetings  2019,
Washington DC, 12 April 2019.
Thank you for inviting me to this forum.
 I intend to cover some of the global risks and policy challenges from the perspective of emerging
market economies (EMEs). We are aware that most EMEs have emerged more resilient than
before  from  a  turbulent  2018.  For  the  greater  part  of  2018,  the  EMEs  faced  a  wave  of  global
spillover  risks  leading  to  capital  outflows,  currency  and  asset  price  volatility  and  tightened
financial  conditions.  These  developments  posed  risks  to  growth  and  inflation.  Strong
fundamentals,  forex  reserve  buffers,  capital  in  banking  systems  and  prudent  macroeconomic
policies,  however,  enabled  these  economies  to  absorb  global  spillovers.  Yet,  as  Agustin
1
Carstens and Hyun Song Shin soberingly point out, “EMEs aren’t out of the woods yet”.
Global Risks
Let me highlight three major risks confronting EMEs in 2019.
2. The biggest risk facing these economies is the growing evidence that global growth and trade
is  weakening.  Unsettled  trade  tensions  and  developments  around  Brexit  are  imparting  further
downside risks to the outlook. There is considerable uncertainty as to whether this weakness is
temporary or the beginning of a recession in advanced economies. This uncertainty also seems
to  be  reflected  in  several  downward  revisions  to  the  2019  global  growth  forecast  by  the  IMF.
Moreover, central banks across the world are stepping back from tightening monetary policy and
some of them are  promoting  easier  lending  conditions.  In  some  economies,  fiscal  stimuli  are
being used to support growth.
3. The second risk is that EMEs remain vulnerable to financial market volatility as the experience
of  2018  has  shown.  The  risk  of  sudden  stops  and  reversals  of  capital  flows  has  increased.
Consequent external financing gaps and currency depreciations could undermine the outlook for
growth and macroeconomic stability for these economies, just when global growth had begun to
show  signs  of  a  synchronised  revival  a  decade  after  the  global  financial  crisis.  Furthermore,
adverse  financial  conditions  could  aggravate  existing  stress  in  the  balance  sheets  of  lending
institutions in some EMEs and stretch their capital requirements.
4. The third risk to EMEs is the high volatility in international oil prices. For net energy importers
like India, the recent firming up of oil prices on production cuts by major suppliers presents risks
to  current  account  deficit  and  inflation.  The  financialisation  of  energy  markets  and  changing
underlying  dynamics  in  the  global  oil  market  are  adding  an  upside  risk  to  prices,  though  the
demand  is  subdued.  While  break-even  costs  for  shale  production  have  apparently  increased,
investors have turned risk averse and are focusing on cash flows and financial returns. This may
reduce the flexibility of shale output in filling the shortfalls created by OPEC plus production cuts.
Policy Challenges
So, in this environment, what are the policy challenges faced by EMEs?
5.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial  crisis  (GFC),  several  EMEs  have  embarked  upon
structural reforms to reorient their economies. In the short-run, however, these reforms inevitably
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
involve  sacrifices,  including  in  terms  of  losses  of  growth  momentum.  Conventionally,  these
reforms  are  best  undertaken  in  the  expansionary  phase  of  the  economic  cycle.  With  growth
slowing  down  in  a  synchronised  manner  across  borders,  the  space  for  undertaking  and/or
pushing ahead with structural reforms is likely to become severely constricted or even deterred.
But  the  fact  remains  that  we  need  more  structural  reforms  precisely  when  the  economy  is
slowing  down  to  ensure  durable  momentum  to  growth.  This  is  a  point  which  I  would  like  to
stress.
6. As  the  global  economy  loses  speed  and  with  fiscal  space  getting  squeezed,  the  focus  in
EMEs  as  well  as  advanced  economies  is  likely  to  be  on  monetary  policy  as  the  first  line  of
defence. Central banks may once again be expected to assume the mantle of guardians of the
world  economy.  The  global  financial  crisis  has,  however,  exposed  several  limitations  of
conventional  and  unconventional  monetary  policy  tools.  In  despair,  some  have  turned  to  the
heterodox evolution of ideas that has come to be known as modern monetary theory. While the
jury is still out on this idea, I have my own strong reservations on this due to its serious downside
risks. In the end, monetary policy must touch the real economy, spur investments, and maintain
monetary and financial stability.
7. I do, however, feel that the time has come to think out of the box, including by challenging the
conventional wisdom. Let me try and somewhat shock you with one such thought experiment.
Typically, modern central banks with interest rates as their main instrument move in baby steps
–  25  basis  points  or  multiples  thereof  –  and  announce  a  stance  of  tightening,  neutrality  or
accommodation to guide the markets and the public on the likely future course of policy. One
thought that comes to my mind is that if the unit of 25 basis points is not sacrosanct and just a
convention, monetary policy can be well served by calibrating the size of the policy rate to the
dynamics of the situation and the size of the change itself can convey the stance of policy. For
instance, if easing of monetary policy is required but the central bank prefers to be cautious in its
accommodation, a 10 basis points reduction in the policy rate would perhaps communicate the
intent of authorities more clearly than two separate moves – one on the policy rate, wasting 15
basis points of valuable rate action to rounding off, and the other on the stance, which in a sense,
binds  future  policy  action  to  a  pre-committed  direction.  Likewise,  in  a  situation  in  which  the
central bank prefers to be accommodative but not overly so, it could announce a cut in the policy
rate  by  35  basis  points  if  it  has  judged  that  the  standard  25  basis  points  is  too  little,  but  its
multiple, i.e., 50 basis points is too much. This approach can also be useful when the central
bank is on a tightening mode and potentially help avoid policy turnaround from forward guidance
via stance too far into the future, which in a highly volatile global scenario, may not even be a
year. I am articulating this idea not necessarily in search of a theory but in search of traction with
domain experts and more particularly, with practitioner central bankers who face these dilemmas
in their day-to-day lives.
8. At another level, a formidable challenge that EMEs will continue to face is the management of
global spillovers. We live in a world of mobile capital flows where consequences of their arrivals,
sudden  stops  and  reversals  are  to  be  borne  nationally. Against  this  backdrop,  a  truly  global
financial safety net remains elusive. The strengthening of resources of the IMF gets pushed out
into time whenever we come together for Spring or Annual meetings. Under these conditions,
EMEs which are typically at the receiving end when global spillovers flare up, have no recourse
but  to  build  their  own  forex  reserve  buffers.  Paradoxically,  the  accumulation  of  reserves  has
become stigmatised, including with labels such as “currency manipulation”. As I see it, we may
be unintentionally setting the stage for several EME currencies to break out and challenge the
hegemony of the dominant reserve currencies. There is a need for greater understanding on both
sides. In the meantime, so far as the Reserve Bank of India is concerned, we will continue to play
by the extant rules of the game.
9.  Central  banks  have  to  interact  closely  with  financial  markets  for  transmission  of  monetary
policy impulses. In this context, ensuring a sound and efficient payment and settlement system is
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
a pre-requisite. Taking cognisance of exponential growth of digitisation and online commerce in
India, policy efforts have been directed in recent years to put in place a state of the art national
payments infrastructure and technology platform. This has changed the retail payments scenario
of the country. Regulation and development of our payment system envisages the objectives of
safety,  security,  convenience,  accessibility,  and  leveraging  technological  solutions  to  enable
faster processing. In order to ensure an orderly development of FinTechs and streamline their
influence into the financial system, we are now working on guidelines to introduce a ‘regulatory
sandbox/innovation  hub’  within  a  well-defined  space  and  duration  to  experiment  with  FinTech
solutions.
10. In this high flux and uncertain environment, EMEs could perhaps be better off by stepping up
cooperation on all fronts, while recognising multi-polarity. One area of cooperation could be to put
in  place  an  institutional  mechanism  which  balances  the  concerns  of  both  oil  exporting  and
importing countries to ensure stability in energy prices. EMEs also need to explore alternatives to
reduce dependence on conventional energy sources, and give greater focus on renewables and
energy efficiency. The International Solar Alliance, with its headquarters in New Delhi, is a vivid
example.  It  seeks  to  provide  a  dedicated  platform  for  cooperation  among  financial  and  solar
resource rich countries so that the global community benefits from the use of solar energy.
11. In closing, let me say a few words about India. Real GDP growth is expected to clock 7.2 per
cent during 2019–20, the fastest among large economies of the world, growing by an average
rate of around 7.5 per cent in recent years. Inflation has remained below target, averaging 3.6 per
cent  for  the  period  under  the  inflation  targeting  framework  so  far  (since  October  2016  up  to
February  2019);  the  current  account  deficit  is  expected  to  be  around  2.5  per  cent  of  GDP  in
2018–19; and the gross fiscal deficit has adhered to budgetary targets.
12. Looking ahead, our priority is to remain watchful and take coordinated action to revive growth
and maintain macroeconomic, financial and price stability.
Thank you.
1
Foreign Affairs, March 15, 2019.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
