Yakiv Smolii: The National Bank of Ukraine's key achievements in
2018 and action plan for 2019
Speech  by  Mr  Yakiv  Smolii,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Ukraine,  at  the  opening  of 
the meeting of the National Bank of Ukraine with stakeholders, Kiev, 16 January 2019.
Dear Colleagues,
 I am pleased to welcome you, our partners and clients, those for whom we work, those whom
we regulate, and those with whom we cooperate, here in the National Bank of Ukraine.
Our policy is built on dialogue, which lays the foundation of our success as a central bank. Low
and  stable  inflation,  reliable,  transparent,  and  sound  banking  system,  developed  financial
markets,  an  investment  climate  that  favors  economic  growth  and  widens  the  international
horizon – all of these are our objectives. That is why it is important for us not only to be heard, but
also to receive feedback from our stakeholders.
Today, we will summarize the economic and financial results of 2018, share the NBU’s action
plan  for  2019,  determine  the  main  challenges  for  the  Ukrainian  economy,  and  discuss  the
development potential of the economy and the financial system.
The year 2018 was marked by a recovery of macrofinancial stability to the level seen
before the annexation of Crimea and the Donbas conflict.
Last year was a year of many peaks and records.
In 2018, the economy of Ukraine demonstrated the most rapid growth in the past seven 
years. Real GDP grew 2.8% over three quarters and the full-year economic growth was 3.4%
according to the NBU forecast.
Despite having exceeded the NBU target, year-end inflation returned to the downward trend and
has declined to a single-digit value for the first time over five years, coming in at 9.8%.
As a result, today we see:
lower underlying inflationary pressures on the economy of Ukraine
a more comfortable business environment and an increase in household savings
inflation gradually approaching our medium-term target of 5%.
This is primarily the result of the NBU’s tight monetary policy.
The  gradual  increase  in  the  key  policy  rate  began  in  October  2017  prompted  by  heightened
inflation risks. In 2018, we raised the key policy rate four times, by a total of 3.5 pp to the current
level of 18.0% per annum, in order to bring inflation down to the target over the medium term.
This pushed up deposit interest rates, thus making savings more attractive.
Thanks to the tight monetary policy as well as the benign global price environment for Ukrainian
exports in the first half of the year, and the record harvest of grain crops in the second half of
2018, the hryvnia strengthened by 1.4% over the year.
This  is  the  sign  of  stabilization  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  of  Ukraine. At  the  same  time,
Ukrainians  now  trust  the  NBU’s  ability  to  smooth  out  excessive  market  fluctuations.  This  is
proven by the fact that even Russian aggression in the Kerch Strait and the imposition of the
1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
martial law have not caused any major panic on the foreign exchange market. We highlighted
developments on the foreing exchange market and continued to be active in the market, thus
preventing panic among market participants and households.
The stronger hryvnia allowed the NBU to increase international reserves throughout the year by
purchasing foreign currency on the interbank market.
External financing became another source: Ukraine received a new program of cooperation
with the IMF, which lays the groundwork for further strengthening of macrofinancial stability. As
a result, USD 2.4 billion was added to the reserves by international partners (the IMF, the EU and
the World Bank).
The  resulting  amount  of international reserves is the highest in five years,  at  USD  20.8
billion. The last time we saw such figures was in the fall of 2013.
The  financial  sector  is  showing  good  performance  as  well. The banking system is not only
resilient, capitalized, and transparent, but also profitable – for the first time in five years.
Consumer  confidence  in  the  banking  system  is  on  the  rise.  Hryvnia  household  deposits
increased 15% last year.
Banks are finally doing more lending, with hryvnia household loans up 31% last year.
In addition, we can currently talk about a certain recovery in corporate lending.
Our  priorities  in  achieving  these  results  were  identified  by  the  NBU’s  Medium-Term
Strategy. Approved and unveiled in the spring of 2018, the Strategy identifies seven key goals of
the NBU:
1.  Low and stable inflation.
2.  Stable, transparent, and effective banking system.
3.  Resumption of lending.
4.  Effective regulation of the financial sector.
5.  Free flow of capital.
6.  Financial inclusion.
7.  Modern, open, independent, and effective central bank.
 The NBU’s activities aimed at achieving these goals were what made possible the comforting
highs and record-high figures of 2018.
We  will  continue  to  work  to  ensure  price  and  financial  stability  as  a  foundation  for
sustainable economic growth.
We begin the year 2019 with a revolutionary currency liberalization the likes of which Ukraine has
never seen. In less than a month, the Law On Currency and Currency Operations and our new
currency regulation will go into effect, significantly easing currency transactions for households
and businesses. The new legislation is going to actually work in practice rather than remaining
just words on paper.
But with extended freedom comes extended responsibility. The more liberal the conditions that
financial market participants, businesses, and households enjoy, the more attention we at the
NBU have to pay to financial stability.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thus, we should devote the current year to the next important step without which no financial
stability is possible within either the banking sector or the entire financial system. And by this I
mean  the  “split,”  which  is  something  that  stands  to  shape  the  future  of  the  nonbank  financial
sector.
It is not for nothing that the planned adoption of the bill on the “split” by the Rada has become one
of the structural milestones in the new program of cooperation between Ukraine and the IMF as a
prerequisite for strengthening the financial sector. The new law will bring the nonbank financial
market  in  alignment  with  European  standards,  enhance  the  quality  of  financial  companies’
operation,  protect  financial  service  consumers,  and  encourage  the  arrival  of  new  international
players in this market by creating the right conditions.
In addition, 2019 should become an important year for a further recovery in lending. Despite the
progress made over the past two years, banks have yet to become fully operational, especially
as regards working with large corporate borrowers and making mortgage loans to households.
A more active recovery in lending is currently impeded by the high level of nonperforming loans.
The market is waiting for the Verkhovna Rada to consider and adopt a bill on asset resolution
activities that has been prepared by the EBRD. The new law will pave the way for the operation
of asset resolution companies and ensure the creation of an adequate competitive environment
in Ukraine’s secondary market for loans.
In  addition,  significant  institutional  risks  are  still  there,  and  the  reform  of  the  judiciary  is  still
pending implementation. Completion of the reform would ensure the strict observance of laws
and protection of creditor rights.
It goes without saying that we cannot, on our own, travel all the way to a sustainable economy
and  a  developed  and  stable  financial  system.  Doing  so  requires  that the  NBU  operate  in
conjunction with you: banks, businesses, government agencies, the expert community,
and the media.
We can now talk about the challenges that lie ahead and how we can best meet them – in a joint
effort.
I wish you an interesting and fruitful discussion!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
