Remarks at the Event to Commemorate Thirty Years 
of Banca d’Italia in Japan
Speech by Ignazio Visco 
Governor of the Bank of Italy
Thirty Years of Banca d’Italia in Japan: 
Anniversary Celebration 
Tokyo, 11 June 2019
Governor Kuroda, Ambassador Starace, 
Distinguished representatives of Japan’s authorities, of the financial and corporate 
sectors, of academic and research institutions, and members of the Italian, European and 
international communities in Tokyo,
I am delighted to welcome you all this evening, and to see several personal friends 
among you, as we celebrate the 30th anniversary of the establishment of Banca d’Italia’s 
Tokyo Representative Office, which was officially inaugurated on January 27, 1989 by 
Governor Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, in the presence of the Bank of Japan’s Governor, Satoshi 
Sumita. 
A special word of welcome goes to those of you who also attended that event. 
Like the Bank of Japan and other central banks around the world, the Bank of Italy has 
long recognised the value of a stable presence in major international financial centres, 
for  liaising  with  local  authorities,  disseminating  information  on  and  analyses  of  the 
respective economies, and for closely monitoring market developments. The Bank’s first 
‘Delegation’ – as our foreign offices were, and still are formally called – was opened in 
London in 1917, soon to be followed by the New York Office. 
Our interactions with Japan’s monetary and financial authorities had, of course, been 
under way well before the opening of our Tokyo Office. As Governor Kuroda recalled, in 
1962 Paolo Baffi, then senior deputy governor (Direttore Generale) of the Bank of Italy, 
came to Japan to deliver a series of lectures on international monetary policy, widely 
followed by officers from Asian central banks, thus setting strong foundation to future 
closer relations between our two institutions. 
What I would like to remember today, however, is another episode that significantly 
enhanced this relationship.
In late 1971, Giorgio Carducci and Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa – two young Bank 
of Italy officers working in our Research Department – were dispatched to Japan for a 
study mission by the then Governor Guido Carli, and at the suggestion of the Head of 
the Research Department, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi – later to become through the years, 
Governor of the Bank, Prime Minister, Minister of Finance and President of the Republic. 
Their  task  was  to  analyse  the  financing  model  of  Japanese  industrial  expansion,  and 
especially the role played by banks in funding capital accumulation, an issue of particular 
importance for Italy’s economic development.  Indeed, this was a situation Italy shared at 
that time with Japan, and the banking channel is still today the main source of financing 
for Italy’s predominantly small and medium-sized enterprises.
The mission lasted two months and enjoyed the generous support of the Bank of 
Japan, which went well beyond the already high standards set by the world-renowned 
omotemashi of the Japanese people: Governor Sasaki assigned an office at the Bank of 
Japan  to  Messrs.  Carducci  and  Padoa-Schioppa  throughout  their  stay,  and  they  were 
constantly assisted by the Bank’s officers, who arranged most of the meetings with other 
institutions. As Carducci and Padoa-Schioppa noted in their final report, ‘without that 
precious collaboration, it would have been impossible to conduct the research so rapidly 
and comprehensively’. 
The  report  compiled  by  Carducci  and  Padoa-Schioppa  offered  a  synthetic  but 
thorough  description  of  the  real,  monetary  and  financial  sectors  of  the  Japanese 
economy at that time. It was published in Italian the following year, contributing to a 
better understanding in Italy of the foundations and structural features of Japan’s own 
‘economic miracle’ (a term we use when talking of Italy’s resurgence from the ashes of 
World War II in the 1950s and 1960s).
A  further  important  step  in  the  direction  of  extending  our  interactions  with  the 
Japanese monetary and financial system was taken in 1985, with the secondment of a 
senior Bank of Italy officer as a Financial Attaché to the Italian Embassy in Japan. Today, 
besides our three Representative Offices there are 14 financial attachés seconded by the 
Bank to Italy’s Embassies, covering almost sixty economies around the world.
With the opening of our own Office in Tokyo in 1989, our presence in Japan was 
definitely strengthened, and we have since maintained a high level of cooperation with the 
Italian Embassy, thanks to the efforts over the years of its heads: Mr Rosario Bonavoglia, 
Mr Sandro Appetiti, Mr Pietro Ginefra and the current one, Mr Angelo Cicogna; and, of 
course, of the Italian Ambassadors.
The Office has greatly benefited from our Japanese partners’ forthcoming attitude 
and constant support. The frequent exchange of views with the Bank of Japan, as well as 
with the other financial authorities, and members of the academia and the private sector, 
has provided us with extremely useful input for our own analyses and policy decisions.
It  is  important  to  underline  that  the  activity  of  our  Representative  Office  is  not 
confined  to  maintaining  a  fruitful  collaboration  with  Japan’s  authorities  and  financial 
institutions. It also provides an important contribution, through research and analysis, to 
our understanding of Japan’s economy and its fundamental role in Asia and in the world.
2
I benefited too from the valuable support of the Italian Representative Office in 
Tokyo, not only as a Bank of Italy manager, member of the Board and Governor, but also 
during my missions to Japan when I was the OECD’s Chief Economist during the difficult 
years of the Asian financial crisis. 
 This cooperation and exchange of views with Japanese authorities and experts has 
proven beneficial in the past. It will perhaps matter even more in the future, given the 
challenges that our countries are facing, ranging from navigating a difficult international 
environment  to  adjusting  to  a  rapidly  ageing  society  and  the  spreading  of  new 
technologies. 
Over  the  last  thirty  years,  the  world  economy  has  undergone  a  profound 
transformation. Favourable geopolitical developments have combined with spectacular 
advances  in  information  and  communication  technologies  to  spur  unprecedented 
global economic and financial integration. The impact on economic growth and social 
development has been no less impressive. During this period, the volume of international 
trade has more than quadrupled, contributing to an almost three-fold increase in global 
output. 
While  our  two  countries  have  benefited  from  these  developments,  they  have 
also seen a sharp slowdown in the pace of economic expansion and the emergence of 
structural impediments that are largely shared by our two economies. Sluggish growth, 
adverse demographic trends and soaring public debt are challenges we have in common, 
and the adequate policy responses needed to meet them might be partly based on each 
other experiences and best practices.
The prolonged periods of subdued growth that Japan and Italy suffered since the 
early 1990s have been driven by a deceleration in productivity, a phenomenon common to 
many developed and developing nations but more marked in the case of Japan and Italy. 
In Italy we observed a substantial delay in responding to the significant changes brought 
by globalisation and technological progress. This delay was exacerbated by the difficulties 
of  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  in  innovating  and  adjusting  their  governance 
systems. These factors accompanied the long period of adverse cyclical conditions that 
followed the global financial crisis and the associated progressive reduction in the entry 
and exit dynamics of firms. Corporate sector governance and the efficient reallocation 
of capital in the business sector have often been at the centre of attention in Japan too.
Demographic developments contribute to a better understanding of the subdued 
economic performance, especially in Japan, where the problem of an ageing population 
emerged  earlier.  According  to  UN  population  projections,  in  Italy  the  ratio  of  people 
aged 65 and above to the working age population (20-64) is currently about 38 per cent 
and projected to exceed 72 per cent by 2050; in Japan it is already above 46 per cent and 
is estimated to rise to almost 78 per cent by 2050. Life expectancy at birth is currently 
over 82 years in Italy (15 years longer than in 1950) and close to 84 in Japan (20 years 
above the 1950 level); in both countries it will exceed 87 years by 2050. 
3
Japan and Italy are therefore frontrunners in facing the economic and institutional 
adjustments demanded by this demographic transition, which is unprecedented and has 
far-reaching implications in terms of productivity growth, the balance between saving 
and investment, pension requirements and long-term care. There are clear implications 
here for public finances and asset markets.
Mechanical extrapolations of population trends show that a shrinking labour force 
will exert a significant drag on potential output over the next thirty years for both our 
economies, even taking into account possible mitigating effects, such as those stemming 
from immigration.
With respect to the old-age related spending borne by public finances, both Italy 
and Japan have intervened on pensions, even though their increase in the past twenty 
years  has  been  substantial  and  is  not  going  to  decline  for  years  to  come.  Additional 
funding  needs  will  arise  from  the  health  care  system.  Taking  also  into  account  non-
demographic drivers (such as the effect of technological progress), outlays related to 
health and long-term care are projected to rise significantly. As Japan and Italy have two 
of the highest public debt-to-GDP ratios among advanced countries, there is very little 
fiscal space to accommodate these trends. 
Slow  productivity  growth,  ageing  and  high  public  debt  are  three  interrelated 
challenges  which  require  a  comprehensive  policy  response.  The  demographic 
developments under way and the need to ensure sustainable public finances emphasise 
the importance of boosting productivity growth. 
It must be recognised that advances in medical sciences and improvements in living 
conditions have moved the threshold forward considerably of what used to be called ‘the 
third age’: as the positive experience of Japan illustrates, senior citizens can be engaged 
in  productive  activities,  including  the  provision  of  all-important  community  services. 
Moreover, adequate social policies can encourage a much higher participation of women 
in the labour force, especially in Italy. 
Policies to promote innovation and investment in new technologies are crucial. At 
the same time, as technological progress advances further, taking advantage of its great 
economic opportunities will require paying close attention, in particular, to the changes 
implied for the qualitative profiles of labour demand. Appropriate plans will need to be 
drawn up and consistently deployed to retrain workers, invest in education, fight poverty 
and inequality, lest these powerful transformational forces undermine social cohesion.
Supporting  technological  innovation,  and  its  efficient  diffusion  throughout  the 
economy is key to obtaining sustained increases in productivity in the longer term, and 
to safeguarding the living standards of future generations, as well as the sustainability 
of our countries’ social security systems and public finances. Nevertheless, it is essential 
to take into account the effects on the nature and quality of available jobs, which will 
stem from the extant technological revolution that is proceeding with unprecedented 
speed and is wide ranging, from automation to digitalisation, from robotics to artificial 
intelligence.
4
In this respect Japan appears to be better positioned than Italy in some key areas. First 
and foremost, the quality of its human capital: in Italy only 27 per cent of the population 
aged 25 to 34 has completed tertiary education, while in Japan this percentage is  as 
high  as  60  per  cent.  Italy  and  Japan  also  stand  at  opposite  extremes  as  regards  the 
older working population: in Italy the percentage of people who have completed tertiary 
education in the 55-64 age group is the lowest among the G7 countries while Japan has 
one of the highest. Japan also has a significantly higher R&D expenditure to GDP ratio. 
These differences help to explain the fact that the contribution of total factor productivity 
to output growth has remained positive in Japan (although at much lower levels than in 
the years before the ‘lost decade’), while in Italy it has been negative on average since 
2000, only recently showing a weak recovery. 
Policies to safeguard the benefits of technological progress should go hand in hand 
with a firm commitment to international integration: it would be a serious mistake to 
believe  that  disengaging  from  global  responsibilities  could  make  it  easier  to  achieve 
long-lasting benefits at home. It is unfortunate that in many respects we have recently 
observed  a  deterioration  of  international  relations,  with  the  multilateral,  liberal  world 
economic order that presided over many post-WWII developments starting to falter with 
the emergence of new players and the pressures of new protectionist tendencies. 
To be sure, international economic relations need to be based on generally accepted 
rules, which protect legitimate rights and ensure a level playing field for all parties. The 
system of multilateral regulations and supranational institutions which has provided that 
framework, supporting global economic development in the post-war era, is now facing 
serious difficulties, against a backdrop of significant differences in the political systems 
and economic models of key trading nations. This is making cooperation more complex, 
but by no means less necessary for the common good, a conviction that Japan and Italy 
both share.
Critical issues for the future well-being of all nations, such as the environmental 
sustainability  of  economic  development,  can  only  be  managed  through  joint  actions, 
which leverage scientific research and already available technology to ensure that growth 
does not come at the expense of the environment. Japan’s contribution in this direction 
has, of course, been essential, as it presided over the adoption of the historical Kyoto 
protocol in 1997. We may also recall the alarm already raised in the early 1970s by the 
‘Club of Rome’, with its report, ‘The Limits to Growth’.
 We are facing strong headwinds, as Japan knows only too well, being the acting 
President of the G20 this year. Thorough discussions on all these points took place at 
the G20 meeting of Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors held in Fukuoka a few 
days ago. Indeed, Japan has had the merit of putting at the centre of the agenda those 
topics that are today acknowledged as being central to global economic prospects, such 
as  ageing,  technological  development,  the  need  for  high-quality  infrastructure  and  a 
broader health care coverage in developing countries. 
5
Italy will take the helm of the G20 in 2021 and I am sure that the path taken by Japan 
will be both an important legacy and a hard example to follow. In this essential collective 
endeavour, we know we can count on the full support and determined actions of Japan, 
which, as president of the G20, is making an important contribution to reaffirming the 
value of multilateral cooperation for the world’s shared prosperity.
There  is  clearly  no  shortage  of  opportunities,  including  in  our  own  domains  of 
central banking and financial supervision, to continue working with our Japanese friends, 
and build on the excellent cooperation that our Tokyo Office has contributed to over the 
last thirty years.
As Japan enters its REIWA era with a spirit of renewed confidence, we very much look 
forward to extending that rewarding partnership for the next thirty years and beyond.
Thank you. Grazie. Doumo arigatou gozaimasu.
6
