 J u l y   2 2 ,   2 0 1 9 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
Overcoming Deflation: Japan's Experience and 
Challenges Ahead 
Speech at the 2019 Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture, 
International Monetary Fund 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
Introduction 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  give  a  speech in  honor  of  Michel 
Camdessus. 
 In  my  speech  today,  I  would  like  to  share  some  thoughts  on  Japan's  deflation  that  started 
from  the  late  1990s,  when  Mr.  Camdessus  served  as  the  Managing  Director  of  the 
International Monetary  Fund (IMF). The inflation rate in Japan started to decline after the 
burst  of  the  asset  bubble  in  the  early  1990s.  The  economy  fell  into  deflation  in  the  late 
1990s, in the sense of a sustained decline in prices, and this deflation persisted for about 15 
years. 
 Such  chronic  deflation  used  to  be  regarded  as  a  phenomenon  unique  to  Japan.  However, 
most advanced economies have been experiencing low inflation and low interest rates since 
the  global  financial  crisis.  Many  central  banks  now  face  a  common  challenge  of  how  to 
raise inflation rates. I believe that Japan's experience of a long battle against deflation would 
provide a case study for other central banks in conducting monetary policy going forward. 
 Keeping  this  in  mind,  I  would  like  to  discuss  two  topics  today.  The  first  is  the  reasons 
behind  chronic  deflation  in  Japan  and  the  effects  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary 
easing (QQE) that the Bank of Japan introduced in 2013 as a measure to overcome deflation. 
As  I  will  explain  later,  Japan's  economy  is  finally  no  longer  in  deflation  owing  to  the 
powerful  monetary  easing,  and  it  is  reconfirmed  that  monetary  policy  is  effective  even  in 
overcoming  chronic  deflation.  However,  it  is  taking  time  to  achieve  the  Bank's  price 
stability target of 2 percent. After explaining the reasons behind this, I will move on to the 
second topic of the Bank's initiatives to overcome the current persistent low inflation. The 
Bank introduced the new policy framework, "QQE with Yield Curve Control," in 2016 and 
strengthened  it  in  2018.  I  will  elaborate  on  the  Bank's  thinking  behind  the  new  initiatives 
and its experience. 
  1 
I. Chronic Deflation and QQE 
A. Decline in the Natural Rate of Interest and Chronic Deflation 
Now,  let  me  start  with  Japan's  experience  of  deflation.  In  Japan,  after  the  burst  of  a 
large-scale  asset  bubble  in  the  early  1990s,  the  economy  decelerated  significantly  and  the 
inflation  rate  declined  gradually.  The  economy  fell  into  deflation  amid  the  successive 
collapse of major financial institutions in the late 1990s. Thereafter, except for some periods 
when  commodity  prices  surged,  the  CPI  inflation  rate  remained  in  negative  territory  for 
about 15 years (Chart 1). 
 Why did Japan's economy fall into deflation and face difficulty in getting out of it for a long 
time? In my view, this is basically because the natural rate of interest declined rapidly, due 
to  the  stagnant  potential  growth  rate,  the  bubble  burst,  and  the  subsequent  financial  crisis 
(Chart 2).1  The Bank had been searching for measures to strengthen monetary easing from 
an  early  stage.  It  adopted  the  zero  interest  rate  policy  in  1999  and  introduced  quantitative 
easing (QE) in 2001 ahead of other central banks. However, it could not create sufficiently 
accommodative  financial  conditions  in  a  situation  where  the  nominal  policy  interest  rate 
had  already  reached  the  zero  lower  bound,  and  QE  at  that  time  simply  exchanged  nearly 
zero  interest  rate  short-term  assets  for  zero  interest  rate  deposits  at  the  Bank  of  Japan.  In 
addition, amid a situation of stagnant economic activity and prices, it was perceived by the 
public  and  markets  that  the  Bank  did  not  commit  strongly  enough  to  achieving  price 
stability. This also gradually pushed down inflation expectations and made it more difficult 
to overcome deflation. 
 B. Developments in Economic Activity and Prices since the Introduction of QQE 
In  order  to  break  through  this  situation,  the  Bank  introduced  QQE  in  April  2013.  This 
framework  of  powerful  monetary  easing  consists  of  two  pillars:  (1)  a  strong  and  clear 
commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time 
and (2) large-scale purchases of short- to long-term government bonds to reduce long-term 
interest rates. 
                                                   
1  Nao Sudo, Yosuke Okazaki, and Yasutaka Takizuka, "Determinants of the Natural Rate of Interest 
in  Japan:  Approaches  Based  on  a  DSGE  Model  and  OG  Model,"  Bank  of  Japan  Research 
Laboratory Series, no.18-E-1, 2018. 
 2 
 QQE exerted significant effects, supported by the favorable economic conditions at the time. 
Nominal interest rates declined largely across the entire yield curve. In particular, long-term 
interest rates were influenced strongly, since they had room for a further decline even under 
the  zero  lower  bound  on  short-term  interest  rates.  With  concern  about  the  persistent 
deflation being dispelled, inflation expectations rose, and short- and long-term real interest 
rates  fell  to  a  level  far  below  the  natural  rate  of  interest.  As  a  consequence,  the  economy 
improved significantly and the inflation rate went up.  For the  first time in about 15  years, 
Japan's economy is no longer in deflation. Since the global financial crisis, the inflation rate 
in  Japan alone  has  increased,  while the  rates  in many  advanced  economies  have  declined. 
This indicates the significant effects of QQE (Chart 3). 
 That  said,  the  inflation  rate  is  still  below  1  percent  and  the  low  inflation  environment 
remains.  As  I  just  mentioned,  in  Japan,  powerful  monetary  easing  has  boosted  demand 
through a decline in real interest rates. This transmission mechanism has worked firmly as 
initially intended. However, the problem is that, even though demand shortage was met, it is 
still taking time to overcome low inflation. 
 C. Reasons Why It Takes Time for Inflation to Rise 
In our understanding, the combination of a vulnerability of inflation expectations to adverse 
shocks and structural factors explains why a rise in inflation is taking time. 
 Inflation expectations started to rise following the introduction of QQE in 2013, but leveled 
off around the next summer and started to decline thereafter. Such a decline was largely due 
to a drop in the inflation rate that mainly reflected a significant fall in crude oil prices. In 
2014,  Japan's  economy  was  halfway  through  the  re-anchoring  process  from  a  deflationary 
equilibrium  to  a  new  equilibrium.  Unfortunately,  the  economy  faced  large  adverse  price 
shocks  at  such  a  critical  point,  and  inflation  expectations  stopped  rising  as  they  are 
vulnerable to such shocks before they are well anchored.2 
                                                   
2  As  for  the  effects  of  price  shocks  on  inflation  expectations,  see  Yoshihiko  Hogen  and  Ryoichi 
Okuma,  "The  Anchoring  of  Inflation  Expectations  in  Japan:  A  Learning-Approach  Perspective," 
Bank of Japan Working Paper Series, no.18-E-8, 2018. 
 3 
 However,  inflation  remained  sluggish  even  after  2016,  when  crude  oil  prices  started  to 
increase.  So,  it  is  not  possible  to  attribute  the  reason  only  to  past  price  shocks.  Let  me 
introduce  some  hypotheses  that  focus  on  structural  factors  to  explain  the  current  sluggish 
inflation.   
 The  first  is  that  the  hysteresis  effects  of  inflation  expectations  are  stronger  than  expected. 
The  introduction  of  QQE  dispelled  an  extremely  pessimistic  view  that  deflation  would 
continue. However, the experience of prolonged low growth and low inflation has become 
deeply embedded in people's mindset and behavior, and the assumption that prices will not 
increase  easily  has  been  entrenched.  Recently,  many  analyses  show  that  households' 
inflation  expectations  are  significantly  affected  by  their  experience  for  a  long  time.  For 
example,  compared  to  the  age  group  who  experienced  relatively  high  inflation,  inflation 
expectations are lower for younger generations in Japan. They only have the experience of 
low inflation and deflation.3 
 The  second  hypothesis  is  that  the  past  experience  of  deflation  and  recent  technological 
innovation  have  constrained  the  unit  labor  cost  and  this  mechanism  has  worked  strongly. 
Even though the unemployment rate has declined to about 2.5 percent and the tightening of 
labor market conditions has been evident, wage growth for regular employees has remained 
moderate. Because of the long experience of a severe employment situation under deflation, 
both  labor  and  management  may  have  come  to  prioritize  the  stability  of  long-term 
employment  over  immediate  wage  increases.4  In  fact,  wages  of  part-time  workers,  whose 
employment  can  be  adjusted  more  flexibly,  have  been  increasing  by  more  than  2  percent, 
while those of regular workers increasing by less than 1 percent. In addition, the unit labor 
                                                   
3  With regard to the characteristics of households' inflation expectations by generation in Japan, see 
Jess  Diamond,  Kota  Watanabe,  and  Tsutomu  Watanabe,  "The  Formation  of  Consumer  Inflation 
Expectations:  New  Evidence  from  Japan's  Deflation  Experience,"  CARF  Working  Paper, 
CARF-F-388, 2017. 
4  Regarding  the  effects  of  the  past  employment  situation  on  the  present  wage-setting  stance,  see 
Yuto  Iwasaki,  Ichiro  Muto,  and  Mototsugu  Shintani,  "Missing  Wage  Inflation?:  Estimating  the 
Natural  Rate  of  Unemployment  in  a  Nonlinear  DSGE  Model,"  IMES  Discussion  Paper  Series, 
no.2018-E-8, 2018. 
 4 
cost  is  constrained  by  offsetting  a  rise  in  labor  cost  with  an  improvement  in  productivity. 
Since the IT investment using the recent digital technology is highly substitutable to labor, it 
may constrain a rise in real wages (Chart 4). 
 In addition to the two factors that I explained, there are many others, including the progress 
in globalization. Various factors are interacting with each other and working on prices. For 
example,  when  households  strongly  believe  that  prices  will  not  increase easily,  firms  may 
become cautious about raising their prices for fear of losing their customers, and thereby try 
to constrain the unit labor cost or markup. 
 Reflecting these various factors, the Phillips curve in Japan has flattened, and it has taken 
time for the curve to shift upward due to the delay in a rise in inflation expectations. I think 
Japan's  experience  may  be  a  clue  to  explaining  the  "missing  inflation"  in  advanced 
economies.  The  United  States  and  Europe  suffered  severe  economic  downturns  after  the 
global  financial crisis  as well  as  the  prolonged  low  growth  and  low  inflation  environment 
since then. As with Japan's experience of deflation, such severe situations may have affected 
the  mindset  and  behavior  of  households  and  firms  in  those  countries.  The  progress  in 
digitalization and globalization is also common among advanced economies. 
 II. Lessons Learned from Japan's Experience and Challenges Ahead 
So far, I have talked about the first topic of Japan's experience of deflation and the Bank's 
powerful monetary easing to overcome it. I also explained the reasons behind the persistent 
low  inflation.  Now,  I  would  like  to  move  on  to  the  second  topic  of  the  Bank's  challenges 
under the low inflation environment. 
 Regarding the monetary policy conduct, I think that the Bank learned two lessons from the 
past experience. 
 First, even in the face of a substantial decline in the natural rate of interest, it is possible to 
realize  accommodative  financial  conditions  and  stimulate  economic  activity  and  prices  by 
strengthening monetary easing. We have not yet fully understood the effects and side effects 
of unconventional monetary policy, but there is no need to be too pessimistic about them. 
 5 
 Second, we need to bear in mind that it may take time to overcome entrenched low inflation, 
even  with  the  powerful  monetary  easing.  Of  course,  this  does  not  mean  that  the  inflation 
rate  will  never  rise  again.  In  Japan,  firms'  moves  to  raise  wages  and  prices  have  been 
spreading  gradually,  while  the  economy  has  continued  on  an  improving  trend.  The  Bank 
considers it important to persistently support such moves through monetary policy. We need 
to  maintain  upward  pressure  on  the  inflation  rate  for  as  long  as  possible  and  encourage 
people to change their mindset and behavior. 
 Based  on  this  understanding,  the  Bank  has  pursued  powerful  monetary  easing  since  the 
introduction  of  QQE  that  is  called  a  "new  phase  of  monetary  easing."  However,  it  is  not 
easy  to  continue  with  such  powerful  measures  for  a  long  time.  Next,  I  would  like  to  talk 
about  three  points  regarding  the  challenges  in  maintaining  accommodative  financial 
conditions and the Bank's initiatives to overcome them. 
 A. Communication and Expectation Management 
The  first  challenge  is  how  to  communicate  with  the  public  in  order  to  manage  people's 
expectations effectively. Expectation management is one of the most fundamental elements 
of monetary policy conduct, and in particular, forward guidance regarding the future policy 
stance plays an important role under the low interest rate environment. 
 In a standard economic model, even when short-term interest rates reach the effective lower 
bound, if a central bank announces that it will maintain accommodative financial conditions 
for  a  long  time,  the  behavior  of  each  economic  entity  could  change,  thereby  producing 
significant monetary easing effects. In reality, however, people's behavior does not seem to 
change  as  much  as  the  theory  suggests,  especially  when  the  forward  guidance  horizon 
becomes longer. One of the reasons behind this "forward guidance puzzle" is  the difficulty 
in assuring people's understanding of the central bank's guidance for the distant future. The 
central  bank's  guidance  cannot  gain  confidence  unless  people  perceive  it  as  realistic  and 
time  consistent.  However,  if  the  central  bank  focuses  too  much  on  such  consistency  and 
makes  the  guidance  complicated,  it  becomes  more  difficult  to  convey  its  thinking  to  the 
public. As suggested by recent studies on the "rational inattention," households and firms do 
 6 
not  always  pay  close  attention  to  monetary  policy  or  price  developments.  So,  the  central 
bank  needs  to  clearly  explain  its  thinking  in  plain  language  in  order  to  manage  their 
expectations. 
 On this basis, the Bank of Japan has adopted two types of forward guidance. The first is an 
"inflation-overshooting commitment" introduced in September 2016. This is a commitment 
that  the  Bank  will  continue  expanding  the  monetary  base  until  the  observed  inflation  rate 
exceeds  2  percent  and  stays  above  that  level  in  a  stable  manner.  By  linking  to  the  price 
stability  target,  the  Bank  clearly  shows  its  determination  to  maintain  accommodative 
financial conditions for longer than assumed in a standard economic model. The second is 
"forward  guidance  for  policy  rates"  introduced  in  July  2018.  This  shows  the  Bank's 
intention to maintain the current extremely low levels of short- and long-term interest rates 
for  an  extended  period  of  time,  at  least  through  around  spring  2020,  taking  into  account 
uncertainties  regarding  economic  activity  and  prices.  Through  this  forward  guidance,  the 
Bank  has  made  clear  that  it  considers  it  appropriate  to  maintain  the  current  low  levels  of 
interest rates for such a long time. It also has clarified the time frame to make its intention 
easy to understand. Since the introduction of forward guidance for policy rates, the  survey 
results  show  that  an  increasing  number  of  market  participants  consider  that  interest  rates 
will remain low (Chart 5). This indicates the effectiveness of such guidance. 
 B. Securing Effective Policy Measures 
The second challenge in maintaining accommodative financial conditions for a long time is 
to secure highly sustainable policy measures. 
 In order to address this challenge, in September 2016, the Bank decided to place yield curve 
control at the core of the monetary policy framework. Under yield curve control, the Bank 
aims  to  control  both  short-  and  long-term  interest  rates,  setting  the  target  level  of  10-year 
Japanese  government  bond  (JGB)  yields  at  around  zero  percent.  The  previous  policy 
framework  that  set  the  amount  of  JGB  purchases  as  the  operating  target  was  simple  to 
operate in practice. However, there was a problem that the degree of downward pressure on 
the yields could change to a large extent, depending on economic and market conditions at 
the  time.  In  contrast,  under  yield  curve  control,  the  Bank  sets  the  specific  target  level  of 
 7 
interest rates and conducts JGB purchases so as to achieve this target. In exerting monetary 
easing  effects  stably  for  a  long  time,  the  Bank  judges  that  yield  curve  control  is  a  better 
framework in terms of both controllability and sustainability. 
 There are several points that warrant attention in order to  elicit the utmost effects of  yield 
curve control. 
 The first is to secure confidence that a central bank can actually control long-term interest 
rates. Unlike the money market dominated by the central bank, the government bond market 
consists  of  various  participants,  and  the  price  mechanism  is  more  complex.  Based  on  our 
experience,  in  order  to  control  long-term  interest  rates,  the  central  bank  needs  to  gain  a 
strong presence in the government bond market. It also is important to develop and secure 
effective operational measures to realize fine-tuned interest rate control.   
 More specifically, the Bank already holds more than 40 percent of JGBs on a stock basis. 
Also, its share of JGB transaction volume on a flow basis has been at a high level (Chart 6). 
Long-term  interest  rates  have  been  controlled  by  changing  the  amount  of  JGB  purchases 
appropriately, based on the premise that the Bank has a strong presence in the JGB market 
in  terms  of  both  stock  and  flow.5  When  yield  curve  control  was  introduced  in  September 
2016,  there  were  skeptical  views  about  the  Bank's  ability  to  control  interest  rates.  In  fact, 
when U.S. and European long-term interest rates rose significantly  from late 2016 to early 
next year, there was sudden upward pressure on JGB yields as well. In this phase, the Bank 
used  a  powerful  tool  called  "fixed-rate  purchase  operations,"  in  which  it  buys  unlimited 
amounts  of  JGBs  at  a  specific  interest  rate  level.  As  this  new  tool  was  used  in  a  timely 
manner,  market  confidence  regarding  the  Bank's  ability  to  control  interest  rates  has 
strengthened.  Since  mid-2017,  long-term  interest  rates  have  shown  a  greater  tendency  to 
move at around the target level. 
                                                    
5  For the effects of JGB purchases on long-term interest rates in Japan, see Nao Sudo and Masaki 
Tanaka,  "Do  Market  Segmentation  and  Preferred  Habitat  Theories  Hold  in  Japan?:  Quantifying 
Stock  and  Flow  Effects  of  Bond  Purchases,"  Bank  of  Japan  Working  Paper  Series,  no.18-E-16, 
2018. 
 8 
The  second  point  is  to  maintain  the  minimal  market  functioning  while  controlling  the 
long-term interest rates appropriately. Of course, there is a trade-off between strengthening 
a  central  bank's  ability  to  control  interest  rates  and  maintaining  the  market  functioning. 
Increasing market confidence in the central bank's ability implicitly works as a put option. 
If  this  situation  progresses  further,  the  market  functioning  could  be  overly  constrained.  In 
fact,  from  around  early  2018,  as  confidence  in  the  effectiveness  of  yield  curve  control 
strengthened,  daily  fluctuations  in  JGB  yields  clearly  became  smaller  and  the  JGB 
transaction  volume  also  showed  a  decreasing  trend  (Chart  7).  To  deal  with  this  difficult 
situation, in July 2018, the Bank clarified that long-term interest rates might move upward 
and downward to some extent mainly depending on developments in economic activity and 
prices,  and  made  clear  that  it  would  conduct  JGB  purchases  in  a  more  flexible  manner 
depending  on  market  conditions.  Meanwhile, the  Bank  has  proceeded  with  adjustments  to 
maintain  and  improve  the  market  functioning,  for  example,  by  relaxing  the  terms  and 
conditions  for  the  Securities  Lending  Facility  (SLF).  Reflecting  these  efforts,  price 
movements and the transaction volume of JGBs have recovered recently.   
 As  I  mentioned  earlier,  yield  curve  control  was  introduced  in  2016  to  enhance  the 
sustainability  of  the  monetary  easing  policy.  In  addition,  I  believe  that  the  Bank  can 
maintain  accommodative  financial  conditions  for  a  long  time  by  continuously  making 
efforts  to  strike  a  balance  between  conducting  yield  curve  control  as  well  as  maintaining 
and improving the market functioning. 
 C. Examination of the Financial Functioning 
The third  challenge  in  continuing  with  powerful monetary  easing  is  to  examine its  impact 
on the financial functioning. 
 To  achieve  price  stability,  it  is  essential  to  ensure  financial  stability  and  sustain  the 
transmission mechanism of monetary policy. If long-term and super-long-term interest rates 
decline excessively, the rates of return on insurance and pension products also will decline. 
The Bank considers it necessary to pay attention to the possibility that this will give rise to a 
feeling  of  anxiety  about  the  sustainability  of  financial  functioning  in  a  broad  sense.  The 
Bank also has examined whether the prolonged low interest rates will lead to an expansion 
 9 
of  leverage  due  to  excessively  bullish  expectations  and  whether  they  will  result  in  the 
malfunctioning  of  financial  intermediation  through  the  impact  on  profits  of  financial 
institutions. 
 Out  of  the  two  effects  stemming  from  the  prolonged  low  interest rates,  the  latter  warrants 
more attention at this point. Excessively low interest rates could make financial institutions 
reluctant  to  lend,  such  as  through  capital  constraints,  and  thereby  diminish  the  monetary 
easing  effects.  In  addition,  if  financial  institutions  take  excessive  risks  under  the  severe 
profit  environment  in  order  to acquire  immediate  profits,  the  vulnerability  of  the  financial 
system  could  increase  in  the  longer  term.  These  risks  are  judged  as  not  significant  at  this 
point, mainly because financial institutions have sufficient capital bases. However, we will 
continue to pay attention to whether there are any changes in financial institutions' behavior 
or  the  functioning  of  financial  intermediation  amid  continued  accommodative  financial 
conditions. 
 Conclusion 
As time is running out, I would like to conclude my speech. 
 In recent years, low inflation and low interest rates have been prolonged globally, and many 
central  banks  face  a  common  challenge  of  how  to  raise  inflation  rates.  Based  on  this 
recognition,  I  talked  about  Japan's  experience  and  challenges  from  a  somewhat  long-term 
perspective,  as  Japan  faced  low  inflation  and  low  interest  rates  at  an  early  stage  and  has 
continued to make various efforts to overcome this situation. 
 Japan's  economy  has  improved  significantly  while  the  Bank  has  continued  with  powerful 
monetary  easing  through  "QQE  with  Yield  Curve  Control."  The  positive  annual  CPI 
inflation  has  taken  hold,  and  the  economy  is  no  longer  in  deflation  in  the  sense  of  a 
sustained decline in prices. That said, annual CPI inflation is in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent. 
The Bank will persistently continue with powerful monetary easing in order to maintain the 
momentum toward achieving 2 percent inflation. 
  10 
Recently,  uncertainties  regarding  the  global  economy  have  been  heightening,  and  some 
nervousness  has  been  seen  in  global  financial  markets.  The  Bank  needs  to  pay  close 
attention to the effects of these developments on Japan's economic activity and prices.  We 
will carefully examine various risk factors, in addition to developments in economic activity 
and  prices  as  well  as  financial  conditions,  and  weigh  the  benefits  and  costs  of  the  policy 
effects. In this way, the Bank will continue to conduct its policy in an appropriate manner. 
 Thank you very much for your attention. 
 11 
Overcoming Deflation: Japan's Experience and
Challenges Ahead
Speech at the 2019 Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture, 
International Monetary Fund
July 22, 2019
Haruhiko Kuroda
Governor of the Bank of Japan
Introduction
I. Chronic Deflation, and Quantitative and 
Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE)
II. Lessons Learned from Japan's Experience and
Challenges Ahead
Conclusion
I. Chronic Deflation and QQE
Chart 1
Consumer Prices
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
y/y % chg.
Introduction of QQE
CPI (all items less fresh food)
CPI (all items less fresh food and energy)
-3
CY
85
90
95
00
05
10
15
Note: Figures are adjusted for changes in the consumption tax rate.
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications. 
I. Chronic Deflation and QQE
Natural Rate of Interest
1
Chart 2
 5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
CY
85
Potential growth rate
R* in the DSGE Model
R* estimated based on Laubach and Williams (2003)
R* estimated based on Imakubo et al. (2015)
R* estimated based on the HP Filter
87
89
91
93
95
97
99
01
03
05
07
09
11
13
15
17
Notes: 1. Figures for the potential growth rate are based on staff estimations.
Notes: 2. For details of the methodologies used in this chart, see Nao Sudo, Yosuke Okazaki, and Yasutaka Takizuka, "Determinants of the Natural Rate of Interest in Japan: Approaches
Based on a DSGE Model and OG Model," Bank of Japan Research Laboratory Series, no.18-E-1, 2018.
Sources: Consensus Economics Inc., "Consensus Forecasts"; Bank of Japan. 
2
I. Chronic Deflation and QQE
Chart 3
QQE and Price Developments
Japan's Consumer Prices
y/y % chg. 
CPI (all items less fresh food
and energy)
Introduction of 
QQE 
Average from 2000/Q1 
through 2013/Q1 
- 0.5%
Average from 2013/Q2
through 2019/Q2 
+ 0.5%
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
CY
00
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
16
18
Price Developments in G7 Countries
y/y % chg. 
Average from 2000 through 2012
Average from 2013 through 2018
Japan U.S. Germany U.K. France
Italy Canada
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
Notes: 1. Figures for Japan are adjusted for changes in the consumption tax rate.
Notes: 2. In the right chart, figures for Japan, U.K., and Canada are the CPI; those for U.S. are the PCE deflator; and those for the euro area countries are the HICP. 
Sources: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; Haver. 
I. Chronic Deflation and QQE
Mechanism of Constraint on ULC
3
Chart 4
Wages of Full-Time and 
Part-Time Employees
y/y % chg. 
Scheduled cash earnings
(full-time employees)
Hourly scheduled cash earnings
(part-time employees)
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
CY
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Elasticity of Substitution between 
Labor and Capital
elasticity
All capital
IT investment
All industries
Manufacturing
Nonmanufacturing
Notes: 1. In the left chart, Q1 = March-May, Q2 = June-August, Q3 = September-November, Q4 = December-February. Figures from 2013/Q1 are based on corrected figures adjusted 
for establishments in Tokyo with 500 or more employees. Figures from 2016/Q1 are based on continuing observations following the sample revisions of the "Monthly Labour
Survey."
Notes: 2. In the right chart, the impacts of changes in the ratio of capital cost to real wages on the capital-labor ratio are estimated by the data classified by type of industries. 
The estimation period is 1995-2017. Industry fixed effects are considered. The error bands indicate  ±1 standard deviation.
Sources: Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare; Ministry of Finance; Cabinet Office; Bloomberg; Bank of Japan.
4
II. Lessons Learned from Japan's Experience and Challenges Ahead
Forward Guidance for Policy Rates
Chart 5
BOJ's Forward Guidance
Forecasts for the Target Level of 
the Long-Term Interest Rate at End-2019
July 2018
"The Bank intends to maintain the current 
extremely low levels of short- and long-term 
interest rates for an extended period of time, taking 
into account uncertainties regarding economic 
activity and prices including the effects of the 
consumption tax hike scheduled to take place in 
October 2019."
April 2019
"The Bank intends to maintain the current extremely 
low levels of short- and long-term interest rates for 
an extended period of time, at least through around 
spring 2020, taking into account uncertainties 
regarding economic activity and prices including 
developments in overseas economies and the effects 
of the scheduled consumption tax hike."
Source: JCER, "ESP Forecast."
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
number of respondents
July 2018 survey
(before the introduction of forward guidance)
October 2018 survey
May 2019 survey
-0.1～
0.0
0.0～
0.1
0.1～
0.2
0.2～
0.3
0.3～
0.5
0.5～
0.75
0.75～
1.0
 5
II. Lessons Learned from Japan's Experience and Challenges Ahead
Structure of the JGB Market
Chart 6
Amount of Holdings by Sector
(Stock Basis)
Transaction Volume by Sector
(Flow Basis)
tril. yen
BOJ
Banks
Insurance
Pensions
Overseas
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
BOJ
Domestic banks and investors
Overseas investors
tril. yen
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
CY
12
11
13
Notes: 1. JGBs exclude T-Bills.
Notes: 2. In the right chart, figures basically indicate the amount of JGBs sold by dealers, excluding inter-dealer transactions. Note that figures for "BOJ" indicate the total amount of JGBs
CY
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
14
15
16
17
18
19
18
purchased by the BOJ, including those from entities other than dealers. 
Sources: JSDA; Bank of Japan.
6
0
II. Lessons Learned from Japan's Experience and Challenges Ahead
Functioning of the JGB Market
Chart 7
JGB Yield Elasticity to 
U.S. Long-Term Interest Rates
elasticity to a rise in U.S. long-term interest rates by 1bp, bps
Strengthening the Framework 
for Continuous Powerful Monetary Easing
(July 2018) 
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
90
80
70
60
50
Developments in the
JGB Transaction Volume
tril. yen
Strengthening the Framework 
for Continuous Powerful 
Monetary Easing (July 2018) 
Average from 
CY 2016 through 2017
Transaction volume
in the JGB market
6-month backward
moving average
14
15
16
17
18
19
-0.05
Jan.
2017
Jul.
Jan.
2018
Jul.
Jan.
2019
Jul.
40
CY
13
Notes: 1. In the left chart, figures are slopes in a simple regression model (90-day backward rolling regression) in which the dependent variable is daily changes of 10-year JGB yields and
the explanatory variable is daily changes of 10-year U.S. Treasury yields (one-period lag). Shaded areas indicate ±1 standard error bands.
Note:   2. In the right chart, the transaction volume is the gross amount purchased by banks, investors, and bond dealers. JGBs exclude T-Bills.
Sources: Bloomberg; JSDA. 
7
