    
Stylish regulation 
 
 
Speech given by 
Sam Woods, Deputy Governor for Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive Officer, 
Prudential Regulation Authority 
 
 At the UBS Financial Institutions Conference, Lausanne 
Thursday 16 May 2019 
     
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
1 
   I met recently with the head of a large foreign bank, who was in London following a visit to the continent. He 
had been advised by some of our EU colleagues that with the departure of the UK from the EU, the British 
public would become alarmed at the size of the financial sector relative to the size of the economy and would 
therefore demand ever-tougher financial regulation in order to assuage their sense of unease. Thus it was 
put to him that it would be sensible for him to move more of his operations to Paris, Frankfurt or Dublin, 
where things would be easier. 
 A noisy pro-Brexit demonstration taking place in the next door street seemed to support his case. But I told 
him that I thought it somewhat unlikely that the public would take much interest in the size of the financial 
sector unless it blew up again, and that ten years on from the financial crisis we have largely implemented 
the reforms and are moving into more of a business-as-usual phase. I said that we more often heard the 
opposite concern from EU officials in the context of Brexit – that having escaped the “shackles” of EU 
regulation we would embark on a course of weakening financial regulation in a way that makes the financial 
system less resilient. This, needless to say, would be anathema to the Prudential Regulation Authority and to 
all of us who have spent the last decade repairing the financial system. 
 So as far as the stringency of financial regulation goes, we at the Bank have a clear view of what would 
make sense for the UK in a post-Brexit environment: we should keep it calibrated roughly where it is now and 
have no desire whatsoever to weaken it. And despite inevitable tensions between regulator and regulated, 
my impression is that at the most senior levels most of the people running banks and insurance companies 
in the UK today would agree with that position, and that it also has support in the Government and 
Parliament. We need to keep pace with new developments and continually patch any weak parts of the 
regulatory system, but overall following 10 years of wrenching reform we should let the new architecture do 
its job. 
 But what about the style of regulation in a post-Brexit world? 
 Now I am always reluctant to talk about style, for good reason: my oldest child told me the other day how 
much she admires the persistence with which I prioritise comfort over fashion in my clothing choices. In a 
sense it is also much too early even to think about this question, given that the terms of the UK’s exit from 
the EU, and its future relationship with it, are still far from clear. And this will of course be a question for the 
Government and Parliament to settle when the time comes. However, in its own way Britain can be pretty 
stylish so I and colleagues at the Bank have been spending a little time thinking about this issue, in order to 
be ready to offer views when the time comes. 
 We have begun, of course, with first principles. As I am a practical person I always approach first principles 
with a degree of caution, but nonetheless in principle at least it must be good to have principles. So here are 
a few, which I would argue should form the basis of any regulatory regime which aims to deliver safety and 
soundness and financial stability in a UK context: 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
2 
 
2 
  1. Robust prudential standards. This one may be in the category of “so obvious why do you need to say it?” 
But I think it’s vital that this is stated as the first and most important feature of any credible framework for 
prudential regulation. The goal is to ensure continuity in the supply of vital financial services to the real 
economy throughout the cycle, including after severe shocks. All other principles should be subordinate to 
this one. 
 2. Responsible openness based on international collaboration and standards. This principle is particularly 
relevant to the UK given the Government’s policy of maintaining the UK as a leading international financial 
centre, which is itself rooted in a centuries-long tradition of London as a major global trading hub. In practice, 
what does this mean? It means three things: first, that we have a mandate to engage strongly in international 
standard-setting processes and make sure that we are at the forefront of implementing those rules in a 
thorough way; second, that we adopt practices and structures which promote strong collaboration with 
colleagues in other jurisdictions; and third, that we are open to hosting cross-border business in the UK – but 
only if it is appropriately controlled and governed. Our recent moves to ring-fence retail banking, and other 
expectations (some going back to 2014) that firms will subsidiarise material retail banking and insurance 
businesses, are a vital part of what enables us to take this approach safely. 
 3. Proportionality and sensitivity to business models, and promoting competition. We have, for better or for 
worse, adopted a system in which financial companies are privately or mutually owned and then regulated in 
the public interest in order to make them internalise costs which might otherwise be borne by others. An 
analogy is sometimes drawn with pollution: the factory is encouraged to generate wealth for its owners by 
employing people to make products that people want to buy, but it cannot have a free pass to pour waste 
chemicals into the river. It follows inevitably from this that there will be tensions and arguments between 
regulator and regulated. However, these frictions should not be bigger than they have to be – in other words, 
we should aim for a system in which the burdens on firms created by our regulation are no greater than they 
need to be to achieve the objectives set by Parliament. Part of this is about the ability to adapt regulation for 
different types of businesses, as given the enormous diversity of financial firms operating in the UK it is 
unlikely that one size will fit all in all cases. The other side of this coin is that we cannot run a zero-failure 
regime. 
 4. Dynamism and responsiveness. Sometimes these words – “dynamism”, “responsiveness” and indeed 
“proportionality” above – are understood to imply weak regulation, which unsurprisingly we at the Bank are 
firmly against. So because of this danger of a whiff of weakness we have thought very carefully about 
whether it is important to have something like this as part of our list of principles. We have concluded that it is 
necessary for a simple reason: the financial system is an extraordinarily adaptive organism and is constantly 
changing. Sometimes this is for good reasons, for instance as it adopts new technologies in order to deliver a 
better product. Surely many of us would find it intensely irritating to go back to needing a laptop to check our 
bank balance rather than doing it through the app on our phones, or indeed – if we jump another generation 
back – to have to go into a branch to arrange a payment, although branches are still very important for many 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
3 
 
3 
  customers. Regulation should not block these advances, and should actively keep pace with them – for 
instance we need to have the ability to adapt the calibration of liquidity regulations if it turns out that  
app-based deposit outflows have a different shape from branch-based ones. And as new players emerge we 
need to make sure that our regulation is not creating unnecessary barriers to entry and thereby impeding 
healthy competition. But sometimes the system adapts for bad reasons – the profit motive drives firms to find 
the weaker parts of the system and channel business into them. We need to be sufficiently fleet of foot to 
respond to these shifts before they create serious problems – in short, regulation should be future-facing and 
keep fit for purpose.   
 5. Consistency. Firms and the public need to be confident that the regulatory framework is stable, that 
prudential rules are based on clear evidence, and that supervisory judgements are impartial and consistent. 
We need to ensure that the approaches of regulators are consistent across activities carried out by firms, 
and consistent across sectors where different types of firm happen to provide some similar services.  
 6. Accountability. This is particularly important in a system in which considerable discretion is provided to 
regulators, both to make rules and to supervise and enforce firms’ adherence to them. There is a strong 
economic case for giving such responsibilities to an operationally independent regulator with clear statutory 
objectives defined by Parliament. Like monetary policy, prudential regulation faces a time-inconsistency 
problem. Governments may have incentives to boost credit cycles to increase short-term nominal growth, 
causing problems in the medium- and long-term – indeed these problems may be more acute for financial 
regulation than for monetary policy, given that the cost of regulation tends to impact financial services firms 
in the short-term but the benefits tend only to be visible in the much longer-term (hence the importance of 
cost-benefit analysis requirements being placed on regulators). Of course independent regulators can get it 
wrong too, and have in the recent past – but an independent regulator with a clear mandate for stability can 
more credibly commit to robust prudential standards. Counter-intuitively, it may also be the case that an 
independent regulator has more scope to be proportionate while maintaining confidence, because a 
government may actually need to over-regulate in order to establish its credibility. But – thankfully for all of us 
– we live in a democracy, and so a system of independent regulation can only work if the regulators are 
properly accountable, in particular to Parliament.  
 So much for principles. In practice, where might these lead to for a post-Brexit system of financial regulation 
in the UK? 
 One possibility is: nowhere! This could arise in several ways, but one comes immediately to mind – a 
scenario in which our future relationship with the EU takes a form that means we stick with a system which 
looks exactly like what we have today. There is no reason to be very alarmed by this prospect – it is not ideal 
but we have largely shaped that system through our membership of the EU and we make it work well 
currently. However, this would be undesirable if it came with the prospect of becoming a rule-taker in 
financial services with all the risks – both prudential, and as a matter of industrial policy – that entails.  
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
4 
 
4 
  But let us toy briefly with the idea that the Government and Parliament decide to adopt a style of financial 
services regulation built on the six principles set out above, or something like them. What, in practice, would 
this style look like? 
 To step back one pace, you can consider the style of different bits of financial regulation in the UK as being 
at different points along a spectrum1. Looking at the last two decades, at one end there is the original 
Financial Services and Markets Act2 (FSMA) 2000 model, which gives most discretion to operationally 
independent regulators. Only statutory objectives and the general framework for rule-making (including 
obligations to “have regard” to particular matters) are set out in legislation, and regulators have wide powers 
to make rules which comprise the regulatory regime. At the other end of the spectrum is the way in which 
rules are made in the EU, which we have imported through the “on-shoring” process as part of Brexit. Under 
this approach a significant amount of technical detail, including calibrations, are set out in legislation.  
 In between these two, there are various other options, including in recent UK experience the approaches 
adopted for the Senior Managers and Certification Regime (SMCR) and ring-fencing. Both of these contain 
significantly less detail in legislation (rather than regulators’ rules) as compared to the EU model: 
     SMCR. Certain core aspects of the regime (e.g. the framework for regulatory approval processes 
and the fitness and propriety test, relevant offences, and introducing the concept of conduct rules 
and statements of responsibilities) are set out in legislation. But regulators were given considerable 
discretion in filling in the detail of the framework – including what functions required approval, the 
content of the conduct rules, and the detailed systems and controls requirements that apply to firms. 
  Ring-fencing. The Act amended the PRA’s objectives to incorporate ring-fencing, and set out the 
basic structural aspects of the regime (in particular about the scope of the ring-fence), while leaving 
much of the framework to be established via statutory instruments from the Treasury. The statute 
also detailed matters related to ring-fenced banks’ governance and policies which the PRA should 
make rules about. The PRA also implemented further details of the regime (e.g. systems and 
controls requirements, capital requirements for ring-fenced banks, independence requirements, 
access to payment systems) via rules. 
To be clear, I am not focused here on the question of whether or not the SMCR or ring-fencing are a good 
thing, about which people will argue for decades. Rather, I am focused on the legislative style which 
Parliament adopted in order to introduce them – how this style compares to other models, and which model 
seems to fit best the principles set out above for a future financial services framework in the UK.  
                                                      
1 See Annex 1 
2 The 2000 Financial Services and Markets Act (FSMA) established the current domestic UK framework for financial regulation 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
5 
 
5 
  To my mind, if we look across the four main legislative styles adopted by Parliament in the last couple of 
decades – those for delivering FSMA, SMCR, ring-fencing and the EU model – the one that fits the principles 
best is the approach used for SMCR: 
  1.  Robust prudential standards. It’s a tough regime which enables us to hold the top brass to account 
when things go wrong. 
2.  Responsible openness based on international collaboration and standards. The approach taken 
works with the grain of the international financial system, and other countries have already borrowed 
heavily from it.  
3.  Proportionality and sensitivity to business models, and promoting competition. The regime has left us 
room to tailor it so that it fits a small insurance company as well as it fits a huge bank.  
4.  Dynamism and responsiveness. The framework gives us room to adapt it as needed. To give you 
one recent example: in view of the increased importance of operational resilience at firms, and 
particularly at banks given the programme of branch closures and the rapidly-growing dependence 
of their customers on digital channels, we last year introduced a new Senior Manager Function (SMF 
24) for operations – so that it is clear who is accountable when things go wrong. This simply wasn’t 
as high a priority when the SMCR was first brought in in 2016, but had become more important since 
– and the framework is flexible enough to allow us to respond to this change.  
5.  Consistency. There is enough of the regime in legislation to ensure consistency across activities and 
through time.  
6.  Accountability. We are regularly asked about the regime in Parliament, and have imposed it on 
ourselves.  
The other attraction of using the approach taken for the SMCR for future regulation is that it has been the 
preferred approach adopted by Parliament most recently when not constrained by EU regulation (for the roll-
out of the SMCR to insurers, which occurred in December 2018). This is an important consideration at a time 
of heightened debate, in a Brexit context, about so-called “Henry VIIIth” and “Cardinal Wolsey” powers. 
Although it is uncertain quite what those gentlemen’s views would have been on the output floor in Basel 3.1, 
my point is that making use of an approach recently chosen by Parliament seems to me to have 
considerable attractions relative to choosing something completely new and untested.  
 Would it not, though, be easier and better simply to stick with the EU model through which we have recently 
imported a large volume of rules? This approach is radically different from the approach the UK has taken 
when left to its own devices. Indeed, the EU model, with a large body of technical rules set out in the 
equivalent of primary legislation, is quite different from how most of the world does it. For example, the EU 
and Switzerland were the only two members of the Basel Committee on Banking Standards where Basel 3 
was implemented through primary legislation rather than the prudential authority’s rule-making powers – in 
major economies like the US, Australia and Canada the regulators did the implementation. Even within the 
EU, where directives are used to implement Basel 3, some member states opted to allow regulators to 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
6 
 
6 
  implement these directives. Another example is on the insurance side, where some extremely detailed and 
highly technical actuarial material has ended up in EU legislation as part of Solvency 2 rather than being left 
to regulators. And in general the EU approach contrasts with that of the UK, where Acts of Parliament are 
usually used for overarching changes to the institutional framework and many of the details are then 
delegated to regulators, who are vigorously held to account for their activities by Parliament. Another place in 
which this bites is in relation to smaller firms, which are often subject to the entire rulebook when in some 
cases safety and soundness might be better served by a simpler (simpler, not weaker) approach. None of 
this is to advocate a wholesale re-write of existing, on-shored rules and regulations – to my mind the 
question is more about what style we adopt for future regulations. 
 Why is the EU approach different? Many others have provided answers that question3. Emphasis is 
sometimes put on the differing legal traditions in EU countries, which – it is sometimes argued – in aggregate 
tends to lead to a norm of greater and more detailed specification in EU legislation than tends to result from 
the UK’s approach. But from my experience as a practitioner I think it derives in the main from another factor: 
the goal of harmonising regulation and supervision across 28 countries. It is entirely natural that this latter 
point should lead to a system in which a greater volume of the detail gets locked down in legislation as 
opposed to regulators’ rules. It is also entirely natural to ask whether such an approach would make sense 
for the UK once outside the EU. 
 This question for Government and Parliament will also need to take into account the issue of EU market 
access, which could in some scenarios lead to greater alignment. Alternatively, we could adopt a hybrid 
approach which doesn’t replicate either of the pre-existing EU or British approaches. Once you open this box 
the possibilities are legion. For instance, one could imagine a ‘design vs calibration’ split (design in 
legislation, calibration in rules), or a wholesale/retail split with more of the wholesale framework in legislation 
in order to keep closer to the EU.  
 Conclusion  
 At some point in the Brexit process, the question may arise for the Government and Parliament: what 
framework for financial regulation do we want to have in the UK? What style do we want to adopt? As for 
stringency, we can assure foreign banks’ chief executives that we have no plans to upgrade our regulatory 
dress code to white-tie-only, and we can assure our colleagues in the EU that we have absolutely no desire 
to take off our clothes! But what will be the British style in this area? The PRA and the wider Bank stand 
ready to support this debate if and when it begins. I would urge all those involved to give serious 
consideration to the principles set out above, and to using an existing British approach, in the form of the 
model adopted for introducing the SMCR, to deliver them. 
 3 See for instance Andrew Bailey’s speech: https://www.fca.org.uk/news/speeches/future-financial-conduct-regulation   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
7 
 
7 
  ILLUSTRATIVE 
Annex 1: Illustration of different approaches to financial regulation, by degree of discretion granted to regulators  
      UK pre-
1979 
Banking Acts 
1979, 1987 
FSMA 2000 
framework 
Senior Managers 
and Certification 
Ring-fencing 
On-shored 
EU regime 
UK  
Regime 
UK domestic initiatives – 2013 Banking Reform Act 
Lamfalussy (2001) 
De Larosière 
(2008) 
Single Rulebook 
(2009) 
EU  
Other BCBS countries  
More 
discretion 
for 
regulators 
EU 
Cross-
country 
Less 
discretion 
for 
regulators 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
8 
 
8 
