Philip  Lowe:  Opening  statement  to  the  House  of  Representatives
Standing Committee on Economics
Opening statement by Mr Philip Lowe, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the House
of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Canberra, 9 August 2019.
Chair
Members of the Committee
 Thank  you  for  this  opportunity  to  share  our  views  on  the Australian  economy  and  the  RBA’s
important public policy responsibilities. My colleagues and I strive for a high level of transparency
and these hearings are an important part of the accountability process.
Later this morning, we will be releasing our quarterly Statement on Monetary Policy, which will
include our latest forecasts. I would like to begin today by highlighting the main points regarding
the forecasts for output growth, the labour market and inflation. I will then turn to monetary policy.
Our  central  forecast  is  for  the Australian  economy  to  expand  by  2½  per  cent  this  year  and
2¾ per cent over 2020. The growth forecast for this year has been revised down since we met
six months ago, but the forecast for next year is unchanged. The downward revision this year
mainly reflects weak consumption growth. It has become increasingly clear that the extended
period  of  unusually  slow  growth  in  household  incomes  has  been  weighing  on  household
spending, as has the adjustment in the housing market. Given this experience, the outlook for
consumption continues to be the main domestic source of forecast uncertainty.
Even so, looking ahead, there are signs the economy may have reached a gentle turning point.
Consistent  with  this,  we  are  expecting  the  quarterly  GDP  growth  outcomes  to  strengthen
gradually  after  a  run  of  disappointing  numbers.  This  outlook  is  supported  by  a  number  of
developments including: lower interest rates, the recent tax cuts, a depreciation of the Australian
dollar, a brighter outlook for investment in the resources sector, some stabilisation of the housing
market and ongoing high levels of investment in infrastructure. It is reasonable to expect that,
together, these factors will see growth in the Australian economy return to around its trend rate
next year.
The  major  uncertainty  continues  to  be  the  trade  and  technology  disputes  between  the  United
States and China. These disputes pose a significant risk to the global economy. Not only are they
disrupting  trade  flows,  but  they  are  also  generating  considerable  uncertainty  for  many
businesses around the world. Worryingly, this uncertainty is leading to investment plans being
postponed  or  reconsidered.  It  is  also  now  generating  volatility  in  financial  markets  and  has
increased the prospects of monetary easing in many countries. This means that we have a lot
riding on these disputes being resolved.
Turning now to the Australian labour market, the unemployment rate, at 5.2 per cent, is a little
higher  than  when  we  met  six  months  ago.  This  is  despite  employment  growth  having  been
stronger than we had expected. What has happened is that increased demand for labour has
been met with more labour supply, especially by women and older Australians. Reflecting this, a
higher  share  of  the Australian  adult  population  is  participating  in  the  labour  market  than  ever
before. This is good news. But one side-effect of this flexibility of labour supply is that it is harder
to  generate  a  tight  labour  market  and  so,  in  turn,  it  is  harder  to  generate  a  material  lift  in
aggregate wages growth.
Looking forward, while some slowing in employment growth is expected, the central scenario is
for the unemployment rate to move lower to reach 5 per cent again in 2021. If things evolve in line
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
with this central scenario, it is probable that we will still have spare capacity in the labour market
for  a  while  yet,  especially  taking  into  account  underemployment.  This  means  that  the  upward
pressure on wages growth over the next couple of years is likely to be only quite modest, and
less than we were earlier expecting. Caps on wages growth in public sectors right across the
country are another factor contributing to the subdued wage outcomes. At the aggregate level,
my view is that a further pick-up in wages growth is both affordable and desirable.
Turning now to inflation, the June quarter outcome was broadly in line with expectations, after a
run  of  lower-than-expected  numbers  in  earlier  quarters.  Over  the  year  to  June,  inflation  was
1.6 per cent, in both headline and underlying terms, extending the period over which inflation has
been  below  the  2–3  per  cent  medium-term  target  range.  The  Reserve  Bank  Board  remains
committed to having inflation return to this range, but it is taking longer than earlier expected.
There are a few factors that I would highlight as contributing to the low inflation outcome over the
past year. These are: the slow growth in wages; the ongoing spare capacity in the economy;
various  government  initiatives  to  address  cost-of-living  pressures  on  households;  and  the
adjustment in the housing market, which has contributed to unusually low increases in rents and
declines in the price of building a new home in some cities. Working in the other direction, the
drought and the depreciation of the exchange rate have been pushing some prices up.
Looking ahead, inflation is still expected to pick up, but the date at which it is expected to be back
at  2  per  cent  has  been  pushed  out  again.  Over  2020,  inflation  is  forecast  to  be  a  little  under
2 per cent and over 2021 it is expected to be a little above 2 per cent.
At this point, I would like to turn to monetary policy.
When we met with the Committee in February, I indicated that I thought the probabilities of a
cash rate increase and a cash rate decrease were broadly balanced. Following that hearing, the
situation continued to evolve and the Board reduced the cash rate twice – at its June and July
meetings – to a new low of 1 per cent.
A reasonable question to ask is: what changed?
The answer is the accumulation of evidence that the economy could be on a better path than the
one  we  looked  to  be  on.  The  incoming  data  on  wages,  prices,  GDP  and  unemployment  all
suggested  that  the Australian  economy  was  some  distance  from  running  up  against  capacity
constraints. It also suggested that the day at which inflation was comfortably back within the 2–
3 per cent medium-term target range was not getting any closer.
Faced with this evidence, the Board decided that it was appropriate to lower the cash rate, after
having kept it unchanged for more than 2½ years. It judged that a lower cash rate would boost
jobs and help make more assured progress towards the inflation target.
In the current environment, easier monetary policy mainly works through two channels. The first
is that it affects the exchange rate, which is now at the lowest level it has been for some time.
The second is that it boosts aggregate household disposable income. I acknowledge that lower
interest rates hurt the finances of the many Australians who rely on interest payments and the
Board has paid close attention to this issue. At the aggregate level though, for every dollar the
household sector receives in interest income, it pays well over two dollars in interest to the banks
and other lenders. This means that lower interest rates put more money into the hands of the
household  sector  and,  at  some  point,  this  extra  money  gets  spent  and  this  helps  the  overall
economy.
At  its  meeting  earlier  this  week,  the  Board  decided  to  leave  the  cash  rate  unchanged  at
1 per cent.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
It judged that after having moved twice in quick succession it was appropriate to wait and assess
developments both internationally and domestically.
As I mentioned earlier, there have been a number of developments that could be expected to
support the Australian economy over the next couple of years. Determining with precision the
combined  effect  of  these  developments  is  difficult.  It  is  certainly  possible  that  their  combined
effect will be greater than the sum of the individual parts. If so, growth would surprise on the
upside.  Of  course,  it  is  also  possible  that  the  concerning  international  developments  and  the
ongoing weak growth in household incomes could see the economy underperform our central
scenario. The labour market will continue to provide an important guide as to which path we are
on.
It is, nevertheless, reasonable to expect an extended period of low interest rates in Australia. This
reflects what is happening both overseas and here at home.
While we might wish it were otherwise, it is difficult to escape the fact that if global interest rates
are  low,  they  are  going  to  be  low  here  in Australia  too.  When  the  global  appetite  to  save  is
elevated  relative  to  the  appetite  to  invest  –  as  it  is  now  –  interest  rates  in  all  countries  are
affected.  Our  floating  exchange  rate  gives  us  the  ability  to  set  our  own  interest  rates  from  a
cyclical perspective, but it does not insulate us from long-lasting shifts in global interest rates
driven by saving/investment decisions around the world.
In the central scenario that I have sketched today, inflation will be below the target band for some
time  to  come  and  the  unemployment  rate  will  remain  above  the  level  we  estimate  to  be
consistent  with  full  employment.  While  this  remains  the  case,  the  possibility  of  lower  interest
rates will remain on the table. The Board is prepared to ease monetary policy further if there is
additional accumulation of evidence that this is needed to achieve our goals of full employment
and inflation consistent with the target. Time will tell.
As I have discussed on other occasions, if further stimulus to demand growth is required to get
us to full employment and closer to the economy’s capacity, monetary policy is not the country’s
only option. Monetary policy certainly can help, and it is helping, but there are certain downsides
from relying too much on monetary policy.
One  option  is  for  fiscal  support,  including  through  spending  on  infrastructure.  Spending  on
infrastructure  not  only  adds  to  demand  in  the  economy  but,  done  properly,  it  can  boost  the
economy’s productivity. It can also directly improve the quality of people’s lives through reducing
congestion and improving services. At the moment, there are some capacity constraints in parts
of the infrastructure sector, but these should not prevent us from looking for further opportunities
to boost the economy’s productive capacity and support domestic demand. There is no shortage
of  finance  to  do  this,  with  interest  rates  the  lowest  they  have  ever  been.  This  week,  all
governments in Australia can borrow for 10 years at less than 2 per cent.
Another  option  is  structural  policies  that  support  firms  expanding,  investing,  innovating  and
employing  people.  A  strong,  dynamic  business  sector  is  the  best  way  of  creating  jobs  and
growing  the  overall  economy.  We  will  all  do  better  if Australia  is  viewed  as  a  great  place  to
expand, invest, innovate and employ people. A program of structural reform would help move us
in this direction. It would also help boost productivity growth, which over recent times has slowed
noticeably. If this slowing is maintained, it will become a serious issue and as a society we will
have to make some difficult adjustments. So it is important that we think about the possibilities
here, not just from a short-term perspective but from a long-term perspective as well.
I would like to mention a couple of other areas of the Reserve Bank’s activities.
As  you  would  know,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  the  banker  for  the Australian  Government. As  the
Government’s  banker,  our  systems  process  the  government’s  payments  and  receive  its
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
revenue.  Over  recent  years,  we  have  undertaken  major  investments  in  these  systems.  Two
weekends  ago,  we  finally  turned  off  the  mainframe  computer  on  which  we  had  been  running
these  important  banking  services  for  many,  many  years.  Our  new  technology  will  allow  us  to
continue to provide a very high level of service to the government and its agencies and we are
working with them on some innovative payment solutions. The Department of Human Services is
already using fast payments to get money to those in immediate need. The Reserve Bank is also
continuing to invest heavily in the resilience of the systems we operate that are at the core of
Australia’s interbank and fast payment system.
In  other  payments  related  work,  the  Bank  is  continuing  to  look  for  ways  to  encourage  faster
development of the New Payments Platform, which allows Australians to move money between
bank  accounts  in  real  time 24/7. We have not been satisfied with the progress to date by the
major  banks  and  want  to  see  a  faster  pace  of  innovation  that  benefits  individuals  and  small
businesses.
The Bank’s Payments System Board, in conjunction with the Council of Financial Regulators, is
also  reviewing  the  regulatory  framework  for  money  held  in  stored-value  facilities  and  digital
wallets. With so much innovation occurring in the world of digital payments, including by non-
bank  players,  it  is  important  that  the  regulatory  regime  in  Australia  is  fit  for  purpose  and
appropriately balances competition and the protection of consumers. We are currently reviewing
the regulatory regime in this area and as we complete this work, this issue may come before the
Parliament. Another issue that we are working on that may come before the Parliament is the
strengthening  of  the  regulatory  arrangements  that  apply  to  the  financial  infrastructures  that
underpin Australia’s financial markets.
Finally, we will be releasing the new $20 banknote on 9 October. There are currently around 170
million $20 notes in circulation, so this is a big logistical exercise. I am confident that Australians
will enjoy spending these new high-tech highly secure banknotes. I brought along a sheet today
hot from the printing press for you to have a look at.
Thank you. My colleagues and I appreciate this opportunity to answer your questions.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
