Elvira Nabiullina: Review of recent inflation developments in Russia
and economic outlook
Statement by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, in the follow-up to the Board
of Directors meeting, Moscow, 6 September 2019.
 Today, the Board of Directors has decided to reduce the key rate to 7% p.a.
If economic conditions are in line with our forecast, we will look into further key rate reduction at
one of the upcoming meetings.
Let me dwell on the main factors behind the decision.
First. Annual inflation has already approached 4%. Our estimates suggest that as of the
year-end it will fall within the range of 4.0-4.5%. Meanwhile, inflation is forecast to stand at
3.5-4.0% in the opening months of next year. This is largely associated with the fact that the VAT
rate increase will be factored out from the calculation of annual inflation. This may be considered
as a purely technical factor. Sustainable trends point to inflation of about 4%.
Second.  Inflation  expectations  of  households  and  businesses  remain  elevated.
Therefore, we stay focused on their dynamics.
Right now, I will not highlight the figures we released last week. However, I would like to note that
previously we abstained from posting the results of surveys on household inflation expectations
during  ‘the  week  of  silence’.  We  have  discussed  this  issue  and  from  now  on  we  will  publish
these data as soon as they are released. It is essential that the market promptly receives the
information which the Board of Directors consults when making its decision. The Bank of Russia
will continue to publish its analytical commentary that summarises and estimates expectations of
households, businesses and analysts, after ‘the week of silence’.
Third. Monetary conditions are continuing to loosen. We expect that both previous and
today’s key rate decisions will underpin this trend.
Market expectations for interest rates shifted downwards on the back of the signals in the follow-
up to the Board meetings in June and July. This was also driven by the shifting expectations for
monetary policies of the US Fed and the ECB as the economic growth outlook for the US and
euro area deteriorated.
The decline in interest rates comes with an easing of non-price lending conditions in terms of
maturities and volumes. The easing of both price and non-price monetary conditions contributes
to expansion in lending. According to our estimates, corporate lending will rise by 7-10% while
retail lending will increase by 15–20% this year.
Fourth. Economic activity undershot the Bank of Russia’s expectations in the second
and  early  third  quarter.  This  results  from  internal  and  external  factors.  This  made  us
revise our 2019 GDP growth forecast from 1.0-1.5% to 0.8-1.3%.
An important external factor is a slowdown in growth of the global economy, which has proven
more  tangible  than  expected  due  to,  among  other  things,  the  growing  contradictions  in
international trade. A weakening in domestic demand already reduced export quantities in the first
half of the year, and we forecast that they will contract for a wide range of goods as of the year-
end.
The deterioration in the global growth outlook also affects investment plans. Though, certainly,
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
business sentiment depends not only on external factors but also on the business environment
as a whole. In the first half of the year, growth in fixed capital investment slowed considerably,
which  is  associated  with,  among  other  things,  a  rather  sizeable  drop  in  public  investment.
According to our estimates, even with a revival in national project expenditures in the second half
of the year factored in, total growth of gross fixed capital formation will come in at no higher than
1% as of the year-end.
Consumer  demand  continues  to  make  a  positive  contribution  to  GDP  growth.  This  year,  the
expansion of lending continues to offer strong support to consumption growth. Loans, however,
cannot  be  the  main  driver  of  growth  in  demand.  Consumption  growth  will  remain  slack  as
household incomes stagnate. This year, we expect it to come in at 1-1.5% range.
We have also updated our medium-term baseline forecast. Now, we expect the dynamics of
domestic and external demand to be more moderate in 2020–2021. The most notable revision
has been made for export growth rates. This reflects the deteriorated world economic outlook
amid rising trade tensions.
As a result, we may only expect GDP growth to accelerate to 2-3% by the end of 2022, rather
than in 2021. A higher economic growth rate should primarily be driven by the shift to a more
extensive  implementation  of  national  projects  and  other  governmental  measures  aimed  at
removing  structural  constraints.  This  will  promote  an  increase  in  investment  demand  and  a
quicker rise in labour productivity, household income and, accordingly, consumption.
Lending  will  sustainably  expand  over  the  entire  forecast  horizon  supporting  economic  growth.
Corporate lending will annually increase at a pace of 6-10%, and household lending will grow by
10–15%  each  year.  Mortgage  loans  will  account  for  the  bulk  of  household  lending  growth.
Meanwhile,  macroprudential  measures  will  gradually  reduce  the  growth  pace  of  consumer
lending.
We have updated the balance of payments to factor in the world economy dynamics, prices for
oil and other Russian exports. We assume a gradual decline in oil prices to 50 US dollars per
barrel in 2021 (as compared to 55 US dollars considered earlier). If external demand weakens,
prices for other Russian exports will drop, too. In such conditions, the current account balance
will shrink from 83 billion US dollars (5% of GDP) this year to 28 billion US dollars (which is about
2% of GDP) in 2022.
Given  the  actual  dynamics  observed  since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  we  have  also  slightly
lowered the 2019 forecast for the private sector’s financial account balance from 50 to 40 billion
US dollars. Later on, it is expected to gradually reduce to 20 billion US dollars by the end of 2022.
I would like to emphasise once again that the fiscal rule mechanism smooths out the impact of a
decrease in the current account balance on the domestic economic environment. However, it
only pertains to oil price fluctuations.
I would like to stress that we have slightly changed our approach to publishing forecast
scenarios.  The  key  rate  decision  relies  on  our  baseline  macroeconomic  forecast  and  the
analysis  of  uncertainties  and  risks  for  the  baseline  forecast.  This  is  the  reason  why  we  will
continue to publish the baseline scenario four times a year in our press releases and Monetary
Policy Report following core meetings.
We will release our supplementary scenarios – the high oil price scenario and the risk scenario
that assumes that prices will plunge – in the same manner as the baseline scenario but once a
year, in the Monetary Policy Guidelines. It is determined by the essence of these scenarios that
remains almost unchanged across the meetings. The 2020–2022 Guidelines will be published on
Monday.
Winding up, I would like to comment on monetary policy prospects.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
After the five years of the evolution from tight to moderately tight and then to neutral monetary
policy,  we  have  finally  entered  the  key  rate  range  we  consider  as  a  probable  neutral  interval.
Given today’s decision, the key rate is at the top of this range equalling from 6% to 7% in nominal
terms, or from 2% to 3% in real terms, which is the same, with inflation expected to reach 4%.
In this regard, it is of note that the neutral key rate estimate is not ‘a point’, but a range of values.
It depends on various domestic and global drivers, as well as the monetary policy transmission
mechanism,  and  may  alter,  being  affected  by  them.  It  will  therefore  take  time  to  ‘feel’  the
thresholds of this ‘neutral range’ and make sure that they are in line with our current estimates. If
necessary, we will adjust these estimates.
A sustainable inflation rate close to the 4% target will be the key criterion suggesting that we are
right in our estimates of this range.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
