Central Bank of Chile 
July 2019 
 XXIII Annual Conference of the Central Bank of Chile 
Opening remarks by Mario Marcel, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile 
“Public Trust and Central Banking” 
July 15, 2019 – The Ritz Carlton Hotel, Santiago, Chile 
  
Dear colleagues and friends, distinguished guests: welcome to the XXIII Annual Conference of the 
Central Bank of Chile. 
 
Since 1997, the Central Bank of Chile has been convening prominent scholars and policymakers to 
this  Conference  to  discuss  major  issues  in  central  banking  and  their  implications  for  emerging 
economies. This version is no exception; fresh and thoughtful research will support discussion over 
the next two days. We thank and welcome all participants, including representatives from 21 central 
banks around the World. 
 
The Annual Conference this year has some features that make it special.  First, it will be held back-
to-back  with  the  IMF-CBC-IMFER  Summer  Conference  on  “Current  Policy  Challenges  Facing 
Emerging Markets”, so we expect many of you to stay in Santiago longer than usual, for a full week 
of rich discussions. Second, this year we commemorate 30 years of independence of the Central 
Bank  of  Chile,  so  we  have  devoted  our  Annual  Conference  to  revisit  the  achievements  and 
challenges of central bank independence around the globe. 
 
Central bank independence: achievements, challenges and threats 
 
Central  Bank  independence  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  pieces  of  institutional  architecture 
fostered  by  economic  thinking  in  the  last  half  century.  Theoretical  studies  in  the  1980s  stressed 
central bank independence as a precondition to bringing inflation under lasting control, and support 
for  reform  soon  spread  from  academia  to  policymaking.  Professor Kenneth  Rogoff,  was  a  major 
contributor to this process, so we are privileged to have him as keynote speaker at this Conference. 
 
Central bank independence delivered upon expectations. As the countries with independent central 
banks grew to nearly 70 in recent years, average world inflation dropped to 4%, from more than 
25% 30 years ago. Empirical studies are pretty conclusive on a strong correlation between central 
bank independence and low and stable inflation after controlling for other variables. 
 
The Central Bank of Chile, as one of the pioneers of this remarkable process in the emerging world, 
provides  a  good  example  of  the  merits  of  institutional  independence.  Independence  of  the  CBC 
ended 40 years of double-digit inflation and coincided with the return to democratic rule in 1990. 
Inflation fell from almost 30% to 3% through the 1990s while the economy expanded at an annual 
average 6% in the decade, doubling the average for the previous 40 years. This provided legitimacy, 
credibility and respect for the Central Bank under its independent status, encouraging it to maintain 
high technical standards and commitment to its statutory goals of controlled inflation and financial 
stability over the years.  
 
Independence also helped many central banks to deal with the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2008 
and its aftermath. The magnitude of the crisis demanded prompt and decisive action, while its global 
dimension  required  coordination  across  national  borders. 
from  national 
governments and the authority to act swiftly were critical in containing the deepening of the crisis 
Independence 
 Page 1 of 8 
Central Bank of Chile 
July 2019 
 
and its spillovers throughout the economy. Some of the largest independent central banks applied 
their powers  to articulate unprecedented measures, like massive asset  purchases, whose  effects 
last until today. 
 
Independent central banking has not been an easy ride, though. One thing is to be free from external 
interference, quite another is to build the policy frameworks, governance structures and standards 
to guide actions in a consistent and predictable way. Independent central banks have endorsed and 
benefitted  the most  from inflation targeting,  have  led  the  improvement  in communications  into 
forward guidance, have built reporting mechanisms, and have developed transparency and integrity 
standards beyond statutory requirements. 
 
While policy frameworks, monitoring mechanisms and policy tools could rely on sound theoretical 
work and accumulated experience for monetary policy over the years, issues are not so well resolved 
with  financial  stability.  This  is  not  easy  to  measure,  financial  instability  may  come  from  many 
sources, and there is still and open debate on who –central banks or government regulators-- should 
command macro prudential policies. This is related to the potential tradeoffs between monetary 
policy and financial stability that were intensely debated in this venue two years ago. 
 
The former is a good illustration of the difficulty for independent bodies to deal with multiple policy 
mandates  and/or  the  distributional  effects  of  policy  decisions,  which  involve  choices  that  are 
normally expected in the political process but not easy to tackle by nonelected officials. This was 
particularly exposed during the GFC, given the perception of unfairness in the distribution of the 
burden of the crisis and the actions to contain it. 
 
Even success of independent central banking has come at a price. Controlling inflation has made the 
latter  less  of  a concern  to  citizens  and  politicians.  The  effectiveness  of  central  banks  in securing 
macro and financial stability in the post-crisis years may have also removed responsibility from other 
actors and may have encouraged markets to rely too much on central banks as risk managers. 
 
The  current  wave  of  political  populism  is  a  further  source  of  risks.  Threats  to  central  bank 
independence usually do not come from the public but from political leaders that resent distributed 
governance as well as checks and balances. In the last few months, we have witnessed a number of 
attacks on central bankers for coming in the way of ambitious populist agendas. 
 
Independence and credibility 
 
This is a good reminder that independence of central banks cannot be taken for granted. No matter 
how  deeply  it  is  ingrained  in  the  law,  independence  can  always  be  taken  away  or  significantly 
undermined,  de  facto  or  de  jure.  In  the  real  world,  central  bank  independence  relies  on  the 
willingness of key stakeholders–most notably governments and legislatures—to play by the rules 
and by the ability of central banks to gain legitimacy and credibility from stakeholders. 
 
Independence  does  not  automatically  guarantee  credibility  either.  Being  free  from  political 
interference from politicians does not make a central bank infallible nor free from undue influence 
from  other  actors.  Credibility  needs  to  be  protected  and  cultivated  amid  social,  political  and 
technological change. 
 
 Page 2 of 8 
Central Bank of Chile 
July 2019 
 
In a recent piece, the IMF illustrates the importance of central bank credibility (IMF, 2018). It shows 
that central banks can better accommodate shocks with smaller output loss and social cost the more 
anchored are inflation expectations to the policy target, with lower pass-through from the exchange 
rate to consumer prices and lower persistence of inflation. 
 
More generally, public policies should be more effective the more credible the institutions in charge 
of them, as it helps aligning the behavior of the public to the policy objectives pursued. This is surely 
more  important  for  independent  institutions  that  cannot  rely  of  a  broader  set  of  incentives  and 
controls to shape the behavior of their stakeholders. A key question then is how to build credibility. 
 
This is an issue only partly addressed by Economics. The rational expectations school would suggest 
adopting a clear-cut policy rule, communicating it openly and clearly, and ensuring strict compliance, 
to  exploit  the  learning  capacities  from  economic  agents.  This  certainly  underlies  the  growing 
popularity of inflation targeting and the forward guidance that comes with it. But even this may be 
challenging in a changing environment, where the business cycle overlaps with structural changes, 
and more so in areas, like financial stability, where policy targets may be hard to design and explain. 
 
From credibility to trust 
 
So,  a  broader  approach  to  credibility-building  may  be  needed.  To  this  end,  it  may  be  useful  to 
acknowledge  that  credibility  is  an  attribute  of  a  certain  individual  or  institution:  that  of  being 
believed or trusted. So surely, credibility does not depend exclusively on your own actions but on 
how far others trust you. 
 
Trust, in turn, is defined as a person’s belief or expectation that another person or institution will 
act in favor of one’s well-being (OECD, 2017). So we could think of credibility as an institutional asset 
that depends on the factors that influence trust from stakeholders and the public. 
 
Credibility in a central bank refers to public’s belief that future actions of monetary policy that are 
optimal today will be carried out even if they no longer seem optimal in the future. This is related 
to public trust, but the two concepts are not quite the same. One can imagine the public having trust 
in the central bank and at the same time the latter adopting a discretionary monetary policy strategy 
to  retain  full  flexibility  regardless  of  past  promises.  However,  it  is  hard  to  imagine  the  opposite 
situation of a central bank fully engaged in the management of expectations without trust from the 
public.1 
 
This also applies  to communication. We can discuss alternative  strategies to make  sure  that the 
message issued by a central bank is adequately understood and internalized. However, there is little 
that a good communication strategy can do if the public does not trust the central bank.2 
                                                           
1 Christelis et al. (2016) have formally explored this for the Europe using micro data, finding that higher trust 
in  the  ECB  lowers  inflation  expectations  on  average,  and  significantly  reduces  uncertainty  about  future 
inflation, even after controlling for people’s knowledge about the objectives of the ECB. Similarly, Mellina and 
Schmidt  (2018)  find  that  having  greater  trust  increases  the  probability  of  expecting  unchanged  prices  and 
decreases the likelihood of expecting either slightly or sharply rising prices over the medium term. 
 
2 Through behavioral insights, Bholat et al. (2018) show that public’s trust in the Bank of England can be further 
improved  by  enhancing  the  communication  with  the  public,  particularly  at  times  when  trust  in  public 
institutions has fallen and responsibilities delegated to central banks have increased. 
 Page 3 of 8 
Central Bank of Chile 
July 2019 
 
 
Approaching  institutional  credibility  from  stakeholders’  trust  has  a  number  of  conceptual  and 
operational advantages.  
 
First, there is a large body of research assessing its value: trust is at the heart of societies and a 
major component of social capital. A number of studies have related interpersonal and institutional 
trust to lower transaction costs, social cohesion and wellbeing. 
 
Second, trust is a livelier concept, which can respond to information and experience acquired by 
stakeholders, as compared to the more static notion of credibility. Trust is not an abstract concept, 
but  an  attitude  developed  by  actual  people  based  on  their  beliefs,  information  and  actual 
experiences. 
 
Third,  by  focusing  on  stakeholders,  trust  can  help  institutions  to  pay  closer  attention  to  their 
environment, changes in social values and standards, thus reinforcing their end beneficiaries rather 
than structures or procedures. This may be especially important for technocratic and independent 
organizations,  like  central  banks,  that  may  tend  to  isolate  themselves  despite  mandates  in  the 
general interest. 
 
Finally, as we will see below, recent work shows that trust can be deconstructed into a series of 
components that can be linked to institutional actions. This may provide a stronger lead to how trust 
can be protected, built, or eroded. 
 
In  what  remains,  I  will  argue  that  public  trust  is  the  cornerstone  for  safeguarding  central  bank 
independence as a stable outcome of the way modern societies decide to allocate powers across 
institutions.3 A central bank that is not trusted is vulnerable to political pressure to deviate from its 
mandate, regardless of whether it is formally independent or not.  
 
It  is  therefore  crucial  for  modern  central  banks  to  understand  better  the  concept  of  trust,  the 
mechanisms  for  fostering  and  maintaining  it,  and  to  think  about  strategies  and  tools  for  the 
management of public trust. 
 
What is public trust? What can be done about it? 
 
Available data indicates that public trust in government differs substantially across countries, but it 
tended  to  deteriorate  after  the  GFC.  Within  countries,  trust  may  also  vary  significantly  across 
specific public institutions, being stronger for social services than for political bodies. Cross-section 
evidence  shows  a  strong,  positive  relationship  between  public  trust  and  per  capita  income, 
suggesting an association between trust and development, albeit causality is unclear.4 
 
                                                           
3 The broader concept of trust in government institutions is not delinked from the more specific one on central 
banks. For the case of New Zealand, Hayo and Neumeier (2017) find a statistical connection between overall 
trust in government institutions and public trust in the Reserve Bank of New Zealand.  
 
4 There is also evidence on the statistically positive relationship between trust and central bank independence, 
though the link is not linear (Berggren et al., 2014). 
 Page 4 of 8 
Central Bank of Chile 
July 2019 
 
To dig deeper into the drivers of public trust and its impact on institutional effectiveness we can 
draw on recent work developed by the OECD on the subject (OECD, 2017). This work proposes a 
taxonomy distinguishing five dimensions of trust: reliability, adaptability, integrity, openness and 
fairness.  
 
Reliability refers to the extent to which an institution can deliver on the expectations set upon it in 
an effective and predictable way, reducing uncertainty from the public. Reliability of an institution 
depends and can be assessed on the basis of the clarity of its mandates and specific goals; the quality 
of its organization, planning and decision-making process, and its operational efficiency, including 
its capacity to command the appropriate financial, technical and professional resources.  
 
Adaptability refers to the capacity to recognize changes in the environment, either economic, social, 
technological or institutional, and to adapt to them without compromising its commitments to the 
public.  Long-term  planning,  research,  market  intelligence  and  risk  management  are  important 
mechanisms in this regard. To be adaptable while remaining reliable, an institution should be able 
not only to identify changes, new trends and risks, but also to explain them to the public, including 
the adjustments that may be required from them. 
 
Integrity  means  putting  the  general  interest  entrusted  to  the  institution  above  the  particular 
interests  of  its  authorities,  employees  or  other  narrow  groups.  This  means  far  more  than  strict 
regulations  and  effective  control;  it  may  require  benchmarks,  ethics,  checks  and  balances  and 
openness to scrutiny that can respond to changes in social standards of accepted behavior, which 
may move faster than legislation.  
 
The  latter  entails  with  accessibility,  which  refers  to  the  ability  of  an  institution  to  understand 
people’s needs, leverage a wide pool of information and achieve higher levels of compliance. To be 
accessible,  an  institution  should  develop  active  and  passive  transparency  mechanisms,  seek 
feedback from the public and to foster dialogue and consultation with stakeholders. 
 
Lastly,  fairness  acknowledges  differences across society and  that institutional  actions may  be  far 
from neutral. As a component of trust, fairness involves being aware of such differences and to find 
ways  to  prevent,  mitigate  or  compensate  redistributive  effects  that  are  particularly  undesired. 
Within  an  institution,  fairness  also  involves  the  creation  of  a  working  environment  that  fosters 
productive exchange of ideas, free of harassment and discrimination.  
 
Fostering trust in a Central Bank 
 
The OECD taxonomy may be useful in providing a conceptual basis to go beyond generalizations on 
public trust and to take a more proactive approach to nurture it. In particular, it provides a good 
framework to develop ways to assess trust and to identify concrete levers that an institution can 
use to foster trust. However, can this framework be applied to a central bank? 
 
In my view, this is not  only possible, but  necessary as well. Assessing trust on a central bank  by 
inserting  a  question  in  an  opinion  survey  suffers  from  the  same  limitations  as  with  government 
institutions and a few more. Answers to a broad question may be more reflective of prejudice than 
of attitudes that may shape the response to future policy decisions or incoming information and 
may  come  too  late  in  a  process  of  social or market change  to make  any  difference.  In  addition, 
 Page 5 of 8 
Central Bank of Chile 
July 2019 
 
experience  with  opinion  surveys  in  different  countries  has  shown  that  no  more  than  half  of 
respondents have some basic knowledge of central banks.  
 
Adopting a more systematic and rigorous approach to assessing trust in the central bank may not 
only  help  address  these  shortcomings  but  also  to  acknowledge  the  full  diversity  of  its 
responsibilities.  I  have  already  noted  research  stressing  the  relevance  of  credibility  for  the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy,  but  credibility  and  public  trust  may  be  equally  important  for 
financial stability, the issuing of currency, or the generation of statistics.  
 
Moreover, one can conceive that trust across these functions could be somewhat connected. Loss 
of trust from a misconceived financial intervention or from distorted statistics may spillover to the 
way stakeholders assess the credibility of monetary policy. To foster trust, a central bank must go 
beyond the conduct of monetary policy to focus on how to develop reliability, adaptability, integrity, 
openness and fairness in its different areas of work. 
 
In  the  context of  central  banking,  reliability  is  not  equivalent to  a  dovish monetary  policy  giving 
priority to shortsighted demands to stimulate the economy, but to do the proper balancing of risks 
to align monetary policy with long-run social welfare. It means acting in a coherent way, showing 
thorough  decision-making,  carefully  explaining  reasons  and  arguments  behind  every  action, 
conducing  predictable  decisions,  and  running  efficiently the  central  bank  as  an organization.  For 
this, I consider essential a clear framework for monetary and financial policy, data-driven decision 
making, unquestionable technical capacity and statistics, and skillful crisis management. 
 
Reliability of a central bank, in turn, can be assessed based on the accuracy of its projections, its 
ability to identify financial risks, the quality of its statistics and the safety of the domestic currency 
and payment systems. 
 
For adaptability, a central bank must develop its analytical skills to identify structural changes in the 
economy and emerging sources of risk, telling them apart from necessary innovation. To this end, it 
may  need  to  deepen  its  knowledge  of  markets  and  agents,  and  to  be  on  top  of  technological 
developments. Adaptability also depends on the preparedness to react to unforeseen events. 
 
Central bank integrity requires appropriate access to information, control of conflicts of interest, 
strong  middle  office  arrangements  in  market  operations,  and  effective  auditing  across  different 
areas  and  processes.  For  accessibility,  communication  of  monetary  policy  is essential,  as well  as 
analysis  and  communication  of  financial  risk,  consultation  in  the  issuing  of  new  regulations,  and 
well-structured accountability. The fairness dimension of trust can be enhanced through prevention 
of crises and risk management, financial education and inclusion, and securing equal opportunities 
in staffing and promotion decisions. 
 
Assessing public trust in a central bank across these dimensions does not need to start from scratch. 
Instead, it provides a framework to organize existing data in a more meaningful way. It can also shed 
a  new  light  on  how  to  read  and  use  data  coming  from  different  streams  of  the  literature.  The 
substantial work on central bank transparency led by some of our participants in this conference is 
a good case in point. 
 
In sum, after recognizing credibility as the main asset of a central bank, especially an independent 
one, we can conclude that drawing on parallel work on trust in institutions may provide a useful 
 Page 6 of 8 
Central Bank of Chile 
July 2019 
 
framework  to  assess  the  current  situation  and  to  guide  action  to  address  existing  gaps  and 
vulnerabilities. 
 
Trust in the Central Bank of Chile 
 
The experience of the Central Bank of Chile can illustrate some of the ideas above.  
 
The  IMF  study  on  the  importance  of  credibility  for  monetary  policy  underscored  anchoring  of 
inflation expectations in Chile as key to the effectiveness of its monetary policy and macro resilience 
in the face of external shocks. Deviations of long-term forecasts of headline inflation from target 
have been less than 0.1%–being the lowest for a sample of emerging countries, and even lower a 
benchmark group of advanced economies. This is remarkable considering that inflation volatility in 
Chile has not been particularly low relative to other emerging economies. 
 
Yet we do not see credibility as an immutable attribute, given the dynamism of trust in institutions 
in the public opinion and market perceptions. We believe that a positive past record helps, but trust 
can deteriorate in a number of ways, some of them pretty fast, in the face of new standards and 
developments.  Therefore,  trust  needs  to  be  protected  and  enhanced  in  a  systematic  way  with 
different stakeholders in the different dimensions of activity of the Bank. 
 
This  is  well  reflected  in  the  2018-2022  corporate  strategy  under  course.  This  was  based  on  an 
unprecedented consultation of stakeholders and participatory internal process. It defined as a vision 
for the Bank to be a trustworthy technical institution, known for its high standards in achieving its 
institutional objectives. On this basis, we have launched a number of initiatives aimed at fostering 
public trust in terms by improving its reliability, adaptability, integrity, accessibility and fairness. 
 
To improve its reliability, the Central Bank of Chile has taken a thoughtful process of revision of its 
framework  of  monetary  policy  and  forward  guidance.  Great  emphasis  has  also  been  given  to 
strengthening the technical toolkit to identify and communicate sources of financial risk.  
 
With a focus on adaptability, we have introduced special chapters, analytical boxes and companion 
studies to our flagship reports. We have also launched a technological observatory with the goal of 
identifying new sources of risk, and the creation of the Corporate Risk Area within the Bank. 
 
For integrity, we have broadened the framework and coverage of declaration of interests among 
executives and staff in sensitive functions, and have strengthened our external auditing committee. 
Some initiatives to improve the Bank’s accessibility include regular presentations of Bank reports 
throughout the country, the development of market intelligence mechanisms and the upgrading of 
communications  by  creating  an  Institutional  Affairs  Division.  To  foster  fairness  we  are  also 
deepening  our  analysis  of  the  economic  and  financial  behavior  of  households  and  raising  our 
contribution to financial literacy and education to the highest world standards. 
 
Last, but not least, the CBC launched an external evaluation of its performance in the two central 
areas  of  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  by  convening  a  panel  of  reputed  academics  and 
central bankers, some of whom are here today. We have committed to present the report to the 
Chilean Senate next September and to take the panel´s recommendations as a guidance to further 
strengthening reliability, adaptability and transparency of our work in the years to come. 
 
 Page 7 of 8 
Central Bank of Chile 
July 2019 
 
Closing remarks and acknowledgements 
 
In sum, I underscore the importance of public trust as foundation of modern monetary policy and 
for  the  legitimacy  of  independent  central  banks  in  performing  their  broader  mandates.  This  is 
ingrained  in  the  agenda  of  our  Annual  Conference  this  year:  new  challenges  to  central  bank 
independence,  the  management  of  central  bank  credibility,  and  the  designing  of  the  best 
communication strategies for an effective monetary policy. 
 
I would like to thank Ricardo Reis for being the external organizer of this Conference, as well as to 
Ernesto Pastén and Diego Saravia for being our local counterparts. I also thank all presenters and 
contributors to our program and the conference volume that will be  published thereafter. I also 
thank to our friends and colleagues from the International Monetary Fund for being here and for 
organizing the conference further down the week. 
 
Let  me  finish  by  thanking  Alejandra  Rozas,  Camila  Figueroa,  Paloma  Navarro,  María  José  Reyes, 
Felipe  Leal  and  both  the  Public  Affairs  Department  and  the  Research  Department  for  all  their 
invaluable help managing the challenging logistics of organizing these two conferences together. 
 
Thank you, have a pleasant stay in Santiago and a fruitful discussion over the next two days. 
 
 References 
 
Berggren, N., S.-O. Daunfeldt, J. Hellström (2014), “Social Trust and Central-Bank Independence,” 
European Journal of Political Economy 34: 425-439. 
 
Bholat, D., N. Broughton, A. Parker, J. Ter Meer, and E. Walczak (2018),  “Enhancing Central Bank 
Communications with Behavioural Insights,” Staff Working Paper 750, Bank of England. 
 
Hayo, B. and F. Neumeier (2017), “Explaining Central Bank Trust in an Inflation Targeting Country: 
The Case of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand,” Working Paper 236, ifo Institute. 
 
Christelis, D., D. Georgarakos, T. Japelli, and M. van Rooij (2016), “Trust in the Central  Bank  and 
Inflation Expectations,” Working Paper 537, De Nederlansdsche Bank. 
 
International Monetary Fund (2018), World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3, Challenges for Monetary 
Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize, October 2018. 
 
Mellina, S. and T. Schmidt (2018), “The Role of Central Bank Knowledge and Trust for the Public's 
Inflation Expectations,” Discussion Paper 32/2018, Deutsche Bundesbank. 
 
Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (2017), Trust  and  Public  Policy.  How 
Better Governance Can Help Rebuild Public Trust, OECD Public Governance Reviews, OECD: Paris. 
 Page 8 of 8 
