Yves Mersch: The changing role of central banking
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Lamfalussy Lectures Conference of the Lamfalussy Award at Magyar Nemzeti Bank (The
Central Bank of Hungary), Budapest, 4 February 2019.
 John von Neumann, the Hungarian-born mathematician, once said: “there’s no sense in being
precise  when  you  don’t  even  know  what  you’re  talking  about”.  I  saw Alexandre  Lamfalussy  in
many  different  roles  over  the  course  of  30  years,  and  I  always  admired  his  capacity  to  be
extremely precise because he was professionally knowledgeable.
It is therefore a great honour for me to be awarded a prize in memory of a man who made such
an important contribution to European integration.
During many years representing my country of origin in the Belgian constituency at the IMF, I
witnessed the intellectual strengths of the Hungarian representatives, especially from the central
bank. I therefore feel particularly flattered to have been awarded this prize by the Magyar Nemzeti
Bank and its president, Mr Matolcsy.
I  also  want  to  express  my  thanks  to  Governor  Ewald  Nowotny  of  the  Oesterreichische
Nationalbank, who is also a firm believer in the need to bring the people of our continent together
without nations trying to dominate each other.
Indeed, I feel very humble and modest in this environment. I was lucky to be able to develop my
views  and  opinions  when  accompanying  my  highest  political  authorities  in  their  meetings  for
more than 20 years. Moreover, my family provided me with two solid foundations: resistance to
illiberalism during World War II, and the respect of the rule of law.
I have been veering between what Benoît Mandelbrot called “the two poles of human experience”,
one driven by my legal background and the deterministic system of order and planning, and the
other inspired by my lifelong experience with finance and the stochastic or random systems of
irregularity and unpredictability.
Trying to straddle the two poles with insights from political science brings me to today’s theme:
the changing role of central banks.
Mandelbrot  said  of  the  great  financial  crisis: “Financial  economics,  as  a  discipline,  is  where
chemistry was in the sixteenth century: a messy compendium of proven know-how, misty folk-
wisdom, unexamined assumptions and grandiose speculation.”
According  to  him,  “financial  markets  are  the  machines  in  which  much  of  human  welfare  is
decided but so limited is our knowledge of how the financial system functions that we resort not
to science but to shamans… a few elderly men, the central bankers. We do not understand what
they do or how, but we have blind faith that they can somehow induce the economic spirits to
1
bring us financial sunshine and rain and save us from financial frost and pestilence.”
Are these bitter words from an insufficiently recognised genius battling the hysteresis effects of
the “efficient market hypothesis”? Or is this an expression of frustration that finance still largely
operates under a Euclidean perception of the world when it comes to measuring risk because
2
new theories take time to become operationally mature and stable?
Whatever the motivation, it points to the difficulties of change management. The same reflections
apply to all organisations – while they are designed on the basis of all the knowledge available at
the time, their designs age as the world around them evolves, and new experience lays bare
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
weaknesses. Some of these weaknesses can be mitigated; others might be fundamental and
need fixing without delay.
But, in the absence of consensus on what is essential, what is noise, what is cyclical and what is
structural? These are precisely the questions that come up in view of the changing role of central
banks.
The  design  of  the  modern  central  bank  dates  back  to  the  consensus  that  arose  around  the
disinflationary path of the 1980s – that central banks should be independent and have a narrow
mandate to fight inflation. In Europe, there was a second layer of consensus on how to allocate
what is done at national level and what is done at regional level.
However, the decision on shared sovereignty was driven by more political considerations. While
the monetary leg was to be supported by an institutional setup, the economic and fiscal leg was
left to coordination and a set of common rules. This was fertile ground for critics. Both Milton
Friedman and Alan Greenspan gave the euro no more than ten years. But the euro has now been
around for 20 years and has been a powerful instrument for keeping the European project afloat.
Nevertheless, the passage of time is inevitable. Globalisation has left its mark and the political
factors in Europe have changed. European enlargement, the failures of economic coordination,
the  imbalances  of  the  policy  mix  and  the  evolution  of  the  European  Commission  from  a
technocratic  body  towards  a  more  political  one,  among  other  factors,  have  shaped  how  the
constitutional principles underlying Europe’s central banks are used.
But the biggest test was the great financial crisis, which is still shaking the foundations of our
societies today.
What has changed for central banks? How have they adjusted? What changes are still needed?
And what changes must be resisted?
During the first half of the ECB’s existence, it only saw a few changes. One important one was
the forward-looking adjustment concerning how the decision-making process worked. A voting
rotation principle was proposed, which would cap the number of voting members at 21.
This amendment to the ECB Statute, proposed by the Governing Council, was adopted with no
changes by the European Council, Commission and Parliament.
The Governing Council made use of the Statute’s flexible adjustment procedure again last year
following a suggestion of the General Court on the interpretation of the role of the ECB regarding
clearing and payment systems. This time around, the Commission started to interfere with the
minimal  changes  the  ECB  had  recommended,  followed  by  more  extensive  changes  by  the
Parliament and yet more by the Council, which even added a new objective to this chapter on
monetary  functions  and  operations.  These  amendments  –  if  adopted  –  would  bring  monetary
policy  instruments  under  the  control  of  the  legislators  –  a  clear  violation  of  the  independence
principle of the Treaty. Obviously, the Treaty’s fundamental principles cannot be modified by this
simplified amendment procedure. The discussion is ongoing.
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  operational  side.  In  the  ECB’s  first  ten  years  there  was  only  a  slight
clarification of the quantitative definition of price stability, the ECB’s prime objective, which was
subsequently defined as headline inflation of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
Throughout the crisis, no further attempts to change the strategy, definition or numerical value of
our objective gained any traction.
However,  during  the  crisis  one  could  see  a  trend  developing  around  monetary  policy
implementation, with major changes to instruments, communication and accountability.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Outside the central bank, but influencing it on the institutional side, the major policy response to
the crisis has been to strengthen EMU and to attempt to reinforce economic coordination and
amend  the  fiscal  rules.  Additionally,  a  crisis  management  tool,  the  European  Stability
Mechanism, was created as an intergovernmental body outside the Treaties.
At  the  same  time,  a  banking  union  was  set  up  with  a  single  supervisor,  a  single  resolution
authority  and  a  still-to-be-completed  single  deposit  guarantee  scheme.  According  to  an
empowering clause included in the Maastricht Treaty activated by unanimity, the ECB received
specific supervisory powers, albeit only for credit institutions.
This transfer of sovereignty is still being challenged in the German Constitutional Court. It came
hot on the heels of a first move towards greater coordination in the financial sector through the
establishment of European agencies for bank, insurance and securities and markets, in which
Alexander  Lamfalussy  played  an  important  role.  Indeed,  the  governance  structure  of  these
agencies  was  modelled  on  the  so-called  Level  3  Committees  introduced  by  the  Lamfalussy
Committee of Wise Men.
During these times, another trend became noticeable: the transfer of an increasing amount of
new  tasks  to  national  central  banks.  Some  of  these  had  traditionally  been  performed  by  the
central banks, but others were totally new. As the ECB has to issue an opinion on every change
to  laws  governing  national  central  banks,  a  conceptual  framework  evolved  which  establishes
which tasks are governmental tasks, and which tasks are traditional central bank tasks, or which
tasks could be considered ancillary to them. An undue transfer of competences to a central bank
of  tasks  that  belong  to  governments  could  indeed  be  seen  as  circumventing  the  monetary
financing prohibition or threatening its financial or resource independence.
NCB consent and the funding of such new activities would therefore need to be scrutinised.
The  case  law  of  our  adopted  opinions  over  recent  years  in  many  countries  covers  topics  as
diverse  as  buying  paintings,  financing  culture,  education  or  investments  and  the  financing  of
resolution  funds.  We  also  gave  opinions  on  establishing  a  central  register  of  bank  account
numbers;  exercising  asset  management 
insurance  premiums;  protection  of
competition in the mortgage loan market, to name but a few.
functions; 
However, the biggest change in terms of conceptual evolution, strategic thinking and interaction
with different policy fields concerns financial stability and macroprudential policy.
Under  monetary  policy,  the  Treaty  foresees  that  the  ECB  shall  contribute  to  the  policies  of
competent authorities relating to banking supervision and the stability of the financial system. The
Statute lists this as one of the tasks of the ECB. The concept of a financial cycle, as distinct from
the  business  cycle,  was  only  developed  much  later  with  the  increasing  financialisation  of  our
3
economies.
The  emergence  of  this  reality  of  a  financial  cycle  and  its  relation  to  central  banking  was
acknowledged with the establishment of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) at the ECB
and supervisory tasks being conferred on the ECB, including some macroprudential instruments
under the supervisory legislation.
The  monetary  response  to  the  crisis,  with  negative  interest  rates  and  quantitative  easing,
sharpened the focus around who is responsible for financial stability, but numerous tensions are
still unresolved. Since financial systems are largely determined by national features, questions
arise about what should be done at the national level and what at the centralised level.
Who should be responsible for the use of which kinds of instruments?
Other  elements  of  the  multi-dimensional  macroprudential  and  financial  stability  discussions
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
relate  to  the  interaction  with  microprudential  and  monetary  policy  actions,  not  to  speak  of  the
fiscal policy capacity in this respect.
While Alexander  Lamfalussy  as  late  as  1993  still  supported  a  narrow  mandate  for  monetary
policy  to  safeguard  its  independence,  banking  supervision  aside,  just  one  year  later  he  was
claiming that “central banking has never been a static business. Throughout its long history it has
performed  different  tasks  in  different  periods.”  He  also  mentioned  systemic  stability  in  this
context.
But he firmly sees financial stability enshrined in monetary policy. In 2010 under the shadow of
the  crisis  he  called  for  “central  banks  to  not  regard  their  macroprudential  duty  as  being  less
important  than  their  mandate,  to  pursue  price  stability”.  Still,  he  also  saw  risks,  saying:  “The
macroprudential mandate requires for the central bank a type of relationship with, and therefore a
type of independence from the government that is different in substance from the one governing
monetary policy.”
In the past, I have advocated an interpretation of functional independence, distinguishing between
monetary  policy  and  prudential  supervision.  Should  we  also  apply  this  to  macroprudential
supervision, which is currently still mostly enshrined at national level?
A recent discussion on a possible macroprudential stance that is separate from the monetary
policy stance would lend credit to this idea.
On the one hand, it is true that banking systems will remain determined by national features for
as long as banking union is not completed and the sovereign-bank nexus still exists. On the other
hand,  monetary  policy  supports 
through
unconventional measures.
Challenges ahead: the interaction of monetary policy with macroprudential policies
the  credit  cycle  euro  area-wide,  particularly 
While  a  stronger  systemic  orientation  is  essential  if  financial  stability  is  to  be  assured,  the
definition of the problem to be solved is still blurred. Even if we can agree on a macroprudential
objective, such as increased resilience of the financial system, we are still failing to measure the
goal  or  define  an  operational  target.  Moreover,  there  remains  a  need  to  clarify  the  range  of
available  tools,  calibrate  the  balance  between  rules  and  discretion,  and  clarify  governance
arrangements, both nationally and internationally, as well as the potential interaction with other
policy areas.
Many  believe  that  central  banks  are  best  equipped  to  do  this  job.  In  pursuing  their  goal  of
preserving price stability, central banks are attentive to the evolution of real and financial markets,
they are familiar with the credit and banking channel and their institutional independence shields
them from political interference.
However, as central bankers we have to perform our tasks with the utmost responsibility. Before
adjusting the conceptual framework underpinning possible policy action, we need tested, robust
analyses.
In macroprudential policy we still lack this certainty that would allow for a macroprudential stance
that is similar but different to monetary policy.
We  have  no  consensus  on  the  definition  and  measurement  of  the  objective.  So  how  can  we
identify clear and well-defined policy goals linked to metrics and potential target levels?
In the absence of a proper understanding of the transmission channels of different instruments
and their potential interactions and spillovers, how can we credibly discharge our accountability
requirements?
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
At this stage, the conceptual foundations lack the robustness to pursue a standalone or non-
quantified objective with instruments that have unknown consequences based on assumptions
and models full of unobservable factors and multidimensional equilibria.
Another open question in the European context addresses the level of governance and decision-
making. Since we cannot measure risk or define resilience, how are we to distribute competence
between the national level and the currency area level, or even the EU as a whole?
Currently,  country-specific  features  of  financial  cycles  certainly  exist  due  to  national  financial
systems and institutional, legal and fiscal frameworks. Financial booms and asset price bubbles
indeed often occur within national borders, in spite of a union-wide single monetary policy stance.
But is deeper integration and Banking Union not around the corner?
At  the  national  level,  the  institutional  architectures  are  a  patchwork,  the  use  of  instruments  a
“Tower of Babel”. I doubt that adding an additional European layer without a clear view of who is
in charge with what instruments and for what objective will advance the issue.
While modesty is advisable in the context of macroprudential ambitions, monetary policy has the
more stable conceptual framework. And through our “two pillar strategy”, which takes account of
real economic developments and money and credit, monetary policy is able to integrate financial
stability  concerns.  By  doing  so,  the  ECB  can  assess  the  longer-term  implications  for  future
4
inflation and economic growth.
Conclusions
Fast-moving times sometimes require adjustments. Central banks are not excluded from this.
Sometimes minor amendments are sufficient, like the introduction of a rotation scheme across
the larger currency union. Other changes might call for bigger reforms – as the financial crisis
painfully highlighted. But often conceptual pendulums swing too far.
While  ambition  is  justified  to  acknowledge  the  importance  of  financial  stability,  humility  is
warranted  when  it  comes  to  policy  conclusions.  The  time  is  not  ripe  for  an  operationalized
standalone macroprudential approach – inside or outside the central bank.
Completing  the  European  deposit  insurance  scheme  (EDIS)  and  the  banking  union,  making
progress with the capital markets union and deepening economic and monetary union will lead to
a  financial  cycle  that  is  less  determined  by  national  structures.  So  the  most  efficient  level  at
which to address these issues will change. But that would not, in and of itself, warrant a separate
institution  making  separate  financial  stability  decisions  and  complicating  the  tasks  of  existing
institutions.
In any case, the monetary policy function will need to be closely involved, and is probably best
placed  to  contribute  to  the  development  of  a  more  robust  conceptual  framework.  This  is  a
precondition  for  operationalising  a  macroprudential  stance  that  would  do  more  than  just
neutralise an efficient and effective monetary policy stance.
Until these preconditions are met, the best solution is to integrate financial stability concerns into
monetary  policy  at  the  European  level  –  including  possible  corrections  with  instruments  at
national levels.
Such a transitional equilibrium is, however, subject to necessary changes depending on three
factors:
1.  Deeper knowledge of the determinants of the financial cycle.
2.  Better understanding of macroprudential transmission mechanisms and policy instruments’
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
consequences, taking into account the institutional evolution of European integration.
3.  A  continuous  reassessment  of  the  evolution  of  the  monetary  policy  toolbox  and  the
consequences of its use for the financial cycle.
1
2
3
4
Mandelbrot, B. and Hudson, R. (2004), The (Mis)behaviour of Markets: A Fractal View of Financial Turbulence, p.
298.
For background information, see: Oesterreichische Nationalbank (2005), “The European Integration Process: A
Changing Environment for National Central Banks”, Proceedings of OeNB Workshops, No 7, 21 October.
See  de  Larosière,  J.  (2018), Les 10 préjugés qui nous mènent au désastre économique et financier,  Odile
Jacob, Paris.
See Issing, O. (2003), “Monetary and financial stability – is there are trade-off?”, speech at the conference on
“Monetary Stability, Financial Stability and the Business Cycle”, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, 28–29
March.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
