Øystein Olsen: Economic perspectives
Address by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to foreign
embassy representatives, Oslo, 8 April 2019.
Accompanying slides of the speech.
Your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
 Firsts of all, I would like to thank you for taking the time to attend this event, which provides me
with an opportunity to present Norges Bank’s view of the economic situation and some of the
challenges ahead.
International economic cooperation is creaking
Throughout  history,  technological  innovation  and  increased  trade  in  goods  and  services  have
been important sources of growth and development. The two driving forces have functioned in
tandem. Trade barriers have been reduced in recent decades. Faster transport and advanced
communications  systems  have  greatly  facilitated  access  to  broader  markets.  Global  value
chains  have  emerged,  and  service  providers  can  be  located  far  from  customers.  With  free-
flowing capital, we can invest globally.
Chart: World trade has grown markedly
Since  the  1970s,  world  trade  has  grown  rapidly. As  a  percentage  of  world  GDP,  international
trade has almost doubled. A number of new countries have also increased their share in world
trade.
A more closely integrated world economy has facilitated specialisation, innovation and better use
of  local  resources.  The  room  for  exchanging  ideas  and  knowledge  has  expanded.  Increased
competition and innovation have gone hand in hand.
Chart: Trade gives Norway opportunities
Efficient global trade is particularly advantageous for small open economies, like Norway. Norway
has benefitted greatly from the opportunities afforded by trade with other countries.
It is almost impossible to imagine today’s welfare level without the specialisation brought about
thanks to a world of open borders. Norway exports a limited range of goods and services to the
world market. This allows us to finance imports of numerous finished goods, which are cheaper
than  if  we  had  manufactured  them  at  home.  Labour  is  thereby  freed  up  for  use  in  education,
health and other services.
Access to capital and technology abroad has enabled us to develop new industries based on
domestic natural resources. Hydropower and the oil industry are prime examples. We now invest
our petroleum wealth in capital markets. The Government Pension Fund Global (GPFG) allows
Norway to take a share in global value added.
We need other countries – more than they need us.
The foundation for today’s global trade cooperation was laid in the years following the Second
World  War.  Institutions  such  as  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  fostered  closer  economic
cooperation between countries. The ratification of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT) marked the beginning of a gradual reduction of tariff barriers, which culminated in a rule-
based, multinational trade system under the aegis of the World Trade Organization (WTO).
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
History has shown that the trend towards a more open and liberal world order can reverse, as
seen in the interwar period. This may now be happening again.
Brexit, the UK’s exit from the EU is the first major setback for European integration in several
decades.
The scaling back of tariffs has stopped, and new tariff barriers are being erected. At the same
time, the WTO’s position has weakened, making it more difficult both to resolve disagreements
and carry out needed regulatory reforms.
Last  year  was  marked  by  trade  tensions  between  the  United  States  and  China.  The  United
States raised tariffs on a range of imports, and China retaliated in kind.
Protectionism means reduced growth capacity, putting at risk the gains brought about by open
borders. If the world enters a new period of rising trade barriers, a prime engine of growth and
development may lose its momentum.
The most serious consequences of new tariff barriers will be faced by developing countries. The
WTO has more than 160 member countries. Many of the new countries have experienced rapid
growth. Substantial technological and economic gaps have been reduced. Living standards have
improved for large population groups.
But not everyone has reaped the gains associated with globalisation and trade. Some have lost.
Inequalities  have  widened.  This  explains  to  a  large  extent  the  opposition  to  globalisation  and
international cooperation.
Chart: China exports more advanced products
The  current  trade  tensions  are  also  about  power  and  influence.  Many  Asian  countries  are
emerging  as  important  drivers  of  the  digital  economy.  China  is  rapidly  adopting  artificial
intelligence and using big data. Exports are shifting from simple to more complex products.
China  is  now  the  world’s  next  largest  economy   and  is  competing  with  advanced  western
countries  in  many  arenas.  This  has  prompted  discussions  about  market  access,  intellectual
property rights and trade balances.
1
Global economic integration is not straightforward, but the shortcomings in today’s framework for
global trade must be dealt with through reform and not increased protectionism. New barriers will
not help poor regions or those that have been left behind in western economies.
For Norway, exports of goods and services account for more than a third of GDP. Norwegian
businesses  are  part  of  global  value  chains.  This  means  that  protectionist  measures  can  spill
over into the Norwegian economy even if Norway is not directly targeted.
Chart: We trade mostly with the EU
The international framework and trade agreements we have with other countries are essential to
the Norwegian economy. The EEA agreement is of particular importance.
Thanks  to  the  free  flow  of  goods,  services,  labour  and  capital  within  the  EEA  area,  Norway’s
domestic market is about 100 times bigger than it would have been otherwise. A good half of our
trade  with  other  countries  is  with  EU  countries  (Chart  5).  Common  regulations  and  product
standardisation facilitate market access for Norwegian firms.
Norwegian  business  and  industry  may  soon  feel  the  consequences  of  Brexit.  The  UK  is  an
important trading partner. The UK’s exit from the EU means it will also exit the EEA agreement,
creating uncertainty for many firms.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
At  the  same  time,  international  economic  cooperation  is  creaking.  In  the  years  ahead,  the
multilateral  trade  system  is  at  risk  of  being  undermined,  which  may  leave  us  with  a  more
fragmented system. This may adversely affect small countries in particular. In that situation, it
would be injudicious for Norway to compromise its current agreements with Europe.
Climate change requires structural adjustments
The world needs more cooperation, not less. We are facing a climate crisis that can only be
addressed by engaging in a common global effort.
Last year’s report from the UN climate panel was alarming. If work to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions is not intensified, global warming could spin out of control. A warmer planet will have
serious consequences.
Major changes in production methods and consumption patterns are needed in order to mitigate
global  warming.  Measures  taken  must  lead  to  concrete  reductions  in  global  emissions  and
should be cost-efficient.
Emissions pricing is essential to reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The polluter must pay.
The  consequences  of  not  having  applied  this  principle  at  a  global  level  are  now  coming  into
evidence. To quote one of last year’s Nobel laureates in economics, William D. Nordhaus: “The
result  is  too  much  burning  of  fossil  fuels,  too  much  climate  change,  and  too  many  harms  to
2
humans, wildlife, ecosystems, and more.”
It is a demanding task to put into place adequate measures. The gains from lower emissions are
shared by all - also by those who do not contribute. This creates a free-rider problem both at the
global and national level. Moreover, there is opposition to environmental taxes, not only among
low-income groups. Subsidies and support are more readily embraced – and thus tend to be
favoured by policy-makers even if their effect on global emissions often does not justify the cost.
An  international  emissions  trading  system  could  ensure  equal  pricing  of  emissions  across
countries and sectors. At a global level we have not reached this goal, but important progress is
being made.
The EU Emissions Trading System and national taxes together cover much of the greenhouse
gas  emissions  in  Europe.  In  Norway,  over  80  percent  of  these  emissions  are  covered  by
emission allowances or taxes.
Chart: Higher prices for European CO2 emissions
The price of emission allowances in the EU has long been so low that the emissions trading
system has been of marginal consequence. But allowances are now being removed from the
market. This has led to a fivefold price rise. The system is beginning to work.
The  shift  towards  a  greener  and  more  sustainable  economy  places  heavy  demands  on
businesses and investors, but also creates opportunities.
Technological  advances  and  innovation  are  necessary  for  achieving  more  sustainable
economies. Economic instruments such as emission allowances and taxes make the quest for
new solutions profitable. Climate policy has already led to rapid progress in the area of solar,
wind and battery technology. Old, polluting equipment is gradually being replaced by new, cleaner
and greener technology.
At  the  same  time,  climate  change  entails  new  risks  for  business  and  industry.  Climate  risks
include the impact of climate change, uncertainty surrounding future climate policy and potential
disruptive technologies.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Expected return and risk are influenced by firms’ response to potential structural changes. That
is  why  many  investors  require  companies  to  report  on  climate  issues,  as  has  the  GPFG.
Managing climate risk is part of the systematic work in the area of responsible investment.
Financial investors must manage climate risk on a par with other risks. Virtually all economic
activities lead to emissions, either directly or from complex production chains. Climate risks are
therefore difficult to isolate and quantify, both at firm and sector level.
Identifying the winners in the green transition is also a demanding exercise.
The financial sector has to adapt to climate risk, but does not have effective tools to contribute to
solving  the  climate  problem.  Also,  it  is  doubtful  whether  defining  emissions  from  sectors  or
individual  businesses  as  unethical  will  make  a  difference.  The  responsibility  for  measures  to
combat global warming must rest with the authorities. The solution lies in economic instruments
that promote structural change.
Structural change generates growth
A shift in consumption patterns and production methods towards lower emissions will reduce
demand  for  fossil  fuels.  This  can  influence  oil  and  gas  activities  in  Norway.  We  have  always
known  that  oil  and  gas  activities  will  be  phased  out  sooner  or  later.  Oil  and  gas  are  non-
renewable resources. A stricter global climate policy may mean that this will occur sooner than
foreseen earlier.
Chart: Important role for Norwegian gas
But Norwegian oil and gas production will, most likely, remain profitable for quite some time. The
supply of clean energy is still limited. Today, coal accounts for a large share of global energy
demand. Demand for natural gas may increase as countries move towards a greener economy.
In Germany and Poland, phasing out coal faster than planned is being discussed. Norwegian gas
can play an important role in a transition phase.
There  is  still  global  demand  for  oil  and  gas.  If  we  reduce  production  on  the  Norwegian  shelf
earlier  than  planned,  other  suppliers  are  ready  to  take  over.  The  climate  impact  of  an  earlier
reduction would therefore be marginal, while the costs to Norway would be substantial.
The oil industry has been an economic engine for Norway for close to 50 years. The revenues
from this industry have improved the welfare of today’s citizens and the citizens of tomorrow.
The  spillover  effects  from  the  oil  sector  to  the  wider  Norwegian  economy  are  substantial.
Throughout  our  country  there  are  oil-related  jobs  to  be  found.  More  than  10  percent  of  all
3
employed  persons  in  Norway  are  either  directly  or  indirectly  working  for  the  oil  industry.
Innovation and skills development in the industry have also benefitted other sectors.
The  oil  industry  has  been  through  a  demanding  period  of  personnel  cuts,  cost  savings  and
rationalisation. The restructuring in the industry that was already underway became even more
pressing when oil prices collapsed in 2014. Today, oil companies are hiring again, and will likely
continue to do so in the coming years. But we must be prepared for a time when the industry is
no longer expanding, but gradually declining, and we will need growth in other industries.
The business sector must drive structural change and innovation, but the authorities can provide
favourable  operating  conditions  to  promote  an  innovative  and  sustainable  business  sector.
Norway ranks high on the ease of doing business index , supported by solid institutions, a high
degree of confidence and a solid welfare system.
4
History has shown that Norwegian business and industry have a strong capacity to adapt. Many
of today’s oil service operators had a long history in other industries before moving into the oil
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
sector. A prime example is the shipbuilding industry, which faced a sharp drop in demand for
ships in the 1970s. The industry had resources and skills that could be reoriented to production
of platforms and other inputs in the oil industry.
Companies in other industries have also seen the opportunities afforded by new technology or
changes in operating conditions
Chart: Employment shifts towards services
Norway’s  industry  is  undergoing  structural  changes.  In  the  past  decades,  the  manufacturing
industry  has  continued  to  decline,  reflecting  increased  automation  and  relocation  abroad.
Increased  prosperity  has  generated  more  demand  for  both  private  and  public  services.
Employment has shifted towards the service sector.
Chart: High productivity in retail sales
The service industry has reaped gains in the form of increased productivity through restructuring
and adoption of new technology. The banking industry was among the first to do so. The retail
trade  sector  has  grown  in  recent  decades  without  any  notable  increase  in  employment.
Productivity growth has been high. Use of new technology and the shift away from private shops
to  chain  stores  have  reduced  distribution  and  administration  costs.  Digital  technology  is  now
driving yet another shift, towards online shopping.
In other areas, intermediaries are changing or disappearing. Travel, cinema tickets and doctor
appointments  are  bought  or  made  online.  Government  agencies,  banks  and  insurance
companies are offering more and more do-it-yourself online services.
Restructuring involves job losses, with potentially painful consequences for those affected. But
over time labour is made available for employment in other better-paid jobs, generating gains in
the form of cheaper goods and services. Structural change is the basis for growth and welfare.
Monetary stability
Let me turn to the current situation and outlook for the Norwegian economy.
Chart: Stronger upturn in the Norwegian economy
In September 2018, Norges Bank raised the policy rate for the first time in seven years, reflecting
the favourable developments in the Norwegian economy. In March this year, the bank raised the
policy rate further. The rate is now at 1 percent.
Growth in the Norwegian economy has been solid since autumn 2016. Employment has risen,
and unemployment has declined. The global upturn, higher oil prices and low interest rates have
contributed  to  pushing  up  growth.  After  falling  sharply  for  several  years,  investment  on  the
Norwegian shelf and oil service exports expanded last year.
A number of signs indicate that capacity utilisation has continued to rise in recent months. The
number  of  employed  persons  as  share  of  the  working-age  population  has  increased,  and
unemployment has drifted down further. There is also an increase in the number of enterprises
reporting capacity constraints.
Chart: Inflation has risen
Consumer price inflation has increased over the past year, partly reflecting higher wage growth.
Tighter labour market conditions suggest that wage growth will increase further.
The risk outlook is dominated in particular by the global developments mentioned. Over the past
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
year,  rising  protectionism  and  political  uncertainty  have  weighted  on  global  growth.  The  UK’s
relations with the EU have yet to be clarified. If trade tensions deepen, growth among trading
partners may be lower than projected. At the same time, the krone may remain weak, if global
uncertainty persist.
The target for monetary policy is annual consumer price inflation of close to 2 percent over time.
Inflation targeting shall be forward-looking and flexible, so that it can contribute to high and stable
output and employment and to countering the build-up of financial imbalances.
At  its  meeting  in  March,  the  Executive  Board  noted  that  the  monetary  stance  in  Norway  is
accommodative. Underlying inflation is a little higher than the inflation target. Capacity utilisation
appears to be slightly above a normal level. The upturn in the Norwegian economy is expected to
continue, partly fuelled by strong pick-up in investment on the Norwegian shelf in 2019. Further
out, lower growth abroad and a decline in petroleum investment will weigh on growth.
Chart: The Executive Board’s assessment and interest rate forecast
The Board decided at the meeting to raise the policy rate to 1 percent. The assessment of the
outlook  and  the  balance  of  risks  suggested  that  the  policy  rate  will  most  likely  be  increased
further in the course of the next half-year.
Conclusion
To wrap up, globalisation, digitalisation and structural changes are facets of the same long-term
trend – we are in the midst of a technology-driven growth process that encompasses much of
the world. It is easy to focus on the negatives, but we must also keep our eyes fixed on the big
picture: never before have so many taken part in a journey with such a great leap in prosperity.
But  growth  is  unevenly  distributed.  The  winners  in  global  competition  are  reaping  substantial
rewards,  while  broad  categories  of  wage  earners  in  the  traditional  industrial  economies  have
been left behind. The harmful effects of rising inequality must be taken seriously. We, the grown-
ups, should also listen to the message sent from our youngsters. They demand that the world’s
leaders take the climate threat seriously and put in place efficient climate policies.
Let’s  hope  that  trends  that  now  appear  to  be  leading  us  in  the  wrong  direction  can  change
course.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
Based on GDP at market rates.
Nordhaus, W. D. (2018): Speech delivered at the Nobel Banquet in Stockholm, 10 December 2018.
Blomgren, A. et al (2015) “Industribyggerne 2015” . IRIS Report 2015/031 (Norwegian only).
World Bank “Ease of doing business index”. data.worldbank.org/indicator/IC.BUS.EASE.XQ
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
