Olli  Rehn:  The  euro  beyond  20  -  monetary  policy  in  the  real
economy
Keynote speech by Mr Olli Rehn, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Conference on financial
market policy, at the Economic Council (CDU Wirtschaftsrat Deutschland), Berlin, 29 January
2019.
 Accompanying slides of the speech.
Meine sehr geehrten Damen und Herren, Liebe Freunde,
Berlin ist immer eine Reise wert!
Es  ist  schön,  wieder  einmal  in  der  deutschen  Hauptstadt  zu  sein.  Ich  danke  dem  CDU
Wirtschaftsrat sehr herzlich für die Einladung. Es ist mir eine große Freude und Ehre, heute zu
Ihnen sprechen zu dürfen. Als Sohn eines Kleinunternehmers liegt mir der Gedanke der sozialen
Marktwirtschaft des Wirtschaftsrats sehr am Herzen.
Aber lassen Sie mich von der Muttersprache Goethes, Ludwig Erhards, sowie auch der von Gerd
Müller und Franz Beckenbauer – übrigens den Helden meiner Jugend! – in  die Muttersprache
von  Shakespeare,  Adam  Smith,  Bobby  Moore  und  Gary  Lineker  wechseln.  Das  ist  etwas
praktischer für meine Rede – und insbesondere für ihre Geduld!
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
As  the  euro  turned  twenty  at  the  beginning  of  this  year,  it  is  logical  to  have  a  look  at  the  two
decades, and to prepare for the third decade of the monetary union that has now started. After
all,  it  is  our  clarity  of  vision  and  sense  of  purpose,  as  Europeans,  as  citizens  and  decision-
makers, which will determine how the future of the monetary union turns out.     
In my remarks today, I will discuss the challenges the monetary policy makers face, with an eye
on the future of the euro. I will not talk about monetary policy only in a narrow sense, as we need
to discuss our monetary concerns in a broader context of economic and political developments.
In this context, let me quote Joseph Schumpeter, one of the greatest economists of all time, who
wrote: “Der Zustand des Geldwesens eines Volkes ist ein Symptom aller seiner Zustände.” ["The
condition  of  the  monetary  system  of  a  nation  is  a  symptom  of  all  its  conditions."]  –  What
Schumpeter said about a nation, goes today as well for Europe as a whole, for our Economic
and Monetary Union. What happens to our money, is a reflection of the state of our union and its
economy.  So we have to take a broad view.
Monetary  policy  has  its  own  mandate  in  economic  life,  but  it  cannot  solve  all  the  world’s
problems. However, monetary policy and economic success are interdependent: price stability is
a  necessary  condition,  although  not  a  guarantee, 
for  sound  economic  development.
Simultaneously,  the  real  economy  together  with  political  developments  determines  the
preconditions for successful monetary policy. As Schumpeter understood, if the economic and
political fundamentals are weak, that will be felt in the monetary developments as well.  
The interaction of real and monetary factors brings me to the following point: Central bankers are
often labelled as either hawks or doves. I don’t see this as a very useful classification. It is almost
a caricature of one-eyed dogmatism, not fitting to any serious central banker that I know of.
Instead,  a  more  relevant  distinction  was  made  by  the  philosopher  Isaiah  Berlin,  who  divided
policymakers to foxes and hedgehogs: “the fox knows many things and the hedgehog knows one
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
big thing”.  
In monetary policy, pursuing the price stability objective with long-term consistency and resolve
calls for the central banker to develop a personality of the hedgehog.
But  monetary  policy  is  not  a  mechanical  exercise  that  can  be  done  in  a  social  vacuum.  A
strategic sense of the interplay between the economy and politics, the markets and the media is
also essential – knowing when to play offensive, when to hold on to defence, and how to combine
the two. By being aware of the big picture, and capable to navigate in uncertain seas, central
bankers should be foxes, as well.
So, monetary policy must always take into account the analysis of the prevailing situation in the
real economy, in enterprises and the society at large, recognizing its challenges and how they
relate to the commitment and responsibility that central banks have for monetary stability.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Our present starting point has both positive and negative features.
On the positive side, the recovery of the euro area after the financial crisis has lasted for almost
six years now. We should appreciate the achievements: the number of jobs in the euro area has
now passed the pre-crisis peak of 2008, and the unemployment rate is continuing to fall. Over 9
million jobs have been created since 2013. There has also been a significant improvement in
public finances of the euro area as a whole, and also the bank balance sheets are now stronger
than before.
On the negative side, the convergence of the euro area price developments to our price stability
objective  is  incomplete.  For  that  reason,  we  still  face  the  challenge  of  monetary  policy
normalization  after  a  decade  with  non-standard  measures.  Hence,  we  continue  to  aim  at
stabilizing inflation back to the target of “below but close to 2 per cent in the medium term”, so
that  we  would  be  able  to  ensure  ourselves  with  “policy  space”,  and  thus  be  able  to  react  to
deflationary as well as inflationary shocks, by moving our interest rates as needed.
Such  policy  space  would  require  higher  interest  rates  on  average  than  today,  which  will  be
possible when the European economy can sustain a clearly higher real interest rate than now, or
when we see sustained convergence of inflation to the ECB’s definition of price stability, or both.
The context has become more difficult recently. As you know, uncertainty about the future of the
European  recovery  has  increased  in  the  last  months  –  the  risks  to  the  growth  outlook  have
moved to the downside. This is largely because of the weakening of the global economic cycle,
which is felt in European exports, also in Germany. The shadow of global trade conflicts and
protectionism is hanging over the European recovery.
Not all risks are external, however: political uncertainties within Europe have increased. A messy
Brexit,  the  worries  about  Italian  fiscal  policy,  and  the  recent  French  unrest,  are  among  the
sources of this uncertainty.  
All in all, my analysis is that the current situation requires patience and persistence in removing
the monetary policy accommodation. Perhaps paradoxically, this is necessary precisely in order
to reach higher interest rates in the future in a durable way. If we were to tighten monetary policy
too soon, the interest rate increases might turn out to be unsustainable, and we might end up
being stuck back in the ultra-low interest rate situation for even longer time than otherwise.
Of course, we should not wait for too long either: an unnecessarily long period of inaction could
trigger financial stability issues that the low interest rate environment may bring about, such over-
indebtedness in some sectors; increases in real estate prices or other market segments; and
the squeeze on banks’ interest rate margins.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
And, of course, if we were to wait for too long, inflation might eventually accelerate too much,
which  would  require  applying  the  monetary  policy  brakes  harder  than  otherwise  would  be
necessary.
This patient approach is reflected in the current forward guidance of the ECB monetary policy, by
which  the  interest  rates  will  remain  at  the  present  levels  as  long  as  necessary  to  ensure  the
sustained convergence of inflation to levels consistent with our definition of price stability; and the
reinvestment  phase  of  our  bond  purchase  programme  will  continue  for  an  extended  period
beyond the first increases of the ECB policy rates. 
Forward guidance has been a very important instrument in the ECB policy toolbox in the recent
years.  A  key  reason  for  having  a  clearly  communicated  strategy  for  monetary  policy  is  the
management of expectations of general price developments among economic actors. This is so
on  many  grounds,  not  least  because  inflation  expectations  are  the  most  important  immediate
determinant  of  actual  inflation.  The  effect  is  so  strong  that  it  is  often  said  that  inflation
expectations tend to be “self-fulfilling”.
Over the last five years, however, the connection between the ECB’s price stability objective and
the expectations has been weaker than it should be. I have elsewhere previously expressed my
view that it would be wise to make a thorough analytical review of the monetary policy strategy of
the  ECB,  in  order  to  strengthen  our  ability  to  stabilize  the  expectations,  and  to  improve  our
accountability and transparency even further. I would like to reiterate this view also here.
 As I pointed out at the beginning, monetary policy is not made in isolation from the rest of the
economy.  In  particular,  successful  monetary  policy  needs  financial  stability  and  healthy
economic fundamentals.
The most fundamental challenge has to do with the real economy – to revitalize investment and
productivity in the euro area countries. The economic potential of our enterprises and workers
must be unleashed and developed.
This is of paramount importance for the well-being of our citizens, but it is also absolutely crucial
for  solving  the  monetary  and  financial  problems  that  we  still  have,  even  ten  years  after  the
financial  crisis.  The  real  interest  rate  that  is  sustainable  in  the  long  run  is  determined  by  the
growth of productivity and the demand for investment in the European economy.
I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  entrepreneurial  drive  and  long-term  orientation  of  the  German
Mittelstand sets an important example for the business life all across Europe, an example that
could help to strengthen the foundations of European productivity and competitiveness.  
Climate change is not only an existential threat to our planet but also reinforces the urgency of
Europe’s economic renewal. The transition of our economies to sustainability calls for both right
incentives and plenty of investment. And turning big time to renewable energy – which is going on
in Finland, in Germany and all over Europe – is also a major opportunity for businesses, which
has  to  be  enabled  by  consistent  public  policy.  The  central  banks  in  the  Eurosystem  are
committed to climate policy and support the ongoing work for removing the obstacles holding
back sustainable finance and the disclosure of climate-related risks.
Another  structural  challenge  is  to  improve    financial  stability  in  the  monetary  union.  The  most
critical lesson of the two past decades was how important financial stability is for real economy
and employment. It has become clear that financial stability was grossly disregarded when the
Economic and Monetary Union was created – it was the ”neglected stepchild” of Maastricht, as
the economist Daniel Gros has put it.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Going  forward,  there  are  several  initiatives  already  on  the  table,  including  those  by  Germany,
France, and the European Commission. In my view the manifesto of 14 German and French
economists, published last year, is a particularly substantive and important contribution.
The  manifesto  proposed  a  synthesis  uniting  the  core  principles  of  ”German”  economic
philosophy, which calls for a stability union with sound incentives and firm rules, and those of
”French”  economic  thinking,  which  emphasizes  economic  governance  with  insurance  and
stabilization.
In essence, such genuinely European synthesis could pave the way for a solid stability union,
where the main responsibility for economic policies should rest with the member states. This
responsibility  can  and  should  be  balanced  with  the  insurance  provided  by  stronger  common
structures, designed especially to safeguard financial stability.
For  example,  the  European  Council  of  last  December  decided  to  create  a  credible  liquidity
backstop  for  the  Single  Resolution  Fund,  to  ensure  that  bank  resolutions  could  be  effectively
managed without recourse to the politically damaging bail-outs at taxpayers’ expense.
Finalizing the banking union also calls for a common European Deposit Insurance Scheme to
prevent cross-border bank runs that could be dangerously destabilizing for the banking systems.
These remaining elements require convincing measures of risk reduction and possibly some co-
insurance features to be feasible politically. In particular, legacy problems in the banking sector
should be worked out in the member states, without shifting the risks to the euro area level.
A  further  area  where  work  is  needed  is  in  the  governance  of  the  fiscal  policy  of  the  member
states.  There  has  been  tension  between  reliance  on  market  discipline  and  budgetary  rules.
However, the dichotomy between rules and market discipline is overstated. Both are needed. At
best, rules and market discipline support and complement each other.
The obvious lesson is that the institutions and incentives have to be designed so that they help
orientate the market forces to meaningful directions – you may call it ‘market discipline by design’
– an idea that immediately brings to mind the economic thinking of Ludwig Erhard, the architect
of the German social market economy.
So we need fiscal rules, and they should be well designed. The European Union fiscal framework
can be amended to emphasise national ownership of fiscal rules and to avoid forced pro-cyclical
fiscal policy.
 This analysis of the institutional challenges brings us into the realm of democratic politics and the
development of the EU as an organization.
The EU is a union of democratic states. It is the citizens’ preferences and trust that count when
the future of the monetary union is decided.
Today, the Enlightenment values, which underpin the European societal model, are challenged,
both  politically  and  socially,  both  from  the  inside  and  the  outside.  Politically,  a  populist  and
nationalist agenda is tempting to many. Socially, the values of tolerance, social market economy
and inclusivity are increasingly under threat.
On the other hand, let us recall that the Europeans value their single currency. According to a
fresh  Eurobarometer  survey ,  as  many  as  77  %  of  euro  area  citizens  support  the  Monetary
Union and the euro. This is the highest figure since 2004. Only 18 % of the citizens of the area
say they are against. In Finland, the percentage of those “for” was even higher, altogether 80 per
cent; in Germany as high as 83 %.
1
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
This support for the common currency is of course conditional. It depends on the stability of the
euro and its performance. Moreover, in any member state, the support for the euro also depends
on how successful the economic policy in that particular country is in adjusting the economy to
the requirements of life within the monetary union.
There  is  a  reason  why  eurozone  reform  is  anything  but  a  technical  matter.  It  is  linked  to  the
overall future of the EU.
First  and  foremost,  we  need  a  monetary  union  that  is  capable  of  delivering  on  the  promises
made to our citizens — promises of financial stability, sustainable growth, and opportunity for
employment.
As Joseph Schumpeter said, money is a reflection of the condition of our economy and our polity.
Looking  from  that  angle,  reinforcing  the  monetary  union  is  an  integral  part  of  a  broader
endeavour to strengthen Europe.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
This is of paramount importance especially today, when the international role of Europe as a key
standard-bearer of democracy and the rules-based international order has become even more
essential than it may have been some years ago.
For politicians, my message is: instead of using political energy for drawing red lines to agitate
the home audience, we’d do better by pursuing positive goals of reform and focusing on building
bridges across Europe.
A stronger Europe and a more stable monetary union are essential for both internal and external
reasons. And these goals can, as in the football field, only be achieved in unity and by teamwork.
This is a vision we can only achieve in dialogue and with support of the citizens of Europe.
Meine Damen und Herren,
Europa  wird  nur  auf  einer  starken  Vision,  durch  Brückenbauen  und  im  engen  Dialog  mit  den
Bürgern erfolgreich aufgebaut.
1
The ”Parlemeter” of October 2018.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
