  A u g u s t   2 9 ,   2 01 9 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
 
 Economic Activity, Prices,   
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Kumamoto 
Hitoshi Suzuki 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
 I. Recent Economic and Price Developments 
A. Developments in Overseas Economies 
I would like to begin my speech by talking about overseas economies. 
 Overseas  economies  have  been  growing  moderately  on  the  whole,  although  the  business 
sentiment  of  manufacturing  firms  has  begun  to  deteriorate  in  advanced  economies  in 
particular,  amid  protectionist  trade  policy  in  some  countries  and  the  heightening  of 
geopolitical risks, as well as the accompanying uncertainty regarding global financial markets. 
Slowdowns are expected to continue for the time being, but overseas economies are likely to 
grow moderately on the whole thereafter with the growth rates rising somewhat, partly due 
to the effects of economic stimulus measures, such as in China, and the progress in global 
adjustments in IT-related goods. 
 Let  me  take  a  look  at  developments  by  major  region.  Regarding  the  U.S.  economy,  while 
trade  friction,  particularly  with  China,  seems  to  have  been  having  a  negative  effect  on 
momentum in manufacturing firms, nonmanufacturing firms have been showing resilience. 
In  a  favorable  employment  and  income  situation,  the  economy  is  likely  to  maintain  its 
moderate  expansion,  partly  underpinned  by  expansionary  fiscal  measures,  as  the  Federal 
Reserve  has  implemented  monetary  policy  measures  that  take  into  consideration  the 
downside risks to economic activity and prices. 
 The European economy has been decelerating, as seen, for example, in the slowdown in the 
pace of increase in business fixed investment with heightened uncertainty over economic and 
political developments.  Potential downside risks to economic activity are trend changes in 
global  financial  markets,  geopolitical  developments,  and  considerable  uncertainty  over 
political developments, such as the  outcome of negotiations on the United Kingdom's exit 
from the European Union (EU). 
 The Chinese economy has continued to see stable growth on the whole, but some weakness 
has been observed in manufacturing firms. An estimate by the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) suggests that, if the U.S.-China trade friction intensifies, the growth rate of the Chinese 
economy  for 2020 could slow by around 1 percent. Although uncertainty remains,  if trade 
1 
 friction with the United States heads toward a settlement, the stability of the economy is likely 
to be enhanced further as there is growing expectation that the authorities' stimulus measures 
gradually will take effect. 
 Emerging  economies  other  than  China  and  commodity-exporting  economies  are  likely  to 
continue their moderate recovery on the whole. 
 The  view  that  global  growth  rates  will  rise  somewhat  is  consistent  with  the  forecasts  of 
international institutions. For example, according to the July 2019 World Economic Outlook 
Update  released  by  the  IMF,  global  growth  is  forecast  at  levels  exceeding  3.0  percent  for 
2019 and 2020, although the projections for both years were revised downward from those 
made in April 2019 (Chart 1). 
 B. Current Situation of Japan's Economy 
I will now discuss the economic situation in Japan. 
 Japan's economy has been on a moderate expanding trend, with a virtuous cycle from income 
to spending operating, and the output gap has remained positive. In 2018, the real GDP growth 
rate for the July-September quarter was negative, due mainly to the effects of natural disasters. 
Thereafter, however, the rate registered positive growth for three consecutive quarters (Chart 
2). Although exports, production, and business sentiment have been affected by the slowdown 
in overseas economies, the situation does not yet indicate an economic downturn, owing in 
part  to  a  sustained  increasing  trend  in  business  fixed  investment.  Private  consumption  has 
been  increasing  moderately,  albeit  with  fluctuations,  against  the  background  of  an 
improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation.  However,  careful  attention  is 
warranted on future developments, including those prior to and after the consumption tax hike 
scheduled for October 2019. 
 According to the Regional Economic Report released by the Bank of Japan in July 2019, all 
nine regions of Japan reported that their respective economies had been either expanding or 
recovering (Chart 3). The Kyushu-Okinawa region, in which Kumamoto Prefecture is located, 
reported  that  firms'  business  sentiment  generally  remained  at  favorable  levels,  although 
2 
 exports and production were relatively weak on the whole. Housing investment and public 
investment  were  at  high  levels,  and  business  fixed  investment  was  increasing.  Private 
consumption  was  also  increasing  moderately  on  the  back  of  an  improvement  in  the 
employment and income situation. 
 Labor  market  conditions  have  remained  tight  as  Japan's  economy  has  maintained  its 
expanding trend. The unemployment rate has been at a low level of around 2.5 percent, and 
the active job openings-to-applicants ratio has remained at a high level. Firms' perception of 
a  labor  shortage,  suggested  by  the  diffusion  index  for  employment  conditions  in  the  June 
Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), remained at a high level in a 
wide range of industries (Chart 4). Firms in many industries therefore have been proceeding 
proactively with labor-saving investment with a view to utilizing artificial intelligence (AI), 
robotic  process  automation  (RPA),  and  other  technologies.  In  addition  to  developing  a 
working  environment  that  further  encourages  the  labor  participation  of  senior  citizens  and 
women, innovations in areas such as automation and labor-saving technologies are important 
for  the  social  development  of  our  economy  in  dealing  with  demographic  changes  brought 
about by an aging population. 
 Experience suggests that, once this type of business fixed investment begins, including that 
intended for domestic capacity expansion, firms will also proactively consider renewing other 
plants  and  equipment,  thereby  making  it  unlikely  that  demand  for  fixed  investment  will 
decline significantly even in the presence of some uncertainty regarding the economy. Indeed, 
despite previous concern over a drop in business fixed investment, the real GDP growth rates 
for the January-March and April-June quarters of 2019 actually registered quarter-on-quarter 
increases. This  could  be  regarded  as  an  indication of  the  resilience  of  Japan's  economy  to 
downward pressure and uncertainties arising from overseas economies. 
 C. Outlook for Japan's Economy 
Japan's economy is likely to continue on an expanding trend throughout the projection period 
-- that is, through fiscal 2021. 
 3 
 In fiscal 2019, exports are projected to continue showing some weakness for the time being, 
reflecting  the  effects  of  the  slowdown  in  overseas  economies,  and  the  pace  of  increase  in 
business fixed investment is likely to decelerate temporarily, mainly in manufacturing. On 
the  other  hand,  private  consumption  likely  will  increase  as  the  employment  and  income 
situation continues to improve. After the consumption tax hike scheduled for October, private 
consumption and housing investment are likely to be pushed down for some time. However, 
the rate of increase in business fixed investment is expected to rise somewhat, due in part to 
increases  in  investment  related  to  urban  redevelopment  projects  as  well  as  labor-saving 
investment. Public investment is also likely to increase, due mainly to the implementation of 
the supplementary budgets for fiscal 2018 and the promotion of policy measures for national 
resilience. Moreover, exports are projected to return to their moderate increasing trend, with 
overseas economies growing moderately on the whole. 
 Following  a  likely  decline  in  the  second  half  of  fiscal  2019  due  to  the  effects  of  the 
consumption  tax  hike,  private  consumption  and  housing  investment  are  expected  to  head 
gradually  toward  a  recovery  in  fiscal  2020.  The  economy  is  projected  to  be  underpinned 
mainly  by  the  continued  increasing  trend  in  exports,  with  the  growth  rates  of  overseas 
economies rising, and an expansion in public expenditure accompanying the hosting of the 
Olympic  Games  to  be  held  in  Tokyo  in  2020.  Japan's  economy  is  therefore  expected  to 
continue on an expanding trend in fiscal 2020.   
 Moreover, although Olympic Games-related expenditure will have been completed, private 
consumption and housing investment are projected to increase in fiscal 2021, partly because 
the  effects  of  the  decline  in  reaction  to  the  scheduled  consumption  tax  hike  are  likely  to 
dissipate. Meanwhile, exports are projected to continue their moderate increasing trend, and 
business fixed investment is also likely to maintain its moderate uptrend, due in part to a rise 
in the potential growth rate. 
 According  to  the  Bank's  July  2019  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (Outlook 
Report), the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts for the real GDP growth rate are 
0.7 percent, 0.9 percent, and 1.1 percent for fiscal 2019, 2020, and 2021, respectively (Chart 
5).   
4 
 However,  in  considering  the  outlook  for  Japan's  economy,  attention  should  be  paid  to 
considerable  uncertainties  regarding  the  global  economy.  Specifically,  these  include  U.S. 
protectionist moves and responses by its trading partners, developments in negotiations on 
the United Kingdom's exit from the EU, geopolitical risks in regions such as the Middle East 
and consequent fluctuations in crude oil prices, and the risk of a sharp decline in economic 
activity in Europe and China. Moreover, concerns over these risks may give rise to volatility 
in financial markets, which in turn would likely push down the global economy. Given these 
growing downside risks concerning overseas economies in particular, it is necessary to pay 
close attention to developments in firms' and households' sentiment in Japan. 
 D. Prices in Japan 
Next, I will elaborate on price developments in Japan. 
 The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh 
food (core CPI) has been at around 0.5 percent recently (Chart 6). With the price stability 
target set at 2 percent, the Bank has been conducting large-scale monetary easing, but there 
is still some way to go before achieving the target. However, firms have been raising prices 
of a wider range of products recently, and the output gap, which I will touch upon later, has 
remained positive. As these factors suggest, the conditions necessary  for strengthening the 
movement toward price rises in the medium term have begun to be put in place, and thus the 
momentum  toward  achieving  the  price  stability  target  appears  to  have  been  maintained  in 
Japan. 
 I would now like to explain the recent environment surrounding prices from the following 
three  aspects:  human  resources,  tangible  factors  such  as  capital  equipment,  and  intangible 
factors including services prices. 
 1. Human resources 
Let me first explain the environment surrounding prices from the aspect of human resources. 
As I mentioned earlier, Japan's employment situation continues to be tight, as seen in such 
indicators as the unemployment rate and active job openings-to-applicants ratio; it seems that 
5 
 the  labor  market  has  been  close  to  full  employment.  In  such  circumstances,  wages  are 
expected to rise. 
 Wages  have  indeed  been  increasing,  particularly  for  part-time  employees  and  temporary 
workers. However, according to the press release presenting the results of the annual spring 
labor-management  wage  negotiations  in  2019,  as  compiled  by  the  Japanese  Trade  Union 
Confederation (Rengo), the year-on-year rate of increase in wages of Rengo union members, 
including  the  amount  equivalent  to  regular  pay  hikes,  remained  at  around  2.0  percent  -- 
marking  the  same  level  as  that  of  2018.  Likewise,  while  base  pay  has  risen  for  a  sixth 
consecutive year, the negotiation results of firms for which base pay data were available for 
aggregation showed that the rate of increase was limited to around 0.5 percent. Moreover, the 
Japan Business Federation (Keidanren) revealed that the 2019 summer bonus payments of 
large firms fell below those of the previous year for the first time in two years. 
 Given  the  projected  decline  in  Japan's  labor  force,  there  is  a  risk  of  labor  shortages 
intensifying. Thus, firms are expected to invest in their human resources wherever necessary 
through more proactive wage increases, so as to maintain their  production levels. Through 
such  wage  increases,  the  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending  will  be  enhanced,  and 
inflation expectations of households and firms will rise. 
 2. Tangible factors 
Next, I will explain the tangible factors that affect prices. The Bank estimates the output gap, 
which is the economic measure of the difference between aggregate demand (actual output) 
of the economy and average supply capacity (potential output) that is smoothed out for the 
business  cycle.  According  to  this  estimate,  the  output  gap  has  remained  positive  for  10 
consecutive quarters since the October-December quarter of 2016, due to the contribution of 
the  tangible  factor  of  a  rise  in  capital  utilization  rates,  in  addition  to  the  human  resources 
factor of the steady tightening of labor market conditions, which I explained earlier (Chart 7). 
This suggests that capital utilization also has been exerting upward pressure on prices. 
 3. Intangible factors 
Lastly, in explaining the intangible factors that affect prices, such as the cost of services, I 
6 
 would  like  to  touch  on  communication  charges  for  mobile  phones  and  the  so-called  koto 
consumption. This type of consumption is based on intangible qualities, and consumers seek 
value  in  experiences  rather  than  getting  pleasure  merely  from  possessing  material  goods. 
These factors have been drawing attention recently. 
 First, as communication charges for mobile phones in Japan have been weighing heavily on 
consumers,  the  government  has  requested  mobile  carriers  to  lower  such  charges,  and  the 
Cabinet has decided on a revision of the service plans that package handset payments and 
communication fees. Successive offers of new simpler plans by mobile carriers based on such 
revision have been pushing down the CPI as a result. 
 Next,  as  for  koto  consumption,  accommodation  and  overseas  package  tours  are  also 
consumption components that affect overall prices. In these areas, there is rising demand for 
koto  consumption,  and  an  increasing  number  of  new  services  are  being  provided  that 
primarily  target  tourists  from  abroad,  in  addition  to  domestic  consumers.  Given  that  the 
Olympic  Games  will  be  held  in  Tokyo,  it  is  expected  that  price  increases  through  such 
experience-oriented consumption also will contribute to pushing up prices overall. 
 I have explained the recent environment surrounding prices from these three aspects -- human 
resources, tangible factors, and intangible factors. Needless to say, there are factors other than 
these  that  could  affect  prices.  Despite  current  economic  expansion  and  tight  labor  market 
conditions, the trend inflationary pressure on the CPI has remained relatively weak. This has 
been affected by the deeply entrenched mindset and behavior based on people's assumption 
that wages and prices will not increase easily, due mainly to the experience of prolonged low 
growth  and  deflation.  Firms'  efforts  to  absorb  the  increase  in  wage  costs  by  raising 
productivity and technological progress in recent years, as seen in the expansion of online 
shopping,  also  have  contributed  to  the  situation  where  prices  do  not  increase  easily. 
Furthermore, consumers now face the important question as to how they can prepare for a 
100-year lifespan. Reflecting these various factors, households' and firms' medium- to long-
term inflation expectations are more or less unchanged (Chart 8). Inflation expectations are 
influenced by both the backward-looking (or adaptive) component that reflects past rates -- 
i.e.,  the  observed  inflation  rate  --  and  the  forward-looking  component  that  reflects  the 
7 
 progress in the Bank's pursuit of monetary easing through its strong commitment to achieving 
the price stability target. Thus, a rise in prices is the key to increasing medium- to long-term 
inflation expectations, and it is important that this brings about a change in the perception of 
firms and households regarding future prices. 
 E. Outlook for Prices in Japan 
Based on the three aspects that affect prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is 
likely to increase gradually toward the price stability target, as the effects of the current large-
scale monetary easing gradually permeate the economy. Firms are expected to broaden their 
efforts to raise prices and wages as Japan's economy continues on an expanding trend and the 
positive output gap is maintained, thereby inducing a gradual change in firms' and households' 
mindsets. Specifically, the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts for the year-on-
year rate of change in the core CPI presented in the July 2019 Outlook Report are 1.0 percent, 
1.3 percent, and 1.6 percent for fiscal 2019, 2020, and 2021, respectively (Chart 5). However, 
it should be borne in mind that, if risks to economic activity materialize -- particularly those 
concerning overseas economies -- there is the possibility that prices will be affected to some 
extent. 
 II. Conduct of Monetary Policy 
A. Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control 
Let me now turn to the Bank's monetary policy. 
 Following  the  introduction  of  QQE  in April  2013,  the  Bank  has  been  pursuing  QQE  with 
Yield Curve Control since September 2016 toward achieving the price stability target of 2 
percent. 
 Under this policy framework, controlling short- and long-term interest rates -- the so-called 
yield curve control -- facilitates the formation of  the term structure of interest rates that is 
most  appropriate  for  achieving  the  price  stability  target.  Specifically,  in  the  guideline  for 
market operations, the Bank sets the short-term policy interest rate at minus 0.1 percent and 
decides  to  purchase  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  so  that  10-year  JGB  yields  will 
remain at around zero percent (Chart 9).   
8 
 Thereafter,  in July  2018,  the  Bank implemented  measures  to enhance  the  sustainability  of 
QQE  with  Yield  Curve  Control.  Specifically,  in  terms  of  yield  curve  control,  while 
maintaining  the target  level  of  10-year  JGB  yields  at  around  zero  percent,  the  Bank  made 
clear that yields might "move upward and downward to some extent mainly depending on 
developments in economic activity and prices," thereby securing a certain degree of flexibility 
in the guideline for market operations. 
 Under the framework of QQE with Yield Curve Control, Japan's economy has continued on 
an expanding trend and the output gap has remained positive. As for prices, the underlying 
trend in the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI excluding fresh food and energy has been 
generally in positive territory for six years. With regard to inflation expectations, the results 
of the Bank's June 2019 Opinion Survey on the General Public's Views and Behavior showed 
that, while medium- to long-term expectations remained low, the proportion of respondents 
who answered that prices would go up one year from now has increased recently, and this 
indicates a change in people's perception of future prices (Chart 10). Although there is still 
some way to go for the core CPI to increase toward the price stability target of 2 percent, it is 
crucial to resolutely continue with powerful monetary easing under QQE with Yield Curve 
Control. 
 Under  these  circumstances,  in  April  2019,  the  Bank  partially  revised  the  description  of 
forward guidance for policy rates to, "the Bank intends to maintain the current extremely low 
levels of short- and long-term interest rates for an extended period of time, at least through 
around spring 2020, taking into account uncertainties regarding economic activity and prices 
including developments in overseas economies and the effects of the scheduled consumption 
tax hike." This was to make clearer the Bank's policy stance that it will resolutely continue 
with powerful monetary easing toward achieving the price stability target (Chart 11). 
 The statement released after the Monetary Policy Meeting held on July 29 and 30 specified 
that  "the  Bank  will  not  hesitate  to  take  additional  easing  measures  if  there  is  a  greater 
possibility that the momentum toward achieving the price stability target will be lost." This 
was to affirm the Bank's commitment to preempting any loss of momentum toward achieving 
the price stability target, particularly where -- mainly arising from developments in overseas 
9 
 economies  --  there are  significant  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices.  On this 
basis,  should  the  Bank  be  required  to  examine  and  implement  specific  additional  easing 
measures,  it  will  take  appropriate  action  depending  on  the  situation  while  weighing  the 
positive effects and side effects. 
 B. Effects and Side Effects of Monetary Easing under a Low Interest Rate Environment 
Let me now share my views on the effects and side effects of monetary easing. 
 While recognizing the importance of maintaining the extremely low levels of short- and long-
term  interest  rates  toward  achieving  the  price  stability  target,  it  also  is  necessary  to  pay 
attention to the possibility of monetary easing effects materializing in an unusual manner and 
of the potential side effects. 
 First,  speaking  of  monetary  easing  effects,  there  is  likely  a  zero  lower  bound  on  financial 
institutions' interest rates on deposits and loans, due to contractual and operational constraints. 
Meanwhile,  it  has  been  pointed  out  that,  in  the  corporate  bond  market,  the  conventional 
method of deciding interest rates on corporate bonds by adding spreads to JGB  yields has 
become less common amid negative JGB yields; instead, pricing is starting to be conducted 
by attaching greater importance to a positive fixed value of interest rates on corporate bonds 
rather than the relative relationship with JGB yields. In such a situation, with a virtually zero 
lower bound, there is the possibility that monetary easing effects stemming from an additional 
decrease in JGB yields will be more limited than before. 
 Next, I would like to discuss three points arising from the potential side effects of monetary 
easing.   
 The first point concerns financial institutions' risk-taking stance. With the population and the 
number of firms across regions declining, in addition to the current prolonged low interest 
rate  environment,  financial  institutions'  average  contract  interest  rates  on  new  loans  have 
reached  extremely  low  levels,  owing  in  part  to  intensified  competition  among  such 
institutions. In this situation, their core profitability has continued to be on a downtrend. There 
also is increasingly limited room to realize gains on the sales of securities and to reverse the 
10 
 allowance  for  doubtful  accounts.  As  a  result,  financial  institutions  have  been  actively 
extending loans to middle-risk firms with relatively high credit risk and investing in assets 
such  as  foreign  bonds  and  domestic  and  foreign  investment  trusts.  The  following  points 
therefore  warrant  attention:  a  deterioration  in  the  profitability  of  borrowing  firms  is  more 
likely  to  result  in  an  increase  in  credit  costs  in  the  event  of  a  phase  shift  in  economic 
developments and credit cycles, and the profits and soundness of financial institutions seem 
to have become significantly susceptible to developments in domestic and foreign financial 
markets. 
 Second, if interest rates decline excessively, the narrowing of financial institutions' deposit 
and  lending  margins  may  make  them  unable  to  secure  adequate  profits,  and  through  the 
tightening of their capital constraints, this could induce a decline in the amount of bank loans. 
Interest  rate  levels  that  reverse  the  effects  of  monetary  easing  in  this  way  are  known  as 
"reversal rates."   
 Third, if lending rates decline further, financial institutions that are no longer able to withstand 
increased downward pressure on their profits may start to charge fees and commissions on 
deposits, thereby making deposit rates virtually negative. In this case, some firms may prefer 
to proceed with debt repayment in an effort to reduce their deposits, and this could contribute 
to  a  decline  in  the  amount  of  bank  loans.  Furthermore,  if  deposit  rates  fall  into  virtually 
negative  territory,  this  could  have  an  adverse  effect  on  economic  activity  through  a 
deterioration in consumer sentiment. 
 When conducting monetary policy, the Bank must weigh up the positive effects against the 
accompanying costs and side effects, including the ones I have explained. In considering the 
effects of monetary policy, it is important to maintain a transmission channel through which 
monetary easing effects spread to the overall economy via financial institutions. Therefore, it 
is crucial that the Bank, while aiming to achieve price stability, also secure financial system 
stability so as to ensure that financial institutions can continue to fully perform their financial 
intermediation function. As the global financial crisis revealed, the considerable impact on 
the real economy of financial system instability makes it increasingly important that the Bank 
conduct monetary policy in a manner that focuses not only on achieving price stability, but 
11 
 also on giving due consideration to financial system stability, on the premise that monetary 
policy  influences  broad  areas  of  financial  activity.  In  other  words,  once  financial  system 
destabilizes, it would be extremely difficult for the Bank to ensure price stability. 
 I believe that, at least for now, financial institutions in Japan as a whole are resilient against 
stress in terms of both capital and liquidity, and financial system stability has been maintained. 
Indeed, as financial institutions have maintained their active lending stance, the year-on-year 
growth rate of loans outstanding has been in positive territory. Yet, going forward, the Bank 
must  consider  monetary  policy  measures  more  carefully,  to  prevent  financial  system 
instability. In doing so, it should examine closely the effects on the profits and lending stance 
of financial institutions of changes in their attitude to risk and of the current prolonged low 
interest rate environment, by taking into account not only the time frame in which monetary 
policy effects spread to the real economy, but also the time frame in which the  side effects 
accumulate. 
 As  the  Bank  continues  resolutely  with  the  current  monetary  easing  policy,  it  will  conduct 
monetary  policy  in  an  appropriate  manner,  while  examining  all  relevant  risks,  so  that  the 
momentum toward achieving the price stability target is maintained. 
12 
Economic Activity, Prices, 
and Monetary Policy in Japan
Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Kumamoto
August 29, 2019
Hitoshi Suzuki
Bank of Japan
Global Economy
Chart 1
IMF Projections (as of July 2019)   
Real GDP Growth Rate
Source: World Economic Outlook Update, International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Note: Figures in parentheses are the difference from the April 2019
CY
Source: IMF.
projections.
Japan's Real GDP
Chart 2
s.a., ann., q/q % chg.
s.a., tril. yen 
s.a., q/q % chg.
Real GDP (nominal value, right scale)
Real GDP growth rate
(left scale)
CY
Source: Cabinet Office.
Source: Cabinet Office.
Regional Economic Assessments
Comparison of Previous and Current Assessments by Region 
Chart 3
Region
Assessment in April 2019
Changes 
from the 
previous 
assessment
Assessment in July 2019
Hokkaido
The economy has been recovering moderately.
The economy has been recovering moderately.
Tohoku
The economy has continued to recover 
moderately, although some weakness has been 
observed in part.
The economy has continued to recover 
moderately, although some weakness has been 
observed in part.
Hokuriku
The economy has been expanding moderately.
The economy has been expanding moderately.
Kanto-
Koshinetsu
The economy has been expanding moderately, 
although exports and production have been 
affected by the slowdown in overseas economies.
The economy has been expanding moderately, 
although exports and production have been 
affected by the slowdown in overseas economies.
Tokai
The economy has been expanding. 
The economy has been expanding.
Kinki
The economy has continued to expand 
moderately.
The economy has continued to expand 
moderately, although some weakness has been 
observed in part.
Chugoku
The economy has been expanding moderately.
The economy has been expanding moderately.
Shikoku
The economy has been recovering.
The economy has been recovering.
Kyushu-
Okinawa
The economy has been expanding moderately.
The economy has been expanding moderately.
Source: July 2019 Regional Economic Report, Bank of Japan.
Labor Market Conditions
Chart 4
Unemployment Rate and 
Active Job Openings-to-Applicants Ratio
Diffusion Index (DI) for 
Employment Conditions
s.a., ratio
s.a., %
reversed, DI ("excessive employment" minus "insufficient employment"), % points
Insufficient employment
Sources: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications;
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare.
Source: Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan),  
Bank of Japan.
Excessive employment
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices as of July 2019
Forecasts of the Majority of Policy Board Members
y/y % chg.
Chart 5
Source: July 2019 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, Bank of Japan.
Notes: 1. Figures in brackets indicate the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates).
2. The forecasts assume the following: (1) the consumption tax will be raised to 10 percent in October 2019 and a  
reduced tax rate will be applied to food and beverages -- excluding alcohol and dining out -- and newspapers, and 
(2) with regard to policies concerning the provision of free education, free early childhood education and such 
measures as free higher education will be introduced in October 2019 and April 2020, respectively. 
CPI
Chart 6
s.a., y/y % chg.
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications.
Note: Figures are adjusted for the effects of consumption tax hikes.
Output Gap
 Chart 7
Excess demand
(upward pressure on prices)
Excess supply
(downward pressure on prices)
Source: Bank of Japan.
Note: Based on staff estimations.
Inflation Expectations
y/y, ann. avg., %
Chart 8
Source: Bank of Japan.
Notes: 1. Figures for households are from the Opinion Survey on the General Public's Views and Behavior, 
estimated using the modified Carlson-Parkin method.
2. Figures for firms are from the Tankan (General Prices, summary of "Inflation Outlook of Enterprises,"
all industries and all enterprises).
Yield Curve Control
Chart 9
 1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2 
Target level of the long-term interest rate: 
around zero percent
Short-term policy interest rate: 
minus 0.1 percent
0      1      2     3     4     5     6     7     8     9     10     15     20        30        40   
residual maturity, year
Outlook for Price Levels
 Chart 10
CY
Source: Opinion Survey on the General Public's Views and Behavior, Bank of Japan.
Notes: 1. Disregarding the effects of consumption tax hikes.
2. Figures for both comprise respondents who chose either "will go up significantly" or "will go up slightly" in the questionnaire.
Strengthening the Framework for Continuous 
Powerful Monetary Easing
Chart 11
Likely to take time to 
achieve the price 
stability target of 2%
Appropriate to 
maintain the positive 
output gap for as 
long as possible
Persistently Continuing 
with Powerful Monetary Easing
Forward guidance for policy rates 
"The Bank intends to maintain the current extremely low levels of 
short- and long-term interest rates for an extended period of time, at 
least through around spring 2020, taking into account uncertainties 
regarding economic activity and prices including developments in 
overseas economies and the effects of the consumption tax hike."
”
Yield curve control and ETF purchases
The long-term interest rate: The Bank will purchase JGBs so that 
10-year JGB yields will remain at around zero percent.  While doing 
so, the yields may move upward and downward to some extent 
mainly depending on developments in economic activity and prices.
ETF purchases:  The Bank will purchase ETFs so that their amount 
outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about 6 trillion yen.  
The Bank may increase or decrease the amount of purchases 
depending on market conditions. 
Achieving the price stability target of 2% at the earliest possible time 
while securing stability in economic and financial conditions
