  05.07.2019 
 Ten years of the FROB and banking system transformations  
Opening address to the conference: “Tenth Anniversary of the creation of the 
FROB”  
 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Chairman of the FROB, Chair of the Single Resolution Board, Chair of the European Banking 
Authority, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Chairman of the Financial Stability 
Institute, dignitaries, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
It is an honour and a pleasure for me to participate in the opening of this conference to 
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the creation of the FROB.  
I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate the chairman of the FROB, Jaime Ponce, 
and also his predecessors, Fernando Restoy and Javier Aríztegui, and their teams, for the 
work they have performed over the last ten years. 
The FROB embodies one of the main institutional changes made during the restructuring of 
the  Spanish  financial  sector  in  the last  decade,  a process  that  has  been  fundamental in 
paving the way for the recovery of the Spanish economy in the aftermath of the crisis.  
Transformation of the Spanish banking industry in the last decade 
This  period  has  witnessed  one  of  the  most  far-reaching  transformations  in  the  Spanish 
financial system in recent decades and the FROB has played an important role in bringing 
about this transformation.  
The  Spanish  economy  was  engulfed  by  the  international  financial  crisis  at  a  time  when 
significant  imbalances  had  built  up,  which  were  particularly  significant  in  our  financial 
system. 
Spain  had  an  oversized  banking  system,  excessively  concentrated  on  lending  to  the 
residential property sector and highly dependent on international wholesale financing.  
In 2008, the consolidated assets of the banking system amounted to 304% of GDP, bank 
lending to the property sector (in the broad sense of the term) reached 99% of GDP and 
bank debt held by non-residents accounted for 24% of GDP. Moreover a significant number 
of deposit-taking institutions suffered from institutional and governance shortcomings.  
Over the last decade many of these vulnerabilities have been resolved; in particular, those 
relating to the high level of non-financial private sector debt, which is now at levels similar 
to those in the rest of the euro area (having fallen by almost 70 percentage points of GDP 
from its peak in 2010). The weight of lending to property and construction activities has 
decreased by 47 percentage points of GDP. 
This reduction in non-financial private sector debt has been reflected in a decrease in the 
size of the financial sector and, in particular, in bank balance sheets in Spain, since business 
abroad has proved to be one of the main determinants of the resilience of some institutions. 
Thus, over the last ten years, the total assets of business in Spain have contracted by 20% 
(a fall of 72 percentage points of GDP) and employment in the sector has fallen by 32%. In 
 3/7 
 addition, the number of bank branches has declined by 43%, while the number of Spanish 
banks1 has fallen from 122 at the start of the crisis to 61 in 2018.  
Also, all the former savings banks, apart from two, have been transformed into commercial 
banks, and most of the mergers and takeovers that have taken place have given rise to 
healthier institutions and have resulted in significant cost savings. The FROB, for its part, 
has played a prominent role in promoting some of these consolidation processes. 
These  efforts  to  correct  the  excessive  size  of  the  sector  were  also  accompanied  by  a 
significant balance sheet clean-up. As we all know, the financial crisis caused the quality of 
Spanish  bank  assets  to  deteriorate  significantly.  Indeed,  in  just  five  years  the  non-
performing loan ratio reached unprecedented levels (of around 14% at the end of 2013) and 
foreclosures rose to over €80 billion in 2014.  
The decline in the return on assets and the increase in net provisions for bad debts caused 
the banking industry as a whole to post a loss in 2012. This weakened bank solvency and, 
moreover, led to significant capital requirements for some banks, to the extent that public 
support was necessary to cover the capital shortfalls identified and to guarantee financial 
stability  and,  ultimately,  the  deposits  of  the  general  public.  The  FROB  was  once  again 
fundamental in this area since, along with the deposit guarantee scheme, it injected around 
€65 billion of capital into the system. 
Another institution set up during the crisis, in which the FROB has a stake, the Sociedad de 
Gestión  de  Activos  Procedentes  de  la  Reestructuración  Bancaria  (Sareb),  also  played  a 
significant role in this process. Between December 2012 and March 2013, Sareb assumed 
property development loans with a gross value of approximately €75 billion and foreclosures 
of €30 billion. 
Thus, against a background of notable declines in their activity levels, banks have managed 
to  reduce  the  weight  of  troubled  assets  on  their  balance  sheets  very  significantly. 
Specifically, the non-performing loans ratio has decreased by more than eight percentage 
points and currently stands at 5.7% of total credit. Foreclosures, meanwhile, are at half the 
level recorded in 2014.  
Over this period there was also a significant improvement in the solvency ratios of Spanish 
credit institutions, which increased their tier 1 capital ratio from 7.5% in 2007 to 13.5% at 
the end of 2018.  
Despite  these  improvements,  the  Spanish  financial  sector  clearly  continues  to  face 
significant challenges. Among other factors, these arise from a non-performing loans ratio 
that is still higher than before the crisis, a rate of return below the cost of capital, and capital 
levels that, despite exceeding the minimum regulatory requirements, are on average below 
those of other European countries and below those needed to restore its reputation.  
                                                                                              
1 Consolidated groups and institutions not belonging to a group that are Spanish owned. 
4/7 
 In any event, the improvement in the Spanish banking system has allowed it to support the 
economic recovery and job creation seen in recent years through a more efficient allocation 
of credit to businesses and industries. 
 The paradigm shift in bank resolution 
This  transformation  of  the  Spanish  financial  sector  has  occurred  in  parallel  with  a  far-
reaching  review  at  international  level  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  for 
financial institutions. The aim has been to increase the resilience of the banking system and 
to reduce the impact of financial crises on the economy, with a wave of reforms, the last 
phase  of  which  was  completed  in  December  2017  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision and will be implemented progressively over the coming years.  
In Europe, these reforms have been accompanied by very significant institutional changes, 
in particular, creation of the banking union. And one of the pillars of the banking union is the 
Single Resolution Mechanism. 
As regards bank resolution, these reforms have in fact generated a paradigm shift, as a 
result  of  the  high  cost  of  the  global  financial  crisis  for  the  public  sector  in  numerous 
advanced  countries.  The  paradigm  shift  consists  in  moving  from  a  bail-out  to  a  bail-in 
system of bank resolution, that is to say, from rescue or recapitalisation using public funds 
to rescue using private funds, belonging to the bank itself, through the use of capital, hybrid 
instruments and, where applicable, the most subordinated debt. 
In Europe, the Single Resolution Board (SRB) is responsible for preparing the resolution of 
significant  European  institutions.  This  preparation  has  already  included  drawing  up 
resolution plans for all significant institutions, analysing their resolvability on an individual 
basis and establishing a minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL) 
that make it possible to comply with the paradigm shift I have just referred to.  
The  SRB  has  also  put  in  place  effective  mechanisms  for  cooperation  with  the  national 
resolution  authorities  that  (like  the  FROB  and  the  Banco  de  España)  participate  in  the 
drawing up of resolution plans and in determining the MREL, and in implementing decisions 
taken  by  the  SRB,  as  well  as  developing  their  own  responsibilities  for  less  significant 
institutions. 
I should like to underline the importance in these European resolution arrangements of the 
requirement  that  European  credit  institutions  (including  Spanish  ones,  naturally)  have 
sufficient levels of MREL. The paradigm shift from a bail-out to a bail-in system, and the 
other tools permitted by European legislation, require that banks have a sufficient level of 
MREL so that, if the case arises and there is a public interest involved, the institution can be 
resolved, while minimising the burden on the taxpayer and ensuring the continuity of critical 
functions and a minimum impact on the rest of the financial system. 
For some institutions, this requirement represents a considerable challenge for the coming 
years. It should prompt them to make adequate planning, to retain sufficient own funds and 
to issue MREL-eligible debt, and to take any opportunity that may present itself to comply 
with the requirements within the period established for the purpose. 
 5/7 
 Challenges remaining on the resolution front in Europe 
Despite the tremendous efforts made on the resolution front in Europe, there are clearly 
important challenges remaining.  
First, the details of the backstop for the Single Resolution Fund (SRF) must be outlined. 
Recently it was agreed that the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) would assume this 
financial  backstop,  which  would  take  the  form  of  a  credit  line,  to  be  used  to  address 
exceptional situations where the SRF’s own resources prove insufficient for resolution of 
certain credit institutions. The backstop will have a limit of 1% of the deposits guaranteed 
in the banking union. It will come into force in 2024 at the latest and must be fiscally neutral 
in the medium term, so the resources committed will subsequently be recovered through 
banking  sector  contributions.  In  addition,  the  introduction  of  the  financial  backstop  will 
eliminate the ESM’s tool for direct recapitalisation of banks.  
In this setting, it is vital to ensure that the backstop is sufficient to meet all the potential 
challenges that the SRF may have to face. 
Second, the question of provision of liquidity in bank resolution has to be addressed. If a 
bank under resolution is sold, the purchaser assumes any liquidity commitments that may 
arise when the bank opens its doors the next day. However, if the resolution is carried out 
by means of a bail-in, there must be arrangements in place in case, when the doors open, 
some  of  the  funding  providers  decide  to  withdraw  their  funds,  because  they  have  been 
affected by the bail-in, because they believe the bail-in has not been sufficient, or simply 
because they prefer not to run the risk of waiting to see what happens to the institution. 
In  such  cases  it  is  essential  to  ensure  that  there  are  sufficient  mechanisms  in  place  to 
provide the institution with liquidity, to grant credibility both to the resolution tool and the 
resolution process.  
In  view  of  how  other  advanced  countries  have  solved  this  problem,  the  solution,  in  my 
opinion,  could  be  to  involve  the  central  bank  as  a  funding  provider,  with  all  due  public 
guarantees provided jointly. However, if any or all of the guarantees were to be enforced, it 
would be important to ensure the fiscal neutrality of the mechanism in the medium term.  
Third, insolvency regimes in Europe must be harmonised. If we have common supervision 
and  resolution  schemes  for  banks  in  Europe,  I  believe  we  should  also  have  harmonised 
arrangements for winding up banks. This would require having a separate insolvency regime 
for  banks,  given  their  idiosyncrasies  and  the  negative  externalities  that  lengthy  and 
inefficient winding up processes may have for other banks, deposit guarantee schemes and 
the  real  economy.  This  should  be  a  common  insolvency  regime  for  all  the  countries  of 
Europe. 
The SRB and the national resolution authorities could play a fundamental role, acting as 
insolvency administrators, with similar instruments and criteria to those already in place at 
the European level for resolution of public interest entities (asset separation, sale, bridge 
bank, etc.). This is not an easy challenge to address, but it is important to analyse its viability 
and how it may be phased in. 
6/7 
  Last but not least, we must complete the banking union. And we all know what that entails: 
establishing a common European deposit insurance scheme, by a specified date. We need 
to  ensure  that  all  European  citizens’  bank  deposits  up  to  €100,000  are  equally  secure, 
irrespective  of  the  institution  holding  the  deposits  and  of  the  depositor’s  country  of 
residence within the banking union.  
Once again, if banking supervision and resolution is centralised, then the responsibility for 
bank deposits should also be centralised. In other words, there should be correspondence 
between  decisions  and  the  consequences  of  those  decisions.  Moreover,  the  empirical 
evidence available2 shows that if banks’ contributions to deposit insurance schemes are risk 
sensitive they should not entail systematic cross-subsidisation between countries. It is not 
only a question of economic efficiency or of shared institutional responsibility, but also of 
equity between all those of us under the umbrella of this common project – the euro – that 
was launched now some 20 years ago. 
In short, I would venture to say that neither Spain nor the rest of Europe has wasted time in 
this decade marked by the crisis. Together we have prepared the banking system for the 
new times ahead, and the FROB has played a key part in this process. Some very significant 
challenges remain, but we now have more mechanisms at our disposal and institutions that 
are better prepared to address these challenges. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
I now give the floor to the Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Luis de Guindos. 
                                                                                               
2 J. CARMASSI, S. DOBKOWITZ, J. EVRARD, L. PARISI, A. SILVA and M. WEDOW (2018), Completing the Banking 
Union with a European Deposit Insurance Scheme: Who is Afraid of Cross-Subsidisation?, Occasional Paper Series 208, 
European Central Bank. 
 7/7 
