B P Kanungo: 20th FIMMDA - PDAI Annual Conference
Speech by Mr B P Kanungo, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 20th FIMMDA
(Fixed  Income  Money  Market  and  Derivatives Association  of  India)  –  PDAI  (Primary  Dealers’
Association of India) Annual Conference, Moscow, 31 August 2019.
 1. I am happy to be here today amidst you and I must thank FIMMDA and PDAI for this privilege.
The annual conference of FIMMDA and PDAI has of late been known as much for the content of
the deliberations as for the choice of the venues, and the present one, its twentieth edition, is no
exception. These occasions bring together the best minds in the financial market, particularly the
fixed  income  segment,  under  one  roof  and  provides  excellent  platform  for  deliberating  on
contemporary issues facing the markets. It is an important platform for us in the Reserve Bank to
share our views on topics of current relevance with the market participants who have a vital role
in, and responsibility for, driving growth and development.
2. FIMMDA is a representative body of participants in the fixed income market in India. I am happy
to note that unlike many such organizations around the world, FIMMDA is much less an interest
group,  and  has  over  the  years  played  a  key  role  in  developments  of  the  markets.  It  has  ably
contributed  to  our  efforts  towards  building  deep  and  liquid  fixed  income  markets  including
derivative markets. But for the role it has played in the spheres of valuation, price dissemination,
product evolution, benchmark development, assimilation of best practices and market education,
we would be well short of being one of the most evolved of fixed income markets among the
emerging  economies  that  we  are  today.  Similarly,  PDAI  has  played  a  seminal  role  in
development  of  the  primary  market  in  government  debt  over  the  last  two  decades,  and  the
successive successful issuances of government debt owes a great deal to the community of
primary dealers.
3. The importance of the fixed income markets cannot be over emphasized. Apart from the fact
that  these  markets  meet  the  funds  requirement  of  the  sovereign  and  sub-sovereign  bodies
across the globe, they also substantially meet the external funds requirements of financial as well
as  non-financial  firms.  Further,  these  markets  are  also  intimately  linked  with  the  funding
requirement of individuals- education finance, home finance, consumption finance and so on- in
several  ways  from  providing  pricing  benchmark  to  providing  funding  for  the  institutions  that
provide  primary  funding.  Quite  obviously,  the  aggregate  value  of  outstanding  fixed  income
instruments  is  estimated  to  be  in  excess  of  USD  100  trillion  in  contrast  with  the  value  of  the
global  stock  market  around  USD  70  trillion.  The  daily  trading  volume  of  the  fixed  income
instruments also exceeds that in the stock market by a factor of three. Though US continues to
account for a large part of the global fixed income market, the fact that the global market size has
trebled during the last fifteen years seems to indicate that the other jurisdictions are catching up.
4. Of the two non-equity sources of external funding for the corporate sector, viz., bank finance
and  market-based  finance,  the  literature  seems  to  find  the  latter  the  preferred  mode  from  a
systemic  viewpoint.  Without  going  into  this  debate,  we  can  perhaps  say  that  the  two  play  a
complementary role. The Indian financial sector which mostly has been a bank-based one needs
to develop a robust fixed income market to bring in market discipline, to augment bank finance
and indeed free up bank finance for uses that cannot access the market directly. Development of
the fixed income market has been an important objective of the Reserve Bank, the Government,
the SEBI and other regulators these many years. Significant progress has been made, yet a lot
remains to be achieved.
5. What are the attributes of the market we aspire to have? There are many ways to describe an
efficient and robust market; but we can underscore four aspects.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
1.  Firstly, there must be wide range of products available. It is nowhere more pronounced as in
the financial markets because it is well recognized that a wide array of securities enable the
economic agents to better deal with the uncertainty of the future.
2.  Secondly, there must be transparency. The financial market is characterized by information
asymmetry, both pre and post transaction. The borrower or investee always knows more
about itself than the lender or the investor. The markets use various mechanisms to address
this problem. Financial disclosures and ratings are two most common means, the integrity
of which is critical to a well-functioning financial market.
3.  Thirdly, there must be liquidity. A market without liquidity serves no purpose. A liquid market
spurs  production  and  consumption;  in  financial  markets,  liquidity  facilitates  savings  and
investment. Liquidity is often seen as synonymous with trading volumes, but as has been
pointed out since the times of Keynes, volumes brought on by transient investors driven by
speculative  short-term  gains  may  not  necessarily  bring  efficiency  to  the  market.  Liquidity
essentially  means  easy  and  frictionless  entry  into  and  exit  out  of  investment  positions
without loss of value. Several prerequisites underpin this: large number of participants, fewer
barriers  to  entry,  large  volume  of  transactions,  pricing  efficiency,  absence  of  risk-free
arbitrage and so on.
4.  Lastly, there must be efficient risk management. As the financial crisis has demonstrated, a
market  without  adequate  risk  management  measures  is  prone  to  failure  with  enormous
economic and social cost. I had mentioned earlier about the range of financial products, the
caveat is that the complexity of these should not run ahead of the understanding of their risk
implications.  Measures  like  move  to  exchange  traded  products,  central  counterparty
clearing,  bilateral  margining  and  reporting  positions  to  trade  repositories  are  aimed  at
improving the risk management practices.
6. How do our fixed income markets perform against these standards? Let me list some stylized
facts.
1.  Government  securities,  that  constitute  the  largest  segment  of  the  fixed  income  market,
stand at about ₹ 58 trillion, treasury bills accounting for another about ₹ 6 trillion. Though the
primary  issuances  have  been  quite  seamless,  only  the  10  year  benchmark  security
accounts  for  bulk  of  the  trading  volumes.  Indeed,  liquidity  in  this  bench  mark  security  as
represented  by  the  bid-ask  spread  is  impressive,  and  according  to  a  recent  BIS  study,
among the best amongst emerging markets. Liquidity, however, almost completely dries off
in other off-benchmark securities, which does not reflect well on the market.
2.  The corporate debt market has registered impressive growth. In the five years between June
2014 and June 2019, the market size has grown from ₹ 14.43 trillion to ₹ 30.63 trillion. Out of
1
this,  the  size  of  structured  notes  market  has  grown  from  ₹  8.78  billion  to  ₹  230  billion .
These figures underscore the growing maturity of the market. We must however note that
there are in excess of 24000 instruments outstanding, reducing the average outstanding per
instrument to a small figure. On the other hand, the issuances in recent times have been
predominantly (upto 75%) by the financial firms. Besides, most of the issuances have been
through private placement. The secondary market in corporate debt is so illiquid that we can
very  well  say  there  is  no  such  market.  The  rating  transition  of  some  corporate  debt,
particularly those issued by  financial  firms,  has  been  phenomenal  –  from  sound  credit  to
junk.
3.  The  evolution  of  the  money  market  continues  to  be  stunted.  Most  of  the  activity  is
concentrated in the overnight segment and a robust term money market continues to elude
us. There is some trading in the treasury bills, but activity in the CPs and CDs is confined to
primary issuances.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
4.  The  interest  rate  derivatives  market  also  continues  to  be  lackluster.  There  is  reasonable
liquidity in overnight interest swaps, but there is no appetite, and hence not much trading in
other derivatives including interest rate futures. The Credit Default Swap market, introduced
in 2012 is moribund. It is ironical that while some participants used to write little understood
products like quanto swaps a decade and a half back, there is little effort to provide simple
products like caps or collars on bonds today.
5.  Despite  allowing  full  access  to  non-resident  investors  to  the  domestic  interest  rate
derivatives  market,  anecdotal  evidence  seems  to  suggest  that  an  offshore  market  in  this
segment might be developing, much like the NDF market.
7. I now come to the important question of what needs to be done? We must understand that
development  of  markets  is  a  complex  process. An  economy  aspiring  for  faster  development,
does have financing needs. There is domestic savings augmented by the foreign savings to fulfill
the financing needs. It is for the market to perform an efficient role in allocation. Development of
markets  is  not  driven  by  altruism;  it  requires  alignment  of  incentives  of  all  stakeholders  –  the
investor, the investee as well as the regulator. The incentives of the first two are well appreciated,
but the regulator is often seen as a spoilsport in the process of development of markets. It must
be appreciated that the regulator’s objective is financial stability, avoidance of market failures and
consumer  protection,  and  the  financial  crisis  has  underscored  the  importance  of  these
objectives. Even as the regulatory framework keeps evolving, are there other aspects to look at?
1.  One of the most important prerequisites of a liquid and robust market is wide participation by
agents  with  large  volumes  of  merchandise.  In  this  respect,  banks  constitute  the  single
largest set of entities followed by insurance companies, pension funds, and now alternative
investment funds. It has been generally observed that such of these entities as have large
balance sheet, large holding of government securities are not very active either in markets or
in innovation. There is perhaps a need to go beyond the comfort of 6-9-3 banking in search
of unexploited market and unharvested returns. We would also work towards enhancing the
overall liquidity in Government securities market in terms of availability of two-way quotes in
less liquid maturities through targeted market making schemes. Further, measures towards
activation of a securities lending and borrowing programme, inter-operability of depositories
for  smooth  transfer  of  ownership  in  securities  will  receive  our  attention.  We  are  also
engaging  Government  for  active  consolidation  of  Government  debt  through  frequent
buyback/switch operation.
2.  It is recognized that non-resident investors bring volume and liquidity to the financial markets
for the simple reason that there is a large corpus of savings available overseas, forever in
search  of  yields.  There  has  been  a  gradual  effort  to  remove  the  barriers  to  entry  for  NR
investors in the debt segment. The gradual process is motivated by the possibility of sudden
reversals causing turbulence in the interest rates. Even though there has been a great deal
of interest from foreign investors in Rupee debt securities in recent times which protects the
Indian borrower from foreign exchange risk in contrast with foreign currency debts, the threat
to stability in the interest rate market and some residual threat to stability in the forex market
remains. Be that as it may, greater access to foreign investors to the rupee debt market –
cash as well as derivative will gradually be considered.
3.  It is estimated that five years down the line, the demand for bonds will significantly outstrip
the supply. It is a paradoxical situation. Is the market barring borrowers from the market?
The issues relating to CDS comes to mind. The basic purpose of CDS was to enable lower
rated  borrowers  to  access  the  market  while  the  investor  is  protected  against  default  by
buying a CDS. But in a market, where only highly rated entities issue bonds, there will be no
need  for  a  CDS  or  rather,  a  CDS  will  leave  nothing  on  the  table  for  the  investors,  in
comparison  with  a  government  security.  Bringing  liquidity  into  this  and  other  derivative
product needs introspection.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
4.  The risk management at market level is pretty robust, with central counterparty settlement,
exchange traded products, trade repositories, legal entity identifier, etc. But there is scope of
improvement at entity level as far as financial institutions are concerned, which will be tested
with  introduction  of  new  accounting  standards.  Some  other  aspects  of  regulation  –  e.g.,
treatment  of  cash  margins  as  deposits,  payment  of  interest  on  such  margins,  posting  of
collateral  abroad  –  are  all  under  examination  to  enable  participants  to  move  to  global
margining standards.
5.  IRDA, SEBI and PFRDA too could help development of interest rate markets. For instance,
short  selling  activity  could  benefit  if  a  wider  pool  of  securities  lenders  can  be  developed.
Insurance  and  pension  funds,  mutual  funds  have  significant  holdings  of  Government
securities that could be used to lent to short sellers. This would avoid short-squeeze incident
we saw a couple of years back, apart from generating income for these entities. We are
working  with  regulators  to  develop  a  securities  lending  product  that  could  enable  these
entities to participate in securities lending.
6.  On a more general note, one of FIMMDA’s important function has been to organize market
feedback  on  policy  initiatives.  This  is  a  great  help  for  regulators  to  assess  the  impact  of
regulations, especially at the proposal stage. While this should continue, I would be really
happy if FIMMDA and its members make efforts to identify market development initiatives
and bring it to the notice of the regulators. On a lighter vein, market is known to run ahead of
regulators while the latter try to catch up. While this is not what I can encourage you to do, I
do appreciate that market alone can foster innovative ideas and shall expect you to engage
with regulators in regard to the steps that we can jointly take.
7.  Ordinarily,  in  so  far  as  the  trades  are  between  informed  participants  who  are  capable  of
comprehending and defending their interests, the regulator should not be concerned about
the fairness of pricing. Nevertheless, fair pricing is a sound principle in any market, often
threatened  by  the  fact  that  there  are  few  sellers.  I  expect  FIMMDA,  with  its  expertise  in
valuation and role as a market developer will keep a close eye on this.
8.  There  have  been  discussions  about  market  timings  of  various  segments  of  financial
markets.  Taking  into  account  the  representations  received  from  the  market,  we  are
examining current market timings with respect to trading, clearing and settlement cycles of
financial markets regulated by the Reserve Bank to improve market efficiency.
9.  Financial Market Infrastructures play a critical role in the financial system and the broader
economy. These infrastructures facilitate the clearing and settlement of monetary and other
financial  transactions,  such  as  payments,  securities,  and  derivative  contracts  (including
derivatives contracts for commodities). The central bank of any country is usually the driving
force in the development of national payment systems. The Reserve Bank of India has been
playing this developmental role and has taken several initiatives for Safe, Secure, Sound,
Efficient, Accessible and Authorized payment systems in the country. In this context, I would
briefly outline the developments taking place in this space.
10.  At the heart of payment market infrastructures (PMIs) is the one owned by central banks
which the world over is a real-time gross settlement (RTGS) system. As the world moves
closer  to  real  time  everything,  including  payments  and  the  inflection  on  innovation,  better
governance and wider access, the role of the RTGS system is evolving. This places new
demands  on  the  business  and  technology  architectures  of  PMIs  and  RTGS  systems  in
particular.  To  move  closer  to  providing  access  to  the  RTGS  for  longer  durations,  the
customer  timings  have  been  recently  extended.  There  has  been  a  growing  demand  for
providing wider access to the RTGS system and allow participation of non-banks. The High-
Level  Committee  on  Deepening  of  Digital  Payments  (CDDP)  recommended  that  non-
banking  entities  should  be  included  as  associate  members  of  payment  systems  and
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
become  an  active  player  in  enhancing  acceptance  infrastructure  in  the  country.  The
recommendations are under examination.
11.  Another  development  in  the  markets  is  related  to  implementation  of  Legal  Entity  Identifier
(LEI).  In  view  of  the  financial  crises  across  the  world,  LEI  has  provided  a  way  to  identify
financial connections so that regulators and firms can better understand the true nature of
risk exposures across the financial system. In India, LEI has been mandated across various
sectors in the financial markets including derivatives and non-derivatives market and also for
large  corporate  borrowers.  This  is  being  implemented  in  a  phased  manner.  Since  it  has
been made mandatory for large corporate borrowers to obtain LEI, banks should, apart from
advising  such  borrowers  to  obtain  LEI,  encourage  such  borrowers  to  obtain  LEI  for  their
parent  entity  as  well  as  all  subsidiaries  and  associates.  Implementation  of  LEI  for  large
borrowers may help banks in better monitoring of transactions and hence, exposure of such
borrowers across nations.
8.  Let  me  now  conclude.  The  role  of  financial  sector  in  a  growing  economy  cannot  be
overemphasized. As the most important segment, the fixed income market in India has to grow
to cater to the investment needs of an economy that aspires to become a USD 5 trillion economy
in near future. While the RBI and other sister regulators will continue to draw the contours of
growth with financial stability in mind, the market needs more activity, innovation and enterprise
from the community of participants in this market.
I hope that you will keep this refrain in mind when you discuss the markets in this conference. I
wish your deliberations all success.
1
SEBI Data
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
