Luís Máximo dos Santos: Opening address - Annual Conference of
the Association of Specialised Credit Institutions (ASFAC)
Opening address by Mr Luís Máximo dos Santos, Vice-Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the
Annual  Conference  of  the Association  of  Specialised  Credit  Institutions  (ASFAC),  Lisbon,  22
October 2018.
 1.  Let  me  start  with  a  word  of  thanks  to  all  the  members  of  the  corporate  bodies  of  the
Association  of  Specialised  Credit  Institutions  (ASFAC),  represented  by  António  Menezes
Rodrigues, its Managing Director. I am also grateful to be joined by all the other speakers and
participants in this Conference. 
Firstly I would like to congratulate António Menezes Rodrigues for his recent appointment to chair
the European Federation of Finance House Associations (EUROFINAS), and secondly ASFAC
for staging another of these Conferences. 
The  importance  and  significance  of  the  appointment  are  obvious  and  so  could  not  go
unacknowledged; regarding the Conference, it is a key date in the calendar for events relating to
the financial system and an excellent opportunity to identify trends in the consumer credit sector,
and share and discuss problems, fully justifying this word of appreciation.   
Therefore it gives me great pleasure to take part in the Conference, with the importance attached
to it by Banco de Portugal shown by the presence of Lúcia Leitão, Head of the Banking Conduct
Supervision  Department,  and  João  Raposo,  Head  of  the  Legal  Enforcement  Department,  as
speakers. 
 2.  Since  its  creation  in  1991,  ASFAC  has  filled  a  significant  space  in  a  sector  with  unique
characteristics in the credit market, and with increasing importance due to social evolution and
market dynamics. 
I see it as very important for the country and for the regulators and supervisors that the financial
corporations  have  a  strong  association  behind  them,  equipped  and  empowered  to  achieve
critical mass. 
We all have something to gain from this. In truth, the more complicated and dense the regulatory
framework, whether in banking conduct or in combating money laundering and terrorist financing,
the more intrusive and principle-based the supervision should be, and the more important the
dialogue with the sector’s representatives.
It was exactly with this in mind that in 2011 Banco de Portugal created the Forum for Banking
Conduct Supervision, in which ASFAC has been an active participant from the start. The road
travelled since then has reinforced the wisdom of that decision. 
But  our  view  is  not  that  the  conversation  should  only  take  place  through  specific  events,  but
rather on a daily basis, as it is in this context that supervisors and supervised entities can extract
full benefit from it. 
This  availability  of  Banco  de  Portugal  to  talk  to  institutions  on  an  ongoing  basis,  in  strict
observance of the diversity of their respective roles, makes behaviours in contravention of the
regulatory framework even more unacceptable, an aspect that cannot be emphasised enough.    
  1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
3. The publication of Decree-Law No 133/2009 of 2 June 2009, which transposed the second
European  directive  on  consumer  credit  agreements,  was  a  milestone  for  consumer  rights  in
Portugal. 
We have come a long way since then. As a result of the consequences of the financial crisis and
the  greater  awareness  of  the  specific  practices  that  could  be  so  harmful  to  consumers,
institutions and the financial system, the regulatory framework and banking conduct supervision
requirements have changed profoundly. 
The impetus from Europe, through the publication of various directives, has been key. Ten years
after the financial crisis it may now be said that the retail banking markets are more transparent,
not least in the all-important consumer credit segment.  
Consumers are more protected, in that they have more rights and some of their existing rights
have  been  broadened.  The  duties  of  information  were  made  stronger;  upper  limits  were
established for the annual percentage rate of charge (APRC) and the nominal interest rate in
consumer  credit  agreements;  the  duty  of  assessing  creditworthiness  was  strengthened;  the
consumer assistance obligation was created; certain banking fees were banned or limited, and,
where associated to payment accounts, became more comparable, above all after the format
given to the fee comparator launched on 1 October; a system was created for preventing and
managing arrears situations, to mention just a few examples. 
Furthermore,  recent  changes  to  the  Legal  Framework  of  Credit  Institutions  and  Financial
Companies place new obligations on institutions when setting their compensation and evaluation
policy for workers in contact with customers in the sale of retail banking products and services,
with  a  view  to  minimising  the  risk  of  conflicts  of  interest  and  avoiding  potential  harm  to
customers.
The  requirement  was  also  established  for  institutions  to  introduce  specific  procedures  for
governance  and  for  monitoring  credit  products,  to  ensure  that  they  are  suited  to  consumers’
interests, goals and characteristics in terms of design and distribution.
Very  important  also  is  the  fact  that  on  1  January  of  this  year,  the  legal  framework  for  credit
intermediaries  came  into  force,  with  the  aim  of  broadening  the  perimeter  of  banking  conduct
supervision. Indeed, access to banking activity now requires the prior permission of Banco de
Portugal, which is also responsible for overseeing the conduct of this activity.
However, the legislator established a transitional period of one year, in which natural and legal
persons carrying out credit intermediary activity prior to the entry into force of the legal framework
may continue to do so without Banco de Portugal’s authorisation.
We are well aware that the credit intermediary authorisation process is of great importance to the
specialised credit institutions sector, given the relevance of these entities for the distribution of
consumer credit products.
It is a challenge for the sector, but also for Banco de Portugal. The credit institutions play a key
role in this process, providing the necessary information and support to credit intermediaries with
which they have or intend to have binding agreements. The institutions must also ensure that the
activity undertaken by their partners observes the rules laid down by the legislator.
I would like to be clear that Banco de Portugal recognises the importance of the work that the
credit institutions and ASFAC have undertaken in this field. 
We  know  that  this  is  a  transformation  with  multiple  implications  and  considerable  costs,
particularly at this point in the transition. But the final result of this process will without doubt be
the better operation of the market, which is a goal with benefits for all. 
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
 4. The specialisation of supply according to the needs of demand is a source of efficiency gains
and is also believed to boost consumer satisfaction. Specialised granting of credit is no different
from this rule. A focused business model can bring various advantages. 
Society  and  consumer  behaviour  are  changing  rapidly.  From  millennials  to  Generation  Z,  the
specific  behaviours  of  consumers  are  numerous  and  decisive.  Firms  in  general  need  to
understand them well to be successful in the market. The financial sector is no exception to this
– far from it.  
Aside from sector-level specifics, which undoubtedly exist, the most important current trend in
the area of specialised credit is in truth common to all entities in the financial sector: how to deal
with the challenge of the digital economy and society? 
The generic name “the digital economy” covers various areas, which progress at different rates,
but all with profound consequences at several levels and a common theme between them: the
technological revolution in the production and consumption processes.    
Monitoring the process of bringing consumer credit to market through digital channels is one of
Banco de Portugal’s current challenges. 
On  17  January  of  this  year,  Banco  de  Portugal  issued  a  circular  letter,  which  requested  the
provision  of  information  on  credit  products  brought  to  market  through  digital  channels  from
beginning to end. The information obtained is key for monitoring and overseeing the practices of
the  credit  institutions  in  offering  consumer  credit  through  digital  channels,  namely  apps  and
online  platforms.  This  process  has  been  developed  in  strict  cooperation  with  the  credit
institutions, and is a good example of the dialogue between supervisors and supervised entities
that I have mentioned.   
 5.  As  has  been  publicised  and  featured  in  the  news,  consumer  credit  is  growing  rapidly  in
Portugal, now at levels akin to those of before the financial crisis. 
It is vital to avoid successive cycles of excessive and injudicious lending followed by a sharp and
lengthy slump. As is known, Banco de Portugal adopted a macroprudential measure aimed at
preventing the accumulation of excessive risk on the banks’ balance sheets and ensuring that
households  obtain  sustainable  financing,  minimising  the  risk  of  arrears.  Its  purpose  is  to  help
bring  appropriate  rigour  to  credit  standards.  Consumer  credit  agreements  signed  after  1  July
2018  fall  under  that  measure,  which  will  therefore  have  an  impact  on  the  consumer  credit
market.   
The terms in which consumer credit is sometimes debated seem to me to be a genuine paradox
for our time. 
In truth, the development and expansion of consumer credit come as a direct consequence of
powerful trends, particularly the stagnation or reduction of salaries, the decline in saving and the
hyperdevelopment of the financial sector. Consumer credit is inseparably linked to a social model
that places consumption as a core value. It is a central element of what we might call the ‘credit
society', and, despite what we might wish to think, is a phenomenon present, albeit to varying
degrees, in all the countries with developed financial systems. 
When things go wrong and the dream becomes a nightmare, moral judgements appear in public
debate. While apparently uncontroversial in nature, in truth they are superficial judgements by
and large, as they do not pay due regard to the underlying causes fuelling indebtedness, and
ultimately abstract from the real roots of the issue, intentionally or otherwise.   
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In truth, as is clear, there is nothing intrinsically wrong with consumers taking on credit; on the
contrary,  for  a  long  time  consumer  credit  has  been  an  economic  and  social  necessity.  What
should not and must not happen is irresponsible lending, disrespecting consumers’ rights, with
the intention of taking opportunistic economic advantage of bank customers’ weaknesses and
insufficient knowledge.   
So I end with a wish that should be well within our compass: for the benefit of bank customers,
financial institutions, the functioning of the economy and society, responsible credit cannot be a
mere objective – it has to be an ongoing action.
Thank you very much for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
