Shaktikanta Das: 17th C D Deshmukh Memorial Lecture
Opening remarks by Mr Shaktikanta Das, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 17th C D
Deshmukh Memorial Lecture, Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, 25 April 2019.
 On behalf of the Reserve Bank of India, I am delighted to welcome Mr. Agustin Carstens, General
Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  to  deliver  the  C.  D.  Deshmukh  Memorial
lecture,  the  seventeenth  in  the  series.  We  are  also  honored  to  have  Smt.  and  Shri  Atul
Deshmukh from late Shri C. D. Deshmukh’s family. A hearty welcome to all the distinguished
invitees of the Reserve Bank.
2. At the outset, I would like to say a few words about Shri C. D. Deshmukh to commemorate the
occasion.  Shri  Chintaman  Dwarkanath  Deshmukh  was  born  in  Nata,  near  Fort  Raigad  in
Maharashtra on January 14, 1896. He had an outstanding educational career. He stood first in the
Matriculation examination of the University of Bombay in 1912. He graduated from Jesus College
of Cambridge University in 1917 and topped the Indian Civil Services examination, then held only
in London, in 1918. Upon his return to India in 1920, he worked in the Government of Bihar and
also as a joint secretary to the Government of India.
3. His association with the RBI began in July 1939, when he was appointed Liaison Officer to
keep  the  Government  of  India  in  touch  with  the  Bank’s  affairs.  Three  months  later,  he  was
appointed Secretary of the Central Board of the Bank and two years later in December 1941, as
the Deputy Governor. He was the first Indian to be appointed as the Governor of the Reserve
Bank of India on August 11, 1943 and he continued in this capacity till June 30, 1949. He played a
pivotal role in the creation of Industrial Finance Corporation and promotion of rural credit. During
his tenure, RBI saw enactment of the Banking Companies Act, 1949 which laid the foundation for
regulation  of  banking  sector  in  India.  The  nationalisation  of  RBI  on  January  1,  1949  also  took
place during his tenure.
4. After his tenure in the RBI, Shri Deshmukh went on to become Member, Planning Commission
when  it  was  set  up  in  1950.  Subsequently,  he  became  Union  Finance  Minister  in  1950  and
served with distinction till July 1956. During his tenure, he made significant contributions to the
formulation  and  implementation  of  the  country’s  First  and  Second  Five  Year  Plans.  He  was
instrumental in the enactment of new Companies Act and nationalisation of the Imperial Bank of
India and life insurance companies. After resignation from Union Cabinet he worked as Chairman
of UGC during 1956 to 1961 and Vice-Chancellor of University of Delhi from 1962 to 1967. In
1975, he was bestowed with the Padma Vibhushan award. He was also a co-recipient of the
prestigious Ramon Magsaysay Award in 1959 for distinguished Government Service.
5. For this year’s Memorial Lecture in honour of Shri C.D. Deshmukh, it is our pleasure to have
Mr. Agustin Carstens with us. He was the Governor of the Central Bank of Mexico from 2010 to
2017 and a member of the BIS Board from 2011 to 2017. As a BIS board member, he chaired
the  Global  Economy  Meetings  and  the  Meetings  of  Economic  Consultative  Council.  He  also
headed the International Monetary and Financial Committee, the IMF’s policy advisory committee
for two years.
6. Mr. Carstens began his career at the Bank of Mexico in 1980, where he has worked in various
capacities. He later served as Mexico’s deputy finance minister and as Deputy Managing Director
at the IMF. He was Mexico’s Finance Minister from 2006 to 2009. He has also been a member of
the Financial Stability Board since 2010 and is a member of the Group of Thirty.
7.  Mr.  Carstens  holds  a  doctoral  degree  in  economics  from  University  of  Chicago  and  has
extensive research experience in the field of macroeconomic issues and finance. His work on
‘Latin  American  Central  Bank  Reform:  Progress  and  Challenges’,  which  takes  stock  of  the
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
institutional  reforms  of  monetary  policy  in  Latin  America  since  the  early  1990s,  was  widely
acknowledged.
8. Today, Mr. Carstens will speak on “ Central Banking and Innovation: Partners in the Quest for
Financial Inclusion”, – a topic which could easily be the most relevant at the current juncture. The
recent emergence of fintech or digital innovations in finance is potentially a strong transformative
force to shape the financial sector globally. A great benefit of these technological developments
is the scope to expand financial outreach in a cost effective manner. At the same time, however,
there are regulatory and supervisory challenges which the central banks across the globe need
to address.
9. The Reserve Bank is committed to promote and deepen the cause of financial inclusion in
India.  The  recent  developments  in  FinTech  have  given  a  fresh  impetus  to  financial  inclusion
process  in  the  country.  Taking  cognisance  of  exponential  growth  of  digitisation  and  online
commerce in India, policy efforts have been directed in recent years to put in place a state of the
art national payments infrastructure and technology platform.The Reserve Bank is continuously
aligning  its  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  so  that  the  evolution  of  FinTech  can  be
leveraged  to  widen  and  ease  the  financial  access  by  the  excluded  population.  In  view  of  the
growing significance of FinTech innovations and their interface with the financial sector as well
as financial sector entities, the Reseve Bank is strengthening its surveillance framework and has
also issued draft guidelines on “Enabling Framework for Regulatory Sandbox” for obtaining the
comments of stakeholders. Mr. Carstens’s talk today will surely give us relevant insights in this
direction.
Let me now invite Mr. Carstens to deliver his lecture.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
