Luis de Guindos: Global financial regulation - where next? Pending
tasks for regulators and macroprudential policy makers
Speech by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the London City
Week, London, 21 May 2019.
Introduction
 More  than  ten  years  have  passed  since  the  global  financial  crisis  triggered  a  comprehensive
regulatory reform process. Many important measures have been put in place since then. The title
of  the  next  panel  discussion  therefore  raises  a  very  pertinent  question  for  global  regulators:
where next?
Should regulators take a long break, as some stakeholders might quietly hope? Or is there still
work  to  be  done? As  you  might  imagine,  I  tend  towards  the  view  that  it  is  not  the  time  for
regulators to rest.
In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  touch  upon  three  areas  that  require  further  efforts.  First,  for  the
banking sector, we need to ensure the full and timely implementation of Basel III standards and a
proper evaluation of the effects of the reforms. Second, macroprudential policy based on robust
quantitative assessments should play a crucial role in sustaining the resilience of the financial
sector over the financial cycle. Third, we need to see active monitoring of the non-bank financial
sector, including from a system-wide perspective. This is because of the growing size and risk-
taking activity of non-banks which may call for macroprudential powers and tools in this area.
Evaluating the effects of reform and implementing the Basel III package
Let me start with reform implementation and assessment. As the post-crisis reform agenda for
the banking sector is now coming to an end, focus is gradually shifting towards evaluating the
effects of the reforms. Such evaluation work is an essential part of the policy process. It helps us
to  understand  whether  the  reforms  are  having  the  desired  effect,  and  to  identify  potential
unintended consequences that may have to be addressed. For these reasons, we fully support
the evaluation work being carried out under the aegis of the Financial Stability Board. We are also
1
conducting a number of evaluation projects of our own.
One recent study by ECB staff, for example, finds that the reforms that are already in place have
helped to make the euro area banking system safer. In particular, risks have been considerably
reduced,  and  euro  area  banks  are  now  better  able  to  withstand  shocks  of  the  kind  we  have
2
experienced in the past.
On the one hand, this is a reassuring result, illustrating the progress we have made over the last
few years. On the other hand, these results should not make us complacent. We need to keep
up our efforts and strive for the full, timely and consistent implementation of those elements of
the  reforms  that  are  still  missing.  For  the  EU,  these  include,  in  particular,  the  Fundamental
Review of the Trading Book and the Basel III finalisation package of December 2017. The latter
includes the so-called output floor, which limits the capital benefit a bank can gain from relying on
internal models rather than on the standardised approach.
Some argue that these and other reform elements are not well-suited to the European market,
and  that  they  would  have  a  disproportionate  impact  on  EU  banks.  Nevertheless,  while  the
reforms will require adjustment by some firms, the transition period – in particular for the output
floor – will help to smooth the transition and make the impact manageable for banks.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Overall,  I  am  deeply  convinced  that  the  reforms  are  necessary  to  restore  confidence  in  the
banking sector and will lead to a better prudential framework. It is thus essential that the entire
Basel  III  package  is  implemented  faithfully  and  consistently  so  that  we  can  maintain  a  level-
playing field at global level and ensure that the G20 framework delivers on its objectives.
Macroprudential policy and a macroprudential dimension to stress tests of the banking
sector
The implementation of these reforms will mark the end of a long journey since the global financial
crisis. Attention will shift towards ensuring the resilience of the banking sector over the financial
cycle. Our macroprudential policy framework and related quantitative assessments, providing a
macroprudential  dimension  to  stress  tests  of  the  banking  sector,  will  be  cornerstones  of  this
process.
Let me say a few words about our policy framework. Macroprudential powers were conferred on
the ECB in 2014. The ECB shares responsibility for macroprudential policy in the euro area with
the national authorities who actually implement macroprudential measures. The ECB is notified
of hundreds of national measures each year and the ECB’s Governing Council may then raise
objections.  The  ECB  can  also  tighten,  or  “top  up”,  should  measures  be  deemed  insufficient,
provided  that  these  refer  to  instruments  covered  in  European  legislation  –  the  Capital
Requirements Directive and the Capital Requirements Regulation.
The  combined  macroprudential  buffer  requirements  in  the  euro  area  currently  range  between
2.5%-  to  5.75%  depending  on  the  country.  Banks  directly  supervised  by  the  ECB  fall  in  the
categories of globally systemically important institutions (G-SIIs) or other systemically important
institutions  (O-SIIs)  and  are  thereby  subject  to  the  respective  capital  buffers.  Four  countries
(soon  to  be  five)  have  activated  the  systemic  risk  buffer,  while  two  have  activated  the
countercyclical  capital  buffer  with  a  further  three  announcing  positive  countercyclical  capital
3
buffer rates for the near future.
Looking ahead, macroprudential policy should play an important role in ensuring the resilience of
the  banking  sector  to  adverse  shocks.  At  this  stage  of  the  financial  cycle,  is  would  still  be
desirable for a number of euro area countries to build-up macroprudential buffers, in my view.
The  crisis  taught  us  that  we  must  be  vigilant  in  safeguarding  the  resilience  of  our  financial
system at times when vulnerabilities are building up.
The slower growth momentum we are seeing increases the risk of tail events, in other words,
shocks that are unlikely to occur, but would have a significant impact on the financial system and
the economy if they did. Bank capital plays a crucial role in absorbing these tail risks: it provides
solvency insurance and makes it more likely that banks will be able to continue to provide credit
during a downturn.
From a macroprudential perspective, then, the continued build-up of buffers could therefore be
justified, especially in those countries where the long upturn may have led to an underestimation
of credit risk or where private indebtedness is particularly high or rising.
Ensuring that buffers are adequate is not just a task for regulators. It is in the interest of banks
too. It contributes to restore confidence in the sector. Improving bank profitability in a sustainable
way,  for  example  by  adjusting  business  models,  would  help  banks  improve  their  capital
generation capacity while also making it easier for them to raise capital externally when needed.
This brings me to the concept of macroprudential stress testing, a key analytical tool that helps
us assess the resilience of the financial system over the cycle. Unlike regular supervisory stress
testing,  it  accounts  for  banks’  reaction  to  adverse  circumstances  and  its  impact  on  the  real
economy that may further stress banks’ operating environment. As such, it can provide a more
complete picture of banks’ performance and capital needs. It can therefore lead to more realistic
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
results for policy use.
The  ECB’s  macroprudential  stress  test  framework  not  only  tracks  the  resilience  of  individual
banking  institutions  but  also  accounts  for  how  banks  interact  with  each  other  and  how  their
actions feed back to the economy. It internalises the fact that banks may deleverage in response
to negative developments. It subsequently, takes into account the extent to which this adverse
credit  supply  shock  may  aggravate  the  downturn  leading  to  a  further  deterioration  in  banks’
balance sheets.
This framework complements the EU-wide stress testing exercises conducted under the aegis
of  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA),  which  are  mainly  of  a  micro-prudential  nature.  A
macroprudential exercise conducted in 2018 for banks directly supervised by the ECB  using the
baseline and adverse scenarios of the recent EBA stress test, confirmed the general resilience
of the euro area banking system. Bank deleveraging and feedback to the real economy would
however lead to a substantial drop in lending to the non-financial private sector. This would lead
to an additional fall in GDP of 1.6% across the euro area, on top of the original GDP shocks in the
adverse scenario over the three-year horizon.
4
This analytical framework can also help us to calibrate macroprudential policies. The framework
shows, for instance, that the timing of the activation of capital-based measures matters for their
effectiveness.  If  a  new  policy  tool  is  introduced  in  good  times,  banks  are  able  to  build  up
additional  capital  by  retaining  their  profits,  and  they  do  not  need  to  shrink  their  loan  books  to
improve their capital ratios. A new capital policy tool that is introduced in bad times however is
likely to trigger a reduction in credit and place an additional drag on the economy. Bad timing
increases  the  cost  of  macroprudential  and  regulatory  interventions,  potentially  rendering  such
measures counter-productive.
Risks and macroprudential policy for the non-bank financial sector
Let me now turn to the non-bank financial sector which is becoming ever more important for our
financial  system.  In  my  view,  work  on  the  regulatory  and,  in  particular,  the  macroprudential
framework for this sector is still in its early stages.
The share of market-based financing is likely to continue growing, not least in view of the efforts
made in the context of the capital markets union, which will have tangible benefits for the euro
area economy as a whole. More integrated and deeper European capital markets will promote a
more  diversified  funding  base  for  the  European  corporate  sector.  This,  in  turn,  will  help  firms
weather  a  possible  shock  to  the  banking  sector  and  a  resulting  decline  in  the  supply  of  bank
credit, as they would be able to draw on other – market-based – funding sources. But this can
only happen if market-based finance remains resilient in the face of such a shock.
The  benefits  of  a  growing  non-bank  financial  sector  are  currently  accompanied  by  potential
vulnerabilities. In search of higher yields, non-banks have accumulated more credit and liquidity
risks on their balance sheets. This renders them more vulnerable to the low credit quality and
high indebtedness in some segments of the corporate and government sector. Moreover, non-
banks may be contributing to the current cyclical underpricing of risk and helping to amplify the
upswing  in  the  wider  financial  cycle.  This  is  partly  because  non-banks  are  subject  to  lighter
regulatory constraints which in some cases allow them to take on more risks. If risks were to
unwind in a disorderly manner we could see funding flows dry-up and funding conditions in the
real economy affected more broadly.
If we were to reap the benefits of a deep and integrated European capital market, then, non-bank
financing needs to develop in a sustainable manner. In this changing environment, it is important
to  strengthen  our  risk  identification  and  monitoring  framework.  International  cooperation  is
needed to develop tools for stress testing but now at system-wide level, in the form of models
that  incorporate  both  banks  and  non-banks,  consider  feedback  and  amplification  from  the
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
interaction between sectors and look for tipping points and non-linear responses.
From a regulatory perspective, at least two lines of defence are needed to counter evolving risks.
First and foremost, prudential standards must remain solid in the non-bank financial sector. But
this alone will not be sufficient if risks evolve more broadly and across institutions. An extension
of the macroprudential toolkit to the non-bank financial sector is needed, thereby providing the
authorities  with  the  means  to  address  risks  at  the  system  level.  While  the  macroprudential
framework for banks is relatively well developed and gives authorities tools with which to address
cyclical  and  structural  systemic  risks,  the  framework  for  non-banks  is  still  in  its  infancy  and
needs  further  development.  Such  a  framework  would  need  to  be  capable  of  identifying  and
addressing the key fragilities and externalities stemming from the non-bank sector, and provide
authorities  with  the  tools  that  would  allow  them  to  achieve  this  in  an  efficient  and  effective
manner.
Concluding remarks
Let  me  conclude.  The  regulatory  community  has  been  striving  to  establish  a  framework  that
makes our financial system more resilient. While much has been achieved, I do not believe that
we can now rest on our laurels.
On  the  contrary,  in  particular  the  three  remaining  tasks  outlined  today  require  our  continued
effort.  The  Basel  III  package  for  the  banking  sector  should  be  implemented  in  a  timely  and
consistently manner across jurisdictions thereby ensuring that a level-playing field is preserved.
As attention shifts towards maintaining the resilience of the banking system over the financial
cycle, macroprudential policy and related quantitative assessments become prominent. Adding a
macroprudential  dimension  to  stress  tests  of  the  banking  sector  is  essential.  Finally,
developments in the non-bank financial sector call for an active monitoring and the extension of
the macroprudential policy toolkit to this sector.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
See the FSB framework for evaluating the effects of the G20 financial regulatory reforms.
See, for example, Carmassi, J., Corrias, R. and Parisi, L. (2019), “Is taxpayers’ money better protected now? An
assessment of banking regulatory reforms ten years after the global financial crisis”, Macroprudential Bulletin,
Issue 7, ECB, March. The results of this analytical work show that, on the one hand, the average probability of
default (PD) of euro area banks decreased from 3.5% in 2007 to 1.1% in 2017, less than a third of its pre-crisis
value. On the other hand, banks’ loss-absorbing capacity increased from 7.2% of total assets in 2007 to 16.9%
or 55.5% of total assets in 2017, depending on the assumptions on the scope of the bail-in. This increase in
loss-absorbing capacity was due to the introduction of larger capital buffers and the new resolution framework,
notably the bail-in tool and the potential intervention of the Single Resolution Fund. Considering the combination
of decreased PDs and enhanced loss-absorbing capacity, the ability of the banking system to absorb losses
while minimising the cost to taxpayers has increased more than three-fold over the last ten years under the
scenario of a narrower scope for the bail-in tool, and twelve-fold under the scenario of a broader scope for the
bail-in tool.
More details are available on the ECB website.
See Budnik K. (2019), “A bird’s-eye view of the resilience of the European banking system: results from the new
macroprudential stress test framework”, Macroprudential Bulletin, Issue 7, ECB, March.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
