Randal K Quarles: A decade of building stronger communities
Speech by Mr Randal K Quarles, Vice Chair for Supervision of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, at the Utah Center for Neighborhood Stabilization 10-Year Celebration,
Salt Lake City, Utah, 20 August 2019.
 Thank you for the kind introduction and for this opportunity to recognize the contributions of the
Utah  Center  for  Neighborhood  Stabilization  (UCNS)  to  the  vitality  of  our  state’s  communities.
Over its 10 years, UCNS has improved the lives of many aspiring homeowners, renters, and
1
small business owners and helped to build a more healthy and vibrant Utah.
As some of you may know, I grew up in Roy, not too far from here, and have lived in either the
Ogden  or  Salt  Lake  City  areas  for  many  decades. Although  I  spent  a  lot  of  my  professional
career in New York and London, and these days spend a good deal of my time in Washington,
D.C., this is still my home, as it is yours. Like many others, I’m thankful for the work of UCNS and
its affiliates, which are investing in the betterment of this city and other Utah communities and
working to ensure that the benefits of those investments extend to everyone living here.
I’ve spent most of my career in the private sector, and as I think about the approach of UCNS as
a nonprofit organization, I am struck by the extent of entrepreneurship you bring to your work.
Like many kinds of businesses, you deploy technical expertise and management skill to make
investments,  with  either  debt  or  equity  financing,  to  generate  healthy  returns.  Some  of  those
returns, measured in dollars, help you continue to carry out your mission, but some of them also
come in the form of promoting small businesses, affordable housing, and community facilities
such as recreation centers, health-care clinics, and childcare facilities, among other things that
build  stronger  communities.  Private-  and  public-sector  partners  who  support  community
development  value  entrepreneurship,  and  it  also  makes  for  a  healthier  and  more  sustainable
organization, which allows you to continue your important work.
By all evidence, UCNS is advancing its goals in spectacular fashion. I expect a large part of this
success  comes  from  the  collaborative  approach  that  you  take  to  those  efforts.  It  seems  that
collaboration is a common thread that runs through your programs. For example, that is apparent
in UCNS’s dedication to working closely with developers to finance affordable housing near high-
capacity transit. These important investments help workers get access to the transportation they
need to get to work, without a longer commute that strains finances and detracts from family life.
Housing  affordability  is  a  growing  challenge  in  Utah,  and  promoting  mass  transit—among
UCNS’s other objectives—has a role to play in keeping housing and transportation affordable.
A collaborative approach also shows up in the close partnership that UCNS has had with local
governments  to  establish  and  maintain  the  Utah  Small  Business  Growth  Initiative,  which
supports  economic  development  and  job  creation  by  helping  small  businesses  qualify  for
financing with banks or other financial institutions.
And  collaboration  is  apparent  in  your  work  with  lenders  and  affordable  housing  providers  to
facilitate the acquisition, rehab, and sale of foreclosed homes to lower-income borrowers, which
helps those families secure the dignity and wealth-building opportunity that comes with stable
homeownership.
This  kind  of  cross-sector  collaboration  between  the  private,  public,  and  nonprofit  sectors  is
critically important to extending economic opportunity and access to financial services to low-
and moderate-income families. I am happy to report that organizations like UCNS have an active
partner in the Federal Reserve, through our community development function, when it comes to
supporting these types of partnerships. I will highlight just a few examples of work the Fed has
recently undertaken that intersects with the work of UCNS.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
As is the case in Utah, families in many states across the country face challenges in finding good
quality housing they can afford. The Federal Reserve is actively engaged on this issue, and has
conducted  research  and  brought  together  stakeholders  to  understand  it  better  and  consider
solutions. As many of you in this room probably know, Utah is located within the district of the
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. In September 2014, the San Francisco Fed co-hosted
a symposium that explored innovative models for supporting equitable development, including the
development of affordable housing, around public transit investment. The event brought together
community development financial institutions, local transit authorities, banks, policymakers, and
other stakeholders and included participants from Salt Lake City. More recently, in August 2018,
the San Francisco Fed hosted a roundtable here to gather key decisionmakers to discuss ways
the city and county could reduce barriers and provide more incentives for the development of
housing that is affordable to lower-income families. In March of this year, the San Francisco Fed
published  an  analysis  of  public-private  loan  funds  for  the  construction  and  preservation  of
affordable housing.  The study spells out the relative advantages of different types of funds for
different  kinds  of  projects—preservation  versus  development,  for  example—and  details  which
funds are best for the early, middle, or late stages of a project.
2
Turning to support for small businesses, community development staffers across the Federal
Reserve  conduct  extensive  research  and  analysis  of  the  challenges  and  opportunities  facing
small business owners. For example, the 12 Federal Reserve Banks collaborate on the annual
Small Business Credit Survey, which surveys business owners about their financing needs and
experiences  to  provide  timely  insights  to  policymakers,  service  providers,  and  lenders.   In
addition  to  providing  information  on  small  business  credit  conditions,  the  Federal  Reserve  is
trying  to  advance  understanding  of  the  best  economic  development  strategies  for  supporting
small businesses. The Kansas City Fed has helped lead on these issues through its “Grow Your
Own”  entrepreneurship-based  economic  development  guidebook,  and  its  2018  Growing
4
Entrepreneurial Communities Summit.
3
These  are  just  a  few  of  the  ways  that  Federal  Reserve  Banks  and  the  Board  of  Governors
support the efforts of community development organizations. I hope that our work will be useful
as you chart a path forward for your second decade of service to Utah, and I look forward to
continued collaboration between the Federal Reserve and community development organizations
such as UCNS. Together, we can help support thriving communities across the Wasatch Front,
the  state  of  Utah,  and  across  our  nation.  Thank  you  again  for  inviting  me  to  speak,  and
congratulations again for 10 years of building stronger communities in Utah.
1234
1
2
3
4
UCNS is the parent organization of four separate organizations that, in combination, work to advance access to
affordable housing, including homeownership and housing near high-capacity or high-frequency transit; support
economic  development  and  job  creation  by  funding  small  businesses;  and  improve  access  to  important
community infrastructure. 
2. Elizabeth Mattiuzzi, “Funds for Kickstarting Affordable Housing Preservation and Production: Lessons for New
Investors,” Community Development Research Briefs (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,
March 2019). Return to text
See www.fedsmallbusiness.org/ for more information.
The  guidebook  is  available  at www.kansascityfed.org/~/media/files/publicat/community/gyo/entrepreneurship-
econ-dev-local-communities.pdf.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
