Adnan  Zaylani  Mohamad  Zahid:  Leadership,  values,  ethics  and
Islamic finance - the next generation of Islamic financial institutions
Keynote address by Mr Adnan Zaylani Mohamad Zahid, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the IFN Asia Forum 2019, Kuala Lumpur, 23 April 2019.
 Allow me to first begin by thanking the organiser for inviting me to deliver the keynote address at
this annual IFN Asia Forum. It is a pleasure to be here this morning in the company of such a
diverse gathering of Islamic finance professionals and weigh in on an important subject of which
the  organiser  had  kindly  assigned  me;  “Leadership,  Values,  Ethics  and  Islamic  Finance:  The
Next Generation of Islamic Financial Institutions".
For many of us, the 2008 global financial crisis will be one of the major events that stays with us
throughout  our  careers.  In  Asia,  we  had  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis  in  1998  which  was
momentous but given the scale and its far reaching impact, the 2008 crisis has left far larger
imprints. More than a decade has passed, yet we continue to live under its shadows. A world that
has grown at a slower pace, in a low inflation, bordering on deflationary risk environment for the
better part of a decade. Banking and financial regulations that undoubtedly have strengthened the
resilience of the system, but could have had unintended consequences on growth. During this
time, a multitude of financial misconducts have been uncovered that have deeply impacted the
global financial sector and damaged its reputation. In many parts of the system, not only has the
crisis  sparked  a  rethinking  of  the  economic  architecture,  the  stability  and  resilience  of  the
financial sector, it has also laid bare, the absence or lack of values and ethics in finance. This
lack of moral compass and its role that contributed to the global financial crisis has resulted in a
loss of trust in finance, prompting a need to restore integrity and trust in financial institutions and
market players.
This should not greatly surprise us. After all, the influential works of economic thinkers that came
to shape many economic and financial policies before the crisis, had as its fundamental basis,
that people who are driven by self-interest, would be able to produce the best outcome for the
economy  and  society.  This  reminds  of  an  earlier  quote  attributed  to  John  Maynard  Keynes;
‘Capitalism is the extraordinary belief that the nastiest of men, for the nastiest of motives, will
somehow  work  together  for  the  benefit  of  all’.  Today,  this  lack  of  moral  compass  and  base
motivation  for  financial  and  economic  decision  making  rings  hollow.  Society  desires  higher
motives and a greater sense of purpose. Supporting this must be a stronger sense of ethics and
values. In the mainstream or conventional financial system, many institutions and practitioners
have  latched  onto  sustainability,  environmental  and  governance  themes  and  standards  as  a
manifestation  of  this.  Finance  must  serve  the  good  and  is  no  longer  about  greed  and  self-
interest.
Raising  the  impact  of  Islamic  finance  to  the  economy  and  society  through  stronger
leadership, values and ethics
Islamic  finance  has  always  been  subjected  to  higher  overarching  objectives  that  place  ethical
and moral conduct at its centre. The Maqasid Shariah first articulated by al-Ghazali in the 12th
century  and  developed  further  by  later  scholars,  speaks  towards  preservation  of  religion,  life,
family, mind and property with the ultimate aim of prevention of harm and attainment of benefits.
At the onset, such objectives entail the prohibition of any unethical or unlawful conduct in Islamic
finance while putting in place features of an  embedded governance that support the highest level
of  integrity  and  good  conduct  within  Islamic  finance.  This  is  achieved  through  the  branch  of
Shariah  of  Fiqh  Muamalat  which  governs  business  and  financial  relationships  in  the  Islamic
economy. The main objective of Islamic economics itself is the human well-being, a concept that
not  only  cuts  across  the  necessities  of  Maqasid  Shariah,  but  also  extends  towards  a  more
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
comprehensive social and economic aspiration for the betterment of the material and spiritual
well-being of a society.
Islamic finance therefore naturally has the potential to take the lead striving towards an ethical,
moral and also sustainable model for finance in the global financial system. In developing the
Islamic financial system, these unique propositions are drawn out further from underlying Shariah
principles. Islamic finance practitioners in principle, are at a minimum, duty-bound to observe the
norms of high ethical conduct to uphold the values and the sanctity of Shariah. Principles alone
however, do not insulate Islamic finance from experiencing conduct risks. Examples in the past
from  various  cases  of  frauds,  breach  of  trust  and  mismanagement  have  occurred,  exposing
Islamic  finance  to  reputational  risks.  Operational  safeguards  remain  critical  in  the  day-to-day
decision  making  and  business  operations.  Islamic  finance  must  also  continuously  reflect  on
whether the governance arrangements, practices and business models of their institutions are
effective and impactful.
Islamic finance can lead in financial inclusion and governance
Today, Islamic finance has already established itself and garnered significance in many parts of
the world. Though much of this appeared as a natural outgrowth of growing prosperity in many
Muslim countries, it did require governmental support and regulatory pushes. In Malaysia, where
the  modern  form  of  Islamic  finance  has  developed  for  over  40  years,  the  national  strategy  to
develop Islamic banking and finance was driven from two perspectives, as an initial strategy for
financial inclusion and to later on position the country as a leader in Islamic finance.
In  financial  inclusion,  Islamic  finance  played  an  important  role  in  bringing  those  who  exclude
themselves  from  the  conventional  system  on  religious  grounds.  Demographically,  Muslim
households  make  up  the  majority  in  our  country,  including  that  of  the  B40  income  category.
There  is  a  natural  affinity  to  subscribe  to  Islamic  finance.  Nevertheless,  outreach  beyond  the
urban areas always requires additional effort. Now, with the help of technology, Islamic finance is
playing  a  greater  role  in  expanding  outreach  of  financial  services  and  increasing  financial
inclusion. Digitally-enabled financial services are resulting in greater access, quality and usage of
financial services. Islamic banking and takaful customers are able to equally benefit from online
and  mobile  banking  services,  and  enjoy  seamless  business  transactions  through  digital
platforms  for  supply  chain  finance.  Digitisation  of  Islamic  products  and  instruments  has  even
contributed in specific initiatives of enhancing financial inclusion, such as the online application of
takaful products that offer affordable and easy to understand protection plans with a convenient
claims process. The Islamic banking industry’s recent launch of the myWakaf portal is another
such initiative to enable easier and more effective wakaf contributions by individuals to selected
projects such as education, healthcare, investment and economic empowerment.
In our leadership aspiration in Islamic finance, key areas that were and are emphasised are in
governance  and  ethics.  Strong  corporate  governance  and  leadership  are  crucial  to  uphold
Shariah values and raise the impact of Islamic finance to the economy and society. A robust
Shariah  governance  framework  within  Islamic  financial  institutions  is  a  must  to  ensure  that
Shariah values are internalised and upheld in business practices. The Islamic Financial Services
Act  2013  accords  due  recognition  to  the  importance  of  governance  structure  within  Islamic
financial institutions.  In practice, Shariah compliance is supported in Malaysia under a two-tier
governance structure that operates at the industry and institutional levels. This comprises the
Shariah Advisory Council of Bank Negara Malaysia as the highest authority in the ascertainment
of  Islamic  law  for  Islamic  financial  business;  and  a  Shariah  committee  setup  in  each  Islamic
financial institution to advise the management and the board on all matters relating to Shariah
issues that are specific to the institution. Currently, we are in the midst of revising the Shariah
Governance Framework to further strengthen it by providing, among others, greater clarity on the
roles,  responsibilities  and  accountabilities  of  the  board,  Shariah  committee  and  key  organs
involved  in  instituting  a  robust  Shariah  compliance  risk  culture.  Through  the  governance,
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
application  of  Shariah  will  be  more  closely  integrated  with  the  business  and  risk  strategies  of
Islamic financial institutions.
These efforts, and many more, have culminated in an unparalleled growth in the Islamic banking
market share which grew six fold over the last 20 years. Islamic banking system now comprises
over 30% of the overall. Takaful has also grown in acceptance, registering double digit growth
rates  outpacing  the  conventional  counterpart  for  the  past  few  years.  Ar-Rahnu,  Islamic
investment  accounts  are  becoming  more  familiar  products  among  Malaysians.  We  have  also
become  and  have  maintained  a  position  among  the  world’s  largest  sukuk  issuers.  Islamic
finance is thriving and competitive.
Islamic financial institutions should consider the wider impact of their activities
Beyond this, Islamic finance is also spearheading initiatives in sustainable finance with Islamic
banking  institutions  championing  the  implementation  of  Value-based  Intermediation  (VBI).
Through  VBI,  Islamic  financial  institutions  adopt  a  highly  structured  framework  to  assess  how
they  create  value  and  impact,  for  example,  from  economic,  social  and  environmental
perspectives. VBI accords equal emphasis to economic value creation and upholding of ethical
values,  and  strengthens  Islamic  finance  as  a  “uniting  force  for  good”.  The  VBI  initiative  is
currently bringing together the banking groups through a pioneering Community of Practitioners
(CoP)  to  advance  the  sustainability  agenda  in  a  collaborative,  concerted  and  synergistic
approach.  This  includes  forming  close  engagement  with  organisations  that  share  similar
sustainability aspirations.
Through VBI, Islamic banks are taking the lead in advancing finance for the good. While these
banks are still at early stages in their journeys, there are already concrete examples of VBI being
put into action today as we see progress in embedding its elements in their financial products,
practices and operations. Though VBI has a far wider scope, these early applications capitalise
on  contemporary  sustainability  themes.  These  include  preferential  financing  rates  for  hybrid
vehicles  and  green  buildings,  specialised  financing  scheme  for  women  entrepreneurs  and
issuance  of  the  world’s  first  Sustainable  Development  Goals  (SDG)  sukuk.  Where  VBI  goes
beyond are in provision of non-financial services bundled in financial solutions such as advisory,
business  network  and  relevant  infrastructures  to  groom  small  clients  with  business  potentials
such as SMEs and micro finance.  Alongside this move towards responsible financing, the CoP
members are actively reviewing their business portfolios, identifying and prioritising VBI issues
within their institutions and building the required capacity. The banks’ progress and effectiveness
of VBI-related initiatives would be captured through the VBI Scorecard. The underpinning thrusts
of VBI are also gaining relevance in the takaful industry as takaful operators are taking initial steps
in  exploring  value-based  protection  for  their  customers.  Given  the  universal  nature  of  VBI,  I
believe that its adoption by financial groups which comprise the conventional financial institutions,
as well as issuers and investors would be a natural evolution in the financial ecosystem.
Expectations on the next generation of Islamic financial institutions
The next generation of Islamic financial institutions would thus be driven by values and not just
profit.  With  a  moral  outlook  for  the  ultimate  good,  strengthened  by  self-discipline,  greater
accountability and integrity, Islamic financial institutions will have stronger consideration of the
impact of decisions made. There should be greater drive to continuously improve their offerings
and  treatments  towards  customers  and  employees,  which  include  fair  and  transparent
disclosure  in  order  to  increase  the  positive  impact  of  their  activities.  Development  of  banking
practices based on VBI concepts are also anticipated to encourage the creation of new business
opportunities and provide the foundation for better returns for Islamic banks over the long term.
An  example  is  assessment  of  financing  application  by  Islamic  banks  based  on  value-creation
instead of mere credit scoring which would benefit business propositions from new sectors such
as SMEs. Another example is refocusing, strengthening and repositioning of personal financing
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
by Islamic banks to best meet the needs and circumstances of customers.  In time, there may
emerge  greater  differentiation  between  VBI  and  non-VBI  institutions  which  will  be  better
understood by shareholders, fund providers and financial markets more generally. Furthermore,
the more comprehensive and holistic approach of VBI in advancing the good for society could
prove to be a key competitive advantage that will influence and shape the future of the financial
industry.
The drive for positive changes in the Islamic financial services industry however requires a major
paradigm  shift  in  many  institutions.  It  takes  a  long  view  to  recognise  returns  beyond  financial
profits where social and environmental gains are also highly valued. It will also take increasing
professionalism  and  high  quality  talent  that  will  contribute  to  this  transformation  of  mind  and
culture. In Malaysia, we can readily leverage on the available Islamic finance talent development
ecosystem, which has a comprehensive and diversified range of offerings, spanning tertiary and
professional  education,  research,  training  and  consultancy  services  which  are  globally-
recognised.  The  implementation  of  VBI  has  already  galvanised  many  stakeholders  including
institutions of higher learning such as the International Centre for Education in Islamic Finance
(INCEIF)  and  International  Shariah  Research Academy  (ISRA)  to  undertake  impactful  applied
research  that  advances  the  implementation  progress  of  VBI  by  the  financial  industry.  Indeed,
Islamic  finance  has  greatly  benefited  through  these  institutions  that  have  contributed  towards
enlarging  the  pool  of  Islamic  finance  professionals  and  deepening  expertise  through  various
programmes and initiatives. At the same time, these institutions have also grown in recognition.
INCEIF  for  example,  has  been  awarded  the  prestigious  accreditation  by  the  Association  to
Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACBS) International in recognition of its excellence in
various areas, including its diverse programmes that have benefitted students from more than 80
countries.
Besides talent, strong and visionary leadership in particular at the Board and Senior Management
will  be  crucial  for  success  in  this  paradigm  shift.  This  leadership  and  strong  professionalism
must continuously be complimented with the right ethics to transform the culture, systems and
people. Nurturing talent also needs to be extended to the board level. In Malaysia, directors can
gain greater appreciation on the dynamics of Shariah principles through programmes such as
the Islamic Finance for Board of Directors Programme. This specialised Islamic finance training
programme builds on the core foundations on corporate governance as set out in the Financial
Institutions  Directors’  Education  programme.  Directors  would  also  be  exposed  to  diverse
perspectives from within and beyond the Islamic banking community on contemporary issues in
the industry.
Let me conclude. The Islamic financial sector has made great strides over the recent decades.
The next growth frontier in Islamic finance however lies in realising its potential to create greater
socio-economic  impact.  Values  and  ethics,  strongly  instilled  would  strengthen  trust  between
people  and  the  system.  For  the  Islamic  finance  industry,  the  move  towards  embracing  VBI
manifests the larger aspiration of Islamic finance. In shaping positive behaviour amongst industry
players,  Islamic  finance  can  become  a  leading  agent  of  change  and  bring  about  sustainable
positive impacts to the economy and society. Translating this vision into reality then requires our
collective efforts, steered by strong and capable leadership.
On that note, I wish you a productive forum ahead.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
