Benjamin E Diokno: Continuity, collaboration and a better future
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the 1st Fintech Alliance Summit, Manila, 26 March 2019.
 FinTech Alliance  Philippines  Chairman  Lito  Villanueva,  Fintech Alliance  Philippines  members,
industry partners, fellow Monetary Board Members, Ms. Tess Espenilla and family, colleagues
 from the BSP, and workers in government, friends from the media, esteemed guests, ladies and
gentlemen, good morning.
I am honored to be your keynote speaker during the 1  FinTech  Alliance Summit. This is my
first  time,  as  BSP  Governor,  to  address  the  country’s  leading  companies  in  the  financial
technology sector.
st
1
As  such,  today  is  an  opportune  time  to  share  with  you  that  I  FULLY  SUPPORT AND  WILL
CARRY FORWARD OUR FINANCIAL INCLUSION  AGENDA so that financial services are made
more accessible to a greater number of Filipinos.  In fact, I expressed the same during my first
press conference as BSP Governor earlier this month. Thus, I am indeed glad that you chose
“Inclusion and Digital Transformation” as conference theme because this is truly in line with my
policy priorities.                                                                     
Launch  of  the  Governor  Nestor  A.  Espenilla,  Jr.  Institute  for  Growth  and  National
Inclusion, Transformation and Empowerment (IGNITE)
I  understand  that  most  of  you  here  had  the  great  opportunity  to  work  closely  with  my
predecessor,  the  late  Nestor A.  Espenilla,  Jr.,  who  championed  financial  inclusion  and  digital
transformation.  
We are all undoubtedly inspired by the life and work of Gov. Nesting. It is thus fitting that later this
morning, we shall witness the launch of the Governor Nestor A. Espenilla, Jr. Institute for Growth
and National Inclusion, Transformation, and Empowerment or IGNITE.
IGNITE  is  a  multi-stakeholder,  research-based  and  data-driven  advocacy.  It  is  a  social
transformation  platform  that  leverages  on  technology  to  empower  financially  unserved  and
underserved Filipinos for more inclusive growth.
I hope that with IGNITE, we can open a world of new possibilities and better opportunities to the
financially excluded. As plans are being finalized, let us continue putting our collective energies
behind this project, and to push forward our inclusive growth agenda at full speed.
To Ms. Tess Espenilla and family, may you take comfort in knowing that his legacy continues to
live—and today it once again speaks to us—urging each and every one of us to do our share to
make our society more inclusive. Together, let us leverage on technological innovations to help
fuel the financial inclusion movement, just as Gov. Nesting would have wanted.
BSP Approach to Digital Transformation
We pursue inclusion amid a global financial ecosystem that is in a state of digital transformation.
Of course, you are all well aware of that—as fintech firms are a big reason for it.
This transformation has completely altered the business landscape and has moved traditional
financial  institutions  to  adapt  and  innovate.  Furthermore,  increasing  consumer  demands  for
better financial products and services have driven digitalization to become a strategic priority for
both  financial  and  non-financial  corporates.  There  is  no  denying  it.  The  digital  revolution  has
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
arrived. And it is here to stay.
Digitalization is expected to become an essential aspect of how we do business, almost as a
matter of routine. Digital transformation should therefore spur a complete change in mindset to
allow for continuous and consistent innovation. We should allow ourselves to think differently, to
grow in the midst of change. As H.G. Wells, a futurist English writer, said in his timeless quote,
“Adapt or perish, now as ever, is nature’s inexorable imperative.”
Rightfully  so,  the  same  applies  to  financial  regulatory  authorities.  Today’s  rapid  digital
transformation requires not just new regulations but demands fresh and bold approaches. Ladies
and gentlemen, I am proud to say that BSP remains a thought a leader in this regard.
To note, in its 2018 Global Microscope report, the Economist Intelligence Unit said the BSP “has
been ahead of the curve in identifying opportunities and setting guidelines for financial inclusion.”
The  research  arm  of  The  Economist  Group  also  recognized  that  BSP’s  focus  on  “creating  a
digital  finance  ecosystem  has  led  to  the  introduction  of  a  sound  payments  infrastructure  that
helps various financial sector players to reduce their costs and further their outreach.”
Said recognition is a reflection of BSP’s proactive approach to digital transformation. Needless to
say that we support responsible fintechs, given their link to increased efficiencies and greater
depth of outreach, which are often considered as pain points of legacy financial institutions. We
likewise welcome the growth opportunities brought about by the entry of a growing number of
fintech firms into the financial services space.
In  light  of  these  developments,  the  BSP  remains  committed  to  establishing  a  regulatory
environment  that  allows  digital  transformations  to  thrive. At  the  same  time,  we  are  mindful  of
attendant  risks  and  any  unintended  consequences  that  technological  innovations  may  bring,
especially when it comes to consumer and data protection.
Because of this, a deliberate part of our strategy is to further deepen our financial education and
consumer  protection  initiatives.  This  balanced  regulatory  approach  is  anchored  on  the  core
principles of risk-based, proportionate and fair regulation; active multi-stakeholder collaboration;
and, consumer protection.
These principles are pragmatically implemented through our flexible “test and learn” approach in
dealing  with  increasing  digital  transformations  in  the  financial  system.  This  provides  an
opportunity for fintechs to participate in the financial system thru collaborations with banks and
other  financial  industry  players  to  achieve  greater  scale,  within  the  regulatory  environment
established by the BSP.     
In  addition,  we  are  likewise  coordinating  and  cooperating  with  other  domestic  and  foreign
regulators  for  possible  information  sharing  and  referral  system  especially  focused  on  fintech
firms. The ultimate objective of our regulatory approach to digital transformation is to be aware of
risks and employ mitigating actions as needed, but only in a manner that also allows benefits
leveraging on these innovations.
In  the  last  three  years,  the  BSP  has  been  preparing  the  groundwork  for  an  expanded  digital
finance  ecosystem,  one  marked  by  diversity  of  players  responding  to  the  varying  needs  of
businesses and individuals, especially those that have been traditionally unserved.
We issued rules to open up the electronic payment rails to more players, (Cir. 980 and 1000);
provided  guidelines  on  virtual  currency  exchanges  as  an  emerging  alternative  remittance
business  model  (Cir.  942  and  944);  allowed  banks  to  exponentially  expand  reach  by  tapping
ubiquitous  retail  outlets  as  cash  agents  (Cir.  940);  and  provided  greater  clarity  on  customer
onboarding  for  low-risk  clients  who  need  formal  financial  services  but  lack  conventional
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
identification documentation (Cir. 950 and 1022).
BSP Legislative Advocacies Bearing Fruit
While these issuances have helped create an enabling environment for innovations to flourish,
BSP recognizes that ushering the country to a new era of digital transformation and inclusive
growth  requires  new  regulatory  tools.  With  the  commitment  and  perseverance  of  my
predecessors  as  well  as  the  support  of  our  lawmakers  and  the  National  Government,  our
legislative advocacies have borne fruit with the passage of the landmark laws for the financial
system.
In October 2018, Republic Act (RA) No. 11127, or the National Payment Systems Act (NPSA)
was  signed  into  law.  The  NPSA  is  a  comprehensive  legal  framework  supporting  the  twin
objectives of maintaining a payment system necessary to control systemic risk and providing an
environment conducive to sustainable growth.
It fosters a level playing field for all participants under a single overarching legal and regulatory
framework.  This  will  bring  about  greater  efficiencies,  foster  digital  innovations  and  promote
“coopetition”– a combination for cooperation and competition – in the financial services industry.
To cope with all these rapid technological changes, there is clearly a need to make BSP more
capable,  efficient,  agile,  stakeholder-oriented  and 
therefore,  cannot
overemphasize the critical importance of the amendments to the BSP Charter with the signing of
RA No.  11211  just last month.
future-ready.  We, 
The  new  BSP  Charter  embodies  a  package  of  reforms  that  places  central  banking  in  the
Philippines at the forefront of modern central banking, improves the BSP’s corporate viability, and
enhances its capacity to craft proactive policies amid rising interlinkages in the financial markets
and the broader economy.
Under our new Charter, the BSP shall continue fostering price and financial stability, with a clear
view that our efforts are ultimately aimed at enhancing the economic wellbeing of Filipinos.
BSP  is  also  working  closely  with  the  Philippine  Statistics  Authority  and  other  government
agencies on the successful implementation of the Philippine Identification System, as provided
under RA No. 11055 signed by the President in August 2018.
PhilSys aims to provide every Filipino a unique and verifiable digital ID and is envisioned to be a
platform for innovations in  consumer  service  delivery.  With  PhilSys,  all  Filipinos  can  have  the
tools to meaningfully participate in the gains of an increasingly digitalized economy.
We believe that with these regulatory and legislative initiatives, the requisite foundation for digital
transformation has been put in place to support industry players called to respond to the needs of
Filipino consumers.
Collaborating and Innovating with Purpose
Whether you are a market pioneer or a startup, Financial service providers must recognize that
tapping into the latest technology will not be enough; greater collaboration and more meaningful
partnerships present the best path towards financial inclusion and inclusive growth.
Strategic partnerships between agile fintechs and experienced financial institutions in the shared
financial  space  will  help  unlock  doors  to  new,  untapped  possibilities.  Greater  collaboration  is
therefore  needed  to  help  scale  innovative  products  and  solutions  and  enable  it  to  reach
previously unchartered territories.
While this remains easier said than done, the life-changing impact of technology–especially for
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
those living in underserved and unserved communities–should be reason enough to drive greater
and more meaningful collaboration among firms.
As we commend its promised benefits, let us not forget that innovation is not the end-goal, but a
means  to  an  end.  We  must  innovate  with  a  purpose  to  serve  the  common  good  and  with
customer-centricity as a guiding principle. 
Digital  innovations  should  drive  inclusivity,  improve  customer  experience,  and  deliver  real
welfare-enhancing benefits for all Filipinos. Only then can we truly say that technology-enabled
innovations have delivered on their promises.
Conclusion: A Challenge to Provide a Better Future
As I come to the end of my talk, I would like to share with you my philosophy that has served me
well in my decades-long career as a public servant. And since you will be talking about inclusion
and digital transformation extensively later today, I think you will also find wisdom in the Oath of
the Athenian City State. I chanced upon it when I went to Syracuse University for my Ph.D. It is a
powerful oath of citizenship, engraved prominently in the dignified beauty of the foyer of Maxwell
Hall, housing the Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs. It reads:
“We will ever strive for the ideals and sacred things of the city, both alone and with many; we will
unceasingly seek to quicken the sense of public duty; we will revere and obey the city’s laws; we
will transmit this City not only, not less, but greater and more beautiful than it was transmitted to
us.”
Though I left Syracuse University in 1981, what I learned at Maxwell remains vital to my life. I saw
the words as transcending generations and an appeal to the conscience of every citizen, of our
joint responsibility to spend a lifetime to lift the people around us. To take on the challenge to
transmit our country, the Philippines, “not only less, but greater, better and more beautiful than it
was transmitted to us.”
Whatever you do, you do it for the person who comes after you. Gov. Nesting had done his part. 
Now, the world is your (digital) playground. Go transform it! Together, let us provide our fellow
Filipinos a better future!
Maraming salamat at mabuhay ang Pilipinas!
1
Fintech (financial technology) refers to the integration of finance and technology in a manner that drives the
transformation or disruption of the traditional processes in financial service delivery.  New business models
driven by fintech can create new risks in different segments of the financial system, or accentuate some existing
risks.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
