Sharon  Donnery:  The  departure  of  the  UK  from  the  EU  –
implications for the Irish economy and financial system
Internal dinner address by Ms Sharon Donnery, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland,
to visiting staff from other central banks, Dublin, 5 March 2019.
Introduction
 1
First, welcome to Dublin! It is a great pleasure join you this evening.
The departure of the UK is particularly important for us in the Central Bank of Ireland given:
The significant trade and investment links with the UK mean that the Irish economy is more
exposed to the risks from the UK’s departure than any others, apart from the UK;
The largest domestic Irish banks have very substantial UK exposures and any deterioration
in the UK economy could impact on their asset quality;
Dublin  is  one  of  the  small  number  of  European  capitals  that  is  likely  to  see  considerable
inward  investment  of  financial  sector  firms,  which  will  significantly  affect  the  size  and
complexity of the financial system here;
In policy fora, Ireland will lose a close ally on certain issues; and
UK firms passport into Ireland across a range of sectors including insurance and payments
services, for example, and for consumers there will be implications when this is no longer
possible.
Therefore, in this context, in my remarks this evening, I will first take the opportunity to outline the
broad  approach  we  have  taken  in  the  Central  Bank  in  our  preparations.  I  will  then  go  on  to
discuss  some  of  the  contingency  planning  and  outline  some  specific  areas  where  public
authorities have had to take action. Third, I will outline the structure of the Irish economy and
discuss some of the more macroeconomic aspects to the departure of the UK. I will highlight
some of the channels through which a no-deal/no-transition outcome would affect the economy
here in Ireland. Finally, I will conclude with some thoughts on life after the UK’s exit for European
authorities.
Our broad approach
In  addition  to  our  national  central  banking  functions,  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  also  acts  as
national  competent  authority  for  the  supervision  of  credit  institutions,  investment  firms,  and
insurance firms. The Central Bank is also the securities and markets regulator and the national
financial conduct authority, as well as being the national macroprudential authority and national
resolution authority. Given this wide range of mandates, we must look at economic and financial
sector  issues  in  a  holistic  fashion,  and  this  is  particularly  the  case  for  Brexit.  This  means
analysing  the  macroeconomic  effects  and  addressing  possible  financial  stability  implications,
ensuring  firms  across  the  whole  financial  system  are  prepared,  and  minimising  the  potential
impact on consumers.
The  international  nature  of  the  financial  sector  here  means  we  cooperate  closely  with  our
European  partners:  not  just  the  ECB  and  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  but  also  the
Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM)  as  well  as  extensive  engagement  with  the  European
Supervisory Authorities (ESAs): the European Banking Authority (EBA), the European Insurance
and  Occupational  Pensions  Authority  (EIOPA)  and  the  European  Securities  and  Markets
Authority (ESMA).
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
We consider the work we undertake on international engagement to be of such importance that it
is one of the five strategic priorities in our three year Strategic Plan we launched earlier in the
2
year (the UK leaving the EU is another).
Broadly speaking our work on the UK leaving the EU has focused on four key areas. These are
ensuring that:
1.  Risks to the Irish economy and consumers are understood;
2.  Regulated firms prepare appropriately for all scenarios;
3.  Where necessary, the required policy and legal adjustments are prepared to counteract the
cliff-edge risks of a hard exit to the delivery of vital financial services; and
4.  We  perform  our  gatekeeper  role  in  a  robust  and  efficient  manner  for  new  firms  seeking
3
authorisations or existing firms revising business plans.
To  meet  these  objectives,  we  established  a  Task  Force  in  2016.  More  recently  a  Steering
Committee was set up to oversee the final stages of the Central Bank’s preparations for cliff-
edge risk mitigation. In line with our commitment to transparency, the reports of the Task Force
4
are regularly published in redacted format.
We  have  made  every  effort  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system  has  the  necessary  level  of
resilience to avoid financial stability risks in the event of a no-deal scenario. Our preparations
have involved a significant amount of engagement with financial firms and this has focused on
ensuring that all necessary steps have been taken to mitigate the risks to their customers and
businesses from the UK’s exit, with a particular focus on a disorderly scenario.
The scale and complexity of the Irish financial system has already changed considerably as a
result of the UK leaving the EU. Work dealing with the authorisation or extension of business for
over 100 firms has required the Central Bank to substantially increase our workforce as well as
prioritising  and  reallocating  our  existing  resources  to  ensure  that  we  took  decisions  in  an
effective, efficient, predictable and timely fashion.
The Central Bank does not view the authorisation process through a solely domestic lens – we
are cognisant that the standards we hold firms to are relevant for the entire EU27 single market
in  financial  services.  Cooperation  with  the  SSM  and  the  ESAs  has  therefore  been  crucial  to
ensure a level playing field and avoid regulatory arbitrage or a race to the bottom.
Broadly  speaking,  while  we  continually  assess  the  risks  and  challenges  posed  by  the  UK’s
departure to the overall financial system in Ireland, we have not provided a blueprint for firms to
follow when considering their own particular risks. Firms are responsible for their own plans to
mitigate  risks  to  their  businesses  and  customers.  We  have  stressed  this  point  clearly  and
consistently through our supervisory work and in our public communications. In the cases when
firms have not made plans – we have made our concerns known. Additionally, there are some
areas  where  the  Bank,  with  other  public  authorities,  have  had  to  intervene  to  put  in  place
measures to mitigate specific financial stability concerns.
Contingency planning
One area which has been of particular importance is the effect a no-deal scenario would have on
the use of a UK-based central securities depository (CSD) by the Irish market.
Securities settlement is a central component of the financial system.
For those unfamiliar with market infrastructure issues, in simple terms, when shares in a stock
or other securities – like government or corporate bonds – are bought and sold, they are settled
at a central securities depository or CSD. Securities settlement systems provide the institutional
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
and technical infrastructure that allows trading to happen.
Today  paper  certificates  are  rarely  used  –  since  so-called  dematerialisation  –  the  settlement
system has operated on a real-time basis. The Irish market however is unique in the area of
securities settlement due to the fact that it has no domestic infrastructure and utilises a number
of settlement systems located across Europe.
Furthermore, due to the level of integration of the UK and Irish financial markets, Ireland has for
many years used a UK based CSD, to settle equity trades and Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs)
through its CREST electronic platform.
Multi-currency settlement (euro/dollar/sterling) is also an important feature of the Irish market.
However, due to the UK leaving the EU, the current arrangements are not sustainable.
To mitigate against potential market disruptions, the Central Bank has engaged extensively with
European counterparts including the ECB, the European Commission, ESMA, and the Bank of
England while also working with domestic stakeholders including the Department of Finance, the
National Treasury Management Agency and the relevant regulated firms.
Thankfully,  this  immediate  cliff  edge  risk  has  been  largely  mitigated  with  the  European
Commission’s  decision  to  grant  temporary  equivalence  to  the  UK’s  legal  and  supervisory
arrangements for CSDs until 29 March 2021. The Central Bank will continue to liaise with the
relevant stakeholders to ensure a long-term solution is implemented on time.
The CSD issue outlined above is not the only area where financial regulatory authorities have had
to  take  steps  to  mitigate  against  cliff  edge  risks.  Work  from  the  Prudential  Regulation  and
Financial Conduct pillars in the Central Bank has highlighted some remaining risks of consumer
detriment and corresponding mitigating measures. For example, the Central Bank has worked
with  the  Department  of  Finance  to  support  the  drafting  of  legislation  to  protect  customers  of
5
insurance products in the event of a no-deal scenario.
The recently published Brexit Omnibus Bill includes amendments to allow for a temporary run-off
regime, which will allow certain UK/Gibraltar insurers and brokers to continue to service existing
insurance contracts with Irish policyholders. This is necessary to protect consumers in the event
6
of a hard exit.
Authorities  have  also  taken  steps  with  respect  to  Investment  Funds.  Some  issues  that  have
arisen  include  the  loss  of  passporting  for  UK  Fund  Management  Companies  acting  for  Irish
Funds  and  the  loss  of  the  ability  for  Irish  funds  to  delegate  their  portfolio  management  to  UK
investment managers.
As with the other issues we have faced, the Central Bank has engaged intensively with other
relevant stakeholders to mitigate these problems and cooperation with our European partners
has been essential.
ESMA recently agreed Memoranda of Understanding with the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA)
of the UK which allows activities, such as fund manager outsourcing and delegation, to continue
to  be  carried  out  by  UK  based  entities  on  behalf  of  counterparties  based  in  the  European
7
Economic Area (EEA).
Cooperation with UK authorities has also been important with the FCA implementing a temporary
permissions regime that allows EEA-based firms currently passporting into the UK to continue
regulated business within the scope of their current permissions in the UK in the event of a no
8
deal Brexit.
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Irish economy and the UK leaving the EU
Moving  to  macroeconomic  aspects  of  the  UK’s  departure  from  the  EU,  much  has  been  said
regarding the particular vulnerability of the Irish economy and I think it is true that Ireland will be
the country most affected, outside of the UK.
Since the referendum in June 2016, the impact on Ireland of uncertainty related to the UK’s exit
appears  to  have  been  small.    Instead,  the  main  impact  thus  far  has  been  through  the
depreciation of sterling against the euro, which has been about 12 per cent. 
Despite the depreciation, Irish exports to the UK have generally held up well – until recently at
least.  However, the weaker sterling exchange rate has put downward pressure on import prices
and as a result overall consumer price inflation over the past three years.
More recently, we have seen some deterioration in business and consumer sentiment as the exit
date has come closer, and the possibility of a no-deal scenario has come into greater focus.
The UK, however, has not yet left the EU.
The risks  from the UK’s exit are not shared equally throughout the Irish economy. Some sectors,
like agriculture for example, and areas such as the border region are disproportionately exposed.
In  addition,  while  the  UK  remains  one  of  Ireland’s  most  important  trading  partners,  this
relationship  has  evolved  over  time,  particularly  since  1973  when  Ireland  joined  the  European
Economic Community (EEC). Therefore, I will take a few moments to articulate the evolution of
the  structure  of  the  Irish  economy  to  help  you  understand  the  channels  by  which  the  UK’s
departure will affect the domestic economy here.
The  Irish  economy  has  changed  dramatically  over  the  past  thirty  years.  In  the  1990s,  Ireland
experienced  a  period  of  sustained  growth  as  well  as  large  inflows  of  foreign  capital,  often  via
foreign direct investment from US firms.
Exports  rose  steadily  and  an  increasing  share  of  employment  came  from  these  foreign
multinational corporations (MNCs).
Living  standards  converged  to  European  levels  and  measures  such  as  GDP  per  capita  have
9
remained  above  the  European  Union  and  Euro  Area  averages  since  the  late  1990s.
Underpinning this success story was a productive and well-educated work force while access to
the European market through EU membership was also a key attraction for foreign firms and
investors.
10
Ireland became a much more open economy over this period as the share of exports in GDP
increased rapidly.
11
The composition of this trade also changed significantly.
Looking back to 1972, prior to joining the EEC, Ireland was heavily dependent on the UK for both
exports and imports. This dependence decreased rapidly in the following decades and the Irish
economy is much less UK focused presently.
 The change in the type of goods exported has
been similarly substantial with the economy becoming orientated around services and high value
added manufacturing, as opposed to agriculture.
12
13
This openness has become a defining feature of the Irish economy and was a key factor in the
‘economic miracle’ of the 1990s and early 2000s.
However, this openness is also a source of vulnerability.
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
As a typical small open economy, Ireland can be strongly influenced by global factors outside of
its control. This vulnerability, combined with a domestic credit fuelled property bubble, contributed
to a severe downturn in Ireland from 2008 although exports also played a large role in the ensuing
recovery.
14
Increasing integration with the EU has also been a defining feature for Ireland in recent decades,
probably  illustrated  most  vividly  by  the  adoption  of  the  common  currency  in  1999.  The
establishment of the Single Market in this period was crucial for the Irish growth story.
  The
benefits of the EU for Ireland are reflected in the views of Irish citizens who are the most likely in
Europe to have a positive image of the EU according to the Eurobarometer survey.
 Approval of
the euro is also among the highest in the EU at 84 per cent.
15
16
Now, let me turn to the present day.
The Irish economy remains extremely open and has grown strongly over the past five years as
evidenced by annual average growth of over 4 per cent in underlying domestic demand.
 This
measure  abstracts  from  the  measurement  issues  around  GDP  in  Ireland  and  gives  a  more
accurate indication of real activity. The labour market also gives evidence of robust growth with
employment now above its pre-crisis peak.
17
is 
The  economy 
focused  on  services  and  high  value  added  manufacturing.  Strong
pharmaceuticals boosted overall export growth significantly in 2018 with one product, vaccines,
accounting for 36 per cent of total merchandise exports on average in the ten months to October
2018.
18
MNCs continue to play an important role in the Irish economy today and are estimated to account
for 22 per cent of total employment.
19
The public finances in Ireland have improved markedly since the crisis although the debt-to-GNI*
ratio remains elevated and above 100 per cent. GNI* is an alternative measure of national income
that more accurately reflects the size of the economy compared to GDP and thus gives a more
informative picture of debt sustainability.
20
The reason I have outlined this assessment of the Irish economy is that all these elements factor
into our thinking on the effects of the UK leaving the EU.
From a historic perspective, the Irish economy is now far more diversified than in the past when
the  UK  was  by  far  the  most  important  market  for  Irish  exports  and  when  these  exports  were
highly focused on agricultural products.
21
However, this reduction in exposure does not mean that the risks from the UK leaving the EU are
not serious. The UK is still a hugely important market for certain sectors and regions in Ireland as
well as being Ireland’s nearest neighbour.
The closeness of the Anglo-Irish relationship is evident in the data.
Research  from  the  Economic  and  Social  Research  Institute,  for  example,  has  highlighted  the
contrast between Irish-owned and foreign-owned exporting firms in Ireland.
 Their findings show
that Irish-owned firms are less diversified then their foreign-owned counterparts, both in terms of
products and markets. They also highlight that around 40 per cent of exports from Irish-owned
firms are sent to the UK, with food exports particularly important.
22
Research from the Central Bank has also shown that the UK is the most significant market for
agri-food  exports  and  increases  in  tariff  or  non-tariff  barriers  have  the  potential  to  significantly
reduce  trade.
  And  while  primary  agriculture  accounts  for  a  small  share  of  overall  national
23
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
output,  the  broader  agri-food  sector  (including  food  processing)  makes  a  sizeable  output  and
employment contribution, particularly when assessed on a regional basis. Some 50 per cent of
Irish  beef  exports  go  to  the  UK.  Research  has  estimated  that  in  a  hard  Brexit  scenario,
agriculture products would attract some of the highest tariffs.
 Teagasc estimates suggest the
tariff on fresh boneless beef, which accounts for two-thirds of the value of beef exports to the UK,
would be 69 per cent.
24
25
Further  research  from  the  Central  Bank  focusing  on  the  specific  effects  of  non-tariff  barriers
estimates  a  9.6  per  cent  decline  in  trade  flows  between  the  UK  and  Ireland  with  the  largest
effects  on  fresh  foods  exports,  as  well  as  on  manufacturing  materials  and  machinery  and
transport.
26
The  most  recent  analysis  from  the  Central  Bank  assessing  the  effects  of  a  disorderly  exit
underscores the potential challenges that the Irish economy would face, particularly in the short
term. Modelling work suggests that a disorderly departure could reduce the growth rate of the
Irish economy by up to four percentage points in the first year.
27
The effects of a disorderly exit would be felt through several channels.
- There would be heightened stress in financial markets and a potentially large depreciation of
sterling.
-  The  deterioration  in  economic  conditions  and  a  more  adverse  outlook  would  cause  firms  to
delay or cancel investment plans.
  -  Consumer  spending  would  also  be  negatively  affected,  reflecting  concerns  over  future  job
losses and income prospects.
  - At  least  for  an  initial  period,  it  is  likely  that  there  would  be  disruption  at  ports  and  airports
if infrastructure is unable to cope with the new arrangements.
Given the deep supply chain linkages between Ireland and the UK, reflected in the reliance on the
UK for imports of intermediate goods used in production by Irish firms, and also given the scale
of food and consumer goods imports from the UK, there would be implications for firms through
disruption to their production processes and for households through the price and availability of
consumer goods.
 - Exports would fall due to an immediate and large reduction in demand from the UK and the fall
in  sterling,  with  some  sectors  being  further  affected  by  any  imposition  of  tariffs  and  non-tariff
barriers.
 - Those sectors – as I discussed – which are more reliant on trade with the UK or which are
more vulnerable to the imposition of tariff and non-tariff barriers, such as agriculture, food and
smaller scale manufacturing, are  likely  to  be  more  adversely  affected.  These  effects  are  also
likely to be focused on rural areas and, in particular, the border regions.
So,  there  are  a  variety  of  ways  that  the  departure  of  the  UK  can  adversely  affect  the  Irish
economy and contribute to a material slowdown in growth.
However, it is important to note that in this scenario, our modelling work still suggests that there
would be growth in output this year and next.
Quantifying the impact of a disorderly UK exit through these channels is extremely uncertain but
the  insight  to  be  taken  from  this  result  is  that  some  of  the  structural  elements  of  the  Irish
economy also have a role to play as the process moves forward. Structural factors include the
diversified nature of production in many sectors. While some sectors are heavily reliant on the
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
UK as an export market, for others, the UK is an important market but nonetheless not the only
one.
The  current  status  of  the  public  finances  are  also  relevant.  There  is  scope  to  run  a  counter-
cyclical fiscal deficit through the operation of automatic stabilisers on tax revenues and transfer
payments  in  the  event  of  a  severe  downturn.  Moreover,  there  is  some  scope  for  temporary
investment to support trade routes after the UK’s departure and temporarily help hard-hit sectors
adjust to new realities.
Of  course,  while  the  UK  leaving  the  EU  is  the  most  clear  current  downside  risk  to  the  Irish
economy,  there  are  others  including  the  weakening  of  the  European  and  global  economic
outlook. The openness of the Irish economy is again a key factor here as some of the sectors
that may be able to weather a slowdown related to the departure of the UK by relying on a variety
of other markets may not have as much space to operate if a global slowdown also persists.
Aside from external risks, the cyclical upswing in Ireland also gives rise to concerns about the
economy’s position in the business cycle and the potential for overheating.
To summarise, the Irish economy is currently in a good place but this outlook is subject to an
unusually high degree of uncertainty given the lack of clarity around the withdrawal terms of the
UK  exit  process.  Also,  we  at  the  Central  Bank  find  ourselves  in  the  interesting  position  of
considering a potential slowdown from external events on one hand while also worrying about
potential overheating from a domestic perspective.
Conclusion – Life after the UK leaves
Dealing with the departure of the UK has been a challenging process and can seem almost all
consuming at times.
However, life will go on.
The UK will still share a land border with Ireland – how visible this border is remains to be seen –
and the UK will still be less than 40 kilometres from the continent.
Interlinkages between the economy and financial systems of the UK and the Members States of
the EU will also remain.
My hope is that cooperation can continue between the UK and EU, albeit inevitably in not quite as
close a fashion as at present. The expertise of colleagues from the UK will be missed.
Cooperation within the EU will become ever more important in my view, particularly with respect
to financial sector supervision.
As financial services from the UK disperse to various locations in the EU, regulators will need to
work  together  to  supervise  large  financial  groups  with  balance  sheets  spreading  across  EU
borders as well as to non-EU countries, including of course the UK.
In  concluding,  I  would  to  thank  everyone  for  their  attention  and  I  look  forward  to  any  further
discussion.
1
2
3
4
5
I would like to thank Paul Reddan and Mícheál O’Keeffe for their contributions to my remarks.
Central Bank of Ireland: Strategic Plan 2091 – 2021 (2019)
Lane, Philip R: The Brexit Discontinuity, address at the 2019 European Financial Forum (13 February 2019)
Central Bank of Ireland: Brexit Task Force Reports.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
Sibley, Ed: Towards a more resilient insurance industry, address at the Central Bank Insurance Conference (15
February 2019)
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union (Consequential Provision) Bill 2019)
ESMA: Esma and EU Securities Regulators Agree No-deal Brexit MOUs with FCA (1 February 2019)
Central Bank of Ireland: FCA announces window for notifications under their temporary permissions regime (16
January 2019)
Source: Eurostat.
Lane, Philip R: The Irish Crisis, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 8287 (2019) and Whelan, K.: Ireland’s economic
crisis: The good, the bad and the ugly, Journal of Macroeconomics, Vol. 39, pp.424–440 (2014).
Source: CSO National Accounts Statistics.
O’Rourke, K: A Short History of Brexit: From Brentry to Backstop, Penguin Books (2019)
In 1998, the Services sectors accounted for about 64 per cent of employment – at the end of 2018, this share
has risen to over 76 per cent.
Central Bank of Ireland: Quarterly Bulletin – Contributions to GDP
O’Rourke, K: A Short History of Brexit: From Brentry to Backstop, Penguin Books (2019)
European Commission: Eurobarometer Survey (Autumn 2018)
Central Bank of Ireland: Quarterly Bulletin – QB1. Figure for 2018 is estimated as full data for the year not yet
available (2019)
Central Bank of Ireland: Quarterly Bulletin – QB1, Box C p35 (January 2019)
National Competitiveness Council: Ireland’s Competitiveness Challenge 2018 (December 2018)
Lane, Philip R: The Treatment of Global Firms in National Accounts, Central Bank of Ireland Economic Letter,
Vol. 2017, No.1 (2017)
O’Rourke, K: A Short History of Brexit: From Brentry to Backstop, Penguin Books (2019)
Lawless, M, Siedschlag, I. and Z Studnicka: Irish enterprise exporting patterns in goods and services, ESRI
Research Bulletin (April 2017)
See Conefrey, T. Irish Agriculture: Economic Impact and Current Challenges. Central Bank of Ireland Economic
Letter, Vol. 2018, No.8 (2018)
InterTradeIreland: Potential Impact of WTO Tariffs on Cross-border Trade (June 2017)
See Teagasc “Brexit Update: Possible impacts on the Irish Beef Industry”. For an overview see ‘Irish Agriculture:
Economic Impact and Current Challenges”, Conefrey, Thomas, Economic Letter Vol. 2018, No.8.
Byrne, S and J Rice: Non-Tariff Barriers and Goods Trade: A Brexit Impact Analysis , Central Bank of Ireland
Research Technical Paper, Vol. 2018, No.7 (2018)
Central Bank of Ireland: The Macroeconomic Implications of a Disorderly Brexit, Quarterly Bulletin 1 (2019) 
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
