 J u n e   7 ,   2 0 1 9 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
 
 Financial Inclusion in an Aging Society 
Keynote Speech at the G20 High-Level Symposium   
on Aging and Financial Inclusion (GPFI Forum) in Tokyo 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
Introduction 
It  is  a  great  honor  for  me  to  speak  at  the  G20  High-Level  Symposium  on  Aging  and 
Financial Inclusion (GPFI Forum) today.1 
 This year, I co-chair the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meetings with 
Minister Aso. One of the priorities for G20 Finance Track in 2019 is "aging and its policy 
implications,"  and  this  is  related  to  the  theme  of  today's  forum,  "Aging  and  Financial 
Inclusion."  I  trust  the  outcome  of  this  symposium  will  contribute  significantly  to  the 
discussions at the G20 meetings.   
 Japan  is  one  of  the  most  aged  countries  in  the  world.  Sooner  or  later,  other  countries  will 
face a similar situation. Today, I would like to talk about the current situation in Japan and 
the challenges it faces,  focusing on  financial inclusion in an aging society,  with respect to 
personal finance and financial literacy in particular. 
 I. Aging Society and Financial Literacy 
Japan's  average  life  expectancy  in  2017  was  81  years  for  men  and  87  years  for  women. 
Over the past 50 years, longevity has risen dramatically, by 13 years for men and 14 years 
for women. Aging itself is something to be welcomed in that people have always wished for 
a longer life. 
 Meanwhile, issues surrounding the aging society have been brought into the spotlight. From 
a  financial  perspective,  household  finance  management  after  retirement  is  particularly 
important.  How  to  make  ends  meet  in  later  life  is  an  issue  many  people  face.  In  terms  of 
personal  finance,  in  Japan,  public  pensions  are  generally  the  main  source  of  income  after 
retirement.  However,  given  life's  uncertainties,  public  pensions  alone  may  not  always  be 
sufficient.  When  expenditure  exceeds  income,  people  commonly  offset  the  gap  by 
withdrawing the financial assets they had been saving until then. 
                                                    
1  Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI)  is an inclusive platform  for all  G20 countries, 
interested non-G20 countries, and relevant stakeholders to carry forward work on financial inclusion, 
including implementation of the G20 Financial Inclusion Action Plan, endorsed at the G20 Summit 
in Seoul in 2010. 
 1 
According  to  a  survey  conducted  in  2018  by  the  Central  Council  for  Financial  Services 
Information  (CCFSI)  in  Japan,  the  average  amount  outstanding  of  financial  products  held 
by  households  with  two  or  more  people  was  14.3  million  yen.2  Looking  at  the  results  by 
age, the amount outstanding held by those in their twenties was about 2.5 million yen, while 
for those in their sixties, the figure was about 18.5 million yen. It could be said that, overall, 
senior citizens in Japan already hold a substantial amount of financial assets.   
 Nevertheless, people in their sixties need to learn how to  extend the life of the assets they 
have accumulated, especially as they can now expect to live another 20 to 30 years, or even 
more  as  we  look  ahead  to  a  normal  life  span  of  100  years.  Meanwhile,  for  the  younger 
generation, it is important to accumulate assets  steadily over time, as they look forward to 
living a long life. On this point, long-term personal asset formation finds policy support in 
Japan  through  the  expansion  of  tax  benefit  systems.  One  example  is  Japan's  individual 
savings  account  for  the  long-term,  diversified,  and  periodic  investment  of  a  small  fixed 
amount  with  tax  exemption,  or  the  Tsumitate  NISA.  Another  example  is  individual-type 
defined contribution private pension plan with various tax benefits, or the iDeCo. 
 As life expectancy increases, people need to find ways to  extend the life of  their financial 
assets.  This  means  that  everyone  has  to  plan  for  their  lives  after  retirement  and  acquire 
financial  literacy  --  that  is,  to  obtain  the  knowledge  necessary  to  manage  their  money 
effectively.  The  importance  of  financial  education  was  discussed  at  the  G20  Los  Cabos 
Summit in 2012, and was emphasized in the Leaders Declaration.3 
 In  relation  to  financial  education,  I  would  like  to  briefly  touch  upon  the  aforementioned 
CCFSI. The CCFSI has its secretariat at the head office of the Bank of Japan. It promotes 
the  advancement  of  financial  knowledge  under  the  following  two  principles:  to  provide 
financial  and  economic  information,  and  to  disseminate  pecuniary  education.  It  has  a 
nation-wide  network  with  local  committees  in  all  47  prefectures  in  Japan.  In  cooperation 
with  the  head  office,  branches,  and  local  offices  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  as  well  as  the 
government,  local  public bodies,  private entities,  and  others,  the  CCFSI  works  to  enhance 
citizens' financial literacy from a neutral and fair position. 
                                                   
2  CCFSI, Survey of Household Finances, November 2018 (available only in Japanese). 
3  G20, G20 Leaders Declaration, June 2012. 
2 
 II. Financial Inclusion for Senior Citizens 
Next,  I  would  like  to  elaborate  on  financial  inclusion  for  senior  citizens.  The  concept  of 
financial  inclusion  holds  that  no  one  should  be  left  behind  in  having  access  to  and 
benefiting from financial services. This is closely related to the United Nations' Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs).4 
 As  we  get  older,  we  all  become  physically  weaker.  Declining  mobility  means  we  can  no 
longer take it for granted that we can easily visit bank branches. Deteriorating eyesight and 
hearing  ability  may  impair  our  capacity  to  fill  out  a  form  or  understand  a  face-to-face 
explanation. Declining cognitive ability may create difficulty in making financial decisions. 
Moreover,  there  is  the  risk  that  senior  citizens  will  become  victims  of  financial  crime.  In 
2018,  among  all  recorded  cases  of  so-called  special  fraud  in  Japan  --  such  as 
telephone-based identity deception -- 78 percent of the victims were aged 65 and over.5 
 Financial inclusion is therefore an extremely important social agenda in an aging society, as 
it  ensures  that  senior  citizens  --  who  may  have  difficulty  in  visiting  banks  or  making 
financial  transactions  due  to  age-related  decline  --  can  continue  to  use  financial  services 
with confidence and benefit as much as possible from these services. In the field of what is 
known as "financial gerontology," there has been discussion about ways to make the adult 
guardianship  system  more  effective  in  order  to  protect  the  rights  of  senior  citizens  with 
cognitive decline. The use of innovative digital technologies has also been considered. For 
example,  using  biometric  technology  for  identity  verification  and  mobile  payments  will 
enable senior citizens to have secured access to financial services without  actually visiting 
bank  premises.  Moreover,  the  use  of  speech  recognition  technology  will  enable  financial 
transactions to be made without the need for physical writing or keyboard skills.  Advances 
                                                   
4  The SDGs are global development goals set by the United Nations in 2015. They are made up of 
17 goals with 169 associated targets to be achieved by 2030. 
5  See  the  National  Police  Agency,  Situation  of  Special  Fraud  Cases  Known  to  the  Police  and  of 
Those  Cleared  Up  for  2018  (Provisional  Values)  (available  only  in  Japanese),  February  2019. 
Special fraud refers to a type of fraud or extortion offense in which the offender deceives their victim, 
over  the  phone  or  by  other  means,  such  as  into  transferring  money  to  a  designated  account.  For 
reference, the total amount outstanding of loss arising from special fraud for 2018 is reported to be 
35.68 billion yen. 
3 
in  technology  may  create  increasingly  comprehensive  financial  services  that  are  better 
tailored to the needs of the individual senior citizen. 
 These new financial services for senior citizens can also be a great business opportunity for 
financial  institutions.  On  the  other  hand,  as  technology  advances,  the  risk  of  technology 
abuse  will  increase,  and  vigilance  is  therefore  essential  to  maintain  security.  I  will  be 
following with great interest how technological innovations in finance -- so-called fintech -- 
will contribute to financial inclusion for senior citizens. 
 Concluding Remarks 
One  realistic  option  to  ensure  a  comfortable  living  in  later  life  is  to  continue  working  as 
long  as  possible.6  Professor  Lynda  Gratton,7  who  is  here  today  as  a  speaker  in  the  next 
session, argues that we can now look forward to a 100-year life, living and working much 
longer.  In  such  a  society,  the  idea  of  a  traditional  three-stage  work-life  model  --  first 
education,  then  work,  and  finally  retirement  --  will  become  outdated,  and  a  multi-stage 
model  --  undergoing  many  life  and  career  transitions  --  will  become  the  new  standard.  In 
this  regard,  the  Japanese  government  is  promoting  working-style  reforms  that  also  take 
longevity into consideration.   
 In  light  of  these  changes  and  challenges,  the  Bank  of  Japan  is  working  to  support  the 
development  of  sound  financial  services  by,  for  example,  improving  financial  literacy 
through  the  activities  of  the  CCFSI,  and  promoting  fintech,  so  that  everyone  can  use 
financial services with confidence, even in an aging society. 
 Thank you for your kind attention. 
                                                   
6  According to the Annual Report on the Ageing Society: 2018 released by the Cabinet Office, about 
40 percent of working people aged 60 or over answered that they would like to work "till anytime as 
long as I can work." When adding those who answered they would like to work "till almost 70," "till 
almost 75," and "till almost 80," about 80 percent of the respondents were very eager to work even in 
their old age. 
7  Professor of Management Practice at London Business School. Co-author of: Lynda Gratton and 
Andrew  Scott,  "The  100-Year  Life  --  Living  and  Working  in  an  Age  of  Longevity."  (London: 
Bloomsbury Publishing, 2016). 
4 
