Sabine  Mauderer:  Scaling  up  green  finance  -  the  role  of  central
banks
Speech by Dr Sabine Mauderer, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at
the  2019  Green  Bond  Principles  and  Social  Bond  Principles  Annual  General  Meeting  and
Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 13 June 2019.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 I am delighted to speak to you right here in the middle of Frankfurt’s famous Palmengarten. The
Palmengarten was opened in 1871, and, like many sights in Frankfurt at that time, was financed
by  a  private  civic  initiative.  To  raise  the  necessary  funds,  several  citizens  founded  the
Palmengarten stock company. The Palmengarten is an early example of a fruitful combination: of
green  and  finance.  Even  now,  the Palmengarten  is  close  to  green  finance:  KfW,  the  biggest
German Green Bond issuer is located close to the Palmengarten. And the Bundesbank, which is
also closely involved in Green Finance, is located just north of the Palmengarten.
A “Green Week” is currently taking place in Frankfurt, with all ICMA and sideline meetings. The
“Green  Week”  originally  was,  and  still  is,  a  large  and  famous  agricultural  fair  in  Berlin.  As
Frankfurt is the financial centre of Germany, it is the perfect place for the “Green Finance Week”.
In my speech, I wish to focus on three topics:
First, the Green Finance activities of the international Central Banks and Supervisors Network on
Greening  the  Financial  System,  or  NGFS,  of  which  the Bundesbank  is  a  founding  member.
Second, let me provide some insights into the Bundesbank’s activities on Green Finance in our
different business areas. Third, I will briefly take stock of current German political initiatives on
Green Finance.
1 NGFS Activities
Beginning with the NGFS, let me first point out the key message of our network: Central banks all
over the world acknowledge that climate change is a source of financial risks. Therefore, green
finance is a field of work for central banks and the whole financial sector. Combating climate
change and preserving the environment: this is no longer a hobby-horse of eco-activists, but a
key  factor  for  economic  and  financial  systems.  This  awareness  can  be  seen  in  the  growing
support for NGFS: We started with central banks and supervisors from eight jurisdictions and
have grown to 40 members and six observers, representing all five continents and overseeing
two-thirds of the globally systemically important financial sector. We are, so-to-say, a “coalition of
the willing”.
Central banks always play a key role in the financial system, and this is also the case for green
finance. In many ways, the market for green assets can be compared to the early stages of other
relatively new market segments.  For  market  dynamics  to  fully  unfold,  investors  need  a  stable
investment  framework,  including  reliable  market  standards,  market  indices  and  transparency.
And central banks are trusted parties. Given our advisory role in politics and our perceived role as
anchor investors, we can serve as catalysts for further market growth. But given our enormous
market  power  and  our  independence,  we  have  to  act  responsibly  and  be  accountable.  To
address central banks’ crucial role, the NGFS sees itself as a platform for best practices and for
the exchange of views and experience between central bankers and supervisors.
In  our  first  comprehensive  report,  published  in  mid-April,  we  put  forward  six  practical
recommendations.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The four recommendations addressed to central banks and supervisors are: 
1.  Integrating climate-related risks into financial stability monitoring and micro-supervision. This
includes  assessing  climate-related  risks  in  the  financial  system  and  integrating  them  into
prudential supervision.
2.  Integrating  sustainability  factors  into  own  portfolio  management.  The  NGFS  encourages
central banks to lead by example in their own operations.
3.  Bridging  data  gaps.  Public  authorities  are  asked  to  share  data  relevant  to  Climate  Risk
Assessment and make these data publicly available.
4.  Building  awareness  and  intellectual  capacity  and  encouraging  technical  assistance  and
knowledge-sharing. The NGFS encourages all financial institutions to build in-house capacity
and  to  collaborate  to  improve  their  understanding  of  how  climate-related  factors  translate
into financial risks and opportunities.
Two NGFS recommendations are addressed to policymakers:
Achieving  robust  and  internationally  consistent  climate  and  environment-related  disclosure.
Investors need to know about the climate risks in their investments.
And  supporting  the  development  of  a  taxonomy  of  economic  activities.  A  taxonomy  makes
investing green easier and prevents “green washing”. It creates more market transparency on
which activities are really green and which are not.
The  NGFS  is  tackling  these  challenges  in  three  workstreams:  on  banking  supervision,  on
macrofinancial  supervision  and  on  scaling  up  green  finance.  I  am  a  member  of  the  NGFS
steering committee and, as of April, I have also taken over the chair of workstream 3. Tomorrow,
workstream 3, hosted by the Bundesbank, will convene here in Frankfurt. As a deliverable for this
year, we are working on a handbook of best practices for incorporating sustainability criteria into
central banks’ portfolio management, with a particular focus on climate-friendly investments. We
plan to publish the handbook by October this year.
2 Bundesbank Activities
As you can see: the Bundesbank is an active member of the NGFS. And to confirm our strong
commitment to the issue, we have also integrated green finance into our own business areas.
Under  my  leadership  as  the  responsible  board  member  for  the Bundesbank’s  market-related
operations,  we  manage  public  sector  funds  as  well  as  our  own  funds.  Looking  at  the  public
sector  funds,  we  have  a  long  track  record  in  sustainable  investments.  As  a  fiscal  agent,
Bundesbank has been managing several large-scale public pension fund portfolios for Federal
states  as  well  as  the  central  government  for  more  than  ten  years.  4  out  of  16  portfolios  are
already  invested  according  to  an  ESG  approach  or  invest  in  Green  Bonds.  In  total,  these
portfolios have a volume in the range of substantial single-digit billions of euros. And we expect
this  number  to  grow  in  the  near  future.  Four  more  fiscal  clients  are  currently  discussing
introducing  ESG  considerations  in  their  investment  strategy,  while  additional  two  are  already
planning to do so. So 10 out of 16 of our fiscal clients are investing sustainable or are on their
way to do so.
Our  public  sector  clients  mainly  focus  on  the  inclusion  of  ESG  criteria  in  equity  investments,
followed by initial approaches in fixed-income portfolios. Based on a passive investment strategy,
we combine various best-in-class approaches with exclusionary screening. Our experience over
the  past  few  years  has  shown  that  developing  a  sustainable  investment  strategy  requires
thorough preparation. There is no “one-size-fits-all” approach to ESG criteria. Moreover, when
talking about sustainable investing, each investor tends to define a set of ESG criteria consistent
with its individual values. Furthermore, we advise our fiscal clients, namely the states of Hesse,
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Baden-Wuerttemberg  and  North  Rhine-Westphalia, 
sustainability and ESG indices that we use for our benchmarking.
to  design  and  create 
tailor-made
Moreover,  the Bundesbank  is  also  considering  investments  in  sustainable  assets  in  its  own
funds. We enjoy more freedom of choice with regard to the selection of investments in our own
funds, unlike – for instance – in the FX reserve management portfolios or even with monetary
policy operations. We are currently in the process of assessing ways we can enlarge the scope
of  assets  and  take  sustainable  investment  criteria  into  account  in  our  own  funds.  We  also
contribute to a Eurosystem working group on sustainability in the management of non-monetary
portfolios.
As regards monetary policy, we have to be careful not to jeopardize our primary mandate of price
stability  by  pursuing  other  policy  objectives.  However,  since  market  neutrality  is  an  integral
principle of our monetary policy operations, sustainable assets are alongside the market within
the scope of the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programme. So the more the market is invested
in green finance, the more the ECB and the national central banks can reflect this development in
the asset purchase programme.
Besides the investments, the Bundesbank is closely looking at the risks resulting from climate
change.  We  look  at  individual  risks  in  our  banking  supervision  and  at  systemic  risks  in  our
supervision  of  financial  stability.  We  are  making  the  case  for  individual  financial  institutions  to
disclose  their  climate-related  financial  risks  and  look  at  these  risks  in  banking  regulation  and
supervision. Regarding financial stability, we evaluate whether the financial system as a whole is
able to deal with asset devaluations resulting from physical climate risks or from transformation
risks following political decisions to address climate change, for example on energy policies.
Furthermore, the Bundesbank is intensifying the public dialogue to raise even more awareness
among market participants and the general public. In the fourth quarter of 2019, we will publish a
report which analyses major market trends in ESG and green finance including an outlook on the
way forward. And we are organising a financial markets conference on sustainability in October.
3 Government Activities
All this comes at a time when German politics has been paying ever-closer attention to Green
Finance,  as  climate  protection  commands  broad  support  across  virtually  the  entire  political
spectrum. In February, the State Secretaries’ Committee for Sustainable Development declared
that Germany should become a leading hub for sustainable finance. Chancellor Merkel reaffirmed
this aspiration just a few weeks ago.
And just last week, the Federal Government’s new Sustainable Finance Advisory Committee met
for the first time. The Bundesbank is an advisory member of this committee. The committee is
tasked with monitoring the European discussion on sustainable finance, improving knowledge,
strengthening sustainable finance and, of course, advising the government. The government is
also planning a strategy for communicating to consumers and the financial industry to promote
green  finance. And  the  government  plans  to  further  discuss  greening  their  own  pension  fund
portfolios.
Most  important  for  market  participants:  the  idea  of  issuing  a  Green  Bund  is  gaining  traction.
There are different models and ideas of how to design such a Green Bund. The challenge is to
establish  this  Green  Bund  on  the  market  while  neither  affecting  the  high  secondary  market
liquidity of conventional Bunds nor fragmenting the existing financing instruments. Gathering from
recent experience of other AAA issuers, we can expect a high demand for a Green Bund.
4 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, the current Frankfurt Green Finance Week is not a one-hit wonder, but an
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
evergreen: Our work for scaling up green finance will continue – as a central bank, but also in the
political arena.
Green Finance will also be an important task for the new European Parliament and European
Commission.  The  EU  action  plan  on  sustainable  finance  will  definitely  shape  our  work  going
forward. So we will not only have “Green Weeks” in Berlin and Frankfurt, but also green months
and years in Brussels.
Let us all keep the spirit up and work together to scale up green finance. Thank you for your
attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
