Vitas Vasiliauskas: Balancing FinTech opportunities and risks
Welcome speech by Mr Vitas Vasiliauskas, Chairman of the Board of the Bank of Lithuania, at
the Joint Bank of Lithuania-International Monetary Fund seminar "Balancing FinTech opportunities
and risks", Rise, Vilnius, 10 June 2019.
 Good  afternoon,  distinguished  guests,  innovators  and  leaders  in  financial  technology,  policy
makers. Welcome to the seminar, jointly organised by the IMF and the Bank of Lithuania.
Over the years, we have successfully cooperated with the Fund on a number of issues relevant
to  Lithuania’s  economy  and  financial  sector. And,  when  it  comes  to  FinTech,  we  set  a  good
precedent  almost  three  months  ago  in  end-March.  Back  then,  our  Member  of  the  Board  Mr
Marius Jurgilas conducted an internal seminar on Lithuania’s FinTech experience at the IMF’s
offices in Washington.
Today  we  find  ourselves  to  be  discussing  financial  technologies  in  Vilnius  –  indeed,  an
appropriate follow-up. Given the importance of the issue, we are deeply honoured to have IMF
Deputy  Managing  Director  Mr  Tao  Zhang  participating  in  the  event.  His  presence  is  truly  a
recognition of Lithuania’s achievements in the FinTech domain.
To  help  frame  today’s  debate,  let  me  briefly  depict  Lithuania’s  FinTech  landscape  from  the
perspective of a regulator. But first, I should perhaps explain why the Bank of Lithuania has put
strategic emphasis on FinTech.
I  will  be  frank  and  open:  we  have  some  very  pragmatic  reasons.  The  most  important  is  the
market  concentration.  The  share  of  the  three  largest  banks,  as  measured  by  assets,  now
exceeds  80  %.  We  also  observe  similar  levels  of  concentration  in  key  market  segments,  for
instance, payments.
This drives us to encourage new participants. In a truly competitive market, the incumbents can
never feel at ease, because there’s always someone ready to take your slice of the pie. Indeed,
the free and dynamic market may be a harsh place. But it is best at providing the consumer with
the highest quality services at a fair price. Needless to say, for a public authority, promoting the
benefit of consumers is one of our key goals.
 Being an integrated regulator, the Bank of Lithuania has developed a wide range of instruments
to attract new players and stimulate competition. In fact, I find the recent guidance provided by
the IMF to well reflect our methods. This is particularly the case with the Bali FinTech Agenda –
the IMF’s blueprint for FinTech development, produced together with the World Bank. Being one
of the jurisdictions to take on the FinTech challenge early on, this shows that the overall direction
we have chosen has put us on the right track.
One example of our good practice is opening up the Bank of Lithuania’s payment infrastructure to
non-banking entities. Now they can directly, – without the middlemen – access the Single Euro
Payments Area through our CENTROlink payment platform. Today, out of the total 80 users of
the CENTROlink, over three quarters are e-money and payment institutions.
By streamlining licensing procedures, we have also shortened the time it takes for such entities
to receive authorisation and begin their operations.
In addition to this, we’ve introduced the concept of a specialized bank, which offers most of the
mainstream financial services, but features a lower initial capital requirement. As a result, already
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
3 specialized bank licences have been issued, with 4 applications under consideration.
And, on top of that, we have initiated the creation of a legal framework for crowdfunding and peer-
to-peer lending. This helps avoid regulatory arbitrage and eliminates the obstacles to the much
needed development of alternative financing sources.
The  results  of  our  efforts  speak  for  themselves:  in  2016,  we  had  6  licenced  e-money  and
payment institutions operating in Lithuania; today, that number has surpassed 80.
And yet, despite these early results, we are constantly looking for new ways to adapt. That is a
large reason why we actively engage with the novel financial market players. Take, for instance,
the Newcomer Programme. Or our own regulatory sandbox, which enables innovative firms to
test their business models under our guidance and supervision.
All this interaction is a two-way street. We do it not only to help new participants, but also to help
ourselves identify regulatory shortcomings.
 This know-how is especially crucial in one particular area – managing risks that are stemming
from FinTech.
The duality of potential benefits and risks, recognized in the Bali FinTech Agenda, is also the
underlying theme in our event today.
In this regard, the Bank of Lithuania has brought the money laundering concerns to the forefront,
substantially boosting human resources devoted to the issue. We have also started to look into
the non-bank entities when conducting cyber security exercises on the financial services sector.
And,  when  it  comes  to  investor  protection,  we  were  among  the  first  to  announce  our  no-
nonsense  position  on  crypto  assets,  dissociating  financial  services  from  activities  related  to
virtual currencies or ICOs.
In terms of the overall risk outlook, the Bank of Lithuania joined forces with 8 other national public
authorities – from law enforcement to data protection – to anticipate and manage FinTech risks.
Institutions will, under their remit, regularly provide us with the relevant aggregated information.
However, risk management is only one of the areas where cross-institutional cooperation has
taken  place.  Public  bodies  in  Lithuania  have  been  active  in  complementing  the  efforts  of  the
regulator on a range of issues, resulting in a Government-level FinTech strategy. Together, we
have been singing in unison, delivering a consistent message, which has attracted international
attention.  This  is  despite  the  breeze  of  political  headwinds,  which  I  expect  to  pass  without
affecting our institutional backbone.
 In  all  of  the  efforts  that  I  described,  Lithuania  is  trying  to  overcome  boundaries  of  a  small
domestic market. In fact, we have already established ourselves as a gateway for third country
FinTechs to enter the European payments and banking markets.
However, this cannot mean that our goal is purely the greatest number of market participants.
Rather, our aim is to enable the growth of the highest quality FinTech companies. Here I am
talking about businesses that are transparent, that follow the supervisory requirements and that
deliver excellent financial services for the public.
For the society at large, Lithuania’s FinTech ecosystem will bring benefits through other channels
as well. Expect positive  spillovers  to  multiple  sectors,  which  could  help  develop  activities  and
innovations that yield high value added for the real economy.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  somewhat  larger  picture  is  also  an  important  reason  why  we  care  about  financial
technologies.
 Ladies and gentlemen, on this note, let me once again welcome you to this event. We have the
perfect blend of public authorities and market practitioners gathered here today. Hopefully, this
will  result  in  a  candid  and  insightful  conversation  on  the  delicate  balance  between  risks  and
opportunities brought about by FinTech.
I also expect that the seminar will lay a strong foundation for a fruitful cooperation between the
IMF and Lithuanian institutions in the area of financial technologies.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
