  Digital Transformation 
Fintech opportunities and risks  
Implementing the Bali Fintech Agenda 
 Intervention of Mr. Abdellatif Jouahri  
Governor of Bank Al-Maghrib 
    Rabat, 13 March 2019 
Dear colleagues and friends, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It gives me real pleasure to be addressing you in this opening session of the 
Regional  Conference  for  Africa  and  the  Middle  East,  held  by  Bank  Al-
Maghrib and the International Monetary Fund, on the digital transformation 
and the implementation of the Bali Fintech Agenda. I would like to start by 
thanking you all for your presence today, and wish a pleasant stay in Morocco 
to those of you attending from abroad. 
I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  particularly  the 
entire  staff  of  the  Monetary  and  Capital  Market  Department,  for  having 
accompanied  us  for  months  in  preparing  this  conference.  My  warmest 
thanks go to the Department Head, Mr. Adrian Tobias, and to his deputy Mr. 
Ghiath Shabsigh, with whom we have worked closely. 
I am also delighted by the strong participation of central banks and regional 
and international institutions; I am confident that many colleagues here had to 
adjust  their  schedules  to  take  part  in  this  conference  witch  shows  the 
importance they attach to the issue we are addressing today. 
The idea of this meeting emerged two years earlier, in our quest for expertise 
and experience with regard to the approaches and policies to cope with digital 
revolution. For this purpose, we interacted with  the IMF, which had already 
begun reflecting on the issue, and had ended setting up, in collaboration with 
the  World  Bank,  the  Bali  Fintech  Agenda,  presented  during  the  last  annual 
meetings held in October, in Indonesia.  
  2 
It  was  then  an  opportunity  to  converse  with  the  staff  of  the  department 
headed by Mr. Tobias, with whom I agreed to organize a regional meeting to 
follow  up  implementation  of  this  agenda,  which  the  Fund  had  initiated  in 
Vienna  early  this  year.  Today,  this  agenda  has  become  a  reference  used  to 
address the problem in a structured and standardized way. 
I will not go through the details of this agenda, first because I think that Mr. 
Tobias is better placed than me for this, and second because the issue will be 
discussed thoroughly in the different sessions of this conference. Rather, my 
aim is to focus on the technological revolution, particularly its impact on the 
financial sector, then to  discuss the challenges it poses for public authorities 
in general and for central banks in particular. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In the aftermath of the 2008 crisis, while public authorities and international 
institutions,  including  the  IMF,  were  concerned  about  the  repercussions  of 
the  crisis,  a  different  evolution  was  taking  place  and  began  to  gradually 
transform  the  economic,  financial  and  social  landscape.  This  transformation 
was  particularly  reflected  in  the  massive  use  of  smartphones  and  social 
networks, the emergence of digital finance and Big Data, the development of 
online platforms as well as in the uberization of services. 
With  its  frantic  pace  of  evolution  and  its  emergence  as  a  new  must,  this 
revolution  is  now  influencing  the  way  we  produce,  share,  consume  and 
interact, and its impact is felt on all sectors, including of course the financial 
one. 
  3 
Despite  the  multiple  studies  and  evaluations  carried  out,  the  impact  of  this 
revolution is not yet well identified. However, its impact will probably be felt 
negatively  in  the  labor  market.  In  fact,  one  of  the  most  important  studies, 
conducted  in  2013  by  two  Oxford  researchers  on  the  case  of  the  United 
States, revealed that 47 percent of jobs are at risk of extinction.  In emerging 
and developing countries, this proportion would be higher. According to the 
same researchers estimates in 2016, it reaches 69 percent in India, 77 percent 
in China and 85 percent in Ethiopia.  
As  for  growth,  the  effects  of  this  transformation  have  not  been  clearly 
demonstrated, and economists even talk of a “productivity paradox”, to refer 
to  the  relative  slowdown  of  productivity  observed  in  some  advanced 
countries since the mid-2000s, despite the technological innovations. 
Even more, GDP measurement is also affected, and statistical institutes find 
it challenging to take into account certain technology-driven activities such as 
self-services  made  through  online  platforms.  Also,  inflation  levels  would  be 
overestimated  because  of  the  improved  quality  of  goods  and  services,  not 
taken into consideration in their calculation. 
Another  field  where  major  changes  are  induced  by  this  revolution  is  data 
production and use. Big data generated by new technologies  are at the heart 
of the strategies of economic and social actors, both public and private. Their 
exploitation  takes  many  forms  such  as  customizing  services  and  targeting 
messages to guide the behavior of the consumers or of the public opinion in 
general…  The  case  of  Facebook-Cambridge  Analytica  during  the  last  US 
presidential elections offers an uplifting illustration in this regard. 
  4 
Conversely,  the  impact  of  this  revolution  turns  out  to  be  rather  positive  on 
the  administrative  procedures,  such  as  tax  payment.  In  fact,  benefits  are 
multiple:  reduced  costs,  increased  transparency,  and  the  fight  against  tax 
evasion and corruption reinforced. 
To  sum  up,  I  will  recall  one  of  the  main  conclusions  of  the  2016  World 
Bank's  World  Development  Report  on  “the  digital  dividend”.  Digital 
technologies  and  innovations  have  undoubtedly  helped improve  growth  and 
services supply by substantially reducing the costs of economic and financial 
transactions, but the aggregate impact is still limited and unevenly distributed. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I think that we all agree that one of the areas where technological innovation 
is  growing  rapidly  is  the  financial  sector,  with  a  new  term  being  even 
dedicated  to  it,  the  Fintech.  The  latter  is  revolutionizing  the  financial 
landscape,  by  expanding  products  and  services,  improving  their  quality,  and 
making them more accessible and less expensive. Fintech is transforming the 
relation  with  customers,  the  means  of  payment,  as  well  as  the  modes  of 
financing  and  transfers.  On  this  particular  last  point,  the  potential  gains  are 
enormous  for  developing  countries  receiving  large  flows  of  their  nationals 
abroad.  In  2018,  according  to  the  World  Bank,  these  transfers  may  have 
totaled  689  billion dollars, more  than  three-quarters  of  which  were  intended 
to developing countries. 
Traditional  business  models  of  banks  are  now  challenged  by  the  new 
financing  methods,  thus  putting  more  pressure  on  their  profitability  and 
pushing  them,  in  some  cases,  to  greater  risk-taking,  which  would  eventually 
impact financial stability. 
 5 
In  emerging  and  developing  countries,  with 
internet  and  mobile 
telecommunications  penetration,  Fintech  now  offers 
tremendous 
opportunities  to  strengthen  financial  inclusion  and  economic  and  social 
development. According to a statement  issued last November by the United 
Nations  Secretary  General,  within  a  period  of  six  years,  1.2  billion  people 
have accessed financial services through technology.  
In  a  report  issued  in  2016,  the  Mckinsey  Institute  estimated  the  potential  of 
Fintech in emerging economies by 2025 to  an additional 6 percent of GDP, 
i.e. 3.7 trillion Dollars, and 95 million new jobs. The same report also revealed 
that  two  billion  people  and  200  million  of  very  small,  small  and  medium 
enterprises  in  emerging  countries  do  not  have  access  to  credit,  while  those 
who have are still facing high costs.  
Here again, estimates vary from one study to the other, and all agree on the 
same finding: a huge potential is still there to exploit. 
This  being  said,  risks  in  the  financial  sector  are  the  most  varied  and  most 
important, especially in terms of money laundering, financing terrorism, cyber 
security,  as  well  as  protecting  customers  and  personal  data.  Such  risks  have 
become major concerns both at the national and international level. 
For  us,  central  banks  in  particular,  the  changes  brought  by  the  Fintech 
challenge us in several aspects, namely in our core functions. Now, even the 
monopoly  of  issuing  currency  is  exposed,  leading  some  central  banks  to 
consider  the  option  of  issuing  a  digital  currency,  and  therefore  reduce  the 
costs  related  to  conventional  banknotes’  production  and  use,  and  minimize 
the insecurity risks involved.  
 6 
Among  the  other  fields  concerned  is  financial  supervision.  This  area  is  now 
gradually  expanding  as  new  actors  and  financial  products  have  emerged, 
which can certainly affect monetary policy transmission. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The digital transformation we are facing today is primarily driven by operators 
and  private  companies  that  continue  to  invest  heavily  in  this  area  and  seize 
the  opportunities  and  the  potential  it  offers.  Considering  the  important 
economic,  financial  and  social  implications  of  such  a  revolution,  public 
authorities are compelled to set an adequate legal framework and  provide an 
environment  conducive 
to 
technological 
innovations 
and  Fintech 
development.  
One  of  the  priorities  defined  in  this  regard  is  to  invest  in  education  and 
human  resources’  training,  while  taking  account  of  the  changes  occurring  in 
the  job  markets  due  to  technological  innovations.  The  challenge  is  huge, 
considering the now strong need for a digital skilled labor.  
Many  countries,  more  particularly  emerging  and  developing  ones,  are  now 
faced with the additional issue,  besides having to meet their needs, of dealing 
with  the  "brain  drain"  phenomenon,  which  seems  to  record  an  upsurge  in 
recent  years.  Against  this  backdrop,  strengthening  regional  and  international 
cooperation, with a view to pooling efforts and exchanging experiences, will 
essentially  avoid  worsening  the  digital  divide  between  these  countries  and 
advanced ones. 
That  being  said,  the  actual  benefit  of  those  policies  and  the  efforts  required 
depends on the responsiveness of the population, the economic and financial 
 7 
operators as well as of the politicians, to the adoption of digital technologies. 
After all, it is an issue of a real change of culture. 
It  is  true  that  during  last  years,  initiatives  have  increased, reflecting  a  raising 
awareness  about  the  challenges  posed  by  this  revolution.  Several  countries 
have  developed  cross-cutting  or  sectoral  strategies 
to  promote 
the 
development of digital technologies and their use. 
By way of illustration, I will first give the example of my country  which has 
set up a digital development strategy, and created an agency dedicated to this 
area.  Another  example  is  the  European  commission  which  has  established, 
last  May,  a  panel  of  highly  qualified  experts  to  study  the  impact  of  digital 
technology  on  the  job  market.  Similarly,  G20  countries  agreed  in  2017  to 
elaborate a roadmap for digitalization named “Policies for a Digital Future”. 
Finally,  the  United  Nations  launched,  last  November,  a  Task  force  charged 
with recommending strategies to harness financial technologies in support of 
the Sustainable Development Goals.  It should be reminded here that to meet 
these  goals,  low-income  developing  countries  should  spend  an  additional 
yearly  amount  of  about  520  billion  dollars  by  2030,  according  to  a  study 
published last January by the IMF. 
Several  institutions  attending  today  have  taken  important  initiatives  in  this 
field  and  I  am  confident  that  the  exchanges  of  views  scheduled  in  the 
different panels will be highly informative in this respect. 
For  central  banks,  the  stakes  are  high,  considering  their  position  as  core 
actors  in  the  financial  sector,  which  constitutes  one  of  the  main  arenas  of 
technological innovation.  
 8 
First, we need to seize the opportunities offered by the Fintech to narrow, in 
collaboration  with  the  stakeholders,  the  deficits  and  gaps  in  financial 
inclusion, mainly for youth, rural population and women. This measure is all 
the more important as gender inequalities are particularly high in our regions.  
According  to  the  2019  World  Bank  Report  on  "Women,  Business  and  the 
Law",  women  in  the  Middle  East  and  North  Africa  are  granted  only  half of 
the  rights  of  their  male  counterparts.  Here  in  Morocco,  we  have  just 
completed  our  national  strategy  for  financial  inclusion,  which  will  be 
discussed in the appropriate panel.  
As for regulation, we are now called to leave room for creativity and Fintech 
development, but at the same time, preserve and strengthen resilience of our 
financial systems, and protect consumers and enterprises, particularly smaller 
ones.  To  guarantee  such  a  difficult  equilibrium,  risks  shall  be  identified  and 
classified,  and  the  potential  impacts  of  innovation  and  of  the  new  financial 
activities shall be foreseen.  
Sometimes,  central  banks  are  required  to  resort  to  interim  solutions  in  the 
absence of  statutory  powers, as  is  the  case  for  crypto-assets.  In  fact,  to  deal 
with  this  issue,  which  arose  in  Morocco  in  2017,  we  chose  to  approach  it 
from the consumer protection angle to attract attention to the risks involved. 
Still,  it  should  be  made  clear  that  we  have  not  taken  a  final  position  on  the 
issue.  
Moreover, as enterprises, we are also called to adapt ourselves  to this digital 
transformation,  starting  with  strengthening  the  capacity  of  our  human 
resources  in  this  field  and  reinforcing  our  infrastructures,  mainly  the 
information systems whose resilience to cyber criminality has become a daily 
concern.  
 9 
In  this  regard,  and  as  part  of  our  2019-2023  strategic  plan,  we  conducted  a 
thorough  reflection  in  Bank  Al-Maghrib  and  have  just  drawn  up  a  roadmap 
for  our  own  digital  transformation.  Our  target  is  not  only  to  adapt  our 
business  lines  and  redesign  our  processes,  but  also  to  play  a  role  in  the 
development  and  support  of  our  ecosystem,  through  a  participatory 
approach. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
To  conclude,  I  would  say  that  we  may  have  taken  some  time  to  grasp  the 
scale  of  the  digital  revolution,  but  the  numerous  initiatives  and  interactions, 
such as this meeting, leave us with the hope that the backlog will be quickly 
cleared  and  that  this  revolution  will  effectively  contribute  to  sustainable  and 
inclusive development in our countries. 
In  this  respect,  we  are  pleased  to  note  the  willingness  of  international 
organizations,  including  the  IMF,  main  interlocutor  of  central  banks,  to 
upgrade their means and human resources  with a view to providing support 
to their member countries. 
As  such,  I  suggest,  if  you  deem  it  suitable,  that  we  request  the  Fund  to 
institutionalize  such  a  meeting  in  our  region,  at  the  frequency  most 
appropriate  to  us.  Hence,  we  would  be  able  to  continue  the  debates  and 
exchanges,  assess  the  progress  made,  ultimately  unite  our  efforts,  and 
capitalize  on  our  mutual  experiences  in  order  to  better  address  the  current 
and future challenges of digital transformation. 
 Thank you. 
10 
 