 УНУТРАШЊА УПОТРЕБА 
 NATIONAL BANK OF SERBIA  
Opening remarks at the presentation of the Inflation 
Report – February 2019 
Dr Željko Jović, Vice Governor 
         Belgrade, 13 February 2019  
 Ladies and gentlemen, esteemed members of the press, dear colleagues, 
УНУТРАШЊА УПОТРЕБА 
Welcome to the presentation of the February Inflation Report. We will give you an overview of the 
current macroeconomic developments, our new inflation and economic activity projections, as well 
as monetary policy decisions in the period since the previous Report. 
To begin with, I would like to stress that the year 2018 was marked by positive economic trends. 
According to the preliminary data of the Serbian Statistical Office, GDP growth equalled 4.4%, which 
is its highest increase in ten years. Though the second half of the year saw a slowdown in external 
demand growth, domestic factors are to be credited for the high growth rate. Here I primarily have 
in  mind  the  improvement  of  the  business  climate,  favourable  financial  conditions,  positive  labour 
market trends, as well as the accelerated implementation of infrastructure projects. Growth forecast 
for this year has been kept at 3.5%, while in the following years we expect growth to pick up further 
to around 4%, resting on sustainable grounds.  
  Even  in  conditions  of  strong  economic  growth,  inflation  continued  to  move  within  the  target 
tolerance band (3.0±1.5%), in accordance with our expectations. It has been low and stable for more 
than five years straight  – in December it measured 2.0% y-o-y, which is its average value for the 
whole of 2018 as well. For the following two years, i.e. until the end of the projection horizon, we 
expect stable inflation movements within the target band. 
Serbia’s  economic  programme  continues  to  yield  strong  results,  as  was  recently  noted  by  the 
International Monetary Fund. Favourable fiscal trends continue – in 2018, for the second year in a 
row, the budget posted a surplus and the central government public debt decreased to 53.6% of 
GDP at the end of the year. In January it was somewhere around 50% of GDP.  The fiscal policy, in 
full  coordination  with  the  monetary  policy,  is  providing  an  impetus  to  economic  growth,  without 
giving rise to inflationary pressures – the government’s rising capital expenditures contribute to the 
rise in investment, while higher pensions and wages in the public sector are conducive to sustainable 
growth in consumption. 
In accordance with our projections, the current account deficit in 2018 maintained its share in GDP 
at  the  level  from  2017  (5.2%),  although  imports  increased  on  the  back  of  higher  investment  and 
 1 
 УНУТРАШЊА УПОТРЕБА 
global oil price hike, and external demand slowed down. At the same time, for the fourth year in a 
row, the high net inflow of FDI, equalling EUR 3.2 bn, was more than sufficient to cover the current 
account deficit (143.4% coverage). 
The path to achieving the above  results was  paved by the adopted economic policy measures that 
were appropriate and timely. Their integral part is the monetary policy which maintained the price 
and  financial  stability  and  thereby  contributed  significantly  to  a  considerable  acceleration  of 
economic  growth  and  improved  outlook  for  the  coming  period.  It  is  particularly  important  to  note 
that stability was ensured amid growing uncertainty in the international environment, which attests 
to  the  efficiency  of  monetary  policy  and  measures  undertaken  by  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia. 
Another important result of these measures is the share of non-performing loans in total loans that 
was reduced to 5.7% at end-2018, its new lowest level, thus confirming the further strengthening of 
banking sector stability. 
Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues,  
Since we last met at the presentation of the November Inflation Report, the NBS Executive Board has 
kept  the  key  policy  rate  at  3.0%,  its  lowest  level  in  the  inflation  targeting  regime  yet.  In  making 
such decision, the Executive Board has been guided by the assessment that inflation would continue 
to  move  within  the  target  band  over  the  projection  horizon,  thanks  to,  among  other  things,  the 
effects  of  past  monetary  policy easing.  Caution  is warranted  by  uncertainties in  the  international 
environment,  notably  movements 
in  primary  commodity  prices,  pace  of  monetary  policy 
normalisation  by  leading  central  banks,  and  possible  further  rise  in  protectionism  in  international 
trade.   
Having  in  mind  that  the  key  risks  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  stem  from  the  international 
environment,  the  NBS  will  continue  to  carefully  monitor  and  analyse  trends  in  the  international 
financial and commodity markets, and to assess their impact on economic developments in Serbia.  
In the coming period too monetary policy will be predictable and consistent in delivering low and 
stable inflation in the medium term, which, along with preserved financial stability, will contribute 
to sustainable economic growth and stronger resilience to external uncertainties.   
I would like to use this opportunity to underscore that it was the strong economic growth and the 
results of the National Bank of Serbia in terms of maintaining price and financial stability that were 
cited as the  reasons  behind Standard &  Poor’s decision to  upgrade  Serbia’s outlook  from stable  to 
positive in late 2018.   
At the end of my address, I would like to say that low and predictable inflation and a stable financial 
system,  the  achieved  economic  growth  rates,  balanced  public  finances  and  the  established 
downward  trajectory  of  public  and  external  debt  testify  to  our  commitment  and  readiness  to 
respond timely and adequately to volatile external conditions. Allow me to conclude that  this is an 
environment conducive to further growth in investment and competitiveness, and hence, further 
rise in living standards on sustainable grounds. 
 2 
 УНУТРАШЊА УПОТРЕБА 
Having  said  this,  I  give  the  floor  to  my  colleagues  from  the  Economic  Research  and  Statistics 
Department  to give you a more  detailed analysis of current developments and to present our new 
macroeconomic projections.  
 3 
