Luis de Guindos: Challenges for bank profitability
Speech by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the OMFIF City
Lecture, London, 1 May 2019.
Introduction
 Sustained  economic  expansion  over  the  past  six  years  and  greater  banking  sector  resilience
have supported financial stability within the euro area.
But the recent softening of growth prospects heightens risks. The financial stability environment
has become more challenging than it was a year ago. The risks that have been with us for some
time now – a possible disorderly increase in risk premia, debt sustainability concerns, low bank
profitability and imbalances in the non-bank financial sector – are still present. But they are no
longer being mitigated by an improving macroeconomic outlook.
Indeed, the deteriorating macro outlook renders some of these risks more acute. In particular, it
may  reawaken  concerns  over  debt  sustainability  and  worsen  the  outlook  for  bank  profitability.
Debt  sustainability  concerns  could  drive  up  sovereign  bond  spreads.  In  turn  higher  spreads
generate  losses  on  bond  portfolios  and  higher  market-based  funding  costs  for  financial
institutions.
Bank profitability tends to go hand-in-hand with economic activity. Slower growth prospects may
dent  bank  profitability  through  a  reduction  in  lending  activity  and  a  possible  increase  in  credit
impairments.
Moreover, the ongoing political uncertainties – including trade disputes – and the softer economic
momentum  may  trigger  volatility  in  asset  prices. And  if  a  sudden,  disorderly  increase  in  risk
premia were to materialise, it could further elevate banks’ funding costs.
Against  this  backdrop,  I  am  going  to  focus  my  remarks  today  on  bank  profitability.  Returning
banks to sustainable rates of profitability is a key step towards ensuring that the sector remains
resilient,  particularly  in  the  face  of  slowing  economic  momentum  and  the  potential  for  market
distress.
Euro area banks have certainly improved their profitability in recent years. Their return on equity
reached 6% at the end of 2018, up from 3% two years earlier. But their profitability remains below
their  long-run  cost  of  capital,  which  most  banks  estimate  to  be  in  the  range  of  8-10%. Low
profitability prospects translate into low bank valuations, as observed in price-to-book ratios well
below one, hindering the ability to raise capital, where needed.
1
European bank profitability has been structurally weak since well before unconventional monetary
policy  measures  were  introduced.  Broadly  speaking,  the  sources  of  that  weakness  can  be
divided  into cyclical  factors,  cost  inefficiencies  and competitive  challenges  arising  from
outside the sector. Before discussing these sources, let me begin by reminding you why bank
profitability is important.
Why bank profitability matters
Clearly, bank profitability matters for financial stability. Profits are the first line of defence against
losses from credit impairment. Retained earnings are an important source of capital, enabling
banks to build strong buffers to absorb additional losses. Those buffers ensure that banks are
able to provide financial services to euro area households and businesses, even in the face of
adverse developments, thereby smoothing rather than amplifying the impact of negative shocks
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
on the real economy.
2
Banks with poor structural profitability can face higher funding costs and may be tempted to take
on  more  risk.   Within  the  euro  area,  weak  banks  are  more  likely  than  healthy  banks  to  be
connected to unprofitable firms.  This reduces the flow of lending to profitable firms that need
funding  to  invest  and  grow.  The  resultant  misallocation  of  capital   towards  unproductive
5
businesses weighs on long-run economic growth.
3
4
Low bank profitability can also matter for monetary policy by impairing the accumulation of bank
capital  over  time.  Thinly  capitalised  banks  stymie  the  ability  of  monetary  policy  to  stimulate
economic  activity  in  downturns.  Their  capacity  to  lower  the  interest  rates  they  charge  their
customers and increase the volume of lending to the real economy is constrained.  This limits
the effectiveness of an important transmission channel of monetary accommodation in the euro
area, which relies on bank lending supporting consumption and investment.
6
As the crisis showed, dislocations in the banking sector can deepen recessions and seriously
impair  the  smooth  transmission  of  monetary  policy  across  the  euro  area.  That  risk  remains
today. We recently carried out what we call a macroprudential stress test, which assesses this
amplification of shocks using a micro-macro model that feeds back individual bank reactions into
macroeconomic  outcomes.  On  the  basis  of  the  2018  European-wide  stress  test  data,  we
estimate that the banks’ behavioural reaction to the adverse scenario exacerbates the fall in GDP
7
by a further 1.6% with respect to the initial shock, which itself further depletes banks’ capital.
Cyclical factors
Given that important link between bank behaviour and the cycle, let me turn to the cyclical factors
affecting bank profitability in the euro area.
The economic expansion continued through 2018, although with a sizeable reduction in the pace
of growth relative to the previous year. Since the trough, the number of people in employment
has increased by over 10 million. While the data since the end of 2018 have been weak – notably
in  manufacturing  and  the  external  sector  –  the  economic  fundamentals  remain  in  place  to
support continued expansion.
The economic expansion and employment growth have supported bank profitability. Loan growth
8
has been robust in recent years, with higher volumes helping to mitigate margin compression.
The stock of non-performing loans (NPLs) has been substantially reduced. Outstanding NPLs fell
by €142 billion in 2018 and the aggregate ratio dropped to 3.8% of significant banks’ loans at the
end of 2018, from 7% at the end of 2015.
NPLs  represent  a  double  drag  on  bank  profitability.  First,  NPLs  have  to  be  recognised  and
provisioned  for,  reducing  current  profitability.  Indeed,  the  major  driver  of  the  increase  in  bank
profitability  over  the  past  two  years  has  been  the  smaller  flow  of  new  impairments.  But  even
when  fully  provisioned,  NPLs  hamper  profitability  by  tying  up  scarce  capital  without  providing
returns, absorbing operational capacity and incurring legal and administrative costs.
While  NPL  ratios  have  improved  over  the  course  of  the  expansion,  overall  revenue  growth
remains subdued across the banking sector. Aggregate net interest income as a share of equity
fell marginally between 2015 and 2018, although it is still higher than in countries such as the
United Kingdom that have not had negative policy rates.
Yet a number of euro area banks have successfully delivered robust earnings in recent years. A
recent study by the ECB highlighted the differences between this group and the remainder of
significant euro area banks.  The median of these best performers managed to lift its return on
9
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
equity  by  3.6  percentage  points  in  2014–17  relative  to  2009–13.  By  contrast,  the  median
profitability for other significant banks was essentially unchanged.
Between  those  periods,  the  best  performers  managed  to  keep  net  interest  income  growing
roughly in line with costs, whereas the other banks generally witnessed cost growth outpacing
growth in net interest income. Moreover, the best performers managed to increase net fee and
commission income by more than half between 2009 and 2017, relative to the less than 10%
growth managed by the remainder.
Developing  sustainable  revenue  streams  beyond  net  interest  income  –  such  as  fee  and
commission income – remains vital in order to buttress profitability in the coming years. The low
interest  rate  environment  is  with  us  for  the  foreseeable  future  and  is  caused  in  large  part  by
durable structural factors.
 The interest rate below which monetary policy is accommodative
has  fallen  in  the  euro  area,  as  is  the  case  in  much  of  the  developed  world.
  Even  once
monetary policy normalises, interest rates are likely to remain below levels that were common in
previous decades.
Cost inefficiencies
10
11
The second source of low profitability for euro area banks is enduring cost inefficiencies. Cost-to-
income ratios remain high in the euro area relative to international peers. The euro area has too
many banks, too many branches and too many bankers. The aggregate cost-to-income ratio of
euro area banks reached 66% in 2018, up from 62% in 2010, as the dip in revenues was not
offset by cost containment. While similar to that of peers in Japan and the United Kingdom, it is
above the ratio typical for US banks, and substantially above the ratio of roughly 50% for Nordic
banks.
Reducing costs requires grasping the opportunities offered by technology. Banks have been able
to make greater reductions in the density of the branch network in countries where the take-up of
online banking is higher. The number of branches in the Netherlands and the Baltic states has
halved since 2008, but progress in other countries has been much more limited. Technology can
also  help  enhance  operational  efficiency  by  improving  processes  for  loan  origination  and
servicing and enable workloads to be shared better across employees in multiple locations.
That  requires  substantial  investment  in  information  technology  (IT).  The  best  performing  euro
area banks I mentioned earlier increased their IT spending by around 60% between 2009 and
2017, whereas the remaining banks increased theirs by just 10%. Such investment is expensive,
but has proven worthwhile. The cost-to-income ratio for the median of the best performers fell by
5.5  percentage  points,  whereas  that  for  the  median  of  the  other  banks  increased  by  3.1
percentage points.
12
The other source of higher costs for euro area banks is the adjustment to a suite of post-crisis
regulation. This includes holding greater amounts of high-quality capital and debt instruments that
can be “bailed in” should resolution become necessary. It is also more difficult now to increase
measured  profitability  by  increasing  leverage.  And  whilst  international  requirements  on  loss
absorption only apply to the most systemic banks – so-called G-SIBs – and the Basel standards
typically apply to internationally active banks, in the euro area such requirements are applied to all
banks. Of course, such regulations have been put in place in recognition of the significant public
costs borne throughout the banking crisis. And regulation cannot be seen as the main driver of
costs – Nordic banks operate under the same regulatory framework and have been able to attain
a high rate of profitability.
But one key element in regulation worth noting is the lack of waivers for liquidity and capital in the
euro area. As a result, euro area cross-border banking groups potentially face higher costs than
interstate banking groups in the United States.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
This recourse to ring fencing takes a narrow national perspective. At present, national deposit
insurance schemes will be drawn upon should depositors need to be compensated during bank
resolution.  Hence  the  desire  of  national  authorities  to  ensure  that  each  national  subsidiary  is
sufficiently  capitalised  and  has  adequate  liquidity.  Completing  banking  union,  including  the
introduction of a European deposit insurance scheme and the removal of the remaining national
options  and  discretions,  would  help  ensure  that  the  costs  of  resolution  are  equitably  shared.
Meanwhile, it would enable banks to use liquidity and capital efficiently at the euro area level.
Competition from outside the sector
The  final  challenge  for  bank  profitability  comes  from  increasing  competition  from  outside  the
sector,  in  particular  from  financial  technology  companies  (fintech)  and  non-bank  financial
companies.
Lightly  regulated  fintech  companies  have  begun  to  encroach  into  the  realm  of  payment  and
settlement systems. More than 60% of incumbents view fintechs as a threat to their income from
these activities.
 Given the greater desire by consumers for instant payments and the use of
mobile payments, investment in IT is vital to secure future revenue streams.
13
Banks  also  face  increasing  competition  in  the  provision  of  credit.  Total  assets  of  non-bank
financial intermediaries doubled in the euro area between 2008 and 2017, whereas total banking
sector assets remained broadly unchanged. The growth is particularly marked in the investment
fund sector. Around 28% of euro area non-financial company debt issuances are held by euro
area investment funds, compared with 18% pre-crisis.
The greater provision of market-based credit is welcome, and indeed the capital markets union
agenda has been put in place with this aim in mind. But banks will need to carefully consider how
to adjust their business models to accommodate this greater degree of competition. It certainly
increases the urgency to improve efficiency in credit provision.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
The structurally low profitability of the euro area banking sector remains a concern for financial
stability and for monetary policy.
Return on equity below the cost of capital is unsustainable in the long run. The causes of low
profitability  are  for  the  most  part  structural  and  hence  require  structural  solutions.  Successful
implementation of long-run profitable business plans is essential.
Consolidation remains necessary.
There are a number of benefits arising from cross-border consolidation. Cross-border holdings
of deposits and loans can help bolster economic resilience within the euro area by helping to
smooth  shocks  through  income  sharing.  Such  private  sector  risk-sharing  channels  play  an
important role in smoothing shocks in the United States, but currently smooth a much smaller
share in the euro area.
14
Moreover,  it  can  provide  benefits  for  the  banks  themselves.  In  general,  more  geographically
diversified banks have displayed stronger revenue performance in recent years.
15
But there are a number of national banking sectors that would also benefit from consolidation
within  national  borders,  allowing  for  greater  cost  synergies  and  rationalisation  of  branch
networks.  Such  consolidation  would  permit  small  and  medium-sized  banks  to  attain  sufficient
scale to undertake the IT investment necessary to meet the challenges of the digital era.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
While  both  national  and  cross-border  consolidation  options  are  potentially  viable,  the  key
consideration  for  financial  stability  is  that  the  combined  entity  should  be  able  to  successfully
execute the merger, resulting in a bank that can sustain profitability in the long run.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
See European Banking Authority (2018), Risk Assessment Questionnaire – Summary of Results, December.
70% of banks view their cost of equity in this range, with a further 15% of banks estimating that it lies in the
range of 10–12%.
See,  for  example,  Babihuga,  R.  and  Spaltro,  M.  (2014),  “Bank  Funding  Costs  for  International  Banks,” IMF
Working Papers 14/71, International Monetary Fund; Keeley, M. (1990), “Deposit Insurance, Risk, and Market
Power in Banking,” American Economic Review, 80(5): 1183–1200.
See Andrews, D. and Petroulakis, F. (2019), “Breaking the shackles: Zombie firms, weak banks and depressed
restructuring in Europe,” Working Paper Series, No. 2240, ECB, Frankfurt am Main.
See Gopinath, G., Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Karabarbounis, L. and Villegas-Sanchez, C. (2017), “Capital Allocationand
Productivity in South Europe”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4): 1915–1967.
See Adalet McGowan, M., Andrews D. and Millot, V. (2018), “The walking dead? Zombie firms and productivity
performance in OECD countries,” Economic Policy, 33(96): 685–736.
See Altavilla, C., Canova, F. and Ciccarelli, M. (2019), “Mending the Broken Link: Heterogeneous Bank Lending
and Monetary Policy Pass-Through”, Journal of Monetary Economics (forthcoming) and Kayshap, A. and Stein J.
(1994), “Monetary Policy and Bank Lending”, in Mankiw, G. (ed.) , Monetary Policy, Studies in Business Cycles,
29: 221–56, Chicago, University of Chicago Press; van den Heuvel, S. (2002), “Does bank capital matter for
monetary transmission?”, Economic Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May, 259–265.
See Budnik, K. (2019), “A bird’s-eye view of the resilience of the European banking system: results from the new
macroprudential stress test framework”, Macroprudential Bulletin, 7 (March), European Central Bank.
See Altavilla C., Boucinha, M. and Peydró, J-L. (2018), “Monetary policy and bank profitability in a low interest rate
environment,” Economic Policy, 33(96): 531–586.
See Andersson,  M.,  Kok,  C.,  Mirza,  H.,  Móré,  C.  and  Mosthaf,  J.  (2018),  “How  can  euro  area  banks  reach
sustainable profitability in the future?”, Special Feature, Financial Stability Review, November, European Central
Bank.
See Brand, C., Bielecki, M. and Penalver, A. (eds.) (2018), “The natural rate of interest: estimates, drivers, and
challenges to monetary policy”, Occasional Paper Series, No. 217, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, December.
See, for example, Holston, K., Laubach, T. and Williams, J. (2017), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest:
International Trends and Determinants”, Journal of International Economics, 108 (Supplement 1, May): S59–75.
Andersson et al. (2018), op. cit.
European  Banking  Authority  (2018), EBA  report  on  the  impact  of  FinTech  on  incumbent  credit  institutions’
business models, EBA, London.
See Nikolov, P. (2016), “Cross-border risk sharing after asymmetric shocks: evidence from the euro area and
the United States”, Quarterly Report on the Euro Area, 15(2): 7-18, Directorate General Economic and Financial
Affairs (DG ECFIN), European Commission, Brussels.
Andersson et al. (2018), op. cit.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
