 January  17,  2019 
Bank  of 
Japan 
Opening Remarks at the G20 Symposium in Tokyo 
Masayoshi Amamiya 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan 
Good morning, G20 finance and central bank deputies, professors, and distinguished guests. 
Welcome to Tokyo. This year, Japan assumes the G20 presidency for the first time. Today's 
symposium  is  one  of  the  kick-off  events  under  Japan's  presidency.  On  behalf  of  the 
co-organizers,  the  Bank  of  Japan  and  the  Japanese  Ministry  of  Finance,  I  would  like  to 
express our sincere gratitude for your participation in this symposium. 
 As one of the medium- to long-term policy issues that will be discussed under Japan's G20 
presidency, we chose "aging and its policy implications." The G20 had some opportunities in 
the past to discuss aging in the context of other policy issues such as growth strategies and 
global  imbalances.  This  year,  we  have  decided  to  focus  on  aging  itself  and  discuss  it  in  a 
comprehensive manner for two reasons. 
 First, aging is a common policy challenge for all G20 members. Currently, Japan is the most 
aged country among the G20 membership. However, it is almost certain that in many other 
G20 countries, including emerging economies, the ratio of elderly people will increase in the 
future.  Aging  and  shrinking  populations  can  have  a  huge  impact  on  a  country's  economic 
activity and the distribution of its output. They also have a substantial impact on the flow of 
capital  and  labor  between  countries  at  different  stages  of  aging.  Moreover,  labor  market 
conditions, social security systems, and economic policies are different across countries, and 
these affect each country's economic activity and social welfare in different ways. Therefore, 
it  is  essential  that  we  share  our  experiences  and  deepen  our  understanding  of  where  the 
problem lies and how policies can address it. Above all, since future demographic changes 
can  be  predicted  with  some  degree  of  certainty,  we  can  prepare  policy  responses  to  their 
medium- to long-term trends in advance through constructive discussion. 
 The  second  reason  for  our  focus  on  aging  is  that  its  impact  on  the  economy  will  differ 
depending on policy responses. Aging is an important risk factor for the economy in that it 
can  negatively  affect  future  economic  activity.  However,  given  the  appropriate  policy 
responses, it can also have a positive impact on the economy. In the first place, longevity is 
surely to everyone's benefit. The fact that we can live longer in good health has been achieved 
through human endeavor in fields such as medical technology and in the spread of education. 
Economic policies and institutions must be adapted so that these achievements can improve 
 1 
the  economic  welfare  of  everyone,  including  future  generations.  This  is  exactly  our 
responsibility  as  policymakers.  Based  on  these thoughts,  we  titled  this  symposium:  "For a 
Better Future: Demographic Changes and Macroeconomic Challenges." 
 The symposium focuses on demographic changes over three sessions: first, the impacts on the 
macro economy, second, the impacts on fiscal conditions and the social security system, and 
finally,  the  impacts  on  monetary  policy  and  the  financial  system.  In  each  session,  leading 
scholars and policymakers will provide the latest knowledge and identify the most relevant 
issues. In the discussions that follow, a broader and deeper understanding of the issues will be 
shared by all participants. I believe this will provide valuable input to the policy discussion at 
the subsequent G20 meetings. 
 I hope you will all enjoy, contribute to and benefit from active and constructive discussions. 
 Thank you very much for your attention. 
  2 
