Denis Beau: Navigating a changing weather
Speech  by  Mr  Denis  Beau,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  a  Meeting  with
Observatory Group, New York City, 10 June 2019.
Accompanying slides of the speech.
 I would like to discuss with you today a few issues that come to mind when watching over global
financial developments.
I do not know whether a storm is coming but the weather has certainly changed over the past
quarters and we need to make sure that we are ready to withstand harder times.
Indeed, the two points I would like to make in my initial remarks are 1/ risk to financial stability are
on the rise 2/ against that backdrop, it would be prudent to strengthen further the resilience of the
global financial system. Macroprudential policy has a critical role to play in this respect, alongside
a strong focus on filling knowledge and policy gaps while maintaining a steady (regulatory and
supervisory) hand at the helm.
(1) Risk to financial stability are on the rise
[Slide 1]
The  macroeconomic  outlook  remains  uncertain:  the  global  slowdown,  which  was  initially
exacerbated  last  year  by  idiosyncratic  factors,  is  deeper  and  more  persistent  than  initially
foreseen.
Since  last  summer,  the  IMF  has  revised  its  assessment  of  the  global  economic  outlook
downwards.
The cyclical upswing it expected back in the spring of 2018 became a less even expansion with
increased downside risks over the summer. Last autumn and late last year, the IMF insisted on
the  weakening  of  the  expansion.  The  latest  forecast  took  note  of  the  global  slowdown  and
foresaw a precarious recovery.
Overall, at global level, it looks like we are facing a slowdown at the end of a long expansion
rather than an outright downturn.
However,  uncertainty  is  rising  markedly:  trade  tensions,  geopolitical  risks  across  the  globe,
political risks in Europe, etc. This makes the current juncture harder to navigate.
In the US, the macroeconomic outlook has led the Fed to, somehow, pause in its normalization
process.
In  emerging  markets,  potential  problems  could  be  brewing  as  geopolitical  issues  (from  trade
tensions to Middle East developments) are compounded with financial fragilities.
Europe also has its fair share of uncertainties, with a few risks still unresolved.
The  macroeconomic  outlook  remains  uncertain:  last  year  slowdown  was  mostly  driven  by
idiosyncratic developments but their consequences over the next quarters and, more broadly, the
influence of the global slowdown are still unclear.
According  to  the  latest  projections  of  the  Eurosystem,  GDP  growth  in  the  euro  area  would
decelerate significantly in 2019 at 1.2% (after 1.8% in 2018) before gradually increasing to 1.4%
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
in 2020 and in 2021. This deceleration is mainly driven by Germany and by Italy.
The Brexit situation is unsettled. A combination of “not so bad” growth figures earlier this year in
the  UK  (with  short  term  hoarding  somewhat  covering  the  longer-term  impact  of  Brexit  on
investment) and the decision last April to delay the Brexit deadline until 31  October may have
allowed this issue to slip down in the preoccupations of economic and financial actors.
st
However,  a  “hard  Brexit”  would  be  a  very  unfortunate  development  but  it  remains  a  realistic
outcome. In such circumstances, I cannot but advise anyone not to be complacent and carry on
implementing contingent plans to have them in place if such a possibility were to unfold.
The situation in some other members states [Italy] can also cause concerns and lead to episodic
unrest in markets.
Against that background, central banks have responded by pausing or delaying the normalisation
of the monetary policy stance. At its recent meeting in Vilnius, the Governing Council of the ECB
extended its forward guidance so that interest rates are now expected to remain at present levels
at  least  through  the  first  half  of  2020.  The  Governing  Council  also  released  details  of  a  new
series  of  quarterly  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTRO  III)  intended  as  a
backstop  measure  against  possible  future  funding  pressures.  These  actions  will  support  the
macroeconomic outlook and the financial system.
[Slide 2]
The resulting prospect of a low interest rate environment for a longer period of time is nurturing
two related developments. These are unintended consequences or, more precisely, side effects
that are not completely unrelated with the medicine but should be monitored closely by central
banks in their financial stability capacity and, more generally, by macroprudential authorities.
The first one is an incentive given to corporates and households to take on more debt.
The second one is a sustained slip toward greater risk taking in the markets that may not be
recognized because “things look fine” or because “we should dance while the music is playing”.
In this respect, I am not disputing the relevance of “alternative asset classes” (which the hotly
debated  CLO  market  is  an  emblematic  yet  tiny  part)  and  the  rising  exposure  of  institutional
investors toward “real assets”. Such developments are indeed useful and welcome.
However,  the  large  shift  in  allocations  toward  these  assets  classes  and  the  more  general
increased risk appetite driven by the current macrofinancial environment are not without risks:
On  the  equity  market,  valuations  can  be  stretched  and  mainly  responding  to  financial
developments rather than macro or fundamental factors as we have seen over the past few
months when  the late 2018 correction “corrected” quickly in 2019;
Similarly, after a (modest in a longer-term perspective) increase in late 2018, risk premia in
the bond and credit market are compressed back to their historically low levels.
Losing  sight  of  fundamentals  while  your  risk  tolerance  is  at  its  highest  and  you  have  grown
accustomed to suppressed volatility can foster difficulties ahead when adjustments would have
to be made.
These  two  trends,  non  financial  actors  leveraging  up  and  greater  risk  taking  by  financial
institutions, are indeed global trends. Within the euro area, credit distribution (bonds and loans) to
the private sector has remained the most dynamic in France, resulting in a gradual but persistent
increase in debt ratios.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
More  recently,  credit  has  been  getting  some  traction  in  other  economies  so  that  French
developments may be informative of forthcoming developments elsewhere.
In all cases, the concern is less about an immediate risk that one regarding the sustainability of
the  current  developments.  These  are  indeed  medium-term  trends  deserving  serious  attention
alongside other medium-term developments such as digitalization or climate change.
The former (digitalization) hold very promising prospects in terms of efficiency, inclusiveness and
quality  of  consumer  services,  etc.  It  is  also  a  formidable  challenge  for  the  incumbents,
threatening established positions and questioning business models.
Depending  on  the  reactivity  of  the  various  stakeholders,  (traditional  financial  institutions,  new
players, established players in other sectors making a foray into financial services, regulators,
etc.),  this  challenge  can  be  satisfactorily  overcome  or  leave  the  whole  financial  system  in  a
rather precarious situation.
The latter (climate change) is a tremendous challenge that will contribute to reshaping the global
economy  and,  more  broadly  society.  This  challenge  is  so  significant  that  it  is  bound  to  have
consequences for the financial system both as a risk concern and as a business issue.
(2) Strengthening the resilience of the global financial system
Faced with such developments, it would be prudent to strengthen further the resilience of the
global financial system.
[Slide 3]
I  would  argue  that  macroprudential  policy  has  a  key  role  to  play  to  address  the  immediate
concerns and is one critical element in strengthening resilience further.
Macroprudential authorities can seek to prevent an acceleration of the financial cycle. Or, with
more reasonable ambitions, to contribute to limit the formation of “lumps of risks”.
The most ordinary macroprudential intervention relies on communication. By reminding time and
again of the possible pitfalls of leveraging up and becoming complacent about risk taking, we
seek  to  prompt  second  thoughts  and  ensure  that  risks  are  effectively  understood,  adequately
priced and sensibly managed.
If it starts with communication, macroprudential policy in this respect can also go further.
Indeed, this preventive reasoning led the HCSF, the French macroprudential board, to limit the
main French banks’ exposure to large “highly indebted firms”: by making it more difficulty to an
already  heavily  indebted  corporate  to  take  on  even  more  debt,  the  aim  is  to  restrain  the
development of a segment of overstretched large firms.
But the main objective of macroprudential authorities and an easier one to achieve should be to
strengthen the resiliency of the financial sector when things are going well to allow it to withstand
the shocks that will eventually hit.
This is the rationale behind the CcyB. We do not intend to curb the overall credit growth. Rather,
as JFK once said, “the time to repair the roof is when the sun is shining”. By setting the CCyB
rate above zero now, we lock in existing excess capital at a time it is relatively cheap (in good
times, retain earnings is the main driver of capital increase and the impact of a higher capital
requirement on credit and the economy at large is limited is the current circumstances) to be
able to absorb futures losses and loosen the regulatory requirement at a time capital is scarcer
and the macroeconomic impact of a gap would be significant.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
A number of European countries have taken similar steps to increase their room for manoeuver
ahead of a possible future storm.
In that context, macroprudential policy is often described as a complement to monetary policy: a
policy  necessary  to  remedy  the  financial  stability  consequences  of  very  accommodative
monetary policy.
I  would  have  a  more  encompassing  perspective:  macroprudential  policy  is  a  complement  to
monetary policy both today and in the future:
by  contributing  addressing  financial  buoyancy,  it  enables  monetary  policy  to  be  relatively
more accommodative today – but the preventive reach of macroprudential policy should not
be overestimated, especially while macroprudential authorities are still relatively young and
the policy toolkit less sophisticated than that of other policies;
more significantly, by building up (macro)prudential room for manoeuvre ahead of the next
storm,  it  also  helps  restoring  monetary  room  for  manoeuvre  to  address  adverse
developments.
 To conclude, I hope I convey the obviousness and urgency of the case for macroprudential policy
in the current circumstances. But as I said, it is one part of the answer to address the clouds
looming on the horizon.
Over the past ten years, we have ensured that the financial system has a stronger capacity to
withstand shocks. But we need to develop it further:
through  achieving  the  implementation  of  post  crisis  regulations  and  deploy  international
standards  as  agreed.  This  also  includes  evaluating  the  effectiveness  of  these  new
regulations  and  possibly  adjusting  some  of  them.  But  evaluating  is  not  a  catch  word  for
deregulating;
through maintaining a supervisory steady hand. In Europe, this would include delivering on
the NPL action plan, overseeing the implementation of robust lending standards, etc.;
through developing macroprudential policies; and
through relentlessly filling the knowledge gap, to seize, understand and address the risks
from market developments (e.g. leverage finance), cyber-risks, new systemic players (e.g.
big  tech  as  systemic  solution  providers  or  alternative  suppliers  of  or  hub  to  financial
services).
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
