Benjamin E Diokno: Realizing the golden age of infrastructure
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the 32nd Environmental Scanning Exercise, Manila, 26 June 2019.
 Members of the Monetary Board, colleagues from the BSP, guests, ladies and gentlemen, good
morning!
I  am  very  pleased  to  welcome  all  of  you  to  the  32nd  BSP  Environmental  Scanning  Exercise
(ESE). While this is my first time to address this affair as the BSP Governor, it is certainly not my
first time to attend in this event. I was here eight years ago, in 2011, when I was invited to be a
resource speaker on the topic Public-Private Partnership (PPP) Program.
Over the years, I have come to know that this forum serves as an important platform for the BSP
to discuss relevant economic and financial issues with its stakeholders and experts.
Today,  we  have  once  again  gathered  experts  to  listen  to  their  thoughts  on  a  similar  and  very
urgent topic – “Realizing the Golden Age of Infrastructure.”
I  say  very  urgent  because  this  so-called  “hardware”  for  economic  growth,  has  been  a  major
challenge to our country’s path to sustained inclusive growth.
For  instance,  the  2018  Global  Competitiveness  Index  of  the  World  Economic  Forum  (WEF)
ranks our public infrastructure at 92nd out of 140 countries. This indicates how far behind the
Philippines is compared to other countries.
In fact, we could see and experience for ourselves that we need better roads, bridges, airports,
seaports,  and  railway  systems  that  will  provide  convenient  movement  of  goods  and  services
throughout the country.
This  is  why  the  government  has  put  in  place  the  “Build  Build  Build”  (BBB)  program  at  the
forefront of its economic agenda to address the gaps in the country’s infrastructure sector. This
program  is  expected  to  boost  and  expand  the  economy’s  productive  capacity  and  support  a
sustainable and inclusive economic growth.
On our part, the BSP will continue to safeguard an enabling macroeconomic environment that
will  help  facilitate  the  country’s  “golden  age  of  infrastructure,”  through  the  implementation  of
sound monetary and financial policies.
Moreover,  we  continue  to  spearhead  reforms  that  promote  further  deepening  of  our  domestic
capital markets. We have also worked on enhancing the quality of competition in the banking
system by allowing the entry of new foreign banks and liberalized foreign exchange regulations.
All  these  developments  could  help  increase  the  availability  of  funding,  as  well  as  provide
alternative financing opportunities for infrastructure projects.
Of course, the program is not a silver bullet. And if policymakers are not careful, it could also
pose challenges in the economy.
In  the  long-run,  while  infrastructure  investments  promise  to  support  economic  growth  and
employment,  unforeseen  large  external  demand  and  price  pressures  that  affect  the  import
requirements  of 
improving
macroeconomic conditions. Other challenges facing policymakers include issues on skilled labor
shortage  that  may  cause  delay  in  the  infrastructure  projects;  budget  drawdown  issues;  and
possible inequity in resource allocation at the local level.
infrastructure  projects  can, 
the  benefits  of 
turn, 
limit 
in 
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
In this regard, greater policy dialogue and close coordination of relevant government agencies in
terms of fiscal planning and budget execution, as well as program planning is a policy imperative.
Needless to say that the road ahead requires a lot of work. Let us start today by making this
event  a  fruitful  one  through  the  productive  and  meaningful  exchange  of  ideas  on  the  topic.  In
particular, our discussions shall revolve around the following:
1.  The developments/issues encountered in the BBB program.
2.  Funding  requirements  for  the  continued  and  sustainable  implementation  of  the  BBB
program.
3.  Impact of the BBB program in the short and medium-term on macroeconomic conditions,
namely, inflation, current account, exchange rate, and growth output; and
4.  The possible disadvantageous effects, if any, of infrastructure program on jobs, equity, and
the “crowding out” of credit and investments.
I look forward to have a meaningful exchange of views and ideas on these issues. Let me also
take  this  opportunity  to  thank  our  speakers  in  advance  for  your  time  and  contribution  in  this
exercise, which is part of our effect to look at a broad range of economic and non-economic
issues that provide useful insights for policymaking.
Rest assured, your insights will serve as useful inputs to the BSP’s conduct of monetary policy,
as we all strive to build the “hardware” that would propel our country to sustainable and inclusive
growth.
Thank you and mabuhay tayong lahat!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
