    Presentation of the 2018 annual report 
of the Autorité de contrôle prudentiel et de résolution (ACPR) 
  Press conference of 28 May 2019 
 Speech by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France, 
Chairman of the ACPR
         Press contact: Mark Deen (mark.deen@banque-france.fr).
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Page 1 of 5 
[Slide  1] I am pleased to welcome you to the presentation of the 2018 annual report of the 
Autorité  de  contrôle  prudentiel  et  de  résolution  (ACPR),  alongside  Bernard  Delas,  Vice-
Chairman of the ACPR, Rémi Bouchez, President of the Sanctions Committee, and Edouard 
Fernandez-Bollo, Secretary General of the ACPR. In 2018, the women and men of the ACPR 
continued  to  work  tirelessly  to  safeguard  financial  stability,  in  a  context  marked  by  the 
uncertainty  –  and  at  times  the  emergency  –  of  Brexit.  I  would  like  to  thank  them  for  their 
work. This morning, I shall focus on a topical issue – the profitability of banks and insurers in 
France and Europe [slide 2]. 
  I. 
The profitability of French banks and insurers remains resilient 
The return on equity  of France’s largest banks edged up by 0.4 percentage points to 6.7% 
in 2018,i coming back in line with 2015’s level. The maintenance of profitability levels needs 
to be viewed alongside the sharp rise in bank capital. French banks have strengthened their 
solvency and are now more robust. They have more than tripled their capital since the crisis. 
In  parallel,  they  have  raised  their  core  capital  ratios  (CET1)  by  nearly  8  percentage  points 
since 2008, from an average of 5.8% to 13.6% in 2018 [slide 3]. French banks’ profitability is 
in  line  with  the  euro  area  average  and  well  above  that  of  their German counterparts.  At  an 
international level, only the US banks stand out as having an ROE in excess of 10%.  
French  banks  have  come  a  long  way  in  the  past  ten  years,  in  a  demanding  economic, 
financial  and  regulatory  environment.  We  need  to  be  wary,  therefore,  about  using  two 
misleading points of reference, the first of which consists in comparing current ROEs to pre-
crisis  levels  –  when  they  were  clearly  too  high  – and  the  second  in focusing  on the  cost of 
equity. Apparently, the cost of equity for French and European banks is still too high at over 
9% compared with less than 7% in the US; this figure fails to reflect either the strengthening 
of their solvency and hence resilience, or the sharp decline in risk-free rates [slide 4]. 
With regard to insurance, the industry remains solid. Figures for end-2018 should show that 
insurers’  solvency  capital  requirement  coverage  ratio  has  reached  nearly  240%,  which  is 
similar  to  the  level  seen  in  2017.  But  I  shall  let  Bernard Delas  come  back  to  that  in  more 
detail later. 
    II. 
That said, the trend going forward is less favourable, calling for mobilisation 
Page 2 of 5 
 2.1 
Three factors are currently raising concerns 
Despite  the  quality  of  this  snapshot  for  2018,  the  outlook  –  the  medium/long-term  trend  – 
calls for vigilance and mobilisation. Three factors are  effectively weighing on the profitability 
of both French and European banks. The first two mainly concern retail banking: continuing 
low interest rates and digitalisation. The maintenance  of  a low interest  rate  environment 
is  completely  justified  and  necessary  in  light  of  the  economic  situation  in  the  euro  area. 
However, it is also squeezing net interest margins for retail banks, which finance themselves 
with deposits and not at variable rates in the market, as well as reducing returns on insurers’ 
investments. In the case of banks in particular, the issue should certainly not be ignored, but 
we also need to avoid blowing it out of proportion by claiming it is the only factor weighing on 
euro  area  bank  profits.  On  April  10  the  Governing  Council  explicitly  said:  “In  the  context  of 
our  regular  assessment,  we  will  also  consider  whether  the  preservation  of  the  favourable 
implications  of  negative  interest  rates  for  the  economy  requires  the  mitigation  of  their 
possible  side  effects,  if  any,  on  bank  intermediation.”ii Let’s  allow  time  for  this  work  to  be 
done and for the necessary  decision to be taken. It would be an exaggeration, however, to 
say  this  is  the  only  reason  profits  are  under  pressure:  monetary  policy  also  has  favourable 
effects for banks, including a reduction in the cost of risk and an increase in lending volumes; 
and certain banking systems, notably those in Nordic countries, are generating higher profits 
with interest rates that are at least as low as ours. 
On  a  more  structural  level,  financial  institutions  –  banks  and  insurers  alike  –  are  facing  an 
existential  challenge,  that  of  their  digital  transformation  which  is  revolutionising  modes  of 
use  and  opening  up  a  world  of  possibilities  for  customers.  However,  adapting  to  this  new 
ecosystem  requires  huge  investment  as  well  as  placing  downward  pressure  on  revenues. 
Faced  with  this  challenge,  financial  institutions  will  need  to  find  new  productivity  gains  and 
new  tailored  services,  by  tapping  even  deeper  into  the  possibilities  of  automation  and 
artificial  intelligence  (AI).  The  ACPR  is  working  actively  on  these  issues.  Following  the 
publication  of  a  discussion  paper  on  the  challenges  posed  by  AI  in  the  financial  sector,  in 
February  the  ACPR  launched  a  call  for  candidates  to  participate  in  joint  workshops  with 
financial  industry  participants.  Three  key  processes  are  concerned:  AML/CTF,  internal 
models and customer protection.    
The  third  factor  warranting  attention  relates  to  investment  banks.  According  to  some 
estimates, in the past ten years European investment banks have lost 10 percentage points 
of their market share to US banks.iii This can be attributed to the difficulties European banks 
face  in  achieving the  critical  mass  needed to  operate  in  a global  market.  And  Brexit  will  do 
Page 3 of 5 
 little  to  change  this  trend  if  the  European  market  remains  fragmented.  Conversely,  US 
investment  banks  have  the  benefit  of  a  huge  domestic  market  where  margins  are  higher. 
Their size gives them a decisive advantage when it comes to achieving economies of scale 
and competing for large-scale financing transactions. Faced with these structural challenges, 
French banks’ CIB divisions have already begun to refocus on more profitable activities and 
implement major cost-cutting plans. However, there is still a lot to be done, notably when it 
comes to industrialising processes and flows; digitalisation is also changing trading activities. 
2.2 
Banks and regulators therefore have three focuses for action 
The  main  prerequisite  for  improving  profitability  is  for  banks  to  put  in  place  individual 
restructuring  strategies. There  are  a  number  of  levers  they  can  use for  this: technological 
innovation,  cost  control  or  the  diversification  of  revenue  sources  [slide  5].  On  this  latter 
issue, I would like to underline the resilience of the French “universal” or diversified banking 
model. Combining the three core businesses of retail banking, specialised financial services 
and corporate and investment banking helps to open up opportunities for cross-selling, and 
reduces  banks’  sensitivity  to  the  interest  rate  cycle  by  giving  them  access  to  more  diverse 
sources of financing. Even in retail banking, profitability has been better preserved thanks to 
the increase in fees on activities that are not linked to interest rates: payment services, asset 
management  and  insurance  investments.  For  the  six  largest  French  banks,  net  interest 
margin thus accounts for 44% of net income compared with 57% for their euro area peers. 
The  challenge  of  bank  profitability  also  raises  another 
imperative:  cross-border 
consolidation,  which  would  allow  genuine  pan-European  banking groups  to carry  out  their 
activities  more  efficiently  and  better  withstand  the  international  competition.  Compared  with 
the  US  market,  the  European  banking  sector  remains  fragmented:  the  5  main  European 
banks  have  a  market  share  of  just  20%  compared  with  more  than  40%  for  their  US  peers. 
Meeting this target is in part the responsibility of public authorities: concrete progress finally 
needs  to  be  made  on  the  Capital  Markets  Union,  and  the  Banking  Union  needs  to  be 
completed in a true single banking market. It is particularly important to prevent geographical 
ring-fencing  practices,  which  stop  groups  from  managing  liquidity  and  capital  on  a 
consolidated  basis.  These  policies  could  prove  dangerous  in  the  event  of  a  crisis  as  they 
would make it harder for entities within cross-border groups to support each other. That said, 
private sector actors do not need to wait for public authorities to do everything before starting 
to think about consolidation strategies. 
Lastly,  we  also  need  to  ensure  that  institutions  are  treated  equally  under  international 
regulations. If we are to reach an agreement, two conditions must be met. The transposition 
of Basel III must be reasonable and take into account the application of the “output floor” at 
 the highest level of consolidation. Above all, the transposition must be fair and applied to the 
letter  in  all  jurisdictions,  including  in  the  United  States.  Let  me  be  clear  about  one  thing, 
however: the solution to our banking challenges is not deregulation but rather innovation; not 
a step backwards – towards the financial crisis – but a leap forwards. 
Page 4 of 5 
 III.  We  need  to  remain  fully  mobilised  with  regard  to  two  deadly  risks:  ALM/CTF 
and cyber-security 
The  fight  against  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  (ALM/CTF)  calls  for  unwavering 
commitment.  The  23  inspections  carried  out  by  the  ACPR  revealed  major  failings  in 
supervised entities’ compliance with their AML/CTF and asset-freezing obligations. In 2018, 
the Sanctions Committee imposed nine sanctions, one of which amounted to EUR 50 million. 
In parallel with the Financial Action Task Force’s assessment of France in 2020, the ACPR 
will be closely involved in the implementation of a robust and renewed AML/CTF system at 
the European level. I have every confidence that the European Banking Authority – which is 
moving  to  Paris  on  13  June  this  year  –  will  encourage  effective  cooperation  and the  useful 
exchange of information between national supervisors. Edouard Fernandez-Bollo also chairs 
the EBA’s internal AML/CTF committee. The ACPR conference on 21 June, which will focus 
on AML/CTF in its morning session, will be an opportunity to remind ourselves of the efforts 
we all need to keep making in this field. 
The ACPR and Banque de France are at the frontline of efforts to increase cyber-security in 
the financial sector, which is one of the priorities of France’s G7 presidency. Let me remind 
you that there is no more certain threat to the financial sector than that of cyber-risks. Given 
this urgency, we will be implementing concrete measures in the near future. The main ones 
are the shared “categorisation” of cyber-incidents, and the lessons to be drawn from the G7 
cyber stress-test that will be organised by the Banque de France at the start of June. 
 The French economy has the advantage of having a solid financial system, the most solid in 
the  euro  area:  France  is  a  leader  in  essential  activities  such  as  life  and  non-life  insurance, 
and  asset  management,  and  is  home  to  four  of  the  euro  area’s  eight  global  systemically 
important banks. The European supervisor can also rely on the expertise and experience of 
the  ACPR,  which  are  recognised  both  in  Frankfurt  and  in  Europe.  Let’s  make  the  most  of 
these  strengths  in  the  context  of  Brexit:  without  resting  on  our  laurels  –  the  supervisor  will 
always  remain  vigilant  and  all  of  our  institutions are  aware  of the  scale of  the  challenges  – 
but rather by drawing on our collective intelligence. 
                                                            
i Source:  Financial  disclosures  from  BNPP,  SG,  GCA,  GBPCE,  GCM  and  LBP.  According  to  the  EBA,  the  ROE  of 
French banks (a broad sample) is 6.60 %. 
ii ECB, Mario Draghi’s introductory statement to the press conference on 10 April 2019. 
iii Study by Thomson Reuters. 
Page 5 of 5 
