Benjamin E Diokno: Central banking beyond numbers
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Bankers' Night and Book Launch, Manila, 26 July 2019.
 Our partners in the banking community and the private sector, members of the diplomatic corps,
my colleagues in public service, good evening and welcome to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas.
I  am  pleased  to  host  tonight’s  reception  for  the  banking  community.  This  month  of  July,  we
celebrate BSP’s 26th anniversary. At the same time, we commemorate an important milestone: 
the 70 years of central banking in the Philippines. 
A distinguished heritage
Few institutions in the country can claim such a long and distinguished heritage. The book that
we will launch shortly—written by career central bankers themselves—stands as a testament to
this as we get a glimpse of what the central bank has done through these seven decades: the
evolution  of  ideas,  the  progression  to  policies  until  its  fruition  to  execution  of  programs  and
projects that ultimately redound to the benefit of the Filipino people.
If we look back on our path from the post-war 1949 central bank headed by our first Governor
Miguel Cuaderno, Sr. up to today, we realize that the journey has not been easy. There were
twists and turns, bumps and even detours but we held on and stayed on track.
The passage of R.A. No. 11211 which amends the BSP charter is very timely as it enables us to
cope with constantly evolving challenges. This new law bolsters our capability to safeguard the
stability of prices and the financial system.
A mandate for all
This brings me to my next point—that strong institutions are critical in nation-building and this is
true for a central bank.  So for us here in BSP, our ability to deal with the risks and challenges of
the economy is largely dependent on how well-prepared and pro-active the central bank is.
We  have  our  radars.  We  see  the  risks,  the  threats,  and  even  gaps  and  opportunities.  We
address all these—and we have our toolkits that we would willingly use as needed.
In the process, the numbers change and show good results:   inflation is tamed; Philippine banks
remain  robust,  well-funded,  and  adequately  capitalized;  the  credit-liquidity  dynamics  in  the
country  are  consistent  with  expanding  economic  activities;  the  external  payments  position  is
hefty; the exchange rate trends remain consistent with macro fundamentals; and I can continue
on and on.
But  more  than  the  notable  statistics,  for  us  in  the  BSP,  the  bottom  line  always  is  the  Filipino
people. And  for  this  reason,  we  are  pro-growth.  Remember  the  maxim: A  rising  tide  lifts  all
boats.   An  improved  economy  should  benefit  all,  and  so  government  economic  policy  should
focus on broad economic efforts. 
Because of this, financial inclusion is on top of the BSP agenda because no one, really, must be
left behind. We will go beyond convention and embark on goals outside the ambit of traditional
central banking. At the same time, we will remain mindful not to go beyond what we are allowed
to do under our charter. We will be decisive and forward-looking as we continue to be timely and
data-dependent on our actions.  We will continue to communicate our intentions as clearly as
possible. We will be transparent. 
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
As most of you know, the old norm is for central banks to be deliberately vague. But ultimately,
this is bad for the market, the banks, and the public because it leads to speculative behavior, and
we want to avoid that. 
We will INTENTIONALLY bring the BSP closer to the people.  A central bank cannot operate from
an ivory tower.  It is important that BSP stakeholders understand what we are mandated to do. It
is crucial that our stakeholders trust our integrity and our capability to carry out our mandate. 
Yesterday, we received news reports of the survey results conducted by the Makati Business
Club (MBC). The survey results show that businessmen rank BSP first out of 69 government
agencies  covered  in  the  poll.  The  respondents  were  asked  if  they  were/are  satisfied  with  the
performance of these agencies.
 I will not be modest about this—I am happy to say that this is the 25th time the central bank
topped this survey since this was first conducted in 1987. 
This  year,  97%  of  respondents  said  they  are  satisfied  with  BSP’s  performance.  This  seal  of
confidence and expression of trust in BSP affirms the work that we do here. This recognition will
only motivate us to work harder and better.  
Prospects
Having said this, let me share with you briefly what’s on our radar: Global economic growth in
2019 is expected to be weaker than in 2018 with considerable uncertainties in the short term.
There are other risks—the protracted US-China trade tensions, the possibility of a no-deal Brexit,
and the US-Iran standoff on nuclear deal. On the domestic front, we see challenges arising from
severe weather disturbances, and the delays in infrastructure projects.
Despite the risks, we remain optimistic that the Philippines provides a unique value proposition
that  is  not  short-lived.  It  is  anchored  on  a  dynamic  track  record  of  a  durable,  resilient,  and
sustainable economic growth.
This  optimism  is  not  ours  alone.  This  is  shared  by  third-party  assessors  with  the  series  of
favorable assessments released by the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the Asian
Development Bank ,  as well as by  international credit rating agencies.
1
In  addition,  the  reform  momentum  continues.  We  have  seen  a  number  of  bills  languishing  in
congress  for  2  to  3  decades  enacted  into  law  in  less  than  three  years  under  the  present
leadership.
These laws are:
1.  Republic Act (R.A.) No. 11211 which amended R.A. No. 7653, the Charter of the Bangko
Sentral ng Pilipinas;
2.  R.A. No. 11127 or the National Payment Systems Act;
3.  R.A. No. 11055 or the Philippine Identification System (PhilSys) Act;
4.  R.A. No. 11256 or the “Gold Law”.
5.  Personal Property Security Act (PPSA) (Republic Act No. 11057) which boosts access to
credit  especially  of  MSMEs  by  allowing  the  use  of  non-traditional  collateral  and  providing
clearer priority rules in case of foreclosure.  
These  also  include  the  Islamic  Banking  Law  which  has  been  submitted  to  the  Office  of  the
President  and  Anti-Bank  Hacking  legislation  which  was  passed  by  both  houses  of  the  17th
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Congress. Needless to say that the BSP will focus on the strict and prompt implementation of
these recently enacted laws that will help the BSP to more effectively perform its mandates.
Directions
Let me now elaborate further on what the banking community can expect from the BSP moving
forward. 
In terms of monetary policy, rest assured that future policy actions of the BSP will continue to be
guided by the following principles: it will be focused on achieving inflation targets, it will be pro-
active and pre-emptive, and it will be data-dependent and evidence-based.
On  the  financial  sector,  the  BSP  is  committed  to:  strengthen  risk  governance,  leverage  on
technology,  achieve  greater  and  broader  access  to  financial  services,  uphold  the  integrity  of
financial system and safeguard the interest of the public, and accelerate capital markets reforms.
In addition, BSP also remains committed to maintain a safe, efficient, and reliable retail payments
system in the country through the implementation of the National Retail Payments System. With
exponential  growth  of  the  electronic  retail  payments  through  PESONet  and  InstaPay  and  the
initiatives being rolled out by the BSP and the private sector, the BSP is optimistic that we will
achieve our goal of 20 percent of payments through electronic means by 2020.
[By the way,  PESONet and InstaPay are payment options should you wish to buy the book that
we are launching tonight. You may pay using PESONet and InstaPay.
The  BSP  is  not  only  pursuing  the  delivery  of  its  primary  mandates.  It  recognizes  the  need  to
democratize the access of the public to various financial instruments, products and entities. This
is the essence of financial inclusion. So alongside these commitments, the BSP will continue to
pursue  liberalization  reforms  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  to  foster  a  more  enabling
environment for economic activities. 
Meanwhile,  in  order  to  preserve  and  maintain  currency  integrity,  the  BSP  is  continuously
accepting,  retiring  and  replacing  unfit  currency  in  circulation;  conducting  anti-counterfeiting
operations;  promoting  clean  note  and  coin  policy;  and  enhancing  economic  and  financial
awareness. 
I  am  also  pleased  to  mention  that  by  the  first  quarter  of  2020,  our  banknotes  will  have  the
following security enhancements in our banknotes:
upgraded windowed security thread with unique color and design per denomination;
anti-copying and anti-scanning features; 
and incorporation of tactile marks which is meant for the elderly and visually-impaired.
Let me now highlight the priority legislative measures that the BSP will pursue under the 18th
Congress. These bills seek to further enhance access to quality financial products and espouse
the interests of the general public.
These include: Amendments to the Bank Deposit Secrecy laws which aims to align our existing
law  with  international  standards  on  transparency  to  combat  both  domestic  and  global  tax
evasion, money laundering, and other financial crimes.;
the  Financial  Consumer  Protection  bill  which  aims  to  provide  a  comprehensive  financial
consumer  protection  regime  that  consolidates  financial  inclusion,  financial  education,  good
governance, and effective supervision for the purpose of consumer protection.;
and reforms to Agricultural Financing which seeks to amend the Agri-Agra Law and allow banks
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
to merge their loan allocation to the farm sector as a measure to improve banks’ compliance
rate.
We will work closely with officials of both Houses of Congress, with you the banking community
and other concerned stakeholders, as we pursue the enactment of these important legislative
measures.
Conclusion
And so -  as BSP moves into the story of our future, let me reiterate that every thought, every
word, every act of Bangko Sentral is an opportunity to make a difference for a better quality of life
for every Filipino.  We will be steadfast in this pursuit and we will continue to reinvent ourselves
through fresh ideas, calculated risks, and game-changing reforms.
Supported by the magnanimity and professionalism that have been the hallmarks of the BSP’s
service  to  the  nation,  the  BSP  community  will  remain  the  vanguard  of  an  independent  and
credible BSP.  Katapatan, talino, at husay para sa bayan, para sa Filipino.
Before I end, on behalf of the Monetary Board and the entire Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I would
like to thank the leaders of the banking community for supporting the reforms we have pursued
through the years and for helping maintain a banking system that is sound and responsive to the
needs of the economy and the Filipino people.
1
My bottom line tonight is simple. We will count on your continued support, ……. And….  please
continue following the rules. If you do this, we can all sleep soundly at night. 
Toast
To proceed with the next part of the program, let me now call on the members of the Monetary
Board to join me on stage:
Finance  Secretary  Sonny  Dominguez,  Philip  Medalla,  Juan  De  Zuñiga,  Peter  Favila,  Tony
Abacan, and Bruce Tolentino.
Please  join  us  and  raise  your  glasses  to  the  Central  Bank  for  its  70  years  of  distinguished
service…
To the banking community and the men and women of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, that we
may all remain strong, stable, and resilient in the face of challenges and be vehicles of growth
and development for our ultimate boss – the Filipino People.
Cheers!
Thank you and have a good evening!
1
IMF, WB, and ADB project the Philippines to grow between  6.2 to 6.6 percent in 2019–2020, broadly in line with
the national government’s revised growth targets of 6.0 to 7.0 percent in 2019 and 6.5 to 7.5 percent in 2020.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
