Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Luis
de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Vilnius, 6 June 2019.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. I would like to thank Chairman of the Board Vasiliauskas for his kind hospitality and
express our special gratitude to his staff for the excellent organisation of today’s meeting of the
Governing Council. We will now report on the outcome of our meeting.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  have  conducted  a  thorough
assessment  of  the  economic  and  inflation  outlook,  also  taking  into  account  the  latest  staff
macroeconomic  projections  for  the  euro  area.  As  a  result,  the  Governing  Council  took  the
following decisions in the pursuit of its price stability objective.
First,  we  decided  to  keep  the key ECB interest rates  unchanged.  We  now  expect  them  to
remain at their present levels at least through the first half of 2020, and in any case for as long as
necessary to ensure the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below,
but close to, 2% over the medium term.
Second, we intend to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal payments from maturing securities
purchased under the asset purchase programme for an extended period of time past the date
when we start raising the key ECB interest rates, and in any case for as long as necessary to
maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.
Third,  regarding  the  modalities  of  the  new  series  of  quarterly  targeted  longer-term  refinancing
operations (TLTRO III), we decided that the interest rate in each operation will be set at a level
that  is  10  basis  points  above  the  average  rate  applied  in  the  Eurosystem’s  main  refinancing
operations over the life of the respective TLTRO. For banks whose eligible net lending exceeds a
benchmark, the rate applied in TLTRO III will be lower, and can be as low as the average interest
rate on the deposit facility prevailing over the life of the operation plus 10 basis points.
A  press  release  with  further  details  of  the  terms  of  TLTRO  III  will  be  published  at  15:30  CET
today.
The  Governing  Council  also  assessed  that,  at  this  point  in  time,  the  positive  contribution  of
negative  interest  rates  to  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  and  to  the  sustained
convergence  of 
is  not  undermined  by  possible  side  effects  on  bank-based
intermediation.  However,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  carefully  the  bank-based  transmission
channel of monetary policy and the case for mitigating measures.
inflation 
Today’s  monetary  policy  decisions  were  taken  to  provide  the  monetary  accommodation
necessary for inflation to remain on a sustained path towards levels that are below, but close to,
2% over the medium term. Despite the somewhat better than expected data for the first quarter,
the most recent information indicates that global headwinds continue to weigh on the euro area
outlook. The prolonged presence of uncertainties, related to geopolitical factors, the rising threat
of  protectionism  and  vulnerabilities  in  emerging  markets,  is  leaving  its  mark  on  economic
sentiment.
At  the  same  time,  further  employment  gains  and  increasing  wages  continue  to  underpin  the
resilience  of  the  euro  area  economy  and  gradually  rising  inflation.  Today’s  policy  measures
ensure that financial conditions will remain very favourable, supporting the euro area expansion,
the ongoing build-up of domestic price pressures and, thus, headline inflation developments over
the medium term. Looking ahead, the Governing Council is determined to act in case of adverse
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
contingencies and also stands ready to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate, to ensure
that  inflation  continues  to  move  towards  the  Governing  Council’s  inflation  aim  in  a  sustained
manner.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Euro
area real GDP rose by 0.4%, quarter on quarter, in the first quarter of 2019, following an increase
of 0.2% in the fourth quarter of 2018. However, incoming economic data and survey information
point to somewhat weaker growth in the second and third quarters of this year. This reflects the
ongoing  weakness  in  international  trade  in  an  environment  of  prolonged  global  uncertainties,
which are weighing, in particular, on the euro area manufacturing sector. At the same time, the
euro  area  services  and  construction  sectors  are  showing  resilience  and  the  labour  market  is
continuing to improve. Looking ahead, the euro area expansion will continue to be supported by
favourable  financing  conditions,  the  mildly  expansionary  euro  area  fiscal  stance,  further
employment  gains  and  rising  wages,  and  the  ongoing  –  albeit  somewhat  slower  –  growth  in
global activity.
This  assessment  is  broadly  reflected  in  the  June  2019  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic
projections for the euro area. These projections foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.2% in
2019,  1.4%  in  2020  and  1.4%  in  2021.  Compared  with  the  March  2019  ECB  staff
macroeconomic  projections,  the  outlook  for  real  GDP  growth  has  been  revised  up  by  0.1
percentage points for 2019 and has been revised down by 0.2 percentage points for 2020 and by
0.1 percentage points for 2021.
The risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook remain tilted to the downside, on account of
the  prolonged  presence  of  uncertainties,  related  to  geopolitical  factors,  the  rising  threat  of
protectionism and vulnerabilities in emerging markets.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.2% in May 2019,
after 1.7% in April, reflecting mainly lower energy and services price inflation. On the basis of
current futures prices for oil, headline inflation is likely to decline over the coming months, before
rising  again  towards  the  end  of  year.  Looking  through  the  recent  volatility  due  to  temporary
factors,  measures  of  underlying  inflation  remain  generally  muted,  but  labour  cost  pressures
continue to strengthen and broaden amid high levels of capacity utilisation and tightening labour
markets.  Looking  ahead,  underlying  inflation  is  expected  to  increase  over  the  medium  term,
supported  by  our  monetary  policy  measures,  the  ongoing  economic  expansion  and  stronger
wage growth.
This assessment is also broadly reflected in the June 2019 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 1.3% in 2019, 1.4% in 2020
and 1.6% in 2021. Compared with the March 2019 ECB staff macroeconomic projections, the
outlook  for  HICP  inflation  has  been  revised  up  by  0.1  percentage  points  for  2019  and  revised
down by 0.1 percentage points for 2020.
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) growth stood at 4.7% in April 2019, after
4.6% in March. Sustained rates of broad money growth reflect ongoing bank credit creation for
the private sector and low opportunity costs of holding M3. The narrow monetary aggregate M1
continues to be the main contributor to broad money growth on the components side.
The annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations increased to 3.9% in April 2019,
from 3.6% in March. Beyond short-term volatility, the annual growth rate of loans to non-financial
corporations  has  moderated  somewhat  in  recent  months  from  its  peak  in  September  2018,
reflecting  the  typical  lagged  reaction  to  the  slowdown  in  economic  growth  observed  over  the
course of 2018. The annual growth rate of loans to households stood at 3.4% in April, compared
with 3.3% in March, continuing its gradual improvement.
The monetary policy measures taken today, including TLTRO III, will help to safeguard favourable
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
bank lending conditions and will continue to support access to financing, in particular for small
and medium-sized enterprises.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from the monetary analysis confirmed that an ample degree of monetary accommodation is still
necessary for the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close
to, 2% over the medium term.
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute more decisively to raising the longer-term growth potential and reducing vulnerabilities.
The  implementation  of structural  reforms  in  euro  area  countries  needs  to  be  substantially
stepped  up  to  increase  resilience,  reduce  structural  unemployment  and  boost  euro  area
productivity and growth potential. The 2019 country-specific recommendations should serve as
the relevant signpost. Regarding fiscal policies, the mildly expansionary euro area fiscal stance
is providing support to economic activity. At the same time, countries where government debt is
high  need  to  continue  rebuilding  fiscal  buffers.  All  countries  should  reinforce  their  efforts  to
achieve  a  more  growth-friendly  composition  of  public  finances.  Likewise,  the  transparent  and
consistent implementation of the European Union’s fiscal and economic governance framework
over  time  and  across  countries  remains  essential  to  bolster  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area
economy.  Improving  the  functioning  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  remains  a  priority.  The
Governing Council welcomes the ongoing work and urges further specific and decisive steps to
complete the banking union and the capital markets union.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
