  22.02.2019 
 Banking Union: the challenge of going digital and being regulated 
Presentation of the PwC report 
Pablo Hernandez de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Let me begin by thanking PwC for their kind invitation to participate in this presentation of 
the Sixth Report on Banking Union.  
In recent years these reports have provided us with a detailed analysis of the challenges 
facing the Spanish financial sector as a result of having to adapt to regulatory changes and 
to the new institutional arrangements of Banking Union.  
And this against a background of far-reaching technological change, which has seen the 
emergence of new players (such as the fintech and the technological giants, the so-called 
bigtech).  These  agents  are  altering  the  competitive  framework  in  some  of  the  traditional 
business segments of banks.  
As on previous occasions, this year’s report is very complete and analyses key questions 
on new issues relating to regulation, to banking activity and to the environment banks face.  
Allow me to focus on two specific issues: the tasks outstanding regarding Banking Union 
and the technological challenge from a regulatory standpoint. 
These two issues are, moreover, interrelated. To successfully address the transformation 
imposed  by  the  new  competitive  environment  resulting  from  technological  changes  will 
probably require harnessing the opportunities of scale and specialisation that the integration 
of  European  financial  markets  offers.  But  to  enable  this  process  of  integration  it  will  be 
necessary first to remove the obstacles that continue today to block the way to the creation 
of Banking Union and the full Capital Markets Union.  
The (scant) risk-sharing channels in the Economic and Monetary Union  
Completing  Banking  Union  and  developing  the  European  Capital  Markets  Union  are, 
moreover,  key  objectives  for  securing  the  appropriate  and  stable  functioning  of  the 
European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). Comparing the workings of EMU and of 
the United States, in terms of the mechanisms each have in place to cushion the impact of 
shocks affecting a single country or State, illustrates clearly how far we still have to go.  
Indeed, the empirical evidence suggests that, in the United States, around 70-80% of the 
impact of shocks affecting a particular State is distributed among the other States.   
In  this  case  the  main  risk-diversification  channel  is  through  the  workings  of  the  capital 
markets.  Hence,  the  cross-border  ownership  of  capital  allows  around  40%  of  the 
asymmetric shocks within the United States to be shared.  
The  credit  channel,  which  operates  through  the  granting  of  credit  by  non-resident 
institutions to resident agents, enables around a further 20% of asymmetric shocks in the 
United States to be shared.  
Conversely, in the euro area, around 70% of the financing received by households and firms 
is  mediated  by  the  banking  sector,  while  only  the  remaining  30%  is  obtained  on  capital 
markets. This is practically the opposite of the United States, and reveals how the financing 
of the economy depends on the banking sector in Europe. As a result, capital markets in 
the euro area absorb 10% of shocks, and the credit channel around 34%. 
 3/9 
 Yet irrespective of the different composition of the risk-diversification channels, what needs 
highlighting  is  that  in  the  euro  area  the  combined  power  of  all  the  private  risk-sharing 
channels is much more limited than in more stable monetary unions. Given that the role of 
the public sector is also virtually non-existent in Europe’s case, the outcome is that more 
than 56% of the effect of shocks – as opposed to 28% in the United States – is not shared.  
Moreover, it is important to note that during the most acute phase of the last financial crisis, 
the main risk-sharing channel in the euro area − the credit channel – virtually disappeared, 
owing  to  the  process  of  renationalisation  of  bank  loans.  This  was  due  to  the  climate  of 
mistrust  about  banks’  financial  health,  and  to  the  existence  of  negative  feedback  loops 
between public finances and banking solvency.   
To sum up, in the euro area our risk-sharing channels are weaker and, what is more, they 
tend to contract precisely when they are most needed. 
The  limited  strength  of  private  risk-sharing  channels  in  the  euro  area  reflects  both  the 
underdevelopment  of  capital  markets  and  a  highly  segmented  banking  system  at  the 
national level.  
There are practically no banks with a pan-European strategy, and there is little progress in 
cross-border  lending,  especially  in  the  retail  markets,  or  in  other  words,  in  lending  to 
households and firms.  
Today, the euro area’s banks continue to grant more than 90% of credit to firms resident in 
the same country, with only 5% going to firms in other euro area countries. In the case of 
loans to households, the bias is even greater.  
Expanding this foreign activity is essential for the sound working of the euro area. In this 
respect, there is still a long way to go before we achieve a pan-European banking system 
and a more complete Banking Union. 
The need to complete Banking Union 
Since  Banking  Union  was  launched  in  2012,  substantial  institutional  progress  has  been 
made towards the creation of a new common supervisory and resolution framework. The 
aim has been to restore lost confidence and ensure protection for depositors, irrespective 
of  their  nationality.  The  first  pillar of  Banking Union  –  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism 
(SSM)  –  has  indeed  been  completed.  Today,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  directly 
supervises significant credit institutions, which account for almost 82% of all banking assets 
in the euro area. 
Progress has also been made in the case of the second pillar, with the creation of the Single 
Resolution Mechanism (SRM). The SRM establishes uniform resolution criteria according to 
the principle of the lowest possible cost to the taxpayer.  
However,  for  completion  of  the  Banking  Union  important  institutional  challenges  remain. 
First, the creation of a common financial backstop for the Single Resolution Fund (SRF), 
to  ensure  that  it  has  sufficient  resources  to  withstand  future  banking  crises  without 
destabilising the public finances of the countries concerned.  
4/9 
  In  this  respect,  an  agreement  was  reached  at  the  Euro  Summit  in  December  2018  to 
establish  a  common  financial  backstop  for  the  SRF.  This  took  the  form  of  a  credit  line 
provided by the European Stability Mechanism, to be repaid by the banking system itself 
through its future contributions. The launch of this financial backstop, currently scheduled 
for 2024, could be brought forward to 2020 if it is considered that sufficient progress has 
been made to reduce banking risk. 
Here it is important to note that the percentage of bad loans on euro area banks’ balance 
sheets  has  fallen  notably  in  recent  years,  down  to  close  to  4%  of  all  loans,  albeit  still 
somewhat above the pre-crisis level. Likewise, banks’ capitalisation levels have improved 
substantially; the total capital ratio for euro area banks overall now stands at 18%. 
A further key aspect for completion of the design of the euro area is the creation of the 
common European Deposit Insurance Scheme; this would be the third pillar of Banking 
Union.  
In my view, it is difficult to believe that, without this third pillar, the first two will be able to 
guarantee in a credible manner the same level of protection for all depositors across the 
euro area, irrespective of where they are located. Sufficient confidence to mitigate the risk 
of  large-scale  bank  runs  and  the  consequent  financial  fragmentation  in  severe  crisis 
situations would thus fail to be generated.  
A  recent  paper  published  by  the  ECB  shows  that  a  relatively  small  common  deposit 
insurance  fund  –  0.8%  of  deposits  covered  –  could  suffice  to  withstand  severe  crisis 
situations such as that experienced between 2007 and 2009. 
Moreover, the existence of contributions – tailored to the risk profile of each bank – to a 
European common deposit insurance fund could ensure that there was no systematic cross-
subsidisation between countries. They could, at the same time, guarantee that appropriate 
treatment was given to risks associated with sovereign debt holdings on banks’ balance 
sheets.  
In short, this third pillar would contribute to financial stability and would solve the problem 
of  asymmetry  that  common  supervision  entails  compared  with  the  national  banking 
systems’ ultimate responsibility for deposit insurance. 
None of the above necessarily means that any losses stemming from decisions taken prior 
to the launch of the SSM in 2014 will have to be shared. But if there is to be mutual trust, 
Europe’s leaders should decide to take joint responsibility for the banking risks assumed 
since single supervision came into force. Hence the importance of the measures taken by 
credit institutions to reduce their impaired asset volume, in addition to the direct positive 
impact of such measures on their profitability and efficiency. 
Towards pan-European banking 
It  is  essential  that  the  public  and  institutional  aspects  of  Banking  Union  are  completed. 
However, to secure more stability for the euro area, it is also necessary to strengthen the 
private risk-mitigation and risk-sharing mechanisms I mentioned earlier. To do this, on the 
banking  side,  it  is  important  to  eliminate  national  barriers  to  European  banking 
integration.  
 5/9 
 Despite the challenges faced in recent years, with the emergence of new competitors and 
low levels of profitability, many European countries’ banking systems remain oversized and 
still have surplus capacity. In addition, international consolidation processes have been few 
and far between, and this pattern has not changed since the launch of Banking Union. 
This  situation  contrasts,  once  again,  with  the  consolidation  process in  the United  States 
following the removal of certain regulatory hurdles that restricted mergers and acquisitions 
between banks from different US States. In comparison, here in Europe barriers preventing 
a truly pan-European bank persist, especially in the retail business segment. 
These barriers are both explicit – different national regulations – and implicit. Thus, the use 
of directives that provide for national exceptions and specificities have not been sufficient 
to harmonise and standardise European banking regulations.  
Moreover,  these  regulations  do  not  fully  acknowledge  the  advantages  of  geographical 
diversification of banking activity.  
Also, in some European countries, there are still broad  segments of the banking industry 
that  are  either  fully  State-owned  or  are  sheltered  from  competition  by  means  of  specific 
regulatory treatment. They thus have fewer incentives to search for more profitable business 
options. 
Removing all these obstacles is essential to achieve greater risk diversification through the 
creation of cross-border banks. That would increase the capacity for stabilisation in the face 
of turmoil and would, at the same time, weaken the link between sovereign and banking 
risk. 
Regulatory challenges in the new technology environment 
Following these thoughts on the recent development of and future prospects for Banking 
Union, and its consequences for the financial system and financial stability, I shall devote 
the last part of my address to highlighting a number of regulatory challenges emerging in 
the financial sector’s new technology environment, in which new players, technologies and 
services have appeared.  
The digital transformation process is characterised by its high technology component, with 
applications that are accessible to society at large, and by the speed at which innovations 
are introduced.  
In  this  setting,  it  is  no  surprise  that  banking  intermediation,  which  largely  depends  on 
exploiting information asymmetries, has viewed this revolution with a mixture of concern 
and  interest.  Concern  because  of  the  difficulties  involved  in  adapting  to  the  new 
environment  and  competing  with  the  new  market  players  (especially  bigtech,  which  I 
mentioned  earlier).  Interest,  because  of  the  possibilities  it  offers  to  achieve  synergies, 
improve  the  range  of  services  on  offer  and  secure  efficiency  gains  in  numerous  internal 
processes. 
First,  digital  transformation  offers  significant  potential  advantages  to  companies,  be  it 
thanks to efficiency gains, progress in financial inclusion levels or the possibility for different 
intermediaries to better meet each customer’s needs.  
6/9 
  However,  as  in  any  other  transformation  process,  there  are  also  new  and  important 
challenges to be addressed. Accordingly, the regulator should review and adapt the rules 
already in place; the aim must be to remove obstacles limiting the advantages to be had 
and, at the same time, to mitigate any risks that the new environment may generate. 
From the regulator’s standpoint, it is important, first, to maintain a level playing field, which 
basically  entails  putting  into  practice  the  well-known  maxim:  “same  risks,  same 
requirements”.  
However,  this  has  not  proved  easy,  as  a  great  many  of  the  regulations  in  place  have  a 
sectorial approach. In addition, certain activities are subject to special regulations, because 
of the possible implications, for instance, for financial stability. This is the case of deposit-
taking, which leads to banks being subject to strict criteria that shape their activity overall, 
while other intermediaries that offer similar services, but not deposit-taking, are free from 
such requirements.  
Turning  to  the  promotion  of  innovation,  in  such  a  global,  competitive  and  dynamic 
environment some flexibility in the stages at which ideas are tried out is required. Here, the 
proportionate  application  of  regulations,  within  the  permitted  margins,  or  the  creation  of 
controlled test spaces, known as sandboxes, appear to be suitable measures for promoting 
innovative projects that seek to harness the potential of new technologies in the financial 
sector.  
Further, it is worth paying attention to how this transition process unfolds. As I stated earlier, 
our starting point in Spain – and largely in the rest of Europe – is that of a heavily banked 
society. But, further to digital transformation, significant changes are afoot in the business 
models  of  traditional  institutions,  and  in  the  role  that  other  agents  from  different  sectors 
play, in relation to the provision of financial services.  
As regulators, we should seek to ensure this transition is orderly, maintaining at least the 
existing levels of stability and the safeguards set in place following the financial crisis.  
In this respect, if anything characterises the new scenario, it is the growing importance of 
data as the source of a competitive edge. Technological development has given rise to an 
unprecedented  transformation  in  the  capacity  to  capture,  store,  process  and  analyse 
information.  
Unquestionably, this is one of the basic reasons it was decided to liberalise the exchange 
of  certain  pieces of  financial information in Europe.  And  it  is  also why other  jurisdictions 
(Australia, for example) appear to be following the example.  
It is in this new competitive context, where data on payment transactions circulate more 
readily, that it is important for banks to take the necessary steps to  ensure the security 
and privacy of the information that is shared. 
Also, aspects such as data governance, differentiated treatment in terms of their nature and 
defining where individual data end and where those processed by banks begin are all issues 
that need to be resolved. Indeed, a far-reaching debate looks likely. 
 7/9 
 In  any  event,  in  the  European  Union  this  debate  should  not  be  tackled  in  a  fragmented 
fashion, with national-based differences. It should be one of the issues at the heart of the 
agenda for the forthcoming European Commission meeting.   
It would be remiss of me not to discuss, albeit briefly, the importance of cybersecurity in 
this  new  digital  environment.  Ultimate  responsibility  for  managing  this  increasingly 
significant  risk  should  fall  on  financial  sector  participants  themselves,  including  central 
banks, who play a key role in the management of many market infrastructures. Yet in such 
an interconnected and interdependent sector, the authorities must develop an appropriate 
framework geared both to reducing the incidence of cybernetic attacks and to increasing 
resilience in the face of such attacks. Here, moreover, the principles of proportionality and 
graduality applied when managing other types of risks do not prevail; any link in the chain, 
no matter how small it is, may act as a gateway for a cybernetic attack that compromises 
the security of the entire system.  
Lastly, I should like to discuss an aspect which, I believe, will be pivotal in future discussions 
among financial authorities: coordination among the different regulators.  
As I mentioned, one of the strategic elements of digital transformation is the management 
of  information.  But  the  discussion  goes  beyond  financial  data  and  may  also  affect  other 
sectors.  Moreover,  digital  transformation  enables  the  supply  of  financial  services  to  be 
extended,  accommodating  them  to  the  individual  needs  of  consumers,  who  see  their 
choices and decision-making capacity increase.  
This  means  that  aspects  such  as  the  privacy  or  protection  of  information,  transparency 
towards  consumers  (so  they  may  take  informed  decisions)  and  the  effective  level  of 
competition between providers of specific technological services (take, for example, the use 
of the cloud) all gain in importance.  
However, these matters lie outside the typical remit of financial supervisors and thus make 
it  necessary  to  promote  a  collaborative  climate  and  more  intense  cross-disciplinary 
dialogue.    
Conclusions 
By way of conclusion, I would assert that twenty years after the creation of the euro, major 
headway has been made in equipping EMU with greater stability.  
However, the architecture of EMU remains incomplete: there is a pressing need to complete 
Banking Union and make headway on the Capital Markets Union. To do this, we must push 
through key aspects such as the common European deposit insurance scheme, and deepen 
financial integration. The internationalisation of the banking business would help bring about 
greater diversification, weakening thereby the link between sovereign and banking risk.  
Further,  harnessing  synergies  and  economies  of  scale  may  contribute  to  improving 
profitability. That would provide for the investment needed to enable the ongoing adaptation 
to the change wrought by the digitalisation of the banking business. Digitalisation promises 
major benefits, both for consumers (in the form of better and tailored services) and for those 
financial institutions able to seize this opportunity. Our role as supervisors lies in ensuring a 
safe and stable transition for the good of all citizens. 
Thank you.  
8/9 
    9/9 
