Ravi Menon: Introducing Zhou Xiaochuan
Opening remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore,
at MAS Lecture 2019 by Zhou Xiaochuan, Singarpre, 19 September 2019.
Dr Zhou Xiaochuan, President, China Society for Finance and Banking, and former Governor,
People’s Bank of China
 Mr Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Senior Minister and Chairman, MAS
Mr Goh Chok Tong, Emeritus Senior Minister and Senior Advisor to MAS
Distinguished guests, friends and colleagues, good morning.
Welcome to the tenth MAS Lecture.
Since  its  launch  in  2000,  the  MAS  Lecture  has  featured  leading  members  of  the  international
financial community to share their perspectives on the economic and financial issues of the day.
I have been trying to get Dr Zhou to speak at the MAS Lecture almost since the time I became
MD MAS eight years ago.
On at least a couple of occasions, Dr Zhou actually agreed to deliver the Lecture,
only to be prevented from doing so by pressing issues back home in China.
And now, the stars have finally aligned to bring Dr Zhou to Singapore and to deliver
the MAS Lecture.
Perhaps, there is a deeper significance as to why the stars conspired to make Dr Zhou deliver
the MAS Lecture in 2019 and not earlier.
This  year  marks  the  10th  anniversary  of  China’s  bold  move  to  gradually
internationalise the RMB.
It was in 2009 that the People’s Bank of China launched a cross-border RMB trade
settlement pilot scheme.
Who  better  to  deliver  this  year’s  MAS  Lecture  than  the  chief  architect  and  prime
mover behind that far-sighted policy: Dr Zhou Xiaochuan
Dr Zhou needs little introduction.  
We secured his agreement to deliver the MAS Lecture just three weeks ago.  The
letters of invitation went out two weeks. 
The fact that more than 500 of you are gathered here at short notice is testament to
Dr  Zhou’s  reputation  as  a  visionary  leader  who  shaped  China’s  financial  reform
agenda. 
Still,  it  would  be  remiss  of  me  if  I  did  not  briefly  highlight  the  key  milestones  in  Dr  Zhou’s
distinguished career in public service spanning more than 30 years.
He held leadership roles in the Bank of China and the China Construction Bank. 
He served as Administrator of the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE)
and Chairman of the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC).
And of course – what he is most well known for – he served as Governor of the
People’s Bank of China (PBoC) from 2002 to 2018, the longest-serving Governor of
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
the PBoC.
Dr  Zhou  became  one  of  the  most  respected  central  bankers  on  the  international
circuit.
In February this year, Dr Zhou was awarded the Lifetime Central Banking Award by
London-based  publication  Central  Banking,  a  most  fitting  recognition  of  his
contributions to the Chinese economy and financial sector.
From a bilateral perspective, during Dr Zhou’s tenure, the PBoC and MAS forged close ties and
deepened financial and regulatory cooperation.
We  collaborated  successfully  in  several  areas  over  the  years,  particularly  in
promoting the greater use of RMB in the region.
PBoC’s decision in 2013, under Dr Zhou’s leadership, to appoint the Industrial and
Commercial  Bank  of  China  as  Singapore’s  RMB  clearing  bank  was  a  significant
milestone and spurred the growth of Singapore as a key RMB offshore centre.
In 2016, MAS announced that RMB assets would be included as part of our Official
Foreign Reserves, three years ahead of the inclusion of Chinese bonds in key global
bond indices.
At the personal level, I have had the pleasure and privilege to interact with Xiaochuan at many
international and bilateral meetings.
I have always found his views insightful.
At  our  bi-monthly  meetings  of  central  bank  governors  in  Basel  at  the  Bank  for
International  Settlements, 
I  would  sometimes  ask  Xiaochuan  some  rather
inconvenient questions – about risks related to shadow banking or industrial over-
capacity in China.
Xiaochuan  would  always  answer  these  questions,  as  well  as  those  from  other
governors, with a disarming candour and clarity, never avoiding the hard issues.
This  not  only  helped  to  build  trust  among  his  counterparts  in  the  international
community but also endeared Xiaochuan to many of us as someone we could count
on for insights into the complexities of the Chinese economy and financial system.
Today,  Dr  Zhou  will  speak  on  “The  Rise  of  Technology  in  Finance  –  Opportunities  and
Challenges for Central Banking”. 
Many of us are familiar with Dr Zhou’s views on financial and economic reforms. 
But not many of us know that that when it comes to technology, Dr Zhou was ahead
of the curve amongst his peers.
In 2014, before the words “fintech” and “digital currencies” became popular, Dr Zhou
set up a Digital Currency Research Institute within the PBoC to explore how new
technologies  like  the  blockchain  and  digital  tokens  could  improve  and  strengthen
China’s financial system.
Today, China is a leading fintech player and there is even speculation that PBoC
may become the first central bank in the world to issue its own digital currency – a
topic that Dr Zhou will probably touch on, and if he does not, one of you I am sure
will ask him about!
And now, ladies and gentlemen, please join me in welcoming Dr Zhou Xiaochuan to deliver the
tenth MAS Lecture.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
