Luis  de  Guindos:  International  spillovers  of  monetary  policy  and
financial stability concerns
Speech by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the conference
“The ECB and its watchers XX”, Frankfurt am Main, 27 March 2019.
Introduction
 It is a great pleasure for me to speak at this year’s ECB Watchers Conference. Given the topic of
this session, I will start by referring to our recent findings on international spillovers of monetary
policy  and  the  related  financial  stability  concerns  for  the  euro  area.  I  will  then  focus  on  our
financial  stability  assessment  at  the  present  juncture.  In  doing  so,  I  will  briefly  refer  to  an
analytical tool we have employed to monitor and assess the banking system’s resilience.
Globalisation  has  not  only  caused  inflation  and  output  to  become  increasingly  synchronised
across countries. Equity prices and financing conditions have become more synchronised, too.
Most of this synchronisation stems from (common) global shocks, but the effects of international
spillovers of monetary policy are less obvious.
In my talk today, I will touch upon issues surrounding these international spillovers, and whether
they are of concern for the financial stability of the euro area.
In a globalised and financially integrated world, spillovers from the monetary policy of one country
to other economies are unavoidable.
We can identify at least three international transmission channels:
1.  The “aggregate demand” channel, through which monetary policy affects domestic demand
and, thus, the demand for foreign goods.
2.  The  “exchange  rate  competitiveness”  channel,  through  which  monetary  policy  affects  the
exchange rate, meaning it changes the price of domestic goods relative to foreign goods.
3.  The “financial channel”, through which monetary policy affects domestic financial conditions.
When  there  are  strong  financial  connections  between  countries,  these  conditions  may
change abroad as well.
From these transmission channels, let me focus on the “financial channel” for the remainder of
my talk.
Financial spillovers from US monetary policy to the euro area
Measuring international spillovers is not easy, because global shocks lead to economies moving
1
in a synchronised manner for reasons unrelated to monetary policy.
In line with previous evidence , recent ECB research identifies large financial spillovers from US
3
monetary policy to global financial conditions, including euro area financial conditions.
2
More  specifically,  over  the  course  of  one  month,  monetary  policy  tightening  by  the  Federal
Reserve System drives up euro area corporate bond spreads  just as much as US corporate
bond spreads. It also triggers declines in euro area stock markets of a similar magnitude to the
5
declines in US stock markets.
4
However, the financial spillovers from ECB monetary policy to US bond spreads, or to foreign
equity markets, are found to be less impactful. This asymmetry in the international impact of US
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
monetary policy and euro area monetary policy is rooted in the dominant role of the US dollar in
global financial markets.
6
Furthermore, our analysis  shows that there are only limited spillovers from the monetary policy
of the Federal Reserve to euro area inflation and output. This suggests that ECB monetary policy
actions  are,  by  and  large,  able  to  shield  the  euro  area  economy  from  spillovers  from  US
monetary policy.
But  undoubtedly,  there  is  evidence  that  US  monetary  policy  is  a  driver  of  a  “global  financial
7
cycle”.
In step with such a financial cycle the risks to euro area financial stability can change as well.
Current financial stability concerns in the euro area
As you know, our characterisation of the main risks to euro area financial stability has remained
broadly  unchanged  over  the  recent  years.  We  see  four  main  risks:  The  most  prominent  risk
stems  from  the  possibility  of  a  disorderly  increase  of  global  risk  premia.  The  second  risk  is
related to renewed debt sustainability concerns, for sovereign debt in particular. The third risk is
that banks’ intermediation capacity may be hampered by their continued low profitability. Finally,
we  are  of  the  opinion  that  possible  liquidity  strains  in  the  investment  fund  sector  constitute  a
growing  risk.  All  four  risks  are  intertwined  and  would  have,  if  they  were  to  materialise,  the
potential to be mutually reinforcing.
In  2018,  a  growing  economy  and  improved  banking  sector  resilience  were  important  positive
factors supporting financial stability. Now, however, the assessment is affected by a weakening
economic growth outlook for the euro area. In the latest ECB staff macroeconomic projections,
expected real GDP growth was revised downwards, and the outlook continues to be viewed as
tilted to the downside on account of persistent uncertainties related to geopolitical factors, the
threat of protectionism and vulnerabilities in emerging markets.
In  my  view,  the  deterioration  in  the  growth  outlook  increases  the  risk  of  financial  instability
particularly via two main channels. First, low economic growth raises concerns about sovereign
debt sustainability. And second, it further dampens profitability prospects for the banking sector.
A  weaker  growth  trajectory  will  challenge  euro  area  sovereigns’  ongoing  deleveraging.  Low
growth and elevated public sector debt also leave a number of euro area countries vulnerable to
higher funding costs. Furthermore, threats stemming from rising protectionism around the globe,
and high political uncertainty within Europe, may amplify potential corrections of sovereign bond
risk  premia.  These  risks  notwithstanding,  market-based  indicators  of  stress  in  the  euro  area
sovereign  bond  markets  have  remained  relatively  contained  in  2019,  and  debt  sustainability
concerns have remained country-specific. Looking ahead, as growth prospects moderate it is
imperative that fiscal buffers are rebuilt in countries where government debt still is too high.
A prolonged period of low economic growth also poses challenges for euro area banks. Over the
past ten years following the great financial crisis, funding strains and subsequently hampered
bank intermediation capacity related to low bank profitability have figured prominently in our risk
assessments. The low growth and inflation environment will probably exert downward pressure
on the risk-free rate component of bonds across maturities. As a result, profitability stemming
from the maturity transformation business may come under renewed pressure – not least as
retail household deposits tend to be bound at zero. Furthermore, should downside risks to the
economic  outlook  materialise,  higher  loan  loss  provisions  may  further  compress  bank
profitability.
Accommodative monetary policy has greatly supported bank profitability in past years. In fact,
conventional and unconventional measures have improved the quality of credit overall, thereby
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
reducing provisioning needs. Our measures have also increased the demand for loans, which
has more than offset the negative effect of compressed margins. Furthermore, structural factors
are also weighing heavily on euro area banks’ profitability.
In  an  environment  where  cyclical  factors  may  exert  further  downward  pressure  on  bank
profitability, banks would need to step up their efforts to overcome structural challenges. Such
measures  may  include  cost  reductions  –  including  lower  staffing  costs  and  streamlining  of
branch  networks,  enhanced  digitalisation  –  implying  initial,  one-off  large-scale  investments,
revenue diversification and the reduction of the stock of non-performing loans in the six countries
where levels are still high.
A  number  of  regulatory  and  policy  measures  could  help  to  improve  the  institutional  setting  in
which the banking sector operates and facilitate banks’ efforts to adjust their business models.
Such measures should include completing the banking union (in particular the establishment of a
European deposit insurance scheme), the subsequent removal of the remaining non-harmonised
national options and discretions, and making progress with the capital markets union. This could
foster further consolidation, including across borders, and address the problem of overcapacity
in the euro area banking system.
Assessing the financial stability of the euro area
Beyond regular monitoring activities, financial stability analysis entails assessing the impact on
the financial system of risks materialising, including risks related to international spillovers. Such
assessments can also help inform the calibration of possible appropriate macroprudential policy
responses.
The  stress-testing  framework  is  an  important  analytical  tool  to  quantitatively  assess  financial
system  vulnerabilities  and  risks.  Stress  testing  exercises  of  the  banking  sector  assess  the
sector’s resilience and how it performs under adverse circumstances, thus providing a measure
of  the  severity  of  these  risks.  Individual  bank  results  provide  further  information  about  banks’
potential capital needs. Stress tests can therefore show how the financial system will react when
risks, such as those relating to spillovers, materialise.
In order to enhance its stress-testing capacity, the ECB has invested in an analytical framework
that not only tracks the resilience of the banking sector but also accounts for how it interacts with
8
and feeds back in to the economy as a whole.
This  framework  complements  the  EU-wide  stress  tests  conducted  under  the  aegis  of  the
European Banking Authority (EBA), which are predominantly microprudential in nature.
Our so-called macroprudential stress testing loosens the assumption that banks’ balance sheets
are constant. As banks are hit by, say, negative (spillover) effects from the global environment,
they may react by deleveraging their loan books. This type of stress testing also accounts for
what  implications  banks’  reactions  would  have  for  the  real  economy.  In  other  words,
macroprudential  stress  tests  consider  the  adverse  credit  supply  shock  that  may  lead  to  an
amplification  of  the  macroeconomic  effects  of  the  global  shock,  which,  in  turn,  could  further
damage banks’ balance sheets. By modelling the negative feedback loop between the banking
sector and the real economy beyond the first round of shocks, we believe the exercise becomes
more realistic.
A macroprudential stress test of banks directly supervised by the ECB, using the baseline and
adverse scenarios of the recent EBA stress test, confirmed the general resilience of the euro
area banking system. Results, however, point to an additional fall in GDP of 1.6% across the
euro area, on top of the GDP shocks of the adverse scenario over the three-year horizon.
This stress-testing framework can also inform the calibration of macroprudential policies with the
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
aim of limiting unintended spillovers to other parts of the financial system or the real economy.
In the spirit of pre-emptive macroprudential policy, these exercises can emphasise the need for
the  timely  build-up  of  capital  buffers,  which  can  then  be  used  to  absorb  losses  when  risks
materialise, before they affect growth and employment.
Finally,  the  stress-testing  framework  can  be  used  to  analyse  the  spillover  effects  of  the
9
macroprudential policies themselves.
For instance, another finding of the framework is that capital-constrained banks are more likely to
reduce their foreign exposures than their domestic ones. We are particularly concerned about
spillover  effects  of  macroprudential  policies  within  the  euro  area,  because  the  build-up  of  a
capital buffer in one country should, to the extent possible, not impair the functioning of financial
intermediation in other euro area countries.
Conclusion
Let me conclude by emphasising that, in a globalised and financially integrated world, the euro
area is not immune to spillovers from other regions, in particular to shocks emanating from the
United States.
But we are convinced that we have the appropriate policy tools to largely shield the euro area
economy and financial system from such spillovers. Monetary policy and macroprudential policy
have different objectives and, therefore, different sets of policy tools.
Cyclical  factors,  such  as  compressed  interest  margins,  pose  challenges  to  banks’  operating
environment, but the gains have so far greatly offset the losses. In turn, euro area banks need to
address their structural fragilities, which partially explain the very low price-to-book ratios of euro
area banks when compared with their international peers.
References
Avdjiev, S., Bruno, V., Koch, C. and Shin, H. S. (2018), “The dollar exchange rate as a global risk
factor: evidence from investment”, BIS Working Papers, No 695.
Bernanke, Ben S. and Gertler, M. (1995), “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary
Policy Transmission”, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 9, No 4, pp. 27–48.
Borio, C. and Zhu, H. (2012), “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: A missing link in
the transmission mechanism?”, Journal of Financial Stability, Vol. 8(4), pp. 236–251.
Bruno,  V.  and  Shin,  H.  S.  (2015a),  “Cross-Border  Banking  and  Global  Liquidity”, Review  of
Economic Studies, Vol. 82(2), pp. 535–564.
Bruno, V. and Shin, H. S. (2015b), “Capital flows and the risk-taking channel of monetary policy”,
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 71, pp. 119–132.
Ca’ Zorzi, M. et al. (2019), “Monetary Policy and its Transmission in a Globalised World”, ECB
discussion papers, forthcoming.
Cetorelli, N. and Goldberg, L. (2012), “Banking Globalization and Monetary Transmission”, The
Journal of Finance, Vol. 67(5), pp. 1811–1843.
Chen,  Q.,  Lombardi,  M.,  Ross,  A.  and  Zhu,  F.  (2017),  “Global  impact  of  US  and  euro  area
unconventional monetary policies: a comparison”, BIS Working Papers, No 610.
Chen, Q., Filardo, A., He, D. and Zhu, F. (2016), “Financial crisis, US unconventional monetary
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
policy and international spillovers”, Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 67(C), pp.
62–81.
Curcuru,  S.  E.,  De  Pooter,  M.  and  Eckerd,  G.  (2018),  “Measuring  Monetary  Policy  Spillovers
between  U.S.  and  German  Bond  Yields”, International  Finance  Discussion  Papers,  No  1226,
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
ECB (2019), “A bird’s-eye view of the resilience of the European banking system: results from
the  new  macroprudential  stress  test  framework”,  Macroprudential  Bulletin,  March  2019,
forthcoming.
Ehrmann, M. and Fratzscher, M. (2005), “Equal Size, Equal Role? Interest Rate Interdependence
between the Euro Area and the United States”, The Economic Journal, Vol. 115(506), pp. 928–
948.
Farhi, E. and Maggiori, M. (2018), “A Model of the International Monetary System”, The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 133(1), pp. 295–355.
Forbes, K., Reinhardt, D. and Wieladek, T. (2017), “The spillovers, interactions, and (un)intended
consequences  of  monetary  and  regulatory  policies”, Journal of Monetary Economics,  Vol.  85,
pp. 1-22.
Georgiadis, G. (2016), “Determinants of global spillovers from US monetary policy”, Journal of
International Money and Finance, Vol. 67(C), pp. 41–61.
Iacoviello,  M.  and  Navarro,  G.  (2018),  “Foreign  Effects  of  Higher  U.S.  Interest  Rates”,
International Finance Discussion Papers, No 1227, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System.
Jarociński,  M.  and  Karadi,  P.  (2018),  “Deconstructing  monetary  policy  surprises:  the  role  of
information shocks”, Working Paper Series, No 2133, ECB.
Kim,  S.  (2001),  “International  transmission  of  U.S.  monetary  policy  shocks:  Evidence  from
VAR’s”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 48(2), pp. 339–372.
Miranda-Agrippino, S. and Rey, H. (2018), “US Monetary Policy and the Global Financial Cycle”,
NBER Working Papers, No 21722.
Neely, C. J. (2015), “Unconventional monetary policy had large international effects”, Journal of
Banking & Finance, Vol. 52(C), pp. 101–111.
Rey,  H.  (2018),  “Dilemma  not  Trilemma:  The  Global  Financial  Cycle  and  Monetary  Policy
Independence”, NBER Working Papers, No 21162.
Rogers, J., Scotti, C. and Wright, J. (2014), “Evaluating asset-market effects of unconventional
monetary policy: a multi-country review”, Economic Policy, Vol. 29(80), pp. 749–799.
123456789
1
2
Likewise, the response of financial variables within one day of a policy announcement might not be a good
measure of persistent spillover effects. In fact, a sufficiently long horizon is crucial to capture the spillovers that
are economically relevant. Results over shorter horizons typically differ. For example, Ehrmann and Fratzscher
(2005) estimate that, over one day, about one-third of US Treasury bill rate changes feed through to euro area
interbank rates, but that beyond this US monetary policy has no significant impact on the euro area. Neely
(2015) finds spillovers of a similar magnitude. Curcuru et al. (2018), in contrast, find that during a one-day
period, ECB announcement surprises spill over to US Treasury yields in a similar manner as Federal Open
Market Committee announcement surprises spill over to German Bund yields.
See, for example, Kim (2001), Georgiadis (2016), Chen et al. (2017) and Iacoviello and Navarro (2018). The
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
results for conventional and unconventional monetary policy are similar. Rogers et al. (2014) and Chen et al.
(2016) provide evidence on large spillovers from the Federal Reserve’s unconventional monetary policy to the
euro area.
Ca’ Zorzi et al. (2019) and Jarociński and Karadi (2018) draw a distinction between monetary policy surprises
(the so-called shocks) and other surprises, such as news effects.
Spreads relative to speculative bonds (below BBB rating), averaged over all maturities.
Corporate bond spreads increase by about 10 basis points and stock markets decline by about 50 basis points
in response to a monetary policy shock that increases one-year government bond yields by 2 basis points.
See Ca’ Zorzi et al. (2019).
See Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2018).
See ECB (2019), “A bird’s-eye view of the resilience of the European banking system: results from the new
macroprudential stress test framework”, Macroprudential Bulletin, March 2019, forthcoming.
Forbes et al. (2017) describe how macroprudential policies can create spillovers on their own.
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
