Kateryna  Rozhkova:  National  Bank  of  Ukraine  press  briefing  –
monetary policy statement
Speech by Ms Kateryna Rozhkova, Acting Governor of the National Bank of Ukraine, at a press
briefing on monetary policy, Kiev, 31 January 2019.
Dear colleagues,
 Please be informed that the Board of the National Bank of Ukraine has decided to keep its key
policy  rate  at  18.0%  per  annum.  The  rate  was  maintained  at  the  same  level  in  order  to  drive
inflation down to the target of 5% in 2020.
First, let us summarize the inflation development in 2018:
Last year, consumer price inflation declined to a five-year low of 9.8% (versus 13.7% in
2017). The reversal of the trend after the rise in inflation in 2017 is primarily due to the NBU’s tight
monetary  policy.  The  series  of  interest  rate  hikes  that  started  in  October  2017  increased  the
attractiveness of saving.
Moreover,  the  tight  monetary  conditions  were  among  reasons  for  the  strengthening  of  the
hryvnia. High global prices for exported goods, a record harvest of grain crops, and a substantial
amount of remittances also contributed to the stronger hryvnia.
In addition to monetary factors, an increase in the domestic food supply and lower global prices
for food products dampened inflationary pressures.
Despite having decelerated, inflation was, as expected, above the central bank’s target
range of 6% +/-2 pp at the end of 2018.  The  deviation  from  the  target  was  largely  due  to
factors over which monetary policy has only a limited effect:
higher administered prices
wage-driven growth in production costs 
crude oil prices rising throughout most of the year
a narrowed supply of vegetables due to unfavorable weather.
Consumer demand, fueled by higher wages, was also an important inflation driver. Real wages
grew by 12.5% yoy in 2018. Uncertainty as to whether or not cooperation with the International
Monetary  Fund  would  resume  and  high  external  risks  also  weighed  on  economic  sentiment
throughout most of the year.
The NBU deliberately chose a more lengthy path to bringing inflation to the target in order
to minimize the loss of economic growth.
Being able to balance the need to drive inflation to the target, and the need to support economic
growth, shows the flexibility of the inflation-targeting regime.
How will inflation behave in the coming years and when will it meet the NBU target?
Inflation  will  continue  to  decline  gradually. As  before,  we  expect  inflation  to  decline  to  6.3%  at
year-end 2019 and reach 5.0% at the end of 2020. That said, inflation will already be in the target
range of 5% +/- 1 pp in early 2020, as planned.
The  disinflation  will  primarily  be  due  to  the  tight  monetary  policy.  Inflation  will  be  also
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
curbed by:
prudent fiscal policy driven by the repayment of large volumes of public debt in 2019–2020;
slower wage growth, as domestic wages converge with wages in neighboring countries and
migration moderates;
relatively low exchange rate volatility resulting in low imported inflation;
a decrease in energy prices in the global markets;
weak growth in raw food prices.
These factors will make core inflation decline to 5% in 2019, down from 8.7% in 2018, and to a
level below 4% in 2020–2021.
At the same time, the further planned increases in administered prices, which are required to
bring them to market levels, will impact consumer price inflation.
The NBU has also performed scheduled revisions of other macroeconomic forecasts
Last year, the Ukrainian economy grew more rapidly than in any of the past seven years – by
3.3% according to our latest estimates.
However, real GDP growth will slow to 2.5%  this  year,  as  predicted.  The  slowdown  will  be
driven by the tight monetary policy necessary to bring inflation down to the target level and by the
conservative fiscal policy intended to finance significant public debt repayments this year.
In addition, the grain harvest is expected to decline from the record levels that made agriculture
the primary driver of economic growth.  Another factor will be a gradual deceleration of growth in
the global economy and trade, including due to protectionist measures.
Private consumption will remain a key driver of growth as real household income – wages,
pensions, and remittances from abroad – continues to grow.
Although  investment  activity  will  slow  down,  it  will  remain  an  important  driver  of  demand  for
investment imports. As a result, even given a revival in export-oriented industrial production and
record  grain  exports,  imports  will  grow  faster  than  exports  in  real  terms.  Consequently,  the
contribution of net exports will remain negative, although smaller than before.
Next year, real economy growth will start to accelerate, hitting 2.9% in 2020 and 3.7% in
2021.  The  growth  will  mainly  be  propelled  by  a  gradual  easing  in  monetary  policy,  which  will
bolster domestic demand, and a pick-up in investment activity, as uncertainty about the political
situation diminishes.
After widening to 3.6% of GDP in 2018, the current account deficit will range between 3% and 4%
of  GDP  in  2019  and  2020.  In  2019,  the  deficit  will  narrow  to  3.1%  of  GDP,  due  to  the  2018
bumper corn harvest and a drop in energy prices.
In 2020–2021, the current account deficit will widen slightly, on the back of a decrease in gas
transit, a poorer grain harvest, and a rise in investment imports after the elections.
A  widening  in  the  trade  deficit  will  be  offset  by  greater  private  remittances,  supported  by  the
higher incomes of labor migrants.
A  key  assumption  of  the  macroeconomic  forecast  is  that  Ukraine  will  continue  to
cooperate with the IMF and enjoy relatively favorable access to the international capital
markets.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
At the same time, reasonably high interest rates will contribute to the inflow of debt capital, which,
together  with  continued  inflows  of  foreign  direct  investment,  will  finance  the  current  account
deficit.
External official borrowing and the government’s placement of Eurobonds will make it possible to
repay external public debt, the repayments of which will peak in 2019–2020. This will improve the
expectations of economic agents and promote macrofinancial stability.
As a result, international reserves will hover around USD 21 billion in 2019 and 2020.
The usual increase in uncertainty during presidential and parliamentary elections poses
the main risk to the said macroeconomic forecast, including Ukraine’s ability to meet its
inflation target in 2020.
This, in turn, could affect inflation expectations.
External risks are also important. These include:
a more significant slowdown in the global economy, including in the economies of Ukraine’s
main trading partners;
a drop in the global prices of the commodities exported by Ukraine;
persistently strong labor migration and the resulting pressures on wages;
geopolitical risks, such as an escalation of the Azov Sea conflict, which could cut export
earnings;
uncertainty  over  the  volume  of  gas  transit  through  Ukraine  starting  in  2020,  as  pipelines
bypassing the country are being built to deliver gas to Europe.
Why did the Board decide to leave the key policy rate unchanged?
Taking into account the updated macroeconomic forecast and the above risks, the NBU Board
deems  it  necessary  to  maintain  the  existing  reasonably  tight  monetary  conditions  in  order  to
ensure that inflation returns to its target range in Q1 2020.
What will the NBU’s monetary policy stance be in future?
Any further changes to the key policy rate will depend on inflation developments, as well
as on whether or not risks to price stability materialize.
The Board sees reasons for launching a monetary easing cycle, as risks of inflation decrease
steadily, and inflation returns to its target, along the trajectory outlined in the central bank’s new
macroeconomic forecast.
However,  if  underlying  inflationary  pressures  rise  and  risks  that  inflation  may  not  return  to  its
target increase, the NBU could raise the key policy rate.
A new detailed macroeconomic forecast will be published in the Inflation Report on 7 February.
A  summary  of  the  discussion  by  Monetary  Policy  Committee  members  that  preceded  this
decision will be published on 11 February.
The next meeting of the NBU Board on monetary policy issues will be held on 14 March.
Thank you for your time!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
