Yves  Mersch:  Appointment  hearing  as  Vice-Chair  of  the  ECB
Supervisory Board
Appointment hearing of Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank,  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European  Parliament,
Brussels, 4 September 2019.
 Following my nomination by the ECB’s Governing Council as candidate for the position of Vice-
Chair  of  the  ECB’s  Supervisory  Board,  I  am  grateful  for  this  opportunity  to  outline  the  key
principles that I intend to bring to the role.
I have spent more than 20 years of my career dealing with microprudential supervision in various
roles, first at Luxembourg’s Monetary Institute and Finance Ministry, and then as Governor of its
Central Bank. During that time I helped to develop the template for modern banking supervision in
my country – but I also witnessed the challenges national supervisors can face in a monetary
union. This perspective proved vital when I co-led the internal preparations within the ECB for the
creation of European banking supervision.
Today,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  is  well  established  as  the  single  banking
supervisor in the euro area. If confirmed as Vice-Chair of the ECB’s Supervisory Board, I am
determined to uphold and strengthen this achievement.
In doing so, my approach to supervision will be based on three main pillars.
The first pillar is to transition to a more forward-looking supervision.
European banking supervision has been instrumental in tackling the legacies of the crisis: since
2014 stocks of non-performing loans, or NPLs, have declined by almost 50% and bank capital
has increased significantly. But we also have to look to the future. In an environment of weak
growth,  banks  cannot  afford  large  inflows  of  new  NPLs  while  clinging  to  outdated  business
models. Supervision must ensure that sound underwriting standards and adequate provisions
are  in  place,  that  changing  business  models  are  sustainable  and  that  upcoming  risks  are
addressed.
The second pillar is to further increase the transparency of supervision.
Prudential supervision requires a high level of democratic accountability because its measures
might have an impact on (national) taxpayers’ money. So the way banks are supervised should
be  clear  and  predictable.  Increased  transparency  also  supports  consistency  when  comparing
banks’ compliance with applicable supervisory principles and practices. It thereby ensures a level
playing field and that all supervised institutions are treated equally.
Moreover, transparent supervisory requirements help to understand banks’ risks, and anticipate
supervisory actions. This in turn would strengthen market discipline.
But  we  need  to  strike  a  balance.  Full  disclosure  is  neither  possible  nor  desirable.  Sensitive
information must remain confidential, as it could endanger financial stability if revealed.
The third pillar is to ensure the legality of supervisory action.
There are two elements to this. The first is that there are concerns that tensions could arise from
having  monetary  policy  and  supervision  under  one  roof.  In  my  view,  the  clear  delineation  of
mandates in the legal framework and the functional separation of the policy areas mitigate such
risks,  and  I  pledge  to  ensure  that  the  separation  principle  is  fully  respected.  It’s  worth
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
remembering  that  a  system-wide  perspective  is  the  key  advantage  of  European  banking
supervision,  as  it  allows  us  to  identify  and  react  to  euro  area-wide  linkages  and  spillovers.
Applying  national  laws,  on  the  other  hand,  can  lead  to  a  fragmented  implementation  of
supervisory rules.
The second element is that we have to act within the boundaries of our mandate and respect the
law at all times. Any supervisory action must remain bank-specific and be taken within the limits
of  relevant  European  legislation,  which  is  defined  by  the  co-legislators,  i.e.  the  European
Parliament and the Council, with further specifications from the European Banking Authority.
I look forward to answering your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
