Natasha Ahmetaj: Launching of the new Albanian banknote serie
Address  by  Ms  Natasha  Ahmetaj,  Second  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the
launching of the new Albanian banknote serie, Pristina, 12 September 2019.
 Distinguished guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Today, we have invited you all to the premises of the Bank of Albania – also known as the “home-
place of money”, both figuratively and in the physical sense (as we are standing above the old
treasury room) -  to celebrate the two dimensions of the currency: a means of exchange and an
authentic work of art.
At the very beginning, our process of banknote production started with a design contest. This
process is still in place today. Designs had to meet three criteria:
be a genuine and unpublished work;
have a national character;
employ  a  set  of  techniques  that  serves  security  needs,  namely,  the  use  of  fine  and
complicated lines which are extremely difficult to replicate.
These three criteria are applicable to our banknotes. From the very beginning, banknotes have
been designed not only as a means of exchange, but also as a part of national identity. That is
why,  in  examining  banknotes,  numismatists  are  able  to  discern  different  eras,  the  extent  of  a
nation’s  freedom,  or  even  aspects  of  social  interdependence.  Often,  especially  in  dictatorial
systems,  banknote  design  manifests  a  government’s  influence  on  markets.  A  lack  of  these
influences is a dimension of social freedom.
Time has proven that nothing has changed the educational and national mission of the banknote.
It continues to realise its purposes, as it stands tall against other types of currency.
Over the years, in accordance with international standards, taking into account average income
levels in Albania, new denominations have been added. The series of denominations allows for
an  adequate  banknote  structure  for  the  public  and  fends  off  its  illicit  use.  Recently,  a  new
banknote has been added – 10 000 lekë, which is in the production process and is expected to
be put in circulation in 2020.
The current series dates back to 1996 and its theme evokes the history of our nation, through the
representation of prominent personalities who have left a legacy in our national memory.
The  Bank  of Albania  decided  to  retain  this  theme  in  the  new  series,  which  is  practically  an
evolution and upgrade of the existing series. This option was preferred over a new theme not only
because familiarity with the existing theme is considered as important for public trust, but also
because it preserves an emotional bond with the content of the images.
That is why in the new series we still see the engraved portraits of Naim Frashëri, Ismail Qemali,
Pjetër Bogdani, King Gent, and Scanderbeg, concluding with Asdreni, the author of our National
Anthem, on the 10 000 Lekë banknote.
On each denomination, the portrait on the obverse blends harmoniously into the design on the
reverse. The portraits account for most of the banknote design area and are engraved in raised
print.  In 200 and 500 Lekë banknotes, the portraits of Naim Frashëri and Ismail Qemali have
been notably improved.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
The designs on both the obverse and the reverse of the banknotes have been reconfigured and
enriched with new or improved security features. The dominant colours have been preserved,
but they have been given a fresh look, with more vivid and balanced colours for the eye. The
design composition of each banknote is in harmony with the rest of the series.
The overarching goal was to create a series of banknotes that are modern and easy to use, still
in balance with tradition. The personalisation, versus unification, of some of the security features
for each denomination is a new approach. The reduced dimensions make the banknotes more
user friendly.
Special attention has been paid to features for the visually-impaired. The nominal value on each
side of the banknote is easier to read, the dimension of each denomination are different, and the
raised print that may be felt on the edges of banknotes has been kept to help identify  different
banknotes. 
For the first time in Albania, the new series introduces polymer banknotes. This plastic material,
which is more durable than cotton paper, was selected to be used for the 200 Lekë banknote,
taking into account the higher frequency of changing hands and a lower paper quality evidenced
in this denomination over the years. Polymer banknotes are more resistant to dirt and moisture,
as well as more secure and difficult to counterfeit, as they allow for the insertion of a number of
advanced security features, among others, the transparent window.
Importantly, the existing banknotes of all denominations will continue to be circulated along with
the new banknotes. They will continue to be legal tender and serve as means of payment.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
Banknotes may seem familiar to many of us, as our intuition may suggest, but studies show that,
even in advanced countries, only a few people are capable of distinguishing the images featured
on each banknote.
In order to strengthen the emotional relationship between the public and banknotes – part of our
national identity – in the following days, the Bank of Albania will engage in an intensive campaign
to introduce the new series of banknotes.
The campaign, which starts today, will focus on helping the public become familiar with the new
design.  Detailed  information  will  be  provided  on  the  security  features  used  in  each  of  the
denominations and on ways to identify them. Promotion will be made for how to keep and care
for banknotes with a view to increasing their lifespan.  Last but not least, information will provided
for how to read the messages that are artfully transmitted through the banknotes design, to boost
our national awareness.
In conclusion, I am grateful for the excellent work that has been done on the new series and look
forward to its success. Only the public can measure the degree of success and our goal is to
provide the public with elements and emotions related to our national identity, through a worthy
banknote series, created by renowned brands in the banknote production industry such as G&D,
De  La  Rue  and  Oberthur,  whose  logos  have  been  present  on  our  currency  since  it  was  first
issued.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
