Guy Debelle: FX Global Code
Keynote address by Mr Guy Debelle, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at FX
Week USA, New York City, 11 July 2019.
 Thanks to Matt Boge for all his assistance.
Today I will talk about the FX Global Code.
we are going.
1
 I will talk about where we’ve come from and where
The Code was first published a little over two years ago in May 2017. It is important to remember
why the Code was needed and why it was produced.
Why was the Code necessary? The foreign exchange (FX) industry was suffering from a lack of
trust and dysfunction. The public lost trust in the market through the front-page coverage of the
scandals  that  hit  the  market  and  the  billion  dollar  fines.  This  lack  of  trust  was  there  between
participants  in  the  market  which  was  impairing  market  functioning.  The  market  had  to  move
toward  a  better  place  and  allow  market  participants,  and  the  public,  to  have  much  greater
confidence that the FX market is functioning appropriately.
It is also important to remember what the alternative was in the aftermath of the scandals. There
was a decent chance that authorities could conclude that a regulatory response was necessary
to generate the desired improvement in market structure and conduct. But the Code provided the
opportunity  for  a  joint  public/private  sector  approach  to  address  the  lack  of  trust  and  market
dysfunction.
The Code is not regulation. The Code sets out global principles of good practice in the FX market
to provide a common set of guidance to the market. Its aim is to promote the effective functioning
of the wholesale FX market.
How have we gone on that? In my view the FX market is in a better place than it was a few years
ago. That is confirmed by surveys of market participants too. But there is further progress to be
made.
The  process  for  creating  the  Code  was  global,  coordinated  between  central  banks  and  the
private sector. I was the Chair of the group that produced the Code, with the great assistance of
David Puth who led the market participants.
At the time the Code was launched, a Global Foreign Exchange Committee (GFXC) was created
to maintain the Code. I have just been appointed as GFXC Chair, taking over from Simon Potter
who did a great job of leading the GFXC and over a number of years has been a major driver of
change for the better in the global FX market.
The GFXC is a genuinely global committee and the breadth of its reach has continued to expand.
Seventeen national or regional FX committees are now full members of the GFXC, including the
newly formed committees of Scandinavia, Switzerland and Russia. Smaller currency areas are
also encouraged to participate through associate membership of the GFXC.
Each  of  these  local  FXCs  are  committed  to  promoting  the  Global  Code  in  their  market.  Over
recent years, we’ve also seen the local committees expand the breadth of their membership to
include more buy-side participants, non-bank liquidity providers, etc.
So what has the GFXC been doing since its formation?
An  initial  areas  of  focus  was  to  provide  greater  guidance  around  the  practice  of  ‘last  look’.  In
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
reaching its conclusions in this area, it was appropriate for the GFXC to gather input from the full
range of interested parties in a consultative, transparent manner. In that instance, the Committee
used a public Request for Feedback, with the submissions we received made available on the
GFXC’s website. The outcome of that process was Principle 17 of the Code. The use of ‘last
look’ will likely always remain controversial and continue to be debated within the industry.
Beyond the text of the Code, the GFXC also has a role to play in promoting wider knowledge of
different  aspects  of  the  foreign  exchange  market.  Earlier  this  year,  the  GFXC  published  two
reports that had been drafted by working groups put together to focus on certain areas of the
market.  The  membership  of  these  working  groups  was  drawn  from  around  the  globe,  and
involved a very wide range of market participants with expertise in the subject matter.
The  first  report  focussed  on  the  trading  practices  of  market  participants  who  seek  to  avoid
market risk when managing trade requests from their clients.  This so-called ‘cover and deal’
arrangement is widely used in certain segments of the market and it’s important for clients to
know when it is being used by the banks they’re dealing with and to understand what that means
for them. The GFXC’s report should help foster that understanding.
2
The other report published by the GFXC earlier this year focussed on disclosures.  The Code
emphasises the role that disclosures can play in promoting integrity and transparency within the
market. However, the GFXC’s Report identified a number of challenges that limit the ability of
disclosures to play that role, ranging from the accessibility of disclosures, their clarity, and the
relevance of a lot of the information contained in them. In each of these areas, the report provided
guidance to market participants on what characteristics they should be looking for when using
disclosures and when they are writing them.
3
Some of the disclosures in the market clearly conform to the principles articulated in the Code,
but some very much  push  the  boundaries.  Personally,  I  am  concerned  about  the  disclosures
which take the form of ‘as long as I warn you, then I can do whatever I want when I want when I
am dealing with you’ – what might be termed full caveat emptor disclosures. In my view, these
type of disclosures are not in the spirit of the Code in helping move the market to a better place.
The challenges around ensuring sufficient transparency on trading capacities and behaviours are
particularly  acute  on  anonymous  trading  platforms.  The  GFXC  is  doing  further  work  to  bring
about greater understanding of how information flows across these platforms, and what roles the
different participants play, be they liquidity providers, prime brokers or the platforms themselves.
In describing particular areas of the market and the different trading arrangements that may exist,
the GFXC has highlighted how the principles of the Code are relevant to these practices. The
reports produced by the working groups have been written with that purpose in mind. Another
way of highlighting the applicability of the Code’s principles to different settings is through short
illustrative examples. The Annex to the Code includes around 50 such examples covering a wide
range  of  scenarios.  The  GFXC  will  continue  to  add  to  the  initial  suite  of  examples  where  it
believes it is useful to do so.
While these examples and the reports published by the GFXC do not form part of the Code, they
are  intended  to  assist  market  participants  when  thinking  about  how  the  Code  applies  to  their
activities. Over the period ahead, we will be looking at adding more material like these reports
that help to flesh out the principles.
As many of you would be aware, the GFXC encourages market participants to sign a Statement
of Commitment to the Global Code as a public demonstration of their intention to adhere to the
Code’s principles.
There are numerous public registers on which market participants can post their Statements. On
the GFXC website, an index now allows you to search across all of these registers.   I  would
4
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
encourage everyone in the market to have a look at that index. As it now has more than 900
entries, if you are not able to find your counterparties or your other service providers in the foreign
exchange market, you should be asking them why they haven’t committed to the Code.
Getting greater adoption from the buy-side remains a focus for the GFXC and we have various
initiatives in train on that front. A range of materials has been developed with the aim of making it
easier for firms to engage with and commit to the Code. These materials are now available on
the GFXC’s website and will be added to over time.  If you are a buy-side firm with an active FX
operation,  then  the  Code  very  much  applies  to  you.  If  you  have  a  less  direct  or  frequent
interaction  with  the  market,  the  Code is  still  relevant  but  I  would  emphasise  that  the  Code  is
designed to be applied in a proportionate manner. The steps any firm needs to take should align
with the nature and extent of their engagement with the market.
5
While the Code is voluntary in nature, the benefits of the Code and the relevance of its principles
have been recognised by many regulators and supervisory authorities around the globe. Most
recently,  the  United  Kingdom’s  Financial  Conduct  Authority  confirmed  its  recognition  of  the
Code,  meaning that individuals there will be able to point to their compliance with the Code’s
principles  as  part  of  demonstrating  that  they  are  meeting  the  ‘proper  standards  of  market
conduct’ required under the UK’s Senior Managers regime.
6
The FX Global Code has been in place for a few years now and remains fit for purpose. From the
outset, and to ensure that the Code remains fit for purpose, the GFXC committed to undertaking
a review of the Code at least once every three years. It is appropriate to review it periodically to
reflect the continuously evolving market structure and dynamics. The first review of the Code will
take place during 2020. The intention is that this will be a targeted review, and not a root and
branch  overhaul  of  the  Code.  Throughout  the  second  half  of  this  year,  we  will  be  identifying
specific areas that need to be addressed.
One such area is likely to be anonymous trading. As mentioned, the GFXC’s Working Group on
disclosures  and  transparency  is  doing  more  work  on  this  topic,  and  that  will  include  thinking
about whether it’s sufficiently clear how the Code’s principles are to be applied in this area.
In identifying other areas of focus for the three-year review, the GFXC will gather feedback as
widely  as  possible.  Each  of  the  local  FXCs  around  the  globe  will  be  seeking  input  from  their
members and other market participants and industry groups in their jurisdiction in the coming
months. So that is one avenue for you to provide feedback.
At the same time, the GFXC will soon be launching its annual survey of market participants. This
year,  we  will  be  giving  respondents  an  opportunity  to  point  to  areas  where  they  think  greater
guidance from the Code might be necessary. More broadly, the survey will also be gauged to
general awareness of the Code and opinions on its effectiveness. The survey will be distributed
through the local FXCs but also available on the GFXC website, so I would encourage as many
as possible to participate.
In short, in conducting this review of the Code, we’ll be looking to employ the same consultative
approach that was used in initially drafting the Code a couple of years ago. We will work closely
with each of the local FXCs and other industry organisations to ensure that the Code reflects
what is considered good practice.
In this, I will be assisted by the two vice chairs from the market: Akira Hoshino head of FX at Citi
in Tokyo and Neill Penney co-head of trading at Refinitiv. If you have feedback on the Code, you
can also get in touch with me directly in addition to the other channels I have mentioned. We
really  want  to  hear  from  you  to  ensure  the  Code  remains  fit  for  purpose  in  contributing  to  an
appropriately and effectively functioning foreign exchange market.
1
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
www.globalfxc.org/fx_global_code.htm
www.globalfxc.org/reports.htm?m=72%7C427
www.globalfxc.org/reports.htm?m=72%7C427
www.globalfxc.org/global_index.htm
See www.globalfxc.org/education.htm?m=71%7C433.
www.fca.org.uk/news/statements/fca-confirms-recognition-fx-global-uk-money-markets-codes
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
