Øystein  Olsen:  Management  of  the  Government  Pension  Fund
Global
Introductory statement by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway),
at the hearing before the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs of the Storting
(Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 25 April 2019.
 Please note that the text below may differ from the actual address.
The  Government  Pension  Fund  Global  and  the  fiscal  rule  have  long  been  important  pillars  of
economic policy in Norway. Substantial portions of government petroleum revenues have been
transferred to the GPFG. The resulting capital has been broadly spread across equities, bonds
and real estate and has provided good returns and well-diversified risk.
According to the annual report on the management of the GPFG, total return before management
costs came to –6.1 percent in 2018.
The  return  on  the  GPFG  in  2018  was  the  second  lowest  since  1998.  The  equity  portion  has
increased over time, and the return on equities now has a greater impact on total return than
earlier. The negative return reflects the sharp decline in equity markets towards the end of 2018.
The  investments  in  GPFG  have  a  long  time  horizon.  The  annual  return  over  the  1998–2018
period  was  5.5  percent.  The  annual  net  real  return,  ie  adjusted  for  inflation  and  net  of
management costs, came to 3.6 percent in the same period.
Norges Bank manages the GPFG with the objective of achieving the highest possible return over
time, within the mandate defined by the Ministry of Finance. The GPFG is to be managed within
an adequate control and risk management framework and in a responsible and efficient manner
with a high degree of transparency.
The  Bank  pursues  a  variety  of  investment  strategies.  The  strategies  are  complementary  and
aimed at delivering good returns over time.
In 2018, the return was 0.3 percentage point lower than the GPFG’s benchmark index.
Over  the  whole  period  since  1998  when  Norges  Bank  established  Norges  Bank  Investment
Management (NBIM), the annual return has been 0.25 percentage point higher than the return on
the benchmark index set by the Ministry of Finance.
A  cost-efficient  management  operation  contributes  to  the  aim  of  highest  possible  return.
Management costs are low, measured as a share of capital under management and compared
with other managers.
In 2018, the return was weak both in absolute terms and relative to the benchmark index. In 2017,
the return was 13.7 percent, as much as 0.7 percentage point higher than the benchmark index.
The Executive Board is prepared for wide variations in return from year to year, and applies the
principle that performance must be assessed over time. From that perspective, the return of the
GPFG has been good and higher than the return on the benchmark index.
In the report to the Storting on energy stocks, the Government intends to remove exploration and
production companies from the GPFG’s benchmark index and investment universe. That is in
line with the intention in our advice from 2017 and will contribute to reducing the exposure of the
state’s wealth to oil price risk.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
The report to the Storting on the Government Pension Fund provides for among other things the
possibility  of  investing  in  unlisted  renewable  energy  infrastructure  within  the  environmental
mandates. As we have indicated previously, Norges Bank will approach investment opportunities
and  build  expertise  gradually.  Investments  in  unlisted  infrastructure  will  be  a  topic  for  the
Executive Board’s work on the new strategy plan to apply from 2020.
On 10 April 2015, the Central Bank Law Commission was appointed. Precisely four years later,
the Government put forth a proposal on a new central bank act. At that time, the Storting had
already endorsed retaining Norges Bank as the operational manager of the GPFG.
For Norges Bank, the proposal on a new central bank act entails a number of changes, such as
increasing the capacity of Norges Bank’s Executive Board in the area of capital management.
Norges Bank has already made considerable strides in adapting the internal organisation to the
changes ensuing from the new central bank act.
The main exposures that are decisive for the GPFG’s long-term performance are decided by the
Ministry of Finance and anchored in the Storting. This year’s report to the Storting on the GPFG
includes several measures to further develop the investment strategy. But the objective remains
firm: The highest possible return at an acceptable risk. Within this framework, the GPFG should
be managed in a responsible way.
The report to the Storting notes that there is broad political agreement that the GPFG should not
be an instrument of foreign policy or climate policy, and it is important that this continue to be the
case  in  the  future.  Restrictions  or  instructions  that  have  a  significant  impact  on  the  trade-off
between return and risk will limit the potential to achieve solid performance over time.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
