Benoît Cœuré: Inflation expectations and the conduct of monetary
policy
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
an event organised by the SAFE Policy Center, Frankfurt am Main, 11 July 2019.
 Stable inflation expectations at levels consistent with price stability provide an important nominal
anchor  for  the  economy.  They  reduce  inflation  persistence  and  curb  harmful  macroeconomic
volatility.
There  is  compelling  empirical  evidence  suggesting  that  increased  clarity  about  central  banks’
mandates,  their  reaction  functions  and  inflation  aims  has  helped  anchor  inflation  expectations
and reduce their variability around the communicated inflation aim despite significant shocks to
1
inflation in both directions.
However,  persistently  low  inflation  since  the  great  financial  crisis  has  led  some  central  bank
observers, and financial market participants in particular, to question the ability of central banks
to deliver on their mandate. In the euro area, where the coordinating role of a nominal anchor is
particularly  important  in  view  of  cross-country  differences  in  wage  and  price-setting,  market-
based long-term inflation expectations have fallen since the crisis, and this fall has accelerated
since the start of the year.
These developments have sparked a discussion on two related questions.
The first question, which I have discussed on previous occasions, is whether the fall in market-
based inflation expectations reflects a growing belief that the ECB’s policy space is significantly
2
reduced at the zero lower bound.
The second question is whether similar shifts in the expected inflation outlook can be observed in
the wider economy – that is, whether, and to what extent, market-based inflation expectations
affect  actual  inflation  outcomes  and  can  become  self-fulfilling  by  unleashing  perilous  second-
round effects.
The decline in market-based inflation expectations
The first question is, in short, a discussion about the ECB’s credibility. While there is no room for
complacency,  I  would  argue  that  there  are  three  arguments  that  provide  some  ground  for
comfort.
The  first  is  that  the  drop  in  long-term  market-based  inflation  expectations  has  been  a  global
phenomenon, including jurisdictions where policy rates are currently well above the zero lower
bound. This suggests that concerns by market participants likely extend well beyond the realm of
monetary policy.
The second argument is that survey-based inflation expectations, such as the ones collected by
the ECB in its Survey of Professional Forecasters, have stayed consistently above market-based
measures, and closer to the ECB’s definition of price stability.
The  third  argument  relates  to  the  precise  anatomy  of  the  decline  in  market-based  inflation
expectations.  ECB  staff  analysis  suggests  that  market-based  expectations  are  much  more  in
line with survey-based inflation expectations once one corrects for the inflation risk premium –
that is, the compensation investors demand for bearing risks related to the uncertainty around
the future inflation path.
 1 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
You can see this on the left-hand side of my first slide, which shows a breakdown of inflation-
linked swap rates into expected inflation and an inflation risk premium. It suggests that about 80%
of the drop in the five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead, both since the start
of 2014 and in 2019, is due to a drop in the risk premium.
Actual expectations have fallen to a much smaller extent. In other words, while expectations of a
surge in euro area demand and inflation, as typically captured by a rising inflation risk premium,
have been significantly cut, expectations about the baseline have remained more stable.
Yet, while shifts in risk premia can explain the bulk of recent developments in long-term inflation
expectations,  they  can  explain  much  less  of  the  recent  fall  in  short  and  medium-term
expectations, which you can see on the right-hand side of this slide. Three-quarters or more of
the decline in short and medium-term maturity inflation swap rates since the autumn of last year
reflect a genuine fall in inflation expectations.
Such  a  drop  in  short  and  medium-term  inflation  expectations  is  particularly  remarkable  in  an
environment where highly volatile inflation components, such as energy prices, have remained
relatively  stable,  and  have  even  been  rising  since  the  start  of  the  year.  Recent  market
developments therefore suggest expectations that the current weakness in euro area and global
demand will persist.
Households are not professional forecasters
This  brings  me  to  the  second  question  as  to  whether  similar  shifts  in  the  expected  inflation
3
outlook can be observed outside financial markets.
One drawback of much of the empirical work on the role of inflation expectations is that it has
largely assumed that all measures of expectations are interchangeable – that households and
 2 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
firms can be assumed to have expectations akin to those of professional forecasters or financial
4
market participants.
In reality, reliable data on inflation expectations of consumers or firms are scarce. I will return to
firms in a minute but one reason for the lack of consumer expectations data is that several field
studies have found that many people’s inflation perceptions are substantially different from actual
5
inflation outcomes.
For  example,  based  on  an  experimental  dataset  maintained  by  the  European  Commission,
households believed that annual euro area inflation between 2004 and 2018 was close to 9%,
7
when in fact it was 1.6%.  Similar gaps have been found in the United States and elsewhere.
6
Moreover, many households are not aware of central banks’ inflation aims. In the United States,
for example, a recent survey showed that only a quarter of surveyed households knew of the
Federal Reserve’s 2% inflation aim.  This clearly suggests that central banks need to do much
more to bring the monetary policy discussion to the broader public, and thereby improve their
9
accountability.
8
Yet, there is convincing evidence that, although households may not be able to correctly identify
the  current  level  of  inflation,  they  have  a  fairly  good  understanding  of  changes  in  the trend  of
current  inflation,  and  that  these  changes  are  likely  to  inform  their  expectations  about  future
inflation.
 You can see this on my next slide.
10
What  you  can  see  here  is  actual  HICP  inflation  together  with qualitative  consumer  inflation
expectations  for  the  following  year,  computed  as  a  balance  statistic  which  is  the  difference
between the share of respondents who expect prices to rise and the share of those who expect
11
 3 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
prices to fall, or to stay about the same.
 The correlation with actual inflation is remarkable.
11
Much  of  this  correlation  is  typically  driven  by  price  developments  in  some  of  the  goods  and
services  that  consumers  purchase  more  frequently.  To  put  it  simply,  if  goods  are  purchased
more regularly, price changes are more likely to be noticed.
12
You  can  see  this  on  the  left-hand  side  of  my  next  slide,  which  relates  household  inflation
expectations  to  annual  inflation  in  energy  and  unprocessed  food  –  products  for  which  most
consumers typically have a good understanding of price developments. Clearly, the correlation is
much closer than when these two product categories are excluded, as you can see on the right-
hand side.
What is more, data on consumers’ inflation expectations indeed suggest that developments in
market-based inflation expectations are often representative of trends in the wider economy. You
can see this on my next slide.
 4 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Changes in the direction of household inflation expectations are typically very similar to those of
professional  forecasters,  which  are  shown  on  the  left-hand  side,  and  financial  market
participants, which are shown on the right-hand side, at least for horizons of up to one or two
years.
In other words, most individuals – whether financial investors, teachers or nurses – use simple
rules of thumb to form their short-term inflation expectations. And current inflation seems to be
the most widely used heuristic in this respect, making some degree of inflation persistence a
natural and inevitable phenomenon.
Developments  over  the  past  year,  however,  mark  a  clear  and  visible  departure  from  past
regularities. As you can see on the right-hand chart, a growing gap has emerged between the
inflation expectations of market participants on the one side, and households and professional
forecasters on the other.
This is not about differences in the level, which – as I have argued before – may not mean much.
This  is  about  different  dynamics,  with  the  two-year  moving  correlation  between  market-based
and household expectations dropping from 0.8 in the summer of last year to below 0.3 in June,
the lowest level in nearly nine years.
So, unlike the situation in late 2014 and early 2015, when inflation expectations fell sharply across
the population, and when we launched the asset purchase programme, today households are
much less sceptical about the future.
This raises two important questions.
The  first  is  what  happens  to  inflation  if  financial  market  participants  and  households  hold
diverging views on the future direction of inflation.
 5 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
The second question is why we are seeing this divergence in views, and whether it is temporary
or likely to persist.
Let me try to answer each of these two questions in turn.
Which expectations matter most?
Existing research casts some doubt on the macroeconomic relevance of professional inflation
forecasts, including those of financial markets. There are three related strands in the literature
that  suggest  that household  inflation  expectations  are  often  better  predictors  of  future  inflation
outcomes.
13
The first is that financial market participants are not particularly good at predicting future inflation.
I’m not claiming that central banks are particularly better. You can see this on my next slide. But
as you can see on the following one, financial market participants repeatedly failed to correctly
project even the very near-term outlook for inflation in the euro area.
 6 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
There are two sides to this finding.
One  is  the  automatic  stabilising  role  that  market-based  inflation  expectations  play  despite,  or
precisely because of, their poor track-record in projecting inflation. As market participants react in
real time to any news potentially relevant for the medium-term inflation outlook, they support the
monetary policy transmission process: they tend to frontload accommodation when inflation risks
are skewed to the downside, and they tend to remove accommodation when risks are tilted to
the upside.
You can see this on my next slide, which shows the breakdown of the ten-year overnight index
swap  (OIS)  rate  into  its  real  and  nominal  components.  Clearly,  shifts  in  inflation  expectations
can,  at  times,  have  a  significant  impact  on  financial  conditions  and  hence  on  economic
developments.
 7 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  other  side  of  the  coin  is  that,  while  a  poor  track-record  in  projecting  inflation  may  not
necessarily  discourage  their  broader  use  in  the  economy,  it  is  the  high  frequency  of  their
revisions  that  probably  makes  market-based  inflation  expectations  a  less  reliable  and  useful
yardstick for social partners, firms and households in wage and price-setting, and hence a less
reliable predictor of future inflation.
The second reason is that households’ inflation expectations affect their consumption decisions,
and  hence  growth  and  aggregate  price  developments.
  That  is,  when  consumers  expect
inflation to rise, they tend to spend more today, much in line with the classical (real) interest rate
transmission channel of monetary policy.
14
You can see ECB research on this on my next slide. There is a discernible positive relationship
between households’ reported willingness to spend and the change they expect in inflation.
15
 8 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
The third, and possibly most important, reason is that household inflation expectations have been
found to be a better proxy of firms’ pricing decisions than those of professional forecasters or
financial market participants.
For  example,  research  found  that  using  household  inflation  expectations  in  an  otherwise
standard Phillips curve framework fits US inflation data better over a large sample. This includes
the  aftermath  of  the  great  financial  crisis  and  was  put  forward  as  one  factor  explaining  the
“missing” disinflation puzzle in the United States.
16
ECB staff find similar evidence for predicting wage growth in the euro area. You can see this on
my  next  slide. Although  the  results  need  to  be  treated  with  caution  given  the  short  sample,  a
wage Phillips curve regression using household inflation expectations would have provided the
best  out-of-sample  fit  for  euro  area  wage  growth  over  the  course  of  last  year.  For  financial
market-based inflation expectations, the prediction error would have been more than twice as
large.
 9 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
The few surveys that exist for firms’ inflation expectations corroborate these findings. The most
comprehensive  evidence  exists  for  New  Zealand,  where  firms’  expectations  were  found  to  be
much  closer  to  those  of  households.
  In  the  United  States,  more  than  half  of  the  survey
respondents on a panel of firms in manufacturing and services said they were simply not able to
report their point forecasts for inflation over the next 12 months, consistent with the evidence
found for households.
17
18
The implication is that, even though financing conditions largely depend on the expectations of
financial markets, what ultimately matters for growth and inflation outcomes is how firms and
households expect prices and wages to evolve in the future.
And  so,  while  policymakers  should  never  ignore  signals  coming  from  financial  markets,  they
should not focus on them too narrowly either. The pessimism priced into bond markets today
may  not  necessarily  presage  downward  pressure  on  inflation  tomorrow  –  at  least  not  to  the
same extent.
How stable are household inflation expectations?
The  second  question  relates  to  why  inflation  expectations  between  households  and  financial
market participants are diverging at the current juncture. There is no easy answer.
One reason for the recent resilience in household inflation expectations may simply relate to the
relative stability of the prices for some of the goods and services that consumers purchase more
frequently. Looking through the ups and downs, inflation in energy and unprocessed food has
been,  on  average,  4.5%  between  January  2018  and  today,  and  it  has  never  fallen  below  2%
 10 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
during the course of 2019.
A second, and more benign, reason could relate to a change in how consumers extrapolate and
generalise price changes in frequently purchased products.
Although the available data do not allow drawing definitive conclusions as to whether medium-
term  household  inflation  expectations  have  remained  stable,  my  last  slide  suggests  that  they
have.
It shows a very crude “deanchoring” measure, which combines, at each point in time, those euro
area households that expect inflation to either “increase more rapidly” or “to fall” over the coming
year – that is, expectations that are potentially not consistent with the ECB’s definition of price
stability, depending on the state of the economy.
On the left-hand side, I show this measure together with an index of current inflation perceptions
that weighs those households that perceive prices to have “risen a lot” with those who perceive
them to have “fallen” over the past 12 months.
Clearly, while there was a correlation between these two indices in the 1980s and 1990s, this
relationship weakened, and practically vanished, after the introduction of the euro. That is, euro
area  households,  as  a  whole,  do  not  expect  prices  to  rise  more  rapidly  in  the  future  even  in
periods in which they perceive prices to have increased a lot over the previous 12 months.
On the right-hand side, you can see the same measure together with the HICP for energy and
unprocessed food. From this chart it is clear that stability works in both directions. For example,
the index barely moved when energy and food prices dropped sharply in the aftermath of the
financial crisis, and it hardly moved when they rose markedly towards the end of 2016.
Such broad signs of anchoring – going beyond professional forecasters and financial markets –
 11 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
would  also  be  consistent  with  empirical  evidence  that  confirms  that  announcing  an  official
inflation aim has contributed to reducing costly inflation persistence in a large group of developed
and emerging economies, including the euro area.
19
In  other  words,  even  though  households  continue  to  take  current  inflation  into  account  when
forming  their  expectations,  the  success  of  central  banks  in  bringing  inflation  down  to  low  and
stable  levels  might  have  contributed  to  cutting  the  tails  in  the  distribution  of  future  expected
inflation.
 Such effects may have thereby helped to offset, at least partially, the consequences
of other secular forces that have tended to make inflation more persistent.
Conclusion
20
21
Stable inflation expectations play a crucial role for the effectiveness of monetary policy. For this
and other reasons, central banks have over time radically changed the way they communicate
with the public.
While  increased  central  bank  transparency  has  undoubtedly  been  successful  in  anchoring
inflation expectations, the protracted period of low inflation has caused concerns among financial
market participants that current subdued underlying price pressures will persist in the medium
term. The Governing Council is taking these concerns seriously.
At the same time, euro area households seem to look with much less scepticism into the future.
Their  inflation  expectations  have  remained  more  stable  since  the  start  of  the  year,  and  today
remain close to a six-year high.
There  is  also  tentative  evidence  suggesting  that  household  inflation  expectations  are  better
predictors of future inflation outcomes and that euro area consumers have become less likely to
expect inflation outcomes that would be inconsistent with the ECB’s definition of price stability.
All this confirms the need for central banks to consider and analyse developments in a broad set
of inflation expectations indicators with a view to gauging risks to future price developments.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
For an overview, see Blinder et al. (2008), “Central Bank Communication and Monetary Policy: A Survey of Theory
and Evidence”, Journal of Economic Literature, 46(4), pp. 910–945.
See Cœuré, B. (2018), “What yield curves are telling us”, speech at the Financial Times European Financial
Forum, “Building a New Future for International Financial Services”, Dublin, 31 January; and Cœuré, B. (2019),
“Heterogeneity and the ECB’s monetary policy”, speech at the Banque de France Symposium & 34th SUERF
Colloquium on the occasion of the 20th anniversary of the euro on “The Euro Area: Staying the Course through
Uncertainties”, Paris, 29 March.
For  a  discussion  of  inflation  expectations  in  the  United  Kingdom,  see  Tenreyo,  S.  (2019),  “Understanding
inflation: expectations and reality”, Ronald Tress memorial lecture, Birkbeck University of London, 10 July.
An exception is the recent contribution by Bernanke and co-authors. See Bernanke, B.S., Kiley, M.T. and Roberts,
J.M. (2019), “Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment,” AEA Papers and Proceedings, American
Economic Association, Vol. 109, pp. 421–426.
See  Jonung,  L.  (1986),  “Uncertainty  about  inflationary  perceptions  and  expectations”, Journal  of  Economic
Psychology 7, pp. 315–325; and Jonung, L. and Laidler, D. (1988), “Are perceptions of inflation rational? Some
evidence for Sweden”, American Economic Review, Vol. 78, No. 5, pp. 1080–1087.
See Arioli et al. (2017), “EU consumers’ quantitative inflation perceptions and expectations: an evaluation”, ECB
Occasional Paper No 186.
See, for example, Binder, C. (2017), “Fed Speak on Main Street: Central Bank Communication and Household
 12 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Expectations”, Journal  of  Macroeconomics,  Vol.  52,  pp.  238–251;  and  Binder,  C.  and  Rodrigue, A.  (2018),
“Household Informedness and Long Run Inflation Expectations: Experimental Evidence”, Southern Economic
Journal, Vol. 85(2), pp.580–98.
See Coibion et al. (2018), “Inflation Expectations as a Policy Tool?”, NBER Working Paper No 24788.
See Cœuré, B. (2018), “Central banking in times of complexity”, panel remarks at a conference on the occasion
of Sveriges Riksbank’s 350th anniversary, Stockholm, 25 May.
See Forsells, M. and Kenny, G. (2004), “Survey expectations, rationality and the dynamics of euro area inflation”,
Journal of Business Cycle Measurement and Analysis, Vol 1(1), pp 13–42.
More precisely, the balance statistic is calculated as a weighted average of the percentage of those replying that
consumer prices will “increase more rapidly” or “increase at the same rate” minus a weighted average of the
percentage of those replying that they “stay about the same” or will “fall”, with the more extreme answers (i.e.
“increase more rapidly” and “fall”) being assigned double weighting relative to the intermediate answers.
See also Coibion, O. and Gorodnichenko, Y. (2015), “Is the Phillips curve alive and well after all? Inflation
expectations and the missing disinflation”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 7(1), pp. 197–
232. The basic idea goes back to the Prospect-Theory developed by Kahneman and Tversky (1979), which
stated that the perception of economic situations depends on their framing. In other words, price changes are
perceived during the act of purchase and the price change of a good is perceived more strongly the more often a
good is bought. See Kahneman, D. and Tversky, A. (1979), “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under
Risk”, Econometrica, Vol. 47(2), pp. 263–91
See also Forsells and Kenny (2004, op.cit.).
See Duca, I., Kenny, G. and Reuter, A. (2017), “Inflation Expectation, Consumption and the Lower Bound: micro
evidence from a large euro area survey”, ECB Working Paper No 2196; D’Acunto, F., Hoang, D. and Weber, M.
(2016), “The effect of unconventional fiscal policy on consumption expenditure, NBER Working Paper No 22563;
and Ichiue, H. and Nishiguchi, S. (2015). Inflation expectations and consumer spending at the zero bound: Micro
evidence, Economic Inquiry 53(2), pp. 1086–1107.
This analysis uses quantitative estimates of household inflation expectations.
See Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015, op.cit.).
See  Coibion,  O.,  Gorodnichenko,  Y.  and  Kumar,  S.  (2018),  “How  Do  Firms  Form  Their  Expectations?  New
Survey Evidence", American Economic Review, 108 (9), pp. 2671–2713.
See Coibion et al. (2018, op.cit.). Of the remaining respondents, the average forecast was 3.7%, well above
what professional forecasters and financial market participants were expecting but close to the forecasts of
households.
See  Kocenda,  E.  and  Varga,  B.  (2018),  “The  Impact  of  Monetary  Strategies  on  Inflation  Persistence”,
International  Journal  of  Central  Banking,  September;  Benati,  L.  (2008),  “Investigating  inflation  persistence
across  monetary  regimes”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 123(3), pp. 1005–1060; Bratsiotis, G.J.,
Madsen, J. and Martin, C. (2015), “Inflation targeting and inflation persistence”, Economic and Political Studies, 3
(2015),  pp.  3-17;  and  Levin, A.  T.,  Natalucci,  F.  M.  and  Piger,  J.  M.  (2004),  “Explicit  inflation  objectives  and
macroeconomic outcomes”, ECB Working Paper No 383.
This is also consistent with evidence that households have a much better understanding of actual inflation
outcomes in high-inflation economies. By contrast, most households and firms in low inflation countries do not
view inflation as being a major consideration in their consumption and investment decisions. See, for example,
Frache, S. and Lluberas, R. (2019), “New Information and Inflation Expectations among Firms”, BIS Working
Paper No 781.
These forces include the rise of services in our economies. See Cœuré, B. (2019), “The rise of services and the
transmission of monetary policy”, speech at the 21st Geneva Conference on the World Economy, 16 May.
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
 13 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
