Benjamin  E  Diokno:  Ensuring  price  stability  through  monetary
policy
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Breakfast Briefing with the Italian Chamber of Commerce in the
Philippines, Inc. (ICCPI), Manila, 17 May 2019.
 To the officers and members of the Italian Chamber of Commerce in the Philippines, (ICCPI), led
by  its  President,  Mr.  Sergio  Boero  and  Vice  President  Mr.  Lorens  Ziller,  distinguished  guests,
ladies and gentlemen, magandang umaga/good morning.
It is a pleasure to be invited as guest speaker in today’s breakfast briefing to discuss monetary
policy and the overall the strategies of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas.  The passage of Republic
Act  No.  11211,  or  the  Amendments  to  the  BSP  Charter  (Republic  Act  No.  7653),  definitely
bolsters the BSP’s commitment to its primary objective of promoting the stability of prices as well
as  the  financial  system.  The  enactment  of  the  said  law  is  both  timely  and  appropriate  given
notable  developments  –  both  in  the  global  and  domestic  fronts  –  that  have  taken  place  since
1993 when the old BSP Charter took effect.
For this morning’s presentation, let me focus on these three discussion points.
First, I will provide an overview of the latest developments in the monetary sector by dissecting
inflation numbers in the first four months of 2019 and look into the BSP’s inflation outlook for this
year and in 2020.
Second, I will focus on the monetary measures that have been pursued by the BSP as well as
the non-monetary measures put in place in coordination with other government agencies to help
anchor  both  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  following  a  challenging  inflation  environment  in
2018. This will highlight the crucial role of strong inter-agency coordination to address shocks to
inflation.
Lastly, I want to share the BSP’s policy thrusts moving forward, particularly in the context of the
enactment  of  the  amendments  to  its  charter  which  strengthens  its  mandate  of  safeguarding
price and financial stability.
Let me begin with the recent inflation numbers.
It may be recalled that 2018 was a very challenging year for the BSP. Inflation has been on the
rise beginning the month of January and peaked in the month of September at 6.7 percent before
settling at an average of 5.2 percent for the full year 2018. This inflation rate was 1.2 percentage
points (ppts) above the high end of the inflation target range of 2.0 percent to 4.0 percent for the
year.
Nonetheless, as projected, inflation has gone down significantly, falling toward the midpoint (at
3.0 percent in April 2019) of the target band in the latest inflation print. This is not surprising given
that the price pressures in 2018 were driven by cost-push factors. With the abatement of supply-
side pressures, inflation has also started falling within target. The contribution of food inflation
(represented  by  the  yellow  bar)  to  overall  inflation  has  dropped  markedly  especially  with  rice
prices easing in recent months brought about by the continued arrival of imports and the onset of
the summer harvest season.
Looking ahead, we expect inflation to remain on a target-consistent path for 2019 and 2020. The
latest baseline forecasts (as of 9 May 2019 MB policy meeting) indicate that inflation is projected
to average at 2.9 percent for 2019 while inflation forecast for 2020 is slightly higher at 3.1 percent
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
due largely to the rebound in crude oil prices.
Meanwhile,  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  remain  broadly  balanced  for  2019  amid  risks  of  a
prolonged El Niño episode and higher-than-expected increases in global oil prices. For 2020, the
risks  continue  to  lean  toward  the  downside  as  weaker  global  economic  activity  could  temper
commodity price pressures.
Similarly, forecasts of other institutions generally convey the same expectations. Results of the
BSP’s April 2019 survey of private sector economists showed lower mean inflation forecast for
2019 at 3.1 percent from 3.3 percent in the previous survey round. The mean inflation forecasts
for 2020 and 2021 both declined to 3.3 percent from 3.4 percent. Meanwhile, projections from
other institutions also show inflation within target for this year and the next.
Analysts  expect  inflation  to  continue  easing  and  settle  within  the  government’s  target  range.
However, possible upward pressures are seen to keep inflation from further decelerating.
(Upside risks to inflation): potential rebound in global crude oil prices, adverse weather conditions
such as El Niño, higher electricity rates, reduction in the BSP’s policy interest rate, and higher
domestic demand due to the upcoming midterm elections and school enrollment
(Downside  risks  to  inflation):  the  lower  inflation  prints,  implementation  of  non-monetary  policy
actions to increase domestic food supply and stabilize prices such as the rice tariffication law
and the mitigating measures put in place by the Department of Agriculture against the lingering
weak  El  Niño  condition,  lower  global  crude  oil  prices,  base  effects,  stable  domestic  currency
against the US dollar, slower global trade and economic growth, and continued monetary impact
of the BSP’s policy rate hikes in 2018.
While  the  BSP  is  tasked  with  the  primary  mandate  of  safeguarding  price  stability,  in  certain
circumstances, when price pressures are emanating from the supply side, close coordination
with  other  government  agencies  is  critical  to  rein  in  inflation.  Thus,  a  combination  of  both
monetary and non-monetary measures becomes the best strategy to pursue.
In  2018,  the  BSP  took  timely  and  deliberate  monetary  policy  actions  in  May,  June,  August,
September  and  November  (with  a  cumulative  of  175  bps  hike  in  policy  interest  rate)  to  firmly
anchor inflation expectations to the inflation target and to arrest any possible risk of second-round
effects.
Non-monetary  interventions  implemented  by  other  government  agencies  complemented  the
BSP’s monetary actions in addressing inflation pressures especially in the face of strong supply
shocks in 2018. These measures include enhanced surveillance of basic goods and agricultural
commodities as well as streamlining administrative procedures to address supply bottlenecks.
On 14 February 2019, President Duterte signed Republic Act No. 11203, or the “Act Liberalizing
the Importation, Exportation, and Trading of Rice, Lifting for the Purpose the Quantitative Import
Restriction on Rice, and for Other Purposes." 
The law, which became effective on 5 March 2019, replaces quantitative restrictions with tariffs
and provides for the Rice Competitiveness Enhancement Fund giving more incentive to farmers
to  improve  productivity  and  competitiveness.  The  implementing  rules  and  regulations  were
issued on 5 April 2019 and were published in the Official Gazette on 8 April 2019. Since then, as
shown in earlier slides, inflation has gone down significantly.
With inflation returning to the target, the BSP decided to reduce the policy interest rate by 25 bps
to  4.50  percent  during  its  9  May  2019  policy  meeting.  The  MB’s  decision  was  based  on  its
assessment that the inflation outlook continues to be manageable, with easing price pressures
owing to the decline in food prices amid improved supply conditions. Latest baseline forecasts
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
indicate  that  inflation  remains  likely  to  settle  within  the  target  range  of  3.0  percent  ±  1.0
percentage point for both 2019 and 2020, while inflation expectations have moderated further.
In deciding this, the MB noted the impact of the budget delays on near-term economic activity,
but  took  the  view  that  the  prospects  for  domestic  demand  remain  firm,  to  be  supported  by  a
projected recovery in household spending and the continued implementation of the government’s
infrastructure program. In addition, the MB observed that the global economic growth momentum
has slowed down in 2019. Meanwhile, indications of slower growth in domestic liquidity and credit
require careful monitoring.
At  the  same  time,  the  MB  also  noted  that  the  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  remain  broadly
balanced for 2019 amid risks of a prolonged El Niño episode and higher-than-expected increases
in global oil prices. For 2020, the risks continue to lean toward the downside as weaker global
economic activity could temper commodity price pressures.
Looking ahead, the BSP will continue to monitor developments affecting the inflation outlook to
ensure that the monetary policy stance remains consistent with its price stability objective.
On the other hand, the passage of Republic Act No. 11211, or an Act Amending Republic Act No.
7653,  known  as  the  ‘New  Central  Bank  Act’  (signed  on  14  February  2019)  is  a  significant
milestone for the BSP.
Our  three  pillars  of  central  banking,  that  of  price  stability,  financial  stability,  and  an  efficient
payments and settlements system, were further strengthened with the expansion of the BSP’s
policy toolkit. 
The law restored the central bank’s authority to issue its own debt papers as part of its regular
monetary operations, establishes a stronger prudential regulatory framework to promote a safe
and  sound  financial  system  through  the  expansion  of  supervisory  coverage,  and  authority  to
prescribe metrics attuned to international standards and practices.
The  amendment  likewise  empowers  further  the  BSP  to  oversee  the  country’s  payment  and
settlement  systems  (PSS),  including  critical  financial  market  infrastructures  that  are  vital
components of the PSS.
Additional notes:
The amended BSP Charter restores the central bank’s authority to obtain data from any person
or entity from the private and public sectors for statistical and policy development purposes in
line with the pursuit of our triad mandates.
The law authorizes the increase in the capitalization of the BSP from Php 50 billion to Php 200
billion,  which  shall  be  sourced  from  dividends  declared  by  the  BSP  in  favor  of  the  National
Government. Under the amended Charter, the BSP is also exempt from paying taxes on income
derived from its governmental functions. These reforms place the BSP on a stronger position to
pursue its mandate amidst a growing economy and the increasing sophistication of the financial
system.
Looking ahead, we will continue to vigilantly monitor domestic and global developments to ensure
that the BSP is able to sustain the “trend” of achieving its inflation targets. The BSP stands ready
to deploy appropriate measures  as  needed  to  ensure  an  inflation  environment  conducive  to  a
sustainable growth of the Philippine economy.
Future policy actions of the BSP will continue to be guided by the following principles:
1)    primacy on achieving its inflation objective.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
2)    pre-emptively action if the inflation target is considered to be at risk. And
3)    policy flexibility using all available tools in our enhanced tool kit, as deemed appropriate to
address any threats to our inflation objective.
Let  me  end  my  presentation  with  these  key  notes.  Rest  assured  that  the  BSP  is  strongly
committed to take all necessary policy actions to safeguard the government’s inflation targets
and deliver on its primary mandate of price stability to support the country’s growth trajectory. 
Maintaining  price  and  financial  stability  that  will  minimize  systemic  risks,  as  well  as  provide
resilience  to  shocks  to  the  economy  will  help  foster  an  enabling  macro-environment  that  is
conducive to accelerating economic growth and help expand its productive capacity.
Ultimately, the BSP’s conduct of its monetary policy will always be anchored on its price stability
mandate in support of our collective goal of a Philippine economy that is continuously expanding
and thriving, for the benefit of all Filipinos. Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
