  MONETARY POLICY REPORT 
PRESENTATION BEFORE THE  
FINANCE COMMISSION OF THE  
HONORABLE SENATE OF THE REPUBLIC
   Mario Marcel 
Governor 
Central Bank of Chile 
5 December 2018 
                                                   
 The December 2018 Monetary Policy Report can be found at http://www.bcentral.cl.  
Introduction 
Mr President of the Senate’s Finance Commission, Senator Juan Pablo Letelier, senators members of 
this Commission, ladies, gentlemen,  
I am grateful for your invitation to present the vision of the Board of the Central Bank of Chile (BCCh) 
on the recent macroeconomic developments, prospects, and implications for monetary policy. This 
vision is contained in detail in our December 2018 Monetary Policy Report published this morning. 
Its contents provide the background for the decision adopted by the Board at yesterday’s Monetary 
Policy Meeting, and consider the October Imacec1 that was released today. 
At yesterday’s meeting, the Board decided unanimously to keep the Monetary Policy Rate (MPR) 
unchanged  at  2.75  percent.  At  the  same  time,  we  reiterated  that  the  evolution  of  macroeconomic 
conditions make it possible and necessary to gradually reduce the monetary stimulus.  
This decision is consistent with the analysis and baseline projection scenario I will be sharing with 
you now. This analysis begins noting that annual inflation has risen throughout the year. After being 
under 2% almost the entire second half of 2017, today annual inflation is around 3%. Although this 
increase  owes  partly  to  the  more  volatile  components  of  the  Consumer  Price  Index  (CPI)  and  the 
depreciation of the peso, inflation of the items in the basket that are most sensitive to the activity 
gap—ie. services and nontradables—has risen gradually, but steadily, over the course of 2018. This 
is in line with the growth recovery that began more than a year ago, in a context of favorable external 
conditions and a clearly expansionary monetary impulse.  
This  process  took  a  pause  in  the  third  quarter  due  to  specific  factors  affecting  mining  and 
manufacturing, but it is estimated to resume in the fourth quarter. The October Imacec released this 
morning is an indication, as it shows activity growing 4.2% annually, with the non-mining component 
growing 5.1%. With this, the economy will grow 4% this year and between 3.25% and 4.25% in 2019. 
Inflation  will  follow  a  similar  path,  slowing  down  for  some  months  as  a  result  of  the  fall  in 
international fuel prices, to then begin rising and converging to 3% towards the end of 2019. 
Key factors in this outlook are the observed dynamism of investment and a vision of the labor market 
that,  once  all  the  available  information  has  been  analyzed,  and  factoring  in  the  impact  of  the 
significant  immigrant  flow  of  recent  years,  shows  that  its  dynamism  is  in  line  with  the  better 
performance  of  the  economy.  Accordingly,  the  evolution  of  macroeconomic  conditions  makes  it 
necessary to reduce the monetary stimulus, a process that will continue to be implemented gradually 
and cautiously, in a context where there is still high uncertainty coming from the external scenario. 
Recent economic developments 
As had been anticipated in a number of Monetary Policy Reports, in the third quarter GDP slowed 
down its annual growth rate with respect to the first half of the year. This is consistent with a scenario 
                                                 
1  The  Imacec  (Índice  Mensual  de  Actividad  Económica)  literally  corresponds  to  the  “Economic  Activity 
Monthly Indicator”. 
 1 
in which economic growth is closer to potential—estimated to lie in the 3% to 3.5% range—given 
the progress made in the process of closing capacity gaps, the end of specific factors that had favored 
growth in the first half and a more challenging comparison base in the second (Figure 1). In any case, 
the deceleration of the last quarter was sharper than expected, highlighting the worsened performance 
of mining and manufacturing. In the former, there were operational difficulties in some mines; in the 
latter a significant and greater than expected effect from a string of holidays in September. 
All of us who devote ourselves to analyzing the economy and its evolution should bear in mind how 
difficult it is to draw medium-term conclusions from the observation of high frequency data. Time 
and  again,  we  have  seen  public  discussions  about  the  state  of  the  economy  that  are  based  on  a 
particular observation, which shortly down the line has a significant reversal that renders lots of pages 
of study useless. The case of last September offers a good example. The Imacec of that month was 
strongly influenced by the so-called calendar effect, which is given by the number of working days 
in a month and its composition (how many Mondays, Tuesdays, and so on). In Box III.1 of this Report 
we note that in 2018 the month of September had two peculiarities that extended the calendar effect 
beyond the estimate: two less working days than September of last year and a distribution in national 
holidays  that  led  many  people  to  take  the  full  week  off.  This  produced  a  significant  drop  in 
manufacturing  activity,  which  also  reflected  in  energy  consumption  and  the  hours  worked  in  the 
month (Figure 2). After some people attributed it to a more permanent economic phenomenon, the 
October Imacec data, released this morning, shows the transient nature of the September calendar 
effect  on  manufacturing.  Actually,  measured  in  twelve  months,  non-mining  activity  grew  5.1%, 
where the higher growth is explained by the performance of manufacturing and trade, the two sectors 
that appeared to have retreated in September.  
In this way, the strong fluctuations that the calendar effect may cause in particular months underscore 
the need to carefully analyze the evolution of high-frequency activity indicators. It is possible for a 
month’s activity data to show a steep drop that does not necessarily respond to economic factors and 
that are later offset in subsequent months, without either being construed as a change in the medium-
term trajectory of the economy.  
On  the  domestic  expenditure  side,  a  development  of  the  third  quarter  most  worth  noting  was  the 
strengthening  of  investment  which  made  up  for  a  mild  slowdown  in  consumption.  By  investment 
components, special mention deserves gross formation of fixed capital in machinery and equipment, 
as its rates of change in annual terms have remained high throughout the year (Figure 3). 
Our 2018-2020 growth forecast 
Turning to our projections, after growing 2.8% in the third quarter, we estimate growth for the full 
year  at  4%.  This  projection—which  considers  October  data  up  to  the  statistical  closing  of  the 
Monteray  Policy  Report—is  in  the  lower  bound  of  the  range  estimated  in  September  (4%-4.5%), 
mainly due to the deterioration of mining activity. However, compared with what we foresaw before 
September, the growth in 2018 is in the upper bound of the range (Figure 4). For the next two years, 
we still estimate that the economy will grow around potential, gradually approaching trend growth. 
 2 
Thus, the projection ranges considered in September are maintained: 3.25% to 4.25% in 2019; 2.75% 
to 3.75% in 2020.  
For  spending,  we  anticipate  a  change  in  composition,  to  higher  growth  in  investment  and  some 
slowdown in consumption. Several antecedents point to investment significantly outperforming our 
September  estimate,  including  important  upward  revisions  in  the  Corporation  of  Capital  Goods’ 
(CBC)  Project  Survey,  the  behavior  of capital  goods imports, the  evolution  of more  expansionary 
conditions of credit supply and demand (Bank Credit Survey) and qualitative information from our 
Business Perceptions Report (IPN). Thus, for 2019, our gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) growth 
forecast rises to 6% (4.5% in September), and for 2020 the near 4% figures are maintained.  
The case of mining investment is analyzed in detail in Box III.2 of the Report. According to the latest 
survey of the CBC—released in mid-October—for the period 2018-2021 investment expenditure of 
the  mining  projects  it  covers  went  from  about  5.40  billion  dollars  to  10.60  billion.  The  greatest 
differences are concentrated in the years 2019 and 2020, when the surveyed investment is about 3.5 
billion dollars higher than previously expected. This leap is the result of including a small number of 
projects that have advanced in their realization, but whose scope causes ripple effects in the baseline 
scenario. For 2018, where the incremental effect of the new survey is more limited, it is expected that 
Mining  GFCF  will  increase  18%  annually  (just  over  3  percentage  points  more  than  projected  in 
September). For 2019, its annual expansion rate is revised from 7% in the September Report to 16% 
in our current estimate. By 2020, although the increase in level is notorious compared to the previous 
projection, its rate of annual variation compared to 2019 is not so different, as it remains a little over 
3% (Figure 5). 
Regarding consumption, it has lost some dynamism most recently, but is forecast to resume growth 
at a pace aligned with GDP. This is based on the growth shown by the wage bill, when considering 
the  National  Statistics  Institute’s  (INE)  revised  salary  information,  the  evolution  of  the  hours 
habitually worked and the employment growth obtained by inputting the effects of the immigration 
flow of recent years. Plus, imports of consumer goods are still high. In the fiscal area, we use as a 
working  assumption  that  in  2019  the  economy  will  receive  a  boost  consistent  with  the  approved 
budget.  From  then  onwards,  we  assume  that  the  structural  deficit  will  follow  the  path  of  gradual 
descent defined by the authority (Table 1). 
External scenario 
On the external front, the baseline scenario expects a reduction in the next two years of the momentum 
that the Chilean economy will receive from abroad, although it will remain positive. On the one hand, 
after reaching the peak of this growth cycle in 2017 and 2018, in 2019-2020 the expansion rate of our 
trading  partners’  activity  will  be  reduced.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  last  few  quarters  the  relevant 
financial conditions for the emerging economies began to normalize, a process that will continue in 
the  next  two  years.  The  baseline  scenario  admits  new  episodes  of  volatility  in  the  international 
financial  markets,  insofar  as  they  do  not  escalate  to  a  widespread  negative  shock  on  emerging 
economies. Finally, the recent drop in the oil price means relatively stable terms of trade in 2019 and 
 3 
2020. This considers an average copper price similar to September’s: USD 2.85 in 2019 and 2.80 in 
2020; and a Brent-WTI average oil price around USD 60 dollars in the period (Table 2).  
Domestic financial conditions 
At home, financial conditions are still favorable. On one hand, domestic long-term interest rates and 
risk indicators have remained relatively isolated from external events, while shorter interest rates have 
risen in line with monetary policy developments. In turn, the cost of credit has remained low and 
loans—mainly the commercial and consumer segments—show somewhat higher growth in a context 
where  lending  standards  have  relaxed  somewhat  (Figure  6).  The  stability  of  the  local  financial 
markets contrasts with those of other emerging countries in recent months. This is based to a large 
extent on the cushioning role of our exchange rate float and the substantial availability of domestic 
financing. Thus, the exchange rate has shown major ups and downs in the past few months, fluctuating 
between  CLP  660  and  690  most  of  the  time.  Compared  to  November  last  year,  the  peso  has 
depreciated  close  to  7%  against  the  dollar,  consistently  with  the  global  strengthening  of  the  US 
currency. The real exchange rate level is near its averages of the last 15 to 20 years. As a working 
assumption, we estimate that it will oscillate around these values throughout the projection horizon.  
Inflation 
As I mentioned at the beginning, after being under 2% annually almost the entire second half of 2017, 
headline inflation has been rising this year, to approach 3% in recent months. Although part of this 
rise is explained  by  the  more  volatile  CPI  items  and the  peso  depreciation,  inflation  of the  basket 
components that are more sensitive to the activity gap (ie. services and non-tradables) has increased 
gradually but steadily over the course of 2018 (Figure 7). 
In terms of projections, the drastic fall in fuel prices results in a downward revision to CPI inflation 
this year and next, ending 2018 and 2019 barely below 3%. Towards 2020, once these effects fade 
out,  the  CPI  inflation  will  be  around  3%.  The  CPIEFE—total  CPI  excluding  food  and  energy 
componentes—inflation,  in  turn,  will  approach  3%  in  the  first  half  of  2019,  to  later  stay  in  the 
neighborhood until the end of the projection horizon (Figure 8). 
Monetary policy 
About  monetary  policy,  the  same  as  in  September,  the  Board  considers  that  the  evolution  of 
macroeconomic conditions makes it necessary to gradually withdraw the current monetary stimulus. 
Key in this judgment is our assessment of the size of the capacity gaps compared with the magnitude 
of the monetary stimulus: while the former has decreased, monetary policy is still very expansionary.  
The baseline scenario uses as a working assumption that the monetary policy rate will continue to rise 
in the coming months to approach its neutral level of 4% to 4.5% in the first half of 2020. The Board 
has  stated  that  it  expects  to  adjust  the  MPR  in  a  gradual  and  prudent  manner.  In  particular,  the 
implementation of monetary policy will be conditional on the effects of incoming information on the 
 4 
projected  inflation  dynamics,  making  the  necessary  adjustments  to  policy  measures  if  faced  with 
significant deviations in either direction. 
Risk scenarios 
As usual, there are internal and external elements that may alter the projections I just presented you. 
Like in the past several quarters, the risk balance of the external scenario relevant to Chile remains 
biased downward.  
The  main  risk  continues  to  be  a  drastic  deterioration  of  financial  conditions  facing  emerging 
economies, which could result from some of many elements. On one hand, whatever happens in the 
US is important to us, because of its effects on inflation as well as its monetary policy and economic 
outlook. On the other hand, major geopolitical risks persist. The trade conflict has tended to refocus 
on the US versus China, in a context where the Chinese economies have activated several stimulus 
measures, but financial risks remain while the economy rebalances. In any case, the meetings held by 
the two nations during the G-20 convention seems to indicate that this conflict will not escalate any 
further,  at  least  for  some  time.  In  Europe,  the  uncertainty  surrounding  Brexit  and  the  complex 
situation in Italy has taken on greater force. Finally, although we believe that the drop in the oil price 
responds  primarily  to  supply-side  factors—which  reduces  short-term  inflationary  pressures—it 
remains to be established to what extent this could be reflecting more permanent demand-side factors. 
Recent months have seen a substantial adjustment in  financial asset prices in the developed world 
that could be signaling a change in risk premiums, consistent with a scenario of uncertainty that has 
prevailed for quite some time. 
On the domestic front, we estimate that risks for activity are unbiased. The economy has decelerated 
with respect to early in the year, which had been long expected. However, this deceleration could be 
more persistent if consumption fails to recover its expected dynamism. Meanwhile, the rebound of 
investment could be stronger as other large-scale projects progress. 
As for inflation, we estimate that risks are unbiased. Various indicators suggest that the economy will 
further consolidate the process of closing the capacity  gaps, while others show the reaction of the 
more sensitive CPI components. Thus, expectations two years out are aligned with the policy target. 
It should be noted that this new Monetary Policy Report features greater insight of the implications 
of  risk  scenarios  for  monetary  policy.  This  will  allow  having  a  better  appreciation  of  the  Central 
Bank’s  reaction  to  deviations  from  the  baseline  scenario.  This  reflects  the  Board’s  purpose  of 
enhancing transparency in the conduct of monetary policy and provide guidance to the markets and 
the community on its possible future evolution. 
Summing up, we continue to assume that capacity gaps have been decreasing in recent quarters and 
will continue to do so in the next two years. In these circumstances, for inflation to converge to the 
target  in  the  policy  horizon,  it  is  necessary  that  the  monetary  stimulus  continue  to  be  gradually 
withdrawn in the coming months. With this, we reaffirm our commitment to conduct monetary policy 
with flexibility, so that projected inflation stands at 3% over the two-year horizon. 
 5 
A new supplement to the Monetary Policy Report: The labor market 
The labor market plays a central role in the functioning of the economy, and is particularly important 
for  monetary  policy.  In  the  short  term,  the  way  this  market  responds  to  shocks  and  adjusts 
employment and wages, is key in the behavior of variables such as activity, consumption and prices. 
In the long term, the labor market plays a crucial role in trend growth, because of both the evolution 
of the labor factor and its contribution to productivity growth. 
Accordingly, the analytical framework of monetary policy has always paid special attention to the 
twists and turns of the labor market. In fact, this is a central axis in the conceptual framework modern 
monetary policy is based on, from the different notions of the Phillips curve to the Neo Keynesian 
models of general equilibrium that today sustain our forecasting and analysis. With this in mind, we 
have attached to our December Monetary Policy Report a special study on the functioning of the labor 
market. It is based on the analysis of new databases that allow us to understand some of the clues to 
how this market operates, that were beyond our reach in the recent past.  
The  analysis  of  the  labor  market,  even  if  done  with  the  intention  of  drawing  macroeconomic 
implications, must pay attention to its structure and to the way in which the individual decisions of 
millions of workers and employers—that differ from each other in more ways than one—determine 
how the aggregates behave. However, studying this diversity empirically is no easy task, and is often 
absent from the macroeconomic debate. Most labor market indicators that are regularly reported and 
discussed in the public scene, including wage indexes, unemployment rates or job creation, are not 
only  highly  aggregated,  but  also  represent  net  movements.  This  implies  that  much  relevant 
information, such as differences in the behavior of different groups or changes in the composition of 
the flows, is not present in the analysis or public debate. The omission of this information has more 
weight in economies such as Chile, where the composition of the labor force and employment is very 
heterogeneous  and  can  change  in  quite  short  periods  as  part  of  its  very  process  of  economic 
development. 
Fortunately, advances in data processing capacity have greatly increased the possibilities of going 
beyond the aggregate indicators, complementing them with the use of microdata associated with the 
behavior and characteristics of individual workers and employers. In the case of Chile, access to new 
databases from administrative records, together with the ability to process that volume of information 
in an analytical manner, is especially valuable. The use of disaggregated information is necessary to 
better characterize and understand these developments, as well as to make sense of apparent puzzles 
and paradoxes in the labor market in recent years. 
The labor supply movements of recent years provides a good example of how important it is to have 
alternative  sources  of  information.  While  several  indicators  suggest  that  during  the  last  year  the 
Chilean economy has been closing its capacity gaps, traditional labor market statistics taken from 
different surveys rather show a weakening in the creation of employment, stirring reasonable doubts 
about how much of the recovery of growth has been transmitted to employment and what explains 
the  apparent  lag  between  both  variables.  This,  in  a  context  in  which  sources  of  administrative 
 6 
information—such  as  the  number  of  pension  fund  affiliates  or  of  contributors  to  unemployment 
insurance—tend to show an improved performance of the labor market (Figure 9). 
In  the  case  of  employment,  the  statistics  traditionally  used  in  Chile  are  built  by  extrapolating  the 
results of surveys to the population, using expansion factors, which in turn are based on population 
projections that are updated at every Census. Thus, between one update and the next, the surveys do 
not have the capacity to reflect exogenous changes in demographics. Therefore, a phenomenon of 
immigration of the magnitude that our country has experienced in recent years cannot be represented 
correctly until the expansion factors are updated.  
So, information about levels in the labor force such as employment and other aggregates delivered by 
the  different  surveys  do  not  necessarily  provide  a  faithful  representation  of  the  reality  whenever 
substantive changes occur in population aggregates. As you can see in Box III.3 of the Report, using 
different sources of information a revision can be made of the evolution of employment, factoring in 
the impact of the migrant inflows we have seen recently in Chile. In particular, this exercise shows 
that between 2016 and 2018 employment would have grown between one and two percentage points 
annually more than shown by the surveys, that is, between double and triple the data obtained from 
the  surveys  over  the  last  few  years.  The  difference  in  growth  originates  in  the  assumptions  made 
regarding the new immigrants that entered the country in the last year, which are not available as yet. 
Given that the relative magnitudes and rates obtained from the surveys, including the unemployment 
rate, should not change much, this means that in the last three years the Chilean labor market has been 
able to accommodate between 120 and 190 thousand migrants per year more than what the surveys 
indicate, without a significant increase in unemployment. 
Both the revised remunerations figures and the estimated revisions for employment are in line with 
recent administrative files and clearly above what would be obtained if adjustments to employment 
growth, remunerations and hours actually worked were not considered. 
This does not mean that labor market gaps are closed or nonexistent. Full absorption of the increase 
in  labor  supply  can take  longer,  so  this  increase  in  employment  growth  does  not  imply  that  more 
unemployment  does  not  exist.  In  fact,  wage  indicators—both  the  revised  INE  figures  and 
administrative records—show low growth rates, consistent with a labor supply increase, a vision that 
coincides with the contents of our IPN.  
This special study on the labor market, however, goes beyond the review of current indicators, as it 
seeks to understand the characteristics that shape its behavior over the course of the  business cycle 
and at longer terms. In particular, it presents a characterization of the labor market in Chile from an 
empirical perspective, using diverse sources of information to provide the broadest view possible.  
The main stylized facts revealed by this analysis (Table 3) of Chile’s labor force show an increase in 
the participation of women and a reduction in that of the youth, which is consistent with the increased 
coverage of college education for the new generations. Also, human capital has grown significantly, 
but lags behind developed countries in terms of coverage and especially quality. The return on the 
 7 
working experience of Chilean workers is low by international standards, with marked differences 
across individuals with different levels of education.  
About the characteristics of the labor market, we observe that although informal work has decreased 
in  Chile it  is  still high  (around  30%  of  total  employment),  well  above  the  standards  of  developed 
countries. At the same time, our labor market is very dynamic, with a high turnover relative to other 
countries  and  with  a  significant  incidence  of  fixed-term  jobs.  Meanwhile,  salaried  employment  is 
increasingly concentrated in big companies. Real wages have grown strongly for all income levels, 
but high dispersion persists. The wage differences are correlated with differences in the duration of 
employment (turnover). Finally, the aggregate unemployment rate shows a downward trend, partly 
due  to  the  fall  in  the  relative  participation  of  younger  workers,  and  the  hours  worked  have  fallen 
systematically during the last twenty years. 
Regarding female employment, the data confirm that women receive a lower pay for the work than 
men,  even  controlling  for  such  characteristics  like  education,  specific  occupation  and  expertise. 
Furthermore, women’s income growth profile over the life cycle is significantly lower than that of 
men,  women  are  less  likely  to  keep  their  jobs  and  are  more  likely  to  go  from  unemployment  to 
inactivity.  Still,  the  increasing  weight  of  services  in  overall  economic  activity,  in  line  with  the 
country’s development, has helped in the insersion of women in the labor market. 
The  study  also  examines  how  diverse  features  of  the  labor  market  influence  the  evolution  of  the 
economy’s aggregate productivity (Table 4). On one hand, the human capital that is accumulated via 
experience and seniority at the job allows to boost total factor productivity. On the other hand, the 
labor market allows to relocate workers to jobs where they can be more productive and obtain a better 
pay.  In that sense, transitions between jobs contribute to aggregate productivity, to the extent that 
those flows go generally in the direction from the less productive to the more productive companies.  
However, for a large group of workers the greater mobility does not necessarily mean better pay or 
enhanced  productivity.  In  particular,  in  46%  of  cases,  turnover  does  not  come  with  wage 
improvements. This phenomenon is more present amont high-turnover, low-income workers. Those 
staying in their jobs longer have significantly greater wage gains over time. In the  long term, this 
phenomenon links wider wage inequalities with slower productivity growth, a topic that merits a more 
in-depth examination.  
The study goes on to review how the Chilean labor market responds to economic fluctuations (Table 
5).  The  analysis  reveals  that,  in  general,  there  are  multiple  margins  for  adjustment  that  allow  to 
cushion macroeconomic shocks and moderate the effect on employment that would exist absent those 
margins. These include changes in the composition betwee salaried and self employment, changes in 
participation rates, high turnover and rapid transitions between salaried jobs, the creation of jobs in 
new firms, and wage flexibility in hired work.  
At the same time, evidence has it that the costs associated to such adjustment, both for the workers 
and  for  the  economy’s  aggregate  productivity,  can  be  significant.  The  results  presented  also  have 
implications on how the shocks hitting the economy can affect the evolution of wages and inflationary 
 8 
pressures, information that is of particular importance for monetary policy. Thus, despite the labor 
market’s capacity for adjustment, the weak periods entail important costs. In particular, the process 
of  realocation  to  quality  jobs  and  more  productive  enterprises,  with  the  consequent  impact  on 
aggregate productivity and the workers’ purchasing power, is diminished in the lower phase of the 
cycle. For some workers, especially those in the early stages of their working lives, the effects can be 
very persistent. 
These situations explain the need to have a wider toolkit with indicators to monitor the behavior or 
the  labor  market  over  the  short  term.  In  particular,  it  is  useful  to  complement  survey  data  with 
information  from  administrative  data  bases  and  traditional  aggregates  on  occupation  and 
unemployment with statistics on resignations, firings and hirings. 
Anyway, the BCCh has made progress on these matters. The evidence presented is largely based on 
ongoing research within the Bank and it naturally supplements some of the main topics discussed in 
our 2017 Trend Growth Report. It also attests to the generosity of multiple institutions that, through 
covenants,  have  cooperated  by  sharing  this  information,  including  the  INE,  the  Internal  Revenue 
Service, the Civil Registry, the Labor Directorate and the Ministry of Education.  
Final remarks 
Before I conclude this presentation, I would like to mention the materialization of an initiative that 
we  anticipated  when  we  presented  the  September  Monetary  Policy  Report  before  the  Senate’s 
plenary.  On  that  occasion  we  announced  that  the  Bank  will  seek  an  external  evaluation  of  its 
performance in complying with its Organic Law’s double mandate, that is, to safeguard price stability 
and financial stability. For this purpose, a panel of renowned world experts in central banking will be 
convened. 
I want to take this opportunity to inform you that we have appointed the five foreign economists that 
will make up the aforesaid panel of experts: Dr Karnit Flug (Chair), former governor of the Central 
Bank of Israel, and professors Dr Petra Geraats, from the University of Cambridge, UK; Guillermo 
Calvo, from Columbia University, US; Enrique Mendoza, from the University of Pennsylvania, US; 
and Donald Kohn, Senior Researcher at the Brookings Institution and who formerly served as Vice-
Governor of the US Federal Reserve Board.  
We selected the panel on the basis of these experts’ vast professional experience and knowledge of 
central  banking,  all  renowned  economists  at  the  world  level.  The  group  will  act  with  complete 
independence to gather information and interview local and foreign experts. The topics that the panel 
will be evaluating include the analytical framework and the powers available to the BCCh, its policy 
formulation process, communication and results, with special emphasis on the entity’s most recent 
years of operation. 
The final evaluation report will be presented in the institutional account the BCCh is due to submit to 
the Senate plenary in September 2019, which acquires a special connotation as the year marks the 
30th anniversary of its granted autonomy. We hope that the panel will not only contribute a technical, 
 9 
independent and well informed opinion of the Bank’s performance in the areas entrusted it by law, 
but also generate concrete proposals for improvement that we can include in our institution’s agenda. 
With  this,  I  believe  that  we  demonstrate  our  commitment  to  fulfill  our  responsibilities  before  the 
country on three levels. First, conducting an analysis as objective as possible of the prospects of the 
economy and their implications for monetary policy. Second, applying our resources to deepen the 
analysis  in  an  area  of  crucial  importance  for  the  economy,  while  at  the  same  time  producing 
information that may be of deeper interest to public opinion, the academic world and public policies. 
Third, by generating mechanisms to strengthen  our accountability before the citizens, through this 
Senate, and identify new possibilities for improvement in our work. 
Thank you. 
     10 
   11 
  12 
     13 
   14 
     15 
     16 
    17 
  