28 January 2019 
First Deputy Governor Kerstin af Jochnick 
Swedish Property Federation 
 
 SVERIGES RIKSBANK 
SE-103 37 Stockholm 
(Brunkebergstorg 11) 
 
Tel +46 8 787 00 00 
Fax +46 8 21 05 31 
registratorn@riksbank.se 
www.riksbank.se 
SPEECH 
    DATE: 
SPEAKER: 
VENUE: 
 
  Cautious steps towards higher interest 
rates* 
Thank you for the invitation to come and talk about current monetary policy here 
at the Swedish Property Federation.  
In December, we increased the repo rate for the first time in over seven years. I 
can imagine many people asking themselves why we have started to increase the 
rate now and how we foresee monetary policy further ahead. And households, 
who are more indebted than ever before – can they cope with higher interest 
rates? 
These are questions that I will try to respond to today, based on our latest fore-
casts and assessments. As I see it, there is good reason to take cautious steps to-
wards higher interest rates, in part because historically speaking, we find our-
selves in a special environment. 
As you know, forecasts are always uncertain, and therefore I intend to conclude 
by discussing some of the factors that could lead to us deviating from our mone-
tary policy plan. But let me start by outlining why we have decided to start raising 
the interest rate. 
Why is it appropriate to start raising the interest rate? 
To understand why we have now started to increase the interest rate, it may use-
ful to go back in time a little. In 2014 and 2015, we could see that inflation in Swe-
den had developed so weakly that confidence in the inflation target risked being 
undermined. Powerful monetary policy stimulus was required to reverse the 
                                                            
* I would like to thank Björn Lagerwall for help with writing this speech, Emelie Theobald for help with the dia-
grams, Gary Watson for translation into English and Charlotta Edler, Martin Flodén, Jesper Hansson, Per Jansson, 
Anna Lidberg, David Kjellberg, Cecilia Roos Isaksson, Peter van Santen, Marianne Sterner, Ulf Söderström and 
Anders Vredin for valuable comments. 
  1 [13] 
  trend. In addition to lowering the interest rate below zero, we have also pur-
chased large volumes of government bonds.  
We now see that inflation has been close to target for a longer period, while con-
fidence in inflation remaining around the target has been strengthened, illus-
trated by the fact that inflation expectations have been around 2 per cent in re-
cent years (see Figure 1).  
Figure 1. Inflation close to 2 per cent and confidence in the target has  
strengthened 
Inflation around 2 per cent ... 
… and confidence in the inflation target has 
strengthened 
   
Note. Left-hand graph. Annual percentage change in the CPIF. Right-hand graph. Inflation expectations among all 
participants, per cent, mean values. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and TNS Kantar Prospera 
 
Economic activity abroad remains healthy, despite growth having recently 
slowed somewhat. However, there is some difference between developments in 
the United States, where growth has remained strong and unemployment is at its 
lowest level in almost 50 years, and the euro area, where developments have 
been more subdued.  Wages are now rising increasingly rapidly in countries like 
Germany and the United States and are helping to push up inflation. But despite 
these basically good prospects, we also see a substantial number of risks regard-
ing developments abroad, which I will come back to at the end of my speech.  
For some time now, we have been in an economic boom in Sweden. This in turn 
is partly due to the expansionary monetary policy. Despite a partial slowdown in 
growth, output is still above its trend level (see Figure 2). It was striking that GDP 
fell between the second and third quarters of last year, but we believe most of 
this has to do with temporary factors, including the fact that household consump-
tion of cars was brought forward to quarter 2 due to amended tax rules, which 
pushed down car sales in quarter 3.   
  2 [13] 
  Figure 2. Economic activity still strong in Sweden 
 High pressure on the labour market 
High output level 
GDP gap
01
04
07
10
13
16
19
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
  Note. Left-hand graph. GDP gap refers to the percentage deviation of GDP from the Riksbank’s assessed trends. 
Right-hand graph. Net figures. 
Sources: National Institute of Economic Research, Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
 
For future inflationary pressures, the situation on the labour market plays a par-
ticularly significant role. The tighter the labour market, the higher the pressure on 
wage development. In our assessment, the situation on the labour market is tight. 
An indication of this is that labour shortages – as reported by companies in Na-
tional Institute of Economic Research surveys – are at record-high levels (see Fig-
ure 2). The effect of the labour market situation on wage and price development 
tends to occur with a certain time-lag. There is hence good reason to believe that 
wages and prices will increase more rapidly in the period ahead. 
Our previously established criteria for starting to increase the in-
terest rate have been met 
Inflation and inflation expectations close to 2 per cent and the healthy economic 
activity are in themselves arguments in favour of slightly reducing the support 
from monetary policy. But what prompted us to take this step just now? In con-
junction with the two previous monetary policy decisions in September and Octo-
ber, we said that we would initiate slow increases in the repo rate in December or 
February if economic developments continued to “support the prospects for infla-
tion”. It is, in other words, a forward-looking perspective on inflation that guides 
monetary policy. And in this context, not so much has actually changed since the 
beginning of autumn. Even though inflation outcomes have been slightly lower 
than expected, we still expect CPIF inflation a year or so ahead to be around 2 per 
cent. Cost pressures in the economy are rising, while the major variation in energy 
prices, which we believe to be of a temporary nature, means that inflation will 
vary somewhat in the near term (see Figure 3). 
  3 [13] 
  Figure 3. Criteria met for slow rate increases – inflation prospects still favourable 
3
3
 Contribution of energy prices to CPIF
CPIF
2
1
0
-1
2
1
0
-1
11
13
15
 
Note. The CPIF in terms of annual percentage change and the contribution from energy prices in percentage 
points. The contribution of energy prices in the forecast is calculated as the annual percentage change in energy 
prices multiplied by their current weight in the CPIF. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
 17
19
21
After the increase in December – what will happen 
with the interest rate going forward? 
Moving on from the interest rate decision in December. As I mentioned by way of 
introduction, we have now starting a slow journey towards higher interest rates. I 
would now like to say a little about what this journey might look like. 
The repo rate is expected to be increased very slowly – we are 
“taking our foot of the gas” rather than “applying the brakes” 
According to our forecast in December, the next interest rate increase is expected 
during the second half of this year. Thereafter, the forecast indicates that the in-
terest rate will be increased by about 0.5 percentage points per year. From a his-
torical perspective, this is a very slow rate-hike cycle. We can see this in the left-
hand figure in Figure 4, which compares with previous periods when the repo rate 
has been raised.1 Note that this figure shows the change in the repo rate com-
pared with the initial position, and the horizontal axis indicates the number of 
days that have passed. The repo rate is expected to have risen by about 1.5 per-
centage points during the whole forecast period. In the right-hand figure, we see 
that, in the end of the forecast period, the fourth quarter of 2021, the repo rate is 
expected only to have reached a level of 1 per cent. 
                                                            
1 See also the article “What usually happens when the repo rate is raised?” in Monetary Policy Report, October 
2018. 
  4 [13] 
   Figure 4. The interest rate going forward – more “taking our foot off the gas” 
than “applying the brakes” 
Slow increases compared with previous  
episodes 
3.5
Low level of repo rate even at the end of 
the forecast period 
3.5
July 2010 to July 2011
January 2006 to September 2008
November 1999 to July 2001
Forecast for the repo rate
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
 0
200
400
600
800
1 000
 Note. Left-hand graph. The vertical axis shows the change in the repo rate in percentage points. The horizontal 
axis specifies the number of weekdays after the first rise of the repo rate. The repo rate forecast refers to quar-
terly averages. Right-hand graph. Per cent.  
Source: The Riksbank 
 
There are several reasons why the journey towards higher interest rates is ex-
pected to be so slow this time. I have already touched on the first reason. As such 
substantial monetary policy measures have been required to establish inflation 
and inflation expectations close to the target, it is important to phase out mone-
tary policy support at a slow rate, so that inflation continues to remain around 2 
per cent going forward. There is still uncertainty regarding the strength of future 
inflationary pressures.  The second reason is that we are operating in a new envi-
ronment compared with previous rate-rising episodes. 2 An important circum-
stance is that global real interest rates (i.e. interest rates adjusted for inflation) 
have been exceptionally low for a long time, and in all likelihood will continue to 
be so for some considerable time. Monetary policy cannot influence global real in-
terest rates but must relate to the developments we see. The lower global inter-
est rates are, the lower the policy rate must be to have the same expansionary ef-
fect on the economy. Another circumstance that has changed the monetary policy 
landscape – and which I will address later – is that households are more affected 
by interest rate adjustments than previously.  
What happens to the bond holdings? 
As you may know, in addition to lowering the interest rate to negative levels, we 
have also purchased significant volumes of Swedish government bonds to a nomi-
nal value of approximately SEK 350 billion – to make monetary policy even more 
expansionary.  
There is much talk about interest rates rising in the future, but many may not be 
so aware of how adjustments to the repo rate going forward relate to our bond 
                                                            
2 See “Monetary policy in a new environment”, speech by Stefan Ingves on 5 March 2018. 
  5 [13] 
  holdings. The figure shown in Figure 5 has been taken from the article we pub-
lished in December 2017. 3 The shaded parts of the figure show roughly what has 
happened since then.  
Figure 5. The Riksbank’s overall normalisation plan for monetary policy 
   
New purchases of bonds were discontinued in December 2017, which also signi-
fied the end of phase 1 in Figure 5. Phase 2 in Figure 5 describes developments 
last year up until December.  We are now in the early stages of phase 3: The repo 
rate is starting to be raised, while reinvestments are continuing so that the bond 
holdings are more or less held constant. We have communicated that we will rein-
vest principal payments and coupons “until further notice”, but we have brought 
forward reinvestments of large principal payments that are due during the first 
half of this year to obtain a more even reinvestment profile over time. An issue 
we need to address during the spring is how to manage reinvestments of the prin-
cipal payments due next year. Phase 4 in Figure 5 implies that the repo rate has 
been raised slightly more. Not until then do the bond holdings start to decrease. 
The fifth phase in Figure 5 actually concerns developments in the long term.  Our 
strategy is that the repo rate and the repo rate path will in the long term revert to 
being the main monetary policy tools. Purchases of government bonds or other 
securities then act as a complement when the policy rate is close to its lower 
bound. 
Figure 6 shows the Riksbank’s purchases and holdings of government bonds: The 
left-hand graph shows the development of our purchases, and the right-hand 
graph is a technical illustration of how our holdings might develop if bonds that 
mature after June 2019 are not reinvested. In the left-hand graph in Figure 6, the 
conclusion of new purchases is marked by the disappearance of the blue bars, and 
the right-hand graph reflects how the bond holdings can be expected to be gradu-
ally scaled back.  
                                                            
3 See “The Riksbank’s strategy for a gradual normalisation of monetary policy” article in Monetary Policy Report, 
December 2017.  
  6 [13] 
   Expected gradual reduction in the portfolio if 
reinvestments were to cease 
Reinvestments of coupons
Reinvestment of principal payments
New purchases
Figure 6. The bond portfolio can be expected to decrease in the longer term 
We have concluded new purchases and are re-
investing until further notice 
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
H1
2015
H2
2015
H1
2016
H2
2016
H1
2017
H2
2017
H1
2018
H2
2018
H1
2019
 Note. Left-hand graph. Nominal amounts, SEK billion. The development of reinvestments from mid-2018 on-
wards is a forecast and refers to nominal amounts. The final amounts will depend on current market prices.  
Right-hand graph. Nominal amounts, SEK billion. Forecast up until June 2019, after that a technical projection 
with the assumption that no further reinvestments are made. The vertical line marks the shift between forecast 
and technical projection.  
Source: The Riksbank 
 
The purpose of the bond purchases has been to support general economic devel-
opment and to safeguard the inflation target. But obviously, it is also important 
for us to continuously assess how the Riksbank’s earnings will be affected during 
the course of the journey. This is something we have discussed in different con-
texts.4 Our latest estimate indicates that the effect on earnings from the bond 
holdings could be quite close to zero seen over the entire holding period. But how 
earnings will be ultimately affected depends on how the interest rate develops in 
the future.  
Can households cope with higher interest rates? 
Swedish households current have record-high debts in combination with a large 
proportion of variable-rate mortgages (see Figure 7). As you are no doubt aware, 
the Riksbank has been concerned for many years about the high level of house-
hold indebtedness and the potential negative effects on the Swedish economy of 
rising interest rates or falling house prices.5 From our horizon, it is therefore im-
portant to carefully analyse the interest-rate sensitivity of households. We have 
also returned to this issue on a number of occasions, most recently in the Mone-
tary Policy Report in December.6 
                                                            
4 See, for instance, “The Riksbank’s bond purchases affect government finances”, speech by Martin Flodén on 9 
November 2016. 
5 For example, we published an extensive inquiry into the risks on the Swedish housing market as early as in the 
spring of 2011. See Sveriges Riksbank (2011), “The Riksbank’s inquiry into the risks on the Swedish housing mar-
ket”. 
6 See “How are household cashflows and consumption affected by rising interest rates?” article in Monetary Pol-
icy Report, December 2018. 
  7 [13] 
  Figure 7. Households have increasingly high debt and shorter interest-rate fixa-
tion periods 
Household indebtedness has increased 
Shorter interest-rate fixation periods for  
household mortgages 
100
  100
80
60
40
20
0
80
60
40
20
0
98
01
04
07
Variable
13
16
10
Fixed
 Note. Left-hand graph. Percentage of disposable income. Total household debt as a share of their disposable in-
come, totalled over the past four quarters. Right-hand graph. Percentage of mortgages. Refers to loans from 
mortgage institutions. Percentage of mortgages in each category is calculated based on the value of the loans. 
Variable rate refers to interest-rate fixation periods up to and including three months. Fixed rate refers to inter-
est-rate fixation periods over three months.  
Sources: The Riksbank and Statistics Sweden 
Most households can continue to pay their mortgages even at 
significantly higher interest rates ... 
The question is whether households’ interest-rate sensitivity – in combination 
with rising interest rates – might result in them quite simply not being able to 
meet their interest payments. This could lead to banks incurring direct credit 
losses on their mortgages, which in turn might affect financial stability. 
But I am not overly worried about this risk. Banks do what is known as a “left-to-
live-on” or “discretionary income” calculation, as part of their credit assessment. 
As a rule, they don’t grant mortgages if there is a deficit in the calculation. The es-
timated interest rate they use in the calculation is on average around 7 per cent, 
which is some way above a long-term normal level, which can be assumed to be 
between 4.5 and 6 per cent. 7 Calculations done by the Swedish financial supervi-
sory authority, Finansinspektionen (FI), on a sample of new mortgage holders 
show that only just over 5 per cent of households have a deficit in their discretion-
ary income calculations if the mortgage rate rises to 7 per cent.8 
There is hence nothing to indicate that the household sector as a whole would en-
counter significant problems in paying their interest expenses even if interest 
rates were to rise substantially in relation to their current levels. And, as I said ear-
lier, our forecast indicates extremely limited rate increases in the years to come. 
But when the rate rises, many households might have to adapt their consumption 
to cope with the increased interest payments. From a macroeconomic and mone-
tary policy perspective, it is therefore important to understand how household 
consumption is affected when interest rates change. 
                                                            
7 I have assumed a mark-up on the mortgage rate of 2 percentage points over the interval for the long-term repo 
rate of 2.5-4 per cent. 
8 See Finansinspektionen (2018), “The Swedish mortgage market”.  
  8 [13] 
   … but their cashflows are affected more by interest rate adjust-
ments than before  
Increasingly higher household indebtedness – in combination with a large share of 
mortgages taken at variable interest rates – has resulted in their cashflows being 
more affected by rate changes than previously. Traditionally, we tend to talk 
about the so-called interest rate channel when discussing the effects of monetary 
policy on household consumption. Simplified somewhat, the interest rate channel 
implies that it will be more attractive to save than to borrow when the interest 
rate is raised – and vice versa when the rate is lowered – which affects consump-
tion. Another effect is that when the interest rate is raised, disposable income for 
savers increases and decreased for borrowers – and vice versa when the rate is 
lowered – which also affects consumption. This is usually referred to as the cash-
flow effect of monetary policy.9  
We can understand this effect by looking at how disposable income is defined: 
Disposable income ≈ wages + transfer payments + interest income + other capital 
income – interest expenditure – taxes 
According to the Financial Accounts from Statistics Sweden, households’ debts are 
approximately twice the size of their interest-bearing assets. Which is why a rate 
increase has a negative net effect on total disposable household income.  This ef-
fect has increased as household indebtedness has grown.  
What then does an increased effect mean in actual monetary terms? We have 
studied this as well.10 Table 1 shows a few practical, down-to-earth calculations: a 
typical housing purchase in Sweden and Stockholm in 2004 and 2017 respec-
tively.11 We see that prices have increased significantly during the period, as has 
the size of the mortgages, while interest payments have not. This is due to the low 
mortgage rates. The figures can hence be deceptive. As we see, a 1-percentage 
point higher mortgage rate would have increased borrowing costs by significantly 
more in 2017 than in 2004. For a typical household in Sweden, a 1-percentage 
point higher interest rate in 2004 would have led to an increase in interest ex-
penditure per month of less than SEK 500. This can be compared to 2017, when 
the same typical household would have seen its interest payments increase by 
over SEK 1,100.  For the equivalent typical household in Greater Stockholm, a 1-
percentage point higher interest rate in 2004 would have increased their interest 
expenditure by just over SEK 900 per month, while a similar rate hike in 2017 
would have pushed up interest expenses by more than SEK 2,300 per month. 
From a monetary policy perspective, one thing we need to do is to assess what 
the increased interest-rate sensitivity of households means for the effects of the 
repo rate on their consumption.  
 
                                                            
9 For a more detailed description, see P. Gustafsson, M. Hesselman, and B. Lagerwall (2017), “How are household 
cashflows and consumption affected by higher interest rates?”, Staff Memo, Sveriges Riksbank. 
10 See “Household indebtedness and interest-rate sensitivity”, article in Financial Stability Report 2017:2. The fig-
ures in Table 1 have been updated with details for 2017. 
11 These calculations only show interest payments and ignore effects on interest income. 
  9 [13] 
  Table 1. Households more affected more by interest rate adjustments than pre-
viously 
 Interest payments for a typical housing purchase, SEK per month 
Sweden 
 
 
Housing price (SEK million) 
Debt (SEK million) 
Interest rate (%) 
Interest payments 
Increase in interest payments (+1%) 
Note. The amounts have been adjusted for tax relief on interest payments. The table does not include amortisa-
tions. 
Sources: Finansinspektionen, Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
Greater Stockholm 
2004 
2017 
6.0 
2.6 
4.0 
1.6 
1.6 
3.7 
3643 
3452 
934 
2351 
2004 
1.3 
0.8 
3.7 
1793 
485 
2017 
3.0 
2.0 
1.6 
1814 
1161 
Rate increases in line with the Riksbank’s forecast are expected 
to have minor cashflow effects on households as a whole ... 
In the Monetary Policy Report in December, our assessment was that total dispos-
able household income would slow by about 1.3 per cent in a three-year perspec-
tive as a result of rising interest rates.12 This must be considered a minor effect, 
especially bearing in mind that rising wages, among other factors, will contribute 
about 4 percentage points a year to the growth in disposable household income 
in the coming years. Total disposable income, according to our forecast, will con-
tinue to grow at a healthy rate in the years to come, despite rising interest rates. 
Surveys from the National Institute of Economic Research indicate that house-
holds expect rising interest rates in line with the Riksbank’s repo rate forecast. 
This is probably one reason why saving among households is at a historically high 
level. That said, however, there are a number of uncertainty factors to consider. 
 … but major differences among different groups   
The aggregated figures conceal vary large differences among different house-
holds, a fact substantiated by the Riksbank’s analysis of data on individual house-
holds’ debt.13 We can categorise households based on their indebtedness. Figure 
8 shows how much an interest rate hike of 1 percentage point will subdue dispos-
able income expressed as a percentage for all borrower households and for the 
most indebted. 14  For borrower households as a whole, disposable income will 
slow by just under 2 per cent. For the 10 per cent most indebted households, dis-
posable income will slow by more than 6 per cent.  
                                                            
12 The repo rate will be raised by about 1.5 percentage points during the three-year forecast period. 
13 See K. Blom and P. van Santen, “The indebtedness of Swedish households –-Update for 2017”, Economic Com-
mentaries No. 6, 2017, Sveriges Riksbank.  
14 The calculations only capture the dampening effect of rising interest expenses on disposable household in-
come, as the data material does not contain details on households’ interest-bearing assets. See P. Gustafsson, M. 
Hesselman, and B. Lagerwall (2017), “How household cashflows and consumption are affected by higher interest 
rates?”, Staff Memo, Sveriges Riksbank. 
  10 [13] 
  Figure 8. Major variation between different groups 
Cashflow effect on disposable household income of a rate increase of 1 percentage point 
7
7
 6
5
4
3
2
1
0
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
All borrower households (DTI ≈ 2.6)
10 per cent most highly indebted (DTI ≈ 8.7)
 Note. Per cent. Refers to the average for each group. Within each group, the figure in paranthesis refers to the 
average debt-to-income (DTI) ratio. 
Source: The Riksbank 
 
This variation among households can also have a bearing on the total effects on 
consumption. If the most highly indebted households adapt their consumption 
mostly in the event of a given change in income, the total effect will also be 
greater. As the interest rate affects housing prices, it can also affect the scope of 
households to consume by borrowing against their home as collateral. Currently, 
many households not only have high debts in relation to their disposable income 
but also in relation to the value of their home. But in order to ascertain how dif-
ferences among households can affect total consumption, we would need better 
data on household assets.15 
From this perspective, there is therefore reason to proceed cautiously with rate 
rises, in light of the uncertainty surrounding how the most highly indebted house-
holds will act. But ultimately, it is the repo rate’s effect on overall economic devel-
opment and the prospects for inflation that are the decisive factor for monetary 
policy. 
I would also like to point out that household indebtedness in a broader perspec-
tive constitutes a vulnerability for the Swedish economy, as households with large 
debts are not just sensitive to higher rates but also to other types of changed eco-
nomic circumstances, such as falling housing prices and weaker economic activity 
with higher unemployment. 
                                                            
15 A study by the IMF from 2017 with data up to 2012 indicates that saving among Swedish households is very 
unevenly distributed; for example, the 50 per cent of households with the lowest income do not save at all. See 
IMF (2017), “Sweden: Selected Issues”. 
  11 [13] 
   Several factors can affect our forecasts – no “auto-pi-
lot” towards higher interest rates 
So far, I have talked about the Riksbank’s monetary policy in terms of our best as-
sessment or main scenario. But, as the world-famous physicist and Nobel Laureate 
Niels Bohr is reported to have said: “Prediction is very difficult, especially if it’s 
about the future”. We have most certainly not switched on an “auto-pilot” to-
wards higher interest rates. As always, we are prepared to reassess monetary pol-
icy if developments were to justify it. 
So, what factors could affect our forecasts and future monetary policy? We can di-
vide them into four different categories: economic developments abroad, the do-
mestic economy, the development of inflation and structural changes. 
As regards economic developments abroad there are three obvious uncertainty 
factors that we have considered in conjunction with the most recent monetary 
policy decisions. The first concerns the effects of the United Kingdom’s with-
drawal from the EU – Brexit. As you know, people in the UK voted to leave the EU 
in a referendum back in June 2016, so this risk has indeed been with us for some 
time now. And the recent course of events has increased the uncertainty still fur-
ther. The second risk these past twelve months concerns the trade conflict be-
tween the United States and China. Developments seem to have subdued export 
orders abroad. And recently, growth looks to have slowed in China, which has oth-
erwise provided traction for global growth over a long period. The third risk con-
cerns Italian fiscal policy. The discussion between the EU and the Italian Govern-
ment about the Italian budget has periodically created unease on the financial 
markets, even though the most recent course of events is providing some breath-
ing space. 
As regards the domestic economy, the Riksbank has long since warned about de-
velopments on the Swedish housing market, which is the most important domes-
tic factor that could trigger poorer economic development than in our forecast. 
After having risen sharply over a long period of time, housing prices started to fall 
quite rapidly last autumn. During the course of 2018, prices have recovered 
slightly, and our forecast is for them to continue to rise at a modest rate in the 
coming years. But I think that the situation on the Swedish housing market is still 
very uncertain. Weaker developments than in our forecast pose a significant risk 
to the Swedish economy. Those components of domestic demand that would be 
negatively affected first of all would be housing investment and household con-
sumption.  
But as I am here at the Swedish Property Federation today, I would also like to 
mention that the weaker developments on the housing market since last autumn 
have not escaped housing developers. You can read more about this in an article 
in our Financial Stability Report, published in November.16 An important conclu-
sion we can draw from developments in recent years is that housing developers 
have burdened households with substantial risks during the building process. In 
                                                            
16 See “The new production of housing and financial stability”, article in Financial Stability Report 2018:2. 
  12 [13] 
   the prevailing market situation, these risks have come to the fore, causing house-
holds’ interest to wane, especially when move-in dates to new homes are far-off 
in the future. This will require modified business models in order to rekindle the 
interest of prospective house-buyers in newly built homes. My assessment is also 
that newly built homes are currently far too expensive for many groups. Cheaper 
new builds and better turnover in the housing stock could help untangle this knot. 
There are of course many uncertainty factors not only surrounding future eco-
nomic developments, but also surrounding inflation. An obvious reason for why 
inflation can be higher or lower is the kind of risk for different economic develop-
ments that I have just talked about. But one factor that has puzzled us is the sur-
prisingly low wage growth in Sweden bearing in mind how the economy has 
strengthened in recent years.17  Even though we have seen that wages are now 
rising more rapidly both abroad and in Sweden, uncertainty remains over the 
strength of inflationary pressures. This is also a reason why we are expected to 
proceed very cautiously with repo rate rises in the coming years. 
The Swedish krona may grow weaker or stronger than our forecast, but as we 
have tried hard to get inflation to rise towards the target, we are more concerned 
about the potential effects of a rapid and sharp appreciation of the krona. 
The fourth and final category of uncertainty factors concerns ongoing major struc-
tural changes, the effects of which are very difficult to assess “in real time”. I have 
mentioned two factors today: the trend of low global real interest rates and the 
increasing interest-rate sensitivity of households. But there are also other factors 
that I have not discussed today, but that are nevertheless very important to con-
sider. The mega trend towards greater digitalisation is changing many parts of so-
ciety, and at the Riksbank we are affected not only as regards monetary policy but 
also as regards our other operations, such as our responsibility for a safe and effi-
cient payment system.18 Another important trend from Sweden’s point of view 
concerns changes in demography and labour supply, not least in light of major mi-
gration flows into Sweden in recent years.19 My assessment is that the changes 
we still face are substantial and comprehensive. It will probably be even more dif-
ficult to learn from historical data and correlations when making assessments in 
the future.  
As always, we stand ready to reassess both our forecasts and monetary policy if 
developments were to justify it.  
Thank you for this opportunity to speak to you!  
  
                                                            
17 See, for instance, “The Phillips curve and monetary policy”, article in Monetary Policy Report, July 2018. 
18 See, for instance, “Digitalisation and inflation”, article in Monetary Policy Report, February 2015, and G. Gui-
bourg and F. Erlandsson (2018) “Times are changing and so are payment patterns”, Economic Commentaries No. 
6, Sveriges Riksbank. 
19 See “Monetary policy in a new environment”, speech by Stefan Ingves on 5 March 2018, for a longer discus-
sion. 
  13 [13] 
