  Keynote address by Daniel Mminele,  
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the 2019 BNP Paribas Global Official Institutions Conference  
 Paris 
19 June 2019 
 The global backdrop and monetary policy in emerging markets 
 Introduction 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
 Thank you to BNP Paribas for allowing me the honour to deliver the opening keynote 
address at this prestigious gathering of global official institutions.  
 Also allow me to commend the organisers of this event for their foresight in coming up 
with diverse and well-balanced topics that have risen to the top of the global agenda.  
 There is no doubt in my mind that, at the present moment, uncertainty in the global 
macroeconomic  environment,  including  rising  geopolitical  uncertainties,  elevated 
trade  tensions  and  rising  debt  levels,  dominate  the  discussions  of  most  global 
investors and policymakers.  
 In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  discuss  the  implications  of  these  developments  for 
emerging market economies  and the possibility of further risk from market volatility, 
before I conclude by touching on the policy options at our disposal to navigate through 
these rather turbulent times. 
   Page 1 of 10 
An uncertain global economic environment 
 Investors and policymakers alike have had a nervous last few months. It is often said 
that expansions do not die of old age. Yet, as they lengthen in duration, reaching near-
record periods in some cases, observers increasingly worry about whether the trigger 
of the eventual downturn is already there. Are we in such a case at present?  
 In  his  foreword  to  Global  Economic  Prospects  published  earlier  this  month,  World 
Bank President David Malpass writes that ‘global growth has continued to weaken and 
momentum remains fragile’1. Compared to its January forecast, the World Bank has 
this month downgraded its forecast for global growth in 2019 by 0.3 percentage points 
to 2.6%. Furthermore, it sees only a mild recovery ahead, to 2.8% by 2021. Revisions 
to  this  year’s  forecasts  are  broad-based,  across  both  advanced  and  emerging 
economies.  Private  sector  consensus forecasts  have  similarly  been  scaled down  in 
recent months. 
 In some countries, a moderation was expected after the strong momentum observed 
in  late  2017  and  early  2018.  In  the  United  States  (US),  for  instance,  economists 
anticipated that the boost to private spending from the fiscal stimulus of the first half 
of 2018 would eventually fade. This has indeed happened, although the US economy 
remained  dynamic  at  the  start  of  2019,  rising  by  a  surprisingly  strong  3.1% when 
annualised, despite a temporary shutdown of government services.  
 But  the  deceleration  in  other  countries,  amid  a  slowdown  in  global  trade  flows, 
surprised many by its magnitude. The eurozone slowed from 2.4% in 2017 to 1.8% last 
year,  as  weakening  exports  to  Asia,  the  United  Kingdom  (UK)  and  Eastern  Europe 
took a toll on business confidence. The World Bank now only expects a 1.2% increase 
in  the  eurozone’s  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  this  year.  China  has  also  lost 
momentum,  as  earlier  policy  tightening  curtailed  lending  by  the  non-bank  financial 
sector and the tariff increases of 2018 weighed on exports. 
 By late 2018, these negative economic surprises had reached levels ample enough to 
trigger a bout of risk aversion in financial markets, which particularly affected equities 
                                                           
1 Media Call on the June 2019 Global Economic Prospects Report, World Bank Group, Washington 
DC, United States 
 Page 2 of 10 
and corporate bonds (although emerging market currencies and fixed-income markets 
were  relatively  sheltered).  Global  financial  conditions  tightened.  This  tightening, 
however, proved short-lived, as the continuation of benign (and, in some cases, soft) 
inflation developments allowed major central banks to pause, or delay, the start of their 
normalisation  process.  In  the  US,  in  particular,  indications  by  the  Federal  Reserve 
(Fed) that it could be patient before making any policy decisions helped equities and 
corporate bonds to recover their earlier losses. 
 Nonetheless, many threats to global expansion remain unresolved, and in some cases 
risks previously identified have begun to materialise. First and foremost among these 
are the trade tensions between some of the world’s major economies. In the wake of 
the  recent  increases  in  US  tariffs  on  selected  Chinese  imports,  and  in  light  of  the 
potential for broader tariff increases, analysts are  already anticipating a bigger drag 
on  global  growth  from  what  increasingly  looks  like  a  protracted  trade  conflict.  In  its 
most  recent  Surveillance  Note  for  the  G20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank 
Governors, for  the meetings  in  Fukuoka,  Japan, 10 days  ago,  the  IMF  noted  these 
additional  tariffs  would  “dampen  trade  and  weigh  on  confidence  and  financial 
sentiment, adversely impacting investment and productivity and growth.”  
 Separately,  the  UK’s  Parliament  is  struggling  to  agree  on  the  terms  for  leaving  the 
European Union, with negative consequences for growth and investment and some 
spillovers to continental Europe. Financial markets have displayed sensitivity to these 
developments. 
 At  the  same  time,  a  number  of  geopolitical  tensions  continue  to  simmer,  especially 
between Iran, the US and its Middle East allies. 
 While the G20 observed that global growth appears to be stabilising more recently and 
may  pick  up  into  2020,  downside  risks  overall  are  still  perceived  to  be  tilted  to  the 
downside.  
 What does this backdrop imply for emerging markets? 
 Against such a global backdrop, emerging countries are facing conflicting pressures. 
And the experience of the past 15 months shows that it is not just the monetary policy 
 Page 3 of 10 
path in the major economies, but also the divergences (or not) between these policies, 
that can have major consequences for emerging markets.  
 At first, and for a large part of 2018,  an ever-widening growth gap between  the  US 
economy and its major partners, coupled with budding trade tensions, boosted the US 
dollar.  The  Fed  continued  to  normalise  policy  rate  levels  while  other  major  central 
banks stayed put. The resulting widening in the interest rate divergence in favour of 
the US contributed to dollar appreciation.  
 The mix of rising US interest rates, a stronger dollar and overweight investor positions 
(at  the time)  in  the  so-called  ‘risky assets’  weighed on  the currencies and bonds of 
those emerging markets that exhibited frail external and fiscal balances. Specifically, 
financial stress in Argentina and Turkey, amid the need to roll over a large amount of 
short-term debts and a de-anchoring of inflation expectations, precipitated a sell-off in 
emerging market assets, although with important differentiation across countries.  
 The  situation  changed  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2018,  when  indications  of  slowing 
economic activity in the US led financial markets to anticipate lesser tightening by the 
Fed, resulting in some downward pressure on the dollar and a decline in US Treasury 
yields. The prevailing mix allowed for some recovery in emerging market assets and 
a  resumption  of  capital  flows  to  these  countries.  Additional  factors  also  helped, 
including the decline in oil prices, the tightening of monetary policy in a large number 
of  emerging  countries  that  had  restored  wider  rate  differentials  with  the  advanced 
economies,  and,  in  several  countries,  a  lesser-than-feared  pickup  in  inflation  in 
response to currency depreciation. 
 During the early stages of this year, we have seen a significant change in monetary 
policy forward guidance given by major central banks, the Fed and ECB in particular, 
which  delivered  some  easing  of  financial  conditions,  particularly  in  advanced 
economies, but in emerging markets as well, although to a lesser degree.  
   Page 4 of 10 
Yet  the  situation  remains  fluid,  as  illustrated  by  the  recent  downward  pressure  on 
emerging currencies in response to the renewed flare-up in trade tensions – even if, 
again, rising market expectations of lower US interest rates are cushioning the blow.  
 In summary, the  last few  years  have  continued to teach us that, in a world of open 
capital  accounts  and  elevated  debt  levels,  global  capital  flows  display  cycles  that 
remain  heavily  influenced  by  the  monetary  policy  of  the  advanced  economies. 
Furthermore, the Fed retains its key role in driving these flows, owing to the dollar’s 
role  as  a  funding  currency  for  both  portfolio  flows  and  bank  loans.  Indeed,  the 
desynchronisation of policy cycles between the Fed and other major central banks can 
accentuate the capital flow cycle, especially if it leads to dollar appreciation. 
 That  said,  cross-border  investors  and  lenders  continue  to  differentiate  between 
specific emerging markets. Those with elevated foreign exchange (FX) liabilities, twin 
deficits and poorly anchored inflation expectations remain the most vulnerable.  
 Looking ahead, the relative synchronisation of major economies’ central banks, insofar 
as they all experience a lack of inflation pressures, provides some reason for optimism, 
as  does  the  success  of  these  central  banks  in  reversing  the  undue  tightening  of 
financial  conditions  in  late  2018.  However,  any  indications  that  the  advanced 
economies are slowing faster than expected as risks materialise could trigger renewed 
capital outflows from the emerging markets. 
 Additional risks from geopolitical uncertainties and trade tensions 
 Allow  me  to  briefly  discuss,  albeit  in  more  detail,  how  trade  tensions,  and  more 
generally geopolitical uncertainties, can affect the environment for emerging markets.  
 Countries with open capital markets and floating currencies are exposed to swings in 
the international perceptions of risk – and the factors I have mentioned influence these 
perceptions.  Hence,  even  if  a  specific  emerging  country  is  not  directly  exposed  to 
higher tariffs, or if it is not in the region where a geopolitical issue is flaring up, it can 
experience capital outflows as investors will require a higher premium on its assets. 
  Page 5 of 10 
There are more direct channels through which emerging markets can be affected by 
geopolitical issues. These include, of course, upward pressure in oil prices. We saw, 
up to a few weeks ago, that tensions in the Persian Gulf were keeping the price of 
crude elevated, even as global growth showed signs of slowing.  
 In addition, business confidence will typically suffer if the geopolitical tension affects 
prospects for trade with the region concerned. If the endgame is military conflict and 
infrastructure  destruction,  a  consequence  will  be  migratory  flows.  These,  if 
uncontrolled,  can  cause  both  fiscal  pressures  and  socio-political  tensions  in  the 
country receiving the displaced populations.  
 Finally,  conflict  can  also  increase  the  cost  of,  and  the  potential  restrictions  to, 
international merchandise trade, for instance if it affects an area that is important for 
maritime traffic. 
 Of  course,  we  talk  here  of  linkages  that  relate  to  ‘severe’  geopolitical  events  like 
conflicts  –  and  there  is  thankfully  no  certainty  that  these  will  happen.  Nonetheless, 
emerging countries have also in the past been affected by ‘milder’ events that weigh 
on global demand and make investors less willing to increase exposure to the ‘riskier’ 
emerging market assets.  
 As far as trade tensions are concerned, negative consequences for emerging markets 
will  emerge  if  these  countries  are  involved  in  specific  stages  of  the  affected  global 
value  chains,  or  if  they  export  commodities that  are  used  at  the  beginning  of these 
value chains. 
 The IMF G20 Surveillance note mentioned earlier indicated that based on simulations 
conducted by the IMF, recently announced tariffs, together with previously announced 
ones, could reduce global GDP by 0.5 per cent in 2020.  
 Are emerging economies at risk of further market volatility? 
 This leads me to addressing the issue of  how emerging countries  can navigate the 
current turbulent waters, and in particular how they can deal with  potential financial 
market volatility.  
 Page 6 of 10 
 As I have argued earlier: the experience of the last year shows that portfolio investors 
and other lenders, including banks, do differentiate between emerging markets, largely 
according  to  the  strength  of  their  macroeconomic  and  policy  fundamentals.  For 
instance, while currencies like the Argentinian peso and the Turkish lira depreciated 
by  48%  and  32%  versus  the  US  dollar  in  the  first  10 months  of  2018  respectively, 
others barely depreciated, losing less than 5% over the same period (such Thai baht, 
Malaysian ringgit or Peruvian sol). These discrepancies illustrate the major influence 
of external and fiscal imbalances (the proverbial ‘twin deficits’), as well as the degree 
of endogenous inflation dynamics in response to external shocks. 
 Does  this  mean  that  emerging  market  assets  will  again  experience  widespread 
differences  in  performance  this  year  and  the  next?  While  such  a  risk  is  indeed 
elevated, several factors should nonetheless help to insulate these markets better than 
in earlier crises.  
 First,  most  emerging  countries enjoy  better  coverage  ratios  from  their  FX  reserves, 
even  if  historical  experience  reveals  that,  when  other  fundamentals  are  weak,  high 
reserves may not offer much protection against market volatility.  
 Second,  inflation  expectations  now  appear  better  anchored  in  a  broad  range  of 
emerging  countries,  as  a  direct  consequence  of  the  growing  credibility  of  inflation-
targeting  regimes.  In  several  cases,  public  debt  is  also  better  managed  than  in  the 
past,  with  countries  extending  the  average  maturity  of  their  debt  and  increasingly 
relying on local currency-denominated issues.  
 Finally,  the  real  effective  exchange  rates  appear  to  be  mostly  fairly  valued  or  even 
undervalued after their widespread depreciation in 2018. 
 This said, endogenous sources of vulnerability to future global market turbulence still 
exist in emerging countries. They need to be addressed if future bouts of local market 
volatility are to reduce in both size and duration. I would like to mention, in particular, 
the growing indebtedness of the corporate sector and, to a lesser extent, also of the 
household  and  government  sectors,  which  means  that,  for  most  of  the  emerging 
 Page 7 of 10 
countries,  total  debt  (public  plus  private)  is  now  well  in  excess  of  the  levels  that 
prevailed before the global financial crisis.  
 Similarly,  an  increase  in  FX  liabilities  (mostly  by  the  private  sector)  and,  in  several 
cases,  growing  mismatches  between  FX-denominated  assets  and  liabilities  poses 
risks  in  some  countries.  Indeed,  even  if  there  is  no  such  mismatch  at  present,  the 
levels of both FX assets and liabilities are often large relative to GDP, which means 
that any changes in valuations can quickly generate important swings in a country’s 
net international investment position.  
 Finally,  the  experience  of  South  Africa  also  highlights  the  dangers  linked  to  an 
increased financial fragility of state-owned enterprises (SOEs), as the hard-currency 
liabilities of SOEs can rise quickly, eventually turning into additional credit risks for the 
sovereign. 
 Policy options to deal with turbulent times 
 In  the  beginning  of  these  remarks,  I  pointed  to  the  support  which  emerging  market 
currencies and fixed-income assets have received from the rising expectations of US 
interest rate declines and the fall in long-term bond yields, both in the US and in other 
advanced economies. Such developments ensure that the yield differentials between 
emerging countries and their  advanced counterparts remain  relatively wide, offering 
some buffer against capital outflows. However, this equilibrium is fragile. If the world 
economy proves more resilient than expected, bond yields can easily reverse part of 
their recent decline, especially if the recent US inflation softness proves transitory, as 
most economists indeed anticipate. Conversely, if global growth data surprise on the 
downside,  emerging  markets  could  suffer  from  a  ‘flight  to  safety’  and  renewed 
appreciation of the US dollar. 
 Last year’s events, just like the ‘taper tantrum’ of 2013 or the ‘investment recession’ of 
2016, show that if global financial conditions become less favourable, all the emerging 
countries will be affected to some extent, although those with stronger fundamentals 
will show greater resilience. Building resilience thus appears to be a necessary task 
for governments and central banks alike. In particular, it is important to ensure that 
 Page 8 of 10 
inflation  expectations  remain  well  anchored  and  that,  as  a  consequence,  the  lower 
exchange rate pass-through to inflation observed in the recent cycle remains the norm.  
 But authorities should also keep the growth in FX-denominated liabilities under control, 
so as to allow exchange rate depreciation to play its role as an ‘adjustment variable’ 
and minimise any impacts from external currency and asset price shifts  onto private 
sector  balance  sheets.  They  also  have 
the  option  of  using 
the  available 
macroprudential tools should conflicts emerge between the respective goals of price 
and financial stability, including risks to these balance sheets. 
 Resilience also depends on limiting dependence on foreign capital to meet domestic 
funding needs. It is therefore important for governments to ensure, through a mix of 
prudent fiscal policies and an environment that is conducive for private savings, the 
absence of any major mismatches between the domestic supply and demand of debt 
securities.  Hence, when  non-residents eventually reduce their bond holdings, these 
net sales will be more easily absorbed by domestic investors, and the domestic market 
for  securities  will  remain  liquid.  Appropriate,  sophisticated  market  tools  to  hedge 
against  currency  and  interest  rate  risk  can  only  help  in  the  deepening  of  domestic 
markets. 
 These  tools  I  have  just  mentioned  deal  more  specifically  with  currency-  and  capital 
flow-related risks. Nonetheless, the list is not exhaustive. Resilience also depends on 
the  way  in  which  investors  perceive  the  institutional  and  governance  quality  of  the 
recipient country, the existence of checks and balances, and the depth and quality of 
its political debate. And, as South Africa’s experience shows, financial resilience also 
depends  on  real  economic  resilience.  South  Africa’s  inflation  expectations  may  be 
better anchored than they were in the past, its FX liabilities may be relatively low, its 
banking sector may be solid, and its domestic capital markets may be deep and liquid. 
Yet it’s domestic GDP growth performance has been weak, contributing to relatively 
high  fiscal  and  current  account  deficits  and  a  relative  vulnerability  of  South  African 
assets. 
 Consequently,  emerging  market  policymakers  should  also  focus  on  measures  that 
increase the ability of domestic private agents to adjust to external shocks, including 
the mobility of labour and capital across sectors. These measures include lowering the 
 Page 9 of 10 
constraints to doing business, creating opportunities for laid-off workers to ‘retrain’ and 
find  jobs  in  alternative  industries,  ensuring  that  infrastructure  is  appropriate  for 
business to respond to relative price shifts, and allowing for sufficient economic and 
export diversification. This way, heavy reliance on specific commodities, markets or 
segments of value chains will not become a major risk if those particular sectors face 
global shocks. 
 Conclusion 
 In  conclusion,  let  me  again  point  out  that  while  the  global  environment  remains 
challenging for investors and policymakers alike, much progress has been made over 
the years to better insulate the emerging economies from unavoidable global shocks, 
and authorities have additional tools at their disposal to increase that resilience over 
the medium to long term.  
 Central banks can also play their part in the build-up of that resilience, both through 
the  execution  of  their  price  and  financial  stability  mandate,  and  through  their 
management  of  official  reserves  –  even  though  the  current  low-yield  environment 
makes it difficult to earn good returns on their financial assets.  
 But central banks also face limitations in what they can achieve.  
 Strengthening a country’s economic and financial architecture is everybody’s task. 
 Thank you. 
   Page 10 of 10 
