Jens Weidmann: The role of the central bank in a modern economy
- a European perspective
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  University  of  South Africa
(UNISA), Pretoria, 12 February 2019.
 1 Introduction
Professor Makhanya,
Professor Mogale,
Governor Kganyago,
Ambassador Schäfer,
Ladies and gentlemen,
Thank you very much for the kind introduction and your warm welcome. I am very happy to be
here in South Africa. I am also glad to say that the Bundesbank and the South African Reserve
Bank have developed a good cooperation and close working relationship over the past years. 
It is my privilege today to give a speech at Africa’s largest open distance learning institution, and
the  continent’s  university  with  the  most  enrolled  students.  I  am  pleased  that  some  of  these
400.000 students are with us today. I feel very fortunate to have this opportunity to gain a glimpse
of your ideas and passion for your country.
About a year ago, I was intrigued by the superhero movie “Black Panther” – maybe some of you
have seen and enjoyed it as well. The film plays in Wakanda, an extraordinary fictional country in
Africa. Hidden from the rest of the world, the people of Wakanda live in peace and prosperity,
having preserved their traditions while developing highly advanced technology (by means of an
imaginary resource called “vibranium”, and through good governance). This Hollywood fiction –
despite all its exaggerations – offers a bright and captivating image of Africa that opens our eyes
for future possibilities. Your country has enormous economic potential, and it was probably not
by  accident  that,  in  the  movie,  the  people  of  Wakanda  speak  isiXhosa,  one  of  South Africa’s
official  languages.  Wakanda  is  also  known  for  the  “heart-shaped  herb”,  a  plant  that  gives  the
Black Panther his superpowers. And this, actually, brings me to the topic of my speech.
In recent years, superpowers were often attributed to central banks as they struggled with the
fallout  from  the  financial  crisis.  While  other  institutions  were  perceived  as  being  incapable  of
action, independent central banks had to step in and save the day. A successful crisis response
1
raised expectations, and with them came disappointment and discomfort.
As  a  result,  many  people  in  advanced  economies  have  come  to  question  the  role  of  an
independent  central  bank  in  a  modern  economy.  This  role  is  the  key  issue  I  want  to  address
today. And since I am a European central banker, I will discuss it from that particular perspective.
2 What monetary policy can do and what it cannot do 
2.1 Lessons from history
Ladies and gentlemen,
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
In the 16th century, when conquerors robbed the gold and silver treasures of the Americas and
brought them to Europe, they also paved the way for inflation. Early economists (such as Jean
Bodin and David Hume) learned that the supply of money has an impact on the price level. As
long as an economy operates below capacity limits, a larger money supply can result in a higher
output of goods and services. But once full employment is reached, more money will ultimately
lead to higher prices.
With  the  adoption  of  fiat  currency,  it  was  possible  simply  to  print  legal  tender.  This  posed  a
permanent  temptation  to  governments,  as  they  could  use  the  printing  press  to  finance  their
spending. Giving in to this temptation led to some of the most terrible episodes of hyperinflation,
such as in Venezuela today, in Zimbabwe a decade ago, but also in Germany in the distant past. 
In my country, the enormous government spending during the Great War and in the following
years eventually brought about hyperinflation. Inflation peaked in 1923, when prices doubled in
less  than  4  days.   Such  astronomically  high  price  increases  deeply  interfered  with  people’s
everyday  lives.  This  was  expressed  in  John  Maynard  Keynes’  quip  that  people  got  used  to
3
ordering two beers at a time, because the price would rise faster than the beer became warm.
2
Extreme  cases  illustrate  one  aspect  of  the  costs  of  inflation.  Indeed,  many  people  lost  their
financial wealth in these times. On the other hand, the burden of debtors – the government, in
particular – was easily wiped out. It is the weakest groups of society who typically suffer most
from inflation. Wage earners and transfer recipients like pensioners have only limited possibilities
to hedge against it. Governor Kganyago explained it in a recent speech when he said: “Where
monetary policy tolerates higher inflation, this tends to reduce spending power, especially for the
poor.”  Distributional shifts and the overall economic damage of elevated inflation often create
social unrest and political instability.
4
However, history has taught us that deflation, a general, sustained and self-reinforcing decline in
the price level, can also be devastating for the economy, as the Great Depression demonstrated
in the 1930s. Price stability is a socially desirable goal.
A few decades later, economists perceived a seemingly stable trade-off between inflation and
unemployment:  the  Phillips  curve.  It  was  thought  that  unemployment  could  be  lowered  by
accepting higher inflation. Thus, policymakers were under the impression that they could simply
choose a combination of inflation and unemployment that fitted social preferences – or rather
their preferences. Former German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt once famously claimed that the
German people would rather accept 5% inflation than 5% unemployment. But in the 1970s, the
previously  downward-sloping  Phillips  curve  turned  vertical.  Efforts  to  reduce  unemployment
simply raised inflation and contributed to stagflation, the combination of stagnation and inflation.
What had happened? 
2.2 The problem of time-inconsistency
Central to monetary policy is a problem that permeates many areas of economic policymaking:
time-inconsistency.  Princeton  professor  and  former  Fed  Vice-Chairman  Alan  Blinder  once
5
illustrated this problem with an example that fits very well with today’s venue.
Let’s assume that a university professor has two goals. On the one hand, he wants his students
to learn as much as possible. On the other hand, he wants to spend as little time as possible
marking exams. The professor announces an exam to be held at the end of the semester and
hopes this will induce his students to learn. 
Given his students have indeed studied, the best decision for the professor would be to cancel
the exam to save himself the hassle of grading the exam papers. Thus, his optimal discretionary
behaviour  is  time-inconsistent.  But  if  the  students  see  through  the  professor’s  incentive,  they
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
might not study hard, and all of them end up worse off. What’s the way out of this dilemma?
University examination rules which make end-of-semester tests compulsory instead of leaving
them to the discretion of the professor. 
6
In a seminal paper, the economists Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott once explained why time-
inconsistency gives rise to an inflation bias.  A surprising increase in inflation causes real wages
to fall, firms to hire and the economy to expand. Using monetary policy to create surprise inflation
can  thus  be  tempting  politically.  However,  like  the  students  who  see  through  the  professor’s
incentive, economic agents understand the incentives of the monetary authority. If they anticipate
a  monetary  policy  stimulus,  inflation  will  rise,  but  real  wages  will  remain  constant.  In  the
expectation of inflation, trade unions will already have negotiated a wage increase. The result will
be  a  world  with  higher  inflation,  high  unemployment  and  low  growth,  just  like  the  1970s  in
advanced economies.
What’s  the  way  out  of  it?  The  solution  to  overcome  the  political  incentive  to  create  surprise
inflation is similar to the case of the professor: a credible and firm commitment. An independent
central bank tasked with ensuring price stability is a precondition. 
2.3 Monetary policy consensus
7
Today, there is consensus in economic thinking around the world that price stability is the best
contribution  a  central  bank  can  make  to  enhance  social  welfare  and  to  support  sustainable
growth.  Most economists agree that, in general, monetary policy is neutral in the long run. It can
mitigate the cyclical fluctuations of growth and unemployment, but it cannot steer an economy
onto a permanently higher growth path, nor can it permanently reduce joblessness to below the
natural rate of unemployment. Structural unemployment, for example, can only be addressed by
economic policy measures.
Hyperinflation episodes were one of the reasons why central banks should be prevented from
printing money in order to finance public expenditures. Monetary policy and fiscal policy need to
be separated.
In pursuing price stability, there is also consensus among economists that central banks should
aim for low but non-negative inflation rates to have a safety margin against deflation. Advanced
economies  typically  strive  for  inflation  rates  of  around  2%,   while  emerging  market  and
developing economies usually aim for somewhat higher inflation in order to allow for economic
catching-up.
8
Nevertheless, even if a central bank has the mandate to deliver price stability, there is a strong
temptation to exploit monetary policy instruments for other objectives, even though the benefit is
only short-term. And that makes independence and a time-consistent commitment so important.
Both  economic  theory  and  history  have  shown  that  independent  central  banks  are  better
equipped to keep inflation in check than central banks that are less shielded from the influences
9
of a political cycle focused on the short term.
The Bundesbank has been among the most independent central banks from its inception. Over
decades, Germany enjoyed low inflation rates. Even during the inflation-ridden 1970s, Germany
kept inflation rates at comparatively modest levels. While the average German inflation rate of 5%
was quite high, other industrialised countries with the exception of Switzerland, which also used
to have a very independent central bank, had to cope with significantly higher inflation rates. The
United States had an average inflation rate of 8%, France 10%, Italy and the United Kingdom
14%.
During the 1980s and 1990s, many central banks were granted independence. The European
Central Bank, which was established during that era, has been independent from the outset.
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
3 The euro at 20
Ladies and gentlemen,
On 1 January, the single European currency – the euro – turned 20. Against the yardstick of the
ECB  Governing  Council’s  definition  of  price  stability  of  “below  but  close  to  2%”,  the  euro  has
been a success. The average euro area inflation rate over the first 20 years was 1.7% per year.
The promise of stability was kept. Compared with the average loss of purchasing power of its
legacy currencies like the Deutsche Mark or the French franc, the euro is even more of a stable
currency.
Key  to  this  success,  in  my  view,  has  been  the  monetary  framework  of  our  currency  union.  It
rests on two cornerstones – the mandate and the independence of the Eurosystem, which is
made up of the European Central Bank and the national central banks of those EU countries that
adopted the euro as their currency.
Both  the  mandate  and  independence  are  stipulated  in  the  EU  Treaties.  This  protects  the  two
cornerstones from legal changes, because any changes to the Treaties would require unanimity
among  all  EU  member  states.  The  primary  objective  of  the  Eurosystem  is  to  maintain  price
stability.  Without  prejudice  to  this  goal,  the  Eurosystem  shall  support  the  general  economic
policies in Europe. So there is a clear hierarchy of objectives. 
The independence of the ECB and national central banks is also enshrined in the Treaties which,
in addition, prohibit the monetary financing of governments. 
This  strong  monetary  framework  has  been  the  sound  foundation  of  monetary  stability.
Nevertheless, the euro area experienced a significant economic and fiscal crisis over the past
decade.
Figuratively speaking, you could say that the euro had an easy childhood but difficult teenage
years. Or, as Martin Wolf recently wrote in his FT column: “Like many people of 20, the European
currency has experienced a traumatic adolescence.”
10
The  underlying  causes  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  were  considerable  macroeconomic
imbalances in euro area member states: too much borrowing, too much unproductive spending,
the loss of price competitiveness, a lack of structural reform. 
However,  the  crisis  was  also  borne  out  of  institutional  weaknesses.  You  could  say  that  the
monetary union has a strong leg and a weak leg. The strong leg from the outset has been the
monetary framework which I have already elaborated. The weak leg is the fiscal and economic
policy framework, the lack of a genuine economic union. 
This  framework,  which  was  set  up  in  the  1990s,  was  neither  able  to  prevent  the  adverse
economic developments in member states nor was it ready to resolve a crisis. When the crisis
occurred,  fiscal  emergency  measures  were  taken  to  prevent  it  from  escalating.  And  the
Eurosystem was forced to act as a “crisis response unit”. Understandably enough, this helped to
stabilise the situation. 
The flipside was that some of the measures – in particular, the sovereign bond purchases – took
the Eurosystem to the outer limits of its mandate. 
While I am convinced that – properly designed – government bond purchases are a legitimate
monetary policy instrument, I have always emphasised the specific problems that they entail in
the euro area, with its peculiarity of a single monetary policy and national fiscal policies. 
In this particular set-up, government bond purchases involve the fundamental risk of mutualising
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
sovereign  liability  risks  through  the  central  banks’  balance  sheets,  blurring  the  lines  between
fiscal and monetary policy in the euro area. On that note, it is good that we have cut back risk
sharing  to  only  a  small  degree  in  the  latest  purchase  programme.  The  central  banks  of  the
Eurosystem have nevertheless become the most important creditors to their governments. This
might ultimately call our independence into question.
Regarding the resolution of the crisis and its underlying causes, a lot has happened in the euro
area in recent years. The countries that were hit the hardest tackled important problems at the
root and have since regained competitiveness.
Much  has  changed  for  the  better  in  institutional  terms  as  well,  albeit  not  enough  so  far.  One
important development is the establishment of a permanent euro rescue facility that can grant
conditional financial aid to member states in the event of a crisis. Another essential achievement
is the creation of a European banking supervision, which is a great leap forward on the path to a
more integrated Europe.
Together with stricter financial regulation, economic adjustment and reforms have without doubt
made  the  euro  area  more  stable.  If  there  were  new  upheavals  in  the  financial  system  or  in
individual member states, we would be considerably better equipped to deal with them today than
we were in 2010.
Yet we have not yet done enough to crisis-proof the euro area once and for all. Certain issues
like  the  lack  of  credibility  of  fiscal  rules  or  the  harmful  sovereign-bank  nexus  still  have  to  be
adequately  addressed.  The  unfinished  business  of  euro  area  reform  entails  risks  for  the
Eurosystem. It could be forced to act repeatedly as a “crisis response unit”. At the end of the day,
it could become more and more difficult for the European Central Bank to focus on its promise of
a stable currency. 
4 Central bank independence in a democracy
Ladies and gentlemen,
From  the  vantage  point  of  politics,  the  central  bank  as  “crisis  response  unit”  has  clear
advantages. First, central banks allegedly have powerful tools and deep pockets. And second,
central  banks  decide  independently  and  can  act  quickly,  which  saves  governments  from
organising parliamentary majorities for unpopular decisions.
However,  if  unelected  technocrats  like  independent  central  bankers  take  such  important
decisions,  the  question  can  be  raised  of  how  to  square  this  with  democratic  principles. And
indeed, if certain conditions were not met, independence would become hard to justify, in my
view.
One condition is that central bankers explain their policies to the public. As Alan Blinder, whom I
just  mentioned,  put  it:  “(…)  public  accountability  is  a  moral  corollary  of  central  bank
independence. In a democratic society, the central bank’s freedom to act implies an obligation to
explain  itself  to  the  public.  Thus  independence  and  accountability  are  symbiotic,  not
conflicting.”
11
 
A second condition that needs to be met in order to make central bank independence compatible
with democracy is a narrow interpretation of the mandate. It’s true what the NGO “Transparency
International” wrote in a report on the ECB: “If independence is one side of the coin, the flipside is
a narrow mandate.”
12
And indeed, if independence is used for purposes other than those given by the mandate, we
shouldn’t be surprised if the central bank is increasingly put under scrutiny. Acting beyond the
mandate would also undermine people’s trust in the central bank.
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Trust  is  not  an  item  you’ll  find  on  a  central  bank’s  balance  sheet,  but  ultimately  it’s  a  central
bank’s most valuable asset. Trust helps to anchor longer-term inflation expectations, which in
turn can help to lower what economists call the “sacrifice ratio”. Increasing trust in central banks
reduces the loss in GDP or employment that has to be accepted to reduce inflation by a certain
amount.
13
Trust, by the way, goes beyond reputation. The reputation of a central bank largely hinges on its
track  record  in  fulfilling  its  mandate.  However,  trust  also  depends  on  individual  factors.  Some
people  tend  to  trust  more  in  public  institutions  than  others.  People  also  have  different
preferences, different attitudes regarding inflation, different personal inflation experiences biasing
their future expectations.
14
Surveys show that knowledge about central bank and monetary policy has a positive impact on
trust in the central bank.
  Effective monetary policy communication relies on people having a
basic grasp of concepts such as inflation and interest rates. Ensuring the public has a basic
knowledge of these issues is therefore important for the success of central banks.
15
The  Bundesbank  has  been  strongly  engaged  in  the  field  of  economic  education  for  many
decades, and we have stepped up our efforts in recent years. Our main aim is to enhance the
public’s knowledge about the role of central banks, and the Bundesbank in particular. For that
purpose,  we  organise  seminars  for  teachers  and  lectures  for  school  classes;  we  publish
teaching aids; and we run a money museum as a place to learn about the world of money and
central banking.
In  a  similar  vein,  increasing  financial  literacy  was  also  a  key  topic  during  the  German  G20
presidency two years ago, and the declared objective – in times of digital finance – was to make
financial  services  accessible  to  people  who  didn’t  have  access  before  (the  buzzword  here  is
“financial inclusion”). In such an environment, financial illiteracy is an important channel through
which financial instabilities could potentially arise.
16
Of course, central banks on their own cannot provide for economic and financial education; we
can only contribute. If the general public is the addressee, easily understandable information is
crucial – most people are not economists. 
There is some evidence that relatively “simple” and unsophisticated entertainment programmes
can  effectively  transport  economic  and  financial  education  messages.  I’ve  heard  of  a  popular
soap  opera  called  “Scandal!”  on  South  African  television,  which  embedded  a  storyline  on
excessive borrowing some years ago and which is considered to have had a positive impact on
the viewers’ financial knowledge.
 And recently, the central bank of Jamaica got a lot of attention
for  tweeting  reggae-inspired  music  videos  with  lyrics  like:  “Low  and  stable  inflation  is  to  the
economy what the bassline is to reggae music”. 
17
Beyond the benefits of price stability the public also needs to understand the limits of monetary
policy. For central banks to deliver price stability on a lasting basis, they are ultimately dependent
on  sustainable  public  finances  and  a  stable  financial  system.  Otherwise,  even  independent
monetary policy risks becoming subject to fiscal or financial dominance, respectively.
Fiscal  dominance  refers  to  a  regime  where  monetary  policy  ensures  the  solvency  of  the
government. As interest rates will rise in the process of normalisation, this danger could come to
the fore in Europe in the years ahead.
Financial dominance refers to the risk that monetary policy becomes increasingly concerned with
adverse short-term developments in the financial system. 
The crisis made it obvious that price stability is not a sufficient condition for financial stability.
Thus,  many  central  banks’  mandates  were  extended  by  at  least  some  aspects  of  preserving
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial stability. However, we know from Tinbergen’s rule that every economic policy objective
requires its own instrument. So it is important to keep the toolboxes separate when tackling the
two  objectives.  Inflation  risks  should  be  addressed  with  monetary  policy  instruments,  and
financial  stability  risks  should  primarily  be  addressed  with  macro-prudential  instruments.  That
said, monetary policymakers are well-advised to take the implications of financial imbalances into
account, since they can pose serious risks to price stability in the long run.
5 Conclusion
18
  
Ladies and gentlemen,
Nelson  Mandela  wrote  in  his  autobiography  “Long  Walk  to  Freedom”:  “I  have  discovered  the
secret that after climbing a great hill, one only finds that there are many more hills to climb.”
Central banks all over the world were forced to climb great hills over the last decade. And there
are more hills on the horizon. But central banks should beware of overburdening.
  We are not
superheroes. Indeed, our powers are limited. Neither can we compensate the adverse effects of
demographic changes nor can we hasten the invention and adaption of new technologies. We
cannot lift long-term growth. And we cannot erase inequality. 
19
Wim Duisenberg, the first President of the ECB, once said: “Don’t ask for monetary policy to
perform  tricks  it  cannot  deliver.”  Too  much  power  undermines  support  for  central  bank
independence. 
Even  fictional  superheroes  have  drawn  criticism  when  their  feats  involved  considerable  side-
effects. In the movie “Captain America: Civil War”, the first film featuring the Black Panther, the
United Nations created the Sokovia Accords in order to regulate the activities of the Avengers.
In  order  to  defend  their  independence,  central  banks  should  interpret  their  mandates  narrowly
and seek the support of the broad public. People’s trust gives us scope to take decisions that are
not always popular in the short run. 
Two  years  ago,  Janet  Yellen,  the  former  Chair  of  the  Fed,  told  a  congressional  hearing
something very important. She said: “Sometimes central banks need to do things that are not
immediately popular for the health of the economy.”
  Indeed, it’s not our job to be everybody’s
darling.  This  gives  us  all  the  more  reason  to  continuously  explain  to  the  people,  in  a
comprehensible way, why our work is nevertheless beneficial for society. 
20
The case for connecting applies even more strongly to our economies and nations in general –
and that’s what brings me here in the first place. The message is eloquently conveyed by the
Black Panther himself. At the end of the movie, when King T’Challa opens up Wakanda to the
rest of the world, he says: “(…) more connects us than separates us. But in times of crisis, the
wise build bridges, while the foolish build barriers. We must find a way to look after one another
as if we were one single tribe.”
I think in times of rising protectionism and unilateralism, we should take these words to heart.
Thank you very much for your attention. I now look forward to answering your questions.
1
2
3
4
P. Dietsch, F. Claveau and C. Fontan (2018), Do Central Banks Serve the People?, Polity, Cambridge; A. Riles
(2018), Financial Citizenship – Experts, Publics & the Politics of Central Banking, Cornell University Press,
Ithaka and London.
S. H. Hanke and N. Krus (2012), World Hyperinflations, Cato Working Paper, No 8.
J. M. Keynes (1924), A Tract on Monetary Reform, Prometheus Books, Amherst, p. 51.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
L. Kganyago, Inequality and monetary policy in South Africa, speech at the Nelson Mandela University, Port
Elizabeth, 1 August 2018.
A. S. Blinder (1987), The Rules-versus-Discretion Debate in the Light of Recent Experience, Weltwirtschaftliches
Archiv, Vol. 123, p. 399–413.
F. E. Kydland and E. C. Prescott (1977), Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 85, No 3, pp. 473–492.
N. G. Mankiw and R. Reis (2017), Friedman’s Presidential Address in the Evolution of Macroeconomic Thought,
NBER Working Paper No 24043.
Deutsche Bundesbank, Lower bound, inflation target and the anchoring of inflation expectations, Monthly Report,
June 2018, pp. 31–50.
A. Alesina and L. H. Summers (1993), Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some
Comparative Evidence, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 25, No 2, pp. 151–162. Recent studies which
focus on other or a wider range of countries including developing or transition countries confirm a negative
relationship  between  central  bank  independence  and  inflation.  See  A.  C.  Garriga  (2016),  Central  Bank
Independence in the World. A New Dataset, International Interactions, No 42, pp. 849–868; I. Iwasaki and A.
Uegaki (2015), Central Bank Independence and Inflation in Transition Economies: A Comparative Meta-Analysis
with Developed and Developing Economies, RRC Working Paper No 55; D. Acemoglu et al. (2008), When Does
Policy Reform Work? The Case of Central Bank Independence, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring,
pp. 351–417.
M. Wolf, The eurozone is doomed to succeed, Financial Times, 16 January 2019, p. 9.
A. S. Blinder (1996), Central Banking in a Democracy, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly,
Vol. 82, p. 12.
Transparency  International  (2017),  Two  sides  of  the  same  coin?  Independence  and Accountability  of  the
European Central Bank, p. 4.
D. Bursian and E. Faia (2018), Trust in the monetary authority, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 98, pp. 66–
79.
U. Malmendier and S. Nagel (2016), Learning from Inflation Experiences, The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Vol. 131, pp. 53–87.
B. Hayo and E. Neuenkirch (2014), The German Public and Its Trust in the ECB: The Role of Knowledge and
Information Search, Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 47, pp. 286–303; S. Mellina and T. Schmidt
(2018),  The  Role  of  Central  Bank  Knowledge  and  Trust  for  the  Public’s  Inflation  Expectations,  Deutsche
Bundesbank Discussion Paper, No 32/2018.
C. M. Buch, Financial Literacy and Financial Stability, Speech prepared for the 5th OECD-GFLEC Global Policy
Research Symposium to Advance Financial Literacy, Paris, 18 May 2018.
G. Berg and B. Zia (2013), Harnessing Emotional Connections to Improve Financial Decisions: Evaluating the
Impact of Financial Education in Mainstream Media, World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper, No 6407.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2015), The importance of macroprudential policy for monetary policy, Monthly Report,
March, pp. 39–71.
O. Issing (2016), Central Banks – from Overburdening to Decline?, SAFE White Paper No 42.
Hearing before the Joint Economic Committee, Congress of the United States, 17 November 2016, Transcript,
p. 13.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
