Juyeol Lee: 68th anniversary of the Bank of Korea
Speech by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the commemorating ceremony of
the Bank of Korea's 68th anniversary, Seoul, 12 June 2018.
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea family!
 Today is the 68th anniversary of the Bank of Korea’s establishment. Taking this opportunity, I
wish  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  to  our  predecessors  who  devoted  themselves  to  the
development  of  the  Bank  of  Korea  and  our  economy,  and  to  the  many  people  who  have
supported and encouraged the Bank. I would like to say in addition how much I appreciate the
efforts of all members of our staff, who are faithfully fulfilling the duties entrusted to them in their
positions.
It is judged that the Korean economy is sustaining its solid growth, as consumption and exports
continue their favorable movements even though construction and facilities investment are going
through adjustments. There are high uncertainties, due to the sluggish employment conditions as
well  as  the  financial  unrest  seen  in  some  emerging  market  countries,  but  going  forward  the
domestic economy is expected to grow at a pace that does not diverge greatly from the path
forecast in April.
However,  there  are  still  several  structural  problems  in  our  economy,  which  are  limiting  the
virtuous cycle between growth, employment, income and consumption. Sluggish employment is
a result not only of the delayed improvements in business conditions in some industries, but of
structural factors such as the dual labor market structure as well. Growth that depends heavily
on  specific  sectors  such  as  capital-  and  technology-intensive  industries  can  result  in  weaker
economic resilience to external shocks. Household debt that grows more rapidly than household
income can limit consumption through increases in borrowers’ debt repayment burdens.
I would like to emphasize once again that, when both the domestic and external economies are
growing, structural reforms have to be carried out swiftly. During the structural reform process
conflicts of interest among economic actors can of course arise. But if we postpone our efforts
to resolve our economy’s structural vulnerabilities, then it is likely that we will face a much more
severe situation in the medium to long term. The government will have to smoothly mediate the
disputes among economic actors that can appear in the process of structural reform, and make
efforts to ensure that any resulting negative effects can be minimized.
Fellow members of the Bank of Korea!
I would like to talk now about some of the things that our Bank of Korea will have to focus on
carrying out from the second half of this year.
As inflationary pressures on the demand side are still not high, while the domestic economy is
expected  to  continue  its  solid  growth,  we  will  need  to  maintain  our  accommodative  monetary
policy  stance.  In  this  process  we  will  however  have  to  consider  the  facts  that  the  financial
imbalances  can  grow,  and,  from  a  longer  term  perspective,  that  we  need  to  increase  our
monetary  policy  operating  capacity  to  respond  to  fluctuations  in  business  cycles.  From  this
standpoint, we will have to carefully judge whether it is necessary to adjust the accommodative
monetary  policy  stance  further,  while  closely  checking  future  economic  growth  and  inflation
trends, changes in the monetary policies of major countries and the consequent financial stability
conditions.
In the second half of this year we will have to consider the inflation target to be applied from next
year. The way in which the inflation target is set, and the method by which it is operated, have
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
direct  effects  on  the  central  bank’s  credibility  and  on  whether  economic  actors’  inflation
expectations are securely anchored. We will have to closely analyze whether there have been
any structural changes in the underlying price flows, and in the relationship between growth and
prices, and properly set the inflation target and the period for re-examining it. We will also have to
look whether there are any areas that need improvement in how we fulfill our responsibilities for
explaining policy.
We  will  need  to  strengthen  our  efforts  aimed  at  enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  our  policy
communication.  When  uncertainties  are  high  the  markets  can  react  sensitively  to  even  small
changes in economic conditions, or even to a single word from the policy authorities. It can thus
be  said  that  a  meticulous  communication  strategy  is  demanded,  to  ensure  that  consistent
communication concerning our policy directions can be achieved.
We will also have to devote special attention to financial stability. Financial and foreign exchange
markets in some emerging markets with weak fundamental conditions have experienced unease
recently.  Given  Korea’s  favorable  external  soundness  It  is  unlikely  that  the  financial  unrest  in
these  countries  will  spread  to  affect  us.  But  if  overseas  risks,  from  the  monetary  policy
normalizations  in  major  countries  and  strengthening  protectionism  for  example,  materialize
simultaneously we will be unable to accurately estimate their effects. We will therefore have to
watch even more carefully any changes in these risks.
We  can  also  not  afford  to  be  negligent  in  our  research  on  and  our  responses  related  to  new
issues in economics. We will need to strengthen our analyses of new forms of risk to financial
stability and the changes in our monetary policy operating conditions that can occur due to digital
innovations  such  as  distributed  ledger  technology  and  Fintech.  And  given  that  considerable
changes in the relations between North Korea and South Korea are expected going forward, it
will be necessary as well to prepare in advance for the new role demanded of our central bank,
on the basis of our research on the North Korean economy carried out so far.
Fellow Bank of Korea staff!
With regard to our internal management, I have said that over the next four years we will put an
emphasis  on  ‘change  and  innovation,’  and  improve  our  systems  and  customs.  To  put  this
promise into practice, we gathered staff members’ opinions, among which of those that could be
immediately reflected have been put into practice after the necessary institutional arrangements.
We  delegated  to  lower  levels  authority  in  internal  management  related  for  example  to  human
resources  affairs,  and  greatly  simplified  our  reporting  procedures.  We  will  have  to  aspire  to
devise measures that would improve the matters now under consideration as well. I would like to
stress  again  that  the  ultimate  purpose  of  these  internal  management  improvements  is  to
heighten our organization’s efficiency and productivity.
In view of the fact that the system can control people’s thinking and behavior, we will have to
push unceasingly ahead with system improvements as well. However, if we want our system
improvements to bear fruit, then our organizational culture and our staff members’ awareness
will also have to change, along with the system. In particular, if the staff members at the senior
level firmly accept these changes, take the initiative and set examples for others, then there will
be tangible results.
We will also have to devote redoubled efforts to managing the risks that can occur in the conduct
of our institution’s operations. If we do not properly manage our IT system, security and legal
risks,  the  Bank  of  Korea’s  external  reputation  can  be  greatly  damaged.  Before  any  adverse
incident occurs there is a tendency for small problems to gradually appear that provide us with
forewarnings. And  if  such  signs  are  sensed,  even  if  they  are  only  trivial,  we  should  not  just
dismiss them but must investigate their causes and respond to them thoroughly.
Fellow members of the Bank of Korea!
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Recently  our  economy  is  continuing  to  grow  at  the  level  of  its  potential  growth  rate  and
maintaining  a  favorable  external  credit  standing,  unlike  some  EMEs  that  are  experiencing
financial  and  economic  unease.  I  think  that  you  have  contributed  substantially  to  this  end  by
fulfilling your duties. But we cannot stop here, and will have to seek change and innovation even
more. Only by doing so can we avoid wavering even when confronted with new challenges, and
contribute to the continual development of our economy.
Today, as we greet the 68th year since our Bank’s establishment, I would like to thank everyone
once again for your hard work, and I wish each of you, together with your families, health and
happiness always.
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
