Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
“From Weakness to Strength: The Journey of the Chilean Financial System and its Next Steps” 
ChileDay – September 10 and 11th, 2019 – London, England 
Mario Marcel 
Governor of the Central Bank of Chile 
The Chilean financial system has changed notably in the past four decades. While in the early 1980s it was at 
the center of one of the worse economic and social crises in history, now it is a major source of strength, 
providing  resilience  to  the  economy  in  the  face  of  external  shocks.  So,  how  did  this  happen? What  is  the 
source of such resilience? What new challenges lie ahead? That is the purpose of this presentation. 
 
In a nutshell, we can argue that the regulatory changes that followed the crisis set a new framework that, far 
from preventing financial development facilitated it in a way consistent with economic development. Some 
key reforms –most notably pension reform—facilitated the emergence of new actors, making the financial 
sector more diverse, deep and forward-looking. 
 
Many  pieces  of evidence  and  tests  in  our  semi-annual  Financial  Stability  Report,  have  demonstrated over 
recent  years that  the Chilean financial sector is currently well equipped to face external shocks, providing 
key  support  to  the  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  by  reducing  the  exposure  of  the  business  and  financial 
sector  to  FX  fluctuations.  Similarly,  the  development  of  long-term  capital  markets  secure  local  currency 
financing to investment projects and to the government itself. 
 
The  relationship  between  the  financial  sector  and  FX  markets  will  indeed  be  an  important  part  of  this 
presentation  as  a  connection  between  financial  and macro stability.  This  is  an important  pillar  for  a  small 
open economy like Chile, where the capital account was opened almost 20 years ago.  This is, at the same 
time,  an  area  where  we  can  make  additional  progress,  and  I  will  share  with  you  some  of  our  immediate 
plans that combine well with the agenda that Minister Larrain has just presented. 
 
 Page 1 of 20 
    Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
 Some 50 years ago, banks where almost the only source of financing for firms and households. The Chilean 
economy  was  closed  to  international  trade  and  capital  flows,  interest  rates  were  regulated,  credit  was 
restricted, and banking activity was largely controlled by the State.  
 
In  the  second  half  of the  1970s,  the  banking  sector was  privatized  and  liberalized.  However,  this  was  not 
accompanied with adequate regulation and supervision; and a relatively small financial system built major 
vulnerabilities. When macro policy missteps and external shocks hit in 1982, the banking sector was not just 
a weak link: it amplified these shocks leading the country into the deepest economic and financial crisis in a 
generation.   
   Financial crises are abrupt, costly and protracted affairs, and the Chilean financial crisis of the early eighties 
was no exception. This crisis is often placed among the top 25 most severe financial crises in modern history. 
Page 2 of 20 
    In 1981, annual output growth went from positive 9% in the first quarter, to 0% in the fourth quarter, and to 
minus 14% in 1982. That same year, unemployment reached a record of 25%, and businesses all over the 
country were seriously hampered, ultimately affecting their solvency. Banking profitability went quickly to 
negative territory and the delinquency rate quadrupled to 15% of the total portfolio, putting several banks 
at risk. 
 Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
Several  factors  contributed  to  the  deterioration  of  the  macroeconomic  environment  in  1982.  External 
interest rates rose, the availability of external credit decreased, and terms of trade worsened in the wake of 
the escalation of oil prices. This put enormous pressure on the Chilean peso—which had been under a fixed 
exchange rate scheme since 1979. This regime broke down dramatically and spread to almost all business 
sectors, given large FX exposures, and heavily leveraged financial conglomerates.  
 
    Page 3 of 20 
All these factors interacted with one another to become an outright banking crisis. Nevertheless, whatever 
the causes of the crisis, unsustainable debt was mostly explained by internal vulnerabilities: inappropriate 
regulation, weak supervision, and lack of attention to excessive credit growth, leveraged on a fixed exchange 
rate scheme. 
 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
  The lessons learned from this crisis highlighted the fact that banking regulation and supervision needed to 
be substantially upgraded. In 1986, the General Banking Law introduced limitations on currency mismatch, 
constraints on related party lending, and restrictions for banks to be paid in kind instead of liquid resources. 
All of these elements were common practice before the 1982 crisis.  
 
Paradoxically, what could be considered harsher regulation did not hamper financial deepening. Instead, it 
fostered  a  systematic  buildup  of  solvency  and  credibility  of  the  banking  system  and  allowed  its  healthy 
development in the ensuing decades. Yet the 1986 Banking Law was hardly the only piece of the financial 
architecture that changed significantly. Notably, the creation of a funded pension system, and subsequent 
capital market reforms, together with capital market openness, dramatically changed the size, composition, 
depth, and strength of the financial sector in Chile.  
 
Page 4 of 20 
  Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
  By funneling household savings into capital markets, Pension Funds were especially important  in the early 
development  of  a  deep  debt  market;  and  their  contribution  to  market-making  benefited  from  a  stable 
macroeconomic environment with controlled inflation, extensive use of the UF (a currency unit indexed to 
inflation), and the restructuring of Central Bank’s debt into longer maturities. A deeper and more liquid debt 
market also facilitated the pricing of debt issued by private companies in local markets. 
 
Over  time,  pension  funds  were  allowed  to  invest  abroad.  This  fostered  profitability  and  diversification  of 
pension funds, prevented distorting prices in the domestic financial sector, and created a two-way street for 
capital flows managed by domestic agents. As foreign assets of pension funds needed to be protected from 
FX risk, a hedging market also developed. This fit well with changes on the macroeconomic side. In the late 
1990s Chile adopted a flexible exchange rate regime and liberalized capital flows.  
 
 Page 5 of 20 
  All of these reforms led to developing the Chilean financial system in a sound way. Currently placing Chile 
near the median of a group of countries in terms of private indebtedness. 
 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
    How does the Chilean financial market currently combine with the exchange rate regime? Under the flexible 
exchange  regime  adopted  in  1999  and  taking  into  account  all  the  reforms  mentioned  above,  it  is  not 
surprising  that  Chile  has  a  relatively volatile  currency.  However,  in terms  of  GDP  growth we  appear  more 
stable than our peers. 
 
 Page 6 of 20 
  Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
 
This is due, in part, to the fact that  households, the government and small businesses are not exposed to 
exchange  rate  risk, either because  they do not  borrow  in  foreign currency or because  they hold a natural 
hedge.  Paradoxically,  given  the  openness  of  the  capital  account  and  free  exchange  rate,  Chile  is  not  a 
dollarized  country  at  all.  Banks  and  regulators,  on  the  other  hand  learned  well  the  lessons  of  the  1980s 
crises and FX exposure is central to risk assessment and prevention.  
   
Larger companies, on the other hand, can draw on the openness of the economy and the prestige of local 
regulations to take advantage of the overseas bond market while avoiding undertaking FX risk.  Corporations 
have  learned  to  operate  in  a  flexible  FX  environment  by  using  both,  natural  and  market-based  FX  risk 
hedging instruments. This, in turn, has also been supported by the development of the derivatives market, 
in which Pension Funds have been key counterparts as well.  
 
 Page 7 of 20 
  Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
  Total external debt in dollars has been stable over the last few years, at around US$120 billion. A substantial 
part of this reflects  the  growing internationalization of the  Chilean corporate  sector.  A large share of that 
total is associated with foreign direct investment (FDI) on local subsidiaries of multinational corporations. To 
the  extent  that  FDI  represents  a  commitment  between  related  companies,  the  enforceability  of  debt 
repayment and the associated financial conditions respond to different factors than in the case of debt with 
other institutions, which mitigates risk in the event of an increase in financing costs. Among firms that report 
to the FMC, two-thirds of external debt is concentrated among companies that use the U.S. dollar as their 
accounting currency, this share has been stable over the last decade. 
 
 
Learning  from  previous  episodes,  the  risks  associated  with  external  debt  remain  low,  given  the 
characteristics of the debt and an appropriate use of hedging by the firms. Among firms that report in pesos, 
the debt is mostly concentrated in those with a limited individual currency mismatch: firms with a mismatch 
 Page 8 of 20 
  of over 10% of their assets hold just 3% of external debt, and represent about 10% of the total number of 
companies that use the Chilean peso as accounting currency. 
 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
  Local  institutional  investors’  participation  in  the  local  sovereign  debt  market,  especially  in  the  longer 
segments of the yield curve, is much higher in Chile than in most emerging economies, at 80 to 90%. Thus, 
the  buy-and-hold  strategy  of  these  investors  reduces  the  volatility  of  both  local  sovereign  rates  and 
domestic funding costs. 
 
By  now,  the  Chilean  financial  sector  is one  of  the  most  developed  in  the  emerging  world.  It  has transited 
from  being  largely  dominated  by  traditional  banking  to  being  composed  by  several  other  market 
participants,  including  Pension  Funds,  General  Fund  Administrators  and  Insurance  Companies;  among 
others. Assets under management of these non-bank investors went from less than 1% of GDP in 1984, to 
  Page 9 of 20 
  65% in 2000, and to almost 100% of GDP in 2018. This development has translated into improved access to 
alternative sources of funding by Chilean firms. Currently, around 85% of total corporate bonds are held by 
institutional investors, thus reliance on banking credit of these corporations has gone from 91% of financial 
debt in 1986 to around 25% in recent years. 
 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
  Financial development has been important not only for firms but also for the country as a whole. A deeper 
and  far-reaching  financial  system  contributes  to  building  financial  and  economic  inclusion,  and  financial 
stability against external shocks. In this respect, the Chilean financial system shows better performance than 
other  Latin  American  and  Emerging  economies,  in  dimensions  like  market  capitalization,  number  of 
branches  per  inhabitant,  use  of  derivatives,  and  participation  in  domestic  credit  to  the  private  sector,  to 
name a few.   
 
Nonetheless,  increased  development  and  complexity  of  financial  markets  also  means  that  risks  may  be 
higher, and that a stronger and more sophisticated regulatory framework is required.   
 
Page 10 of 20 
   Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
 
The  Chilean  financial  crisis  of  the  early  eighties  led  not  only  to  a  radical  bank  regulation  revision,  but  also  to 
learning  valuable  lessons  for  the  future.  A  deeper  and  properly  regulated  financial  system  contributes  to 
financial  stability,  inclusion  and  increased  welfare.  Even  though  significant  progress  has  been  made  in  this 
regard, there are still challenges ahead that must be faced to further strengthen our financial system. 
 
Let me now address some of these regulatory challenges the CBC has been working on. 
 
    Page 11 of 20 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
In order to have a deeper FX market and enhance resilience of the financial sector a number of measures 
are being taken by the Central Bank of Chile (CBC). The internationalization of the Chilean peso can enhance 
financial  stability,  by  alleviating  liquidity  concerns  during  stress  episodes  and  reducing  counterparty  risks, 
among other effects. All of these changes must be accompanied with more robust and developed financial 
infrastructures. Also, the wider cross-border usage of the Chilean peso improves our position as a financial 
center. 
 Regarding concrete measures towards accomplishing these goals, the CBC is reviewing its FX regulation, in 
order to modernize and simplify it. In addition, a larger and more developed FX market should benefit from 
having access to more robust financial market infrastructures. 
 
 Page 12 of 20 
    Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
 In order to do so, the  CBC issued regulation and is implementing a Trade  Repository  for OTC derivatives, 
relying on its current faculties and in coordination with the Financial Market Commission.  
 
Additionally,  the  CBC  is  working  on  an  initiative  that  will  allow  its  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS) 
payment system to settle US dollars large-value interbank transactions. These measures add to the future 
inclusion of the Chilean Peso as the first CLS-eligible currency in South America. This is a priority for the CBC, 
therefore we are working closely with the CLS Bank to materialize this in the next three years. 
 
We believe these policy actions, as well as those announced by the Minister of Finance in order to promote 
Chile  as  a  Regional  Financial  Center,  should  greatly  contribute  to  a  more  resilient  financial  sector,  wider 
cross-border use of the Chilean Peso and a greater participation of non-residents in our FX market. 
 
 
   The Strategic Planning 2018-2022 of the CBC includes a thorough review of its FX regulation.  
 
Current  FX  regulations  require  most  FX  transactions  to  be  executed  through  the  “Formal  Exchange 
Market” —which is comprised by banks and some stockbrokers— and to be reported to the CBC. These 
two elements have remained largely unchanged since the capital account was opened 20 years ago. 
  
Back  then,  re-imposing  capital  controls  could  not  be  ruled  out,  and  that  rationale  underlies  the 
somewhat cumbersome structure of the FX regulation. Currently, while capital controls are still part of 
the regulatory toolbox, re-imposing them could only be considered during an exceptional situation. 
 
Therefore, the CBC has decided to streamline its FX regulations and reduce the burden of compliance to 
the private sector, whenever possible, without affecting the quality of the statistical information or the 
capacity to act in an extreme scenario. 
 
The first part of this process, eliminating some of the existing reporting requirements, is about to be put 
out for public consultation.    
Page 13 of 20 
   Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
    Modernizing FX transactions goes beyond a review of existing reporting requirements and the structure 
of  the  regulation.  It  also  considers  the  review  of  long-standing  policy  definitions.  One  of  those 
definitions is the restrictive regulation in terms of the currency denomination of FX transactions. 
 
The Central Bank’s Law establishes that FX transactions cannot be denominated in CLP unless authorized 
by the Central Bank. This faculty has been used only exceptionally, as it was seen as a tool to prevent the 
circumvention of capital controls. 
 
Consequently, for instance, residents cannot grant CLP denominated credits to non-residents (but they 
can  do  so  in  foreign  currency).  While  this  provision  does  not  prevent  transactions  to  occur,  it  adds 
transaction costs that may be preventing a wider cross-border use of the Chilean Peso.  
 
The  CBC  has  implemented  a  free-floating  exchange  rate  regime,  in  which  the  possibility  of  capital 
controls  is  extremely  exceptional  and  even  if  applied  this  measure  might  not  be  effective  to  prevent 
circumvention.  Therefore  the  CBC  is  considering  the  extension  of  present  transactions  that  are 
authorized to be denominated in Chilean Pesos (bonds issued in Chile by non-residents, and transaction 
of  foreign  securities),  as  well  as  the  related  conditions  to  that  authorization.  Such  as  providing 
information to the CBC.  
 
This change of policy will be put out for public consultation by the end of this year. 
Page 14 of 20 
  Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
 The Central Bank is developing a new  regulatory framework that will allow the  real time  gross settlement 
(RTGS) of interbank payments in U.S. dollars, through the incorporation of this currency in the RTGS system 
managed and operated by the CBC.  
 
The financial system’s large-value payments in national currency are currently settled in the RTGS system, 
where  payments  are  final  and  irrevocable  in  accordance  with  international  practices.  In  contrast,  foreign 
currency  payments  are  settled  through  correspondent  banks,  a  process  that  is  not  exempt  from  credit, 
operational, and liquidity risk. The requirements of the new regulatory framework were defined taking into 
account international experience and risk considerations, after which the draft regulations will be published 
for public consultation within the next weeks.  
 
Dollar  settlement  at  the  CBC  will  improve  the  competitiveness  of  local  infrastructures  and  promote  the 
development  of the  financial  market.  Moreover,  the implementation of  this  initiative  will  align  local  FMIs 
with international standards, which recommend settlement in RTGS systems due to their contribution to the 
risk management of participants, the functioning of the economy, and the preservation of financial stability.  
Page 15 of 20 
   Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
 Another  initiative  that  it  is  currently  under  development  is  the  incorporation  of  the  Chilean  Peso  to  the 
Continuous Linked Settlement System (CLS). This financial market infrastructure is currently the international 
standard for the settlement of cross-currency payments because reduces the risk of settlement, also known 
as Hersttat  Risk, to barely zero. Currently, 18  currencies  are  allowed to settle through CLS.  The CBC along 
with CLS and the banking sector are working to make the CLP the 19th currency of this system.  
 
In addition to acting in accordance with its financial stability mandate and contributing to the development 
of the Chilean financial sector, the promotion of this initiative further support the internationalization of the 
CLP. 
 
 Page 16 of 20 
    Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
The reduction of  settlement  risk of the  FX  transactions through a PvP  settlement  in CLS  is just one of the 
benefits  of  the  system.  Moreover,  CLS  reduce  the  liquidity  needs  of  its  participants  through  the  use  of 
multilateral netting, and enhance confidence, particularly in times of financial stress. 
 
From a more general perspective, a satisfactory CLS due diligence process along with a broad international 
participation  trading  in  the  CLP,  will  be  a  strong  signal  of  the  development  and  competitiveness  of  the 
Chilean financial markets.  
 
 The process for the Chilean peso to become the first South American currency on CLS has started. Last July, 
we  received  the  visit  of  CLS  executives  who  had  conversations  with  market  participants  and  fruitful 
discussions at the CBC. After that visit, CLS and the CBC started the due diligence process. During this phase, 
the actions from the public and private sectors are essential. 
 
 Nevertheless, a successful process should not be over before the end of 2021. 
 
The  CBC  is  willing  to  take  all  the  necessary  measures  to  include  the  CLP  into  CLS,  such  as  extending  the 
opening hours of its RTGS system. 
 
Page 17 of 20 
    Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
  
Related  to  Financial  Markets  Infrastructures,  I  would  like  to  mention  that  last  June  the  CBC  issued  a  new 
regulation  framework  which  will  implement  the  first  Trade  Repository  (TR)  of  the  country.  This  TR,  called 
Integrated System of Derivatives Information (SIID, in Spanish), will be owned and operated by the central and, 
after a transition process, will be in full operation by 2021. 
 
The  SIID  will collect, store  and  disseminate  information  of OTC  derivatives  trades,  following  the  Principles  for 
Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMIs) and international standards for reporting. 
 
This  infrastructure  should  promote  transparency  and  market  conduct,  improve  decision-making  of  market 
participants, and contribute to the supervision processes of the Financial Market Commission. 
 
It is important to note that the Minister of Finance has just announced that a bill to regulate Trade Repositories 
will be sent to Congress. The SIID is perfectly compatible with the existence of private-owned trade repositories. 
 
 Page 18 of 20 
 Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
 
According  to  the  latest  BIS  Triennial  Review  of  foreign  exchange  and  OTC  derivatives,  the  Chilean  Peso 
represents 0.2% of the global FX turnover. We strongly believe that this share should increase in the future. 
 
The  different  developments  that  are  underway  should  contribute  to  financial  stability  and  increase  the  cross-
border  use  of  the  CLP,  as  well  as  the  participation  of  non-residents  in  the  domestic  market.    Therefore, 
authorities  and  market  participants  should  be  prepared  to  be  part  of  a  bigger  and  more  internationally 
integrated FX market. 
    Let me conclude by remarking that this journey for the Chilean financial system, through a deep financial crisis, 
has  led  to  just  new  bank  regulation  but  also  to  valuable  lessons  learnt  for  the  future.  A  deeper  and  properly 
regulated financial system contributes to financial stability, inclusion and increased welfare. 
 
 Page 19 of 20 
 
Preventing stress episodes is a task that requires constant monitoring and early detection of potential sources of 
vulnerabilities and risk. 
 
The  enactment  of  a  new  Banking  General  Act  and  internationalization  of  the  Chilean  peso,  among  other 
measures, open up a new phase for modern regulation. Even though significant progress has been made in this 
regard, there are still challenges ahead that must be faced to further strengthen our financial system. 
 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
    Page 20 of 20 
