    ICCOS CURRENCY CONFERENCE 
 OPENING REMARKS 
 
BY 
 
DR. ERNEST ADDISON 
GOVERNOR, BANK OF GHANA 
  11-14 FEBRUARY, 2019 
LABADI BEACH HOTEL 
ACCRA, GHANA 
 Page	|	1		
 
 
Delegation from Currency Research International (ICCOS), 
Fellow Central Bankers from the Middle East and Africa,  
Distinguished Participants, 
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
 
1.  Good morning and let me say ‘Akwaaba’, which means a warm welcome 
in our local language, to all delegates especially those who are in Accra 
for  the  very  first  time.  Let  me  also  extend  our  appreciation  to  the 
Currency Research International (ICCOS) for selecting Accra as the host 
city for this year’s Middle East & Africa (MEA) Cash Cycle Seminar. 
This  unique  event  brings  together  central  bankers,  commercial  bankers 
and other industry experts to deliberate and share experiences on different 
aspects of currency cash management, distribution and circulation within 
the broader payments systems framework.   
 
2.  Ladies and Gentlemen, this Conference is taking place at a time that the 
Bank of Ghana is embarking on some crucial reforms aimed at ensuring 
financial stability and promoting efficiency in Ghana’s payments system. 
As we all know, efficient and functional currency and payment systems 
are fundamental to the effective functioning of any financial system. And 
this is broadly in line with the Bank of Ghana’s core mandate to achieve 
price stability, contribute to the promotion and maintenance of financial 
stability, and ensure a sound payments system.  
3.  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  Good  business  thrives  in  an  environment  of 
macroeconomic stability. This is why we must nurture a culture that puts 
a premium on keeping inflation low. The macroeconomic framework put 
  Page	|	2		
   together by the Government focuses on stability. Fiscal Monetary Policy 
mix was crafted to bring inflation down and anchor inflation expectation. 
The results of the decisive policy implementation are clear.  Inflation has 
been on a downward trend from 15.4 percent in December 2016 to 9.4 
percent  in  December  2018,  remaining  broadly  anchored  within  the 
medium-term  target  band  of  8±2  percent.  The  disinflation  process  has 
been supported by the relatively tight monetary policy stance throughout 
the period. In addition, other macro indicators are pointing in the right 
direction. Growth momentum has picked up, the trade account remains in 
surplus, and there is also relative stability in the exchange rate, despite 
recent volatilities driven by external developments. 
4.  Banks  are  the  epicentre  of  industry  and  critical  for  the  effective 
transmission of policy to the real economy. The Bank of Ghana therefore 
undertook widespread regulatory reforms to build a strong, safe and sound 
banking sector to ensure effective financial intermediation for economic 
growth. Key among the reforms was the increase in the minimum capital 
requirement  of  banks  to  GH¢400  million  from  GH¢120  million.  The 
recapitalization ended on a solid note with a more consolidated banking 
sector as weaker and under-capitalised banks that posed risks to financial 
stability were removed. This has enhanced the efficiency and profitability 
of the remaining banks and helped restore confidence and resilience in the 
banking sector, with the banks now better positioned to support private 
sector-led growth in the Ghanaian economy.   
5.  For the past two decades, the Bank of Ghana has taken steps to improve 
the payment systems infrastructure, alongside strengthening the regulatory 
 Page	|	3		
    frameworks  to  support  the  expanding  financial  technology  space.  The 
overall objective is to broaden the scope of financial services access and 
deepen  financial  inclusion,  while  taking  advantage  of  the  increasing 
digital revolution in the financial sector. 
6.  In  2018, 
the  Bank  of  Ghana,  working  with  other  stakeholders, 
successfully completed the Mobile Money Interoperability (MMI) project 
which  established  an  integrated  and  interoperable  payments  ecosystem.  
In  this  regard,  all  the  three  (3)  key  national  payment  pillars  in  Ghana, 
namely;  mobile  money,  e-zwich  and  gh-Link  are  now  interoperable  to 
facilitate seamless movement of funds across these systems.  
7.  Globally,  the  rapid  growth  in  technological  advancement  has  transformed 
the payment landscape with far reaching impacts. With this global drive, the 
Bank of Ghana has taken full advantage of recent technological advances to 
promote  a  cash-lite  economy  within  the  context  of  the  current  existing 
digitization policy. These tie in with the Government’s agenda to promote 
social inclusion drive for a more formalized economy through digitization 
and automation of business processes. The core part of the strategy is to first 
develop a National Identification System that will facilitate efficient delivery 
of public and private services, including financial services, mobile banking, 
social safety nets, health insurance, and revenue collection, among others.  
8.  In collaboration with other stakeholders, the Bank of Ghana is working to 
change financial services delivery to support the emerging digital society. 
Accordingly, the Bank has revised the Payment System Act 2003 (Act 662) 
and  the  Electronic  Money  Issuers  and  Agents  Guidelines  (2015)  and 
 Page	|	4		
    consolidated these into a draft Payment Systems and Services Bill, which 
will soon be passed by Parliament. The purpose of consolidating the several 
pieces  of  legislature  is  to  take  advantage  of  technological  changes, 
innovations and provide a broader regulatory environment for competitive 
delivery of innovative payment solutions in the country.  
9.  The improvement in Ghana’s digital payment systems are also supportive of 
online  transactions  aimed  at  financial  inclusion.  Available  data  show 
significant  progress  in  the  deployment  of  electronic  payments  such  as 
mobile money, payment cards, payment apps, direct debit and credit funds 
transfer, instant retail payments and virtual cards as alternatives to cash.  In 
particular,  mobile  money  transactions  have  grown  by  leaps  and  bounds. 
Active mobile money accounts has jumped from in 345,434 in 2010 to over 
13 million subscribers with value of transactions of about GH¢223.2 billion 
in 2018.  
10. Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, in spite of the digital revolution and 
rising use of electronic payments and digital currencies, we continue to 
see cash dominating transactions across several of our countries within the 
Sub-Saharan African region. Undeniably, cash still remains the preferred 
medium  of  payment  by  the  large  informal  sector,  although  trends  are 
gradually shifting towards mobile money in Ghana. Thus, while making 
progress in financial inclusion by accelerating the migration to e-payment 
platforms, we are also mindful of the relevance of cash in our day-to-day 
dealings. This is why we must commit to the on-going currency feature 
enhancements and management of cash in circulation.  
 Page	|	5		
  11. In this regard, the Bank of Ghana will continue to monitor the quality of 
substrates and features of the Ghana Cedi and take appropriate actions to 
make  the  Cedi  an  all-time  secured  currency.  Special  attention  is  being 
devoted to improve the features to make it more resilient to counterfeiting 
threats  and  facilitate  data  collection  for  cash  life  cycle  analysis  of  the 
Banknotes.  The  central  bank  will  also  conduct  sustained  currency 
awareness  campaigns  to  educate  the  public  on  the  proper  handling  of 
banknotes. 
12. Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, this Seminar provides opportunities 
for  participants  to  deliberate  on  currency  management  and  operational 
issues. A cursory glance at the Conference Agenda indicates a very tight 
programme  starting  off  with  a  closed  door  Central  Bank  workshop  on 
substrate  for  Banknote  manufacturing.  This  would  be  followed  by  the 
plenary sessions on topics such as, 
●   Ethical principles in Central Banks, 
●   Crypto Currencies – The Real Threats, Challenges and Future 
Technologies, 
●   Big data and the life cycle of the Banknotes, 
●   The changing role of CITS,  
●   Cash handling and circulation models, and 
●   Efficient co-existence of Cash and Digital Payments 
 13. I  can  also  see  Technology  Exhibition  Areas  set  up  for  leading  currency 
industry suppliers to demonstrate their products and innovations in currency 
production, counting, sorting, authentication, recycling, branch automation, 
tracking & tracing, packaging, etc. The programme is expected to end with a 
Page	|	6		
    tour of the Bank of Ghana's new Cash Centre, which was commissioned in 
2015.  
14. To  conclude,  let  me  once  again  express  my  immense  gratitude  to  the 
organizers and the Secretariat for the hard work and diligence in putting 
this seminar together, not forgetting the various sponsors for their kind 
generosity.  I  hope  that  the  outcome  of  the  seminar  series  will  provide 
cutting-edge policy strategies to strengthen currency management across 
the region. Enjoy your stay in Accra and please indulge in some shopping 
– most of our shops accept cash payments!  
15. On  this  note,  I  declare  the  2019  ICCOS  Currency  Conference  dully 
opened. Thank You. 
 Page	|	7		
