Denis Beau: Financial markets - driving innovation and connectivity
Opening remarks by Mr Denis Beau, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, at the Paris
Financial  Seminar,  co-organised  by  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary Authority  and  Paris  Europlace,
Hong Kong, 16 January 2019.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 I am very pleased to open this seminar jointly organised by Paris Europlace and the Hong Kong
Monetary Authority (HKMA). A new year is usually the time when we regain confidence in the
future and in our collective ability to prepare for it.
 However there are many uncertainties weighing on the global economic outlook.
In Europe, there are still many uncertainties about the outcome of Brexit negotiations and the
vote  over  the  withdrawal  agreement.  Caution  requires  that  we  all  be  prepared  for  a  no-deal
scenario. Public authorities and most importantly market participants have all prepared serious
contingency  plans  to  address  and  master  the  cliff-edge  risks  associated  with  such  a  no-deal
scenario. As  a  result,  we  can  expect  that  those  risks  will  be  appropriately  managed,  without
financial stability implications, should such a scenario occur.
Outside Europe, global trade tensions are also generating additional uncertainties. Protectionism
can  indeed  be  a  temptation,  but  in  my  view  it  should  not  be  an  option.  Let’s  be  clear:  our
economies  are  increasingly  integrated,  and  research  conducted  at  the  Banque  de  France
suggests  that  a  rise  in  protectionism  on  a  large  scale  (i.e.  a  generalised  trade  war  scenario)
would have a negative impact on global growth.
Yet these uncertainties can be turned into opportunities and I would like to emphasise
that.  It  is  worth  noting  that  EU  Member  States  remained  impressively  united  behind  their
negotiator,  Michel  Barnier,  during  the  Brexit  talks.  This  unity  must  now  be  directed  towards
achieving an ambition: completing and strengthening the economic and monetary union.
This  period  of  uncertainties  actually  reminds  us  that  bilateral  and  multilateral
cooperation are quite valuable, as they are a common wealth enhancer, especially when
the issue at stake is financial regulation and financial stability. At the end of 2017, central bankers
and  supervisors  reached  a  very  important  agreement  on  the  Basel  III  post-crisis  regulatory
reforms. This agreement must now be implemented in various jurisdictions to further increase
the  soundness  of  the  banking  system.  Since  the  great  financial  crisis,  other  issues  have
emerged.  Cyber-risks  have  risen  significantly  over  the  last  few  years  and  the  financial  sector
remains a primary target. The surge of crypto-assets is another challenge for regulators given
the risks they pose for consumer protection and anti-money laundering. To address these risks
adequately, the digital and global nature of crypto-assets calls for an international approach.
 Cooperation is all the more necessary as the major financial centres, including Paris and
Hong Kong, are highly interconnected.
I believe that Paris today has all the attributes necessary to become the pre-eminent
financial trading and financing hub for continental Europe.  Some  of  the  world’s  biggest
banks, asset managers and insurers are already preparing for life after Brexit and steering their
European operations away from London to our capital. Paris is already home to four of the eight
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
global  systemically  important  banks  in  the  euro  area,  in  addition  to  being  number  one  in  the
region in insurance and asset management. Recent regulatory initiatives have made Paris even
more dynamic. Capitalising on the reform of Negotiable European Commercial Paper (NEU CP)
in  2016,  a  number  of  very  innovative  projects  have  been  launched:  for  instance,  the  French
telecoms  company  Orange  and  the  fintech  SETL  have  jointly  set  up  a  new  central  securities
depository (CSD) called ID2S for the NEU CP market, using blockchain technology.
Paris is also at the heart of cross-border initiatives, making the European financial market
more  integrated.  The  market  exchange  operator  Euronext  is  continuing  to  expand  its  federal
model and in November 2017 acquired the Irish Stock Exchange. The CSD Euroclear is also
committed  to  fostering  common  infrastructures,  and  is  even  looking  beyond  Europe  with
partnerships in the United States with DTCC or in Asia thanks to Bond Connect.
Building  on  this  comprehensive  financial  ecosystem,  Paris  has  also  been  one  of  the
principal  supporters  of  the  renminbi’s  move  towards  internationalisation.  As  of  today,
Paris is indeed the leading continental European centre for deposits and bond issuances in RMB.
This support was embodied and exemplified as early as 2014 with the signature by the Banque
of  France  of  two  memorandums  of  understanding  with  the  HKMA  and  the  People’s  Bank  of
China.
 Cooperation will also prove invaluable in the face of the uncertainty caused by structural
challenges.
A first structural challenge is the digital revolution. The digital revolution is being fuelled by a
wave of cutting-edge technologies, but also by the surge of new players. This new competition is
being driven by fintech start-ups, but also, more importantly, by tech firms that have started to
expand into the financial sector. Here in Asia, you can testify as to just how rapidly big tech firms
can impact the financial sector. While ensuring a level playing field between competitors, our role
as a central bank and supervisor is to guarantee that the digital revolution eventually delivers on
its promises regarding increased security and efficiency. At the same time, incumbents should
be prepared to adapt. Their business models are being challenged by the unbundling of financial
services and by increasing customer expectations in terms of responsiveness and autonomy.
The answers are not easy and cannot be uniform, but I expect that only the most digitally agile
financial  companies  will  eventually  prove  financially  resilient. Against  this  background,  France
has many assets that can make it a leader in digital innovation in Europe, and the Banque de
France is committed to playing its part in this regard. Through its Fintech Innovation Hub, which
has welcomed over 400 innovative players since 2016, the Banque de France promotes active
and open dialogue with all market stakeholders, with the aim of building streamlined regulation for
digital innovation.
The  Banque  de  France  is  also  committed  to  leveraging  new  technologies  for  its  own  digital
transformation. We are already running an interbank blockchain called “MADRE” to automate the
generation  of  creditor  identifiers.  I  am  convinced  that  by  conducting  their  own  experiments,
central banks and regulators are more capable of designing relevant policies and regulations for
digital finance.
 A second structural challenge is climate change, which is perhaps less tangible than the
digital revolution but certainly no less significant.
The  transition  to  a  low-carbon  economy  requires  shifting  thousands  of  billions  of  dollars  from
carbon  intensive  industries. As  a  result,  beyond  green  bonds,  we  also  have  to  develop  new
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial products to bridge this green finance gap. I am thinking of green securitisation, green
covered bonds, and green loans accessible to individuals, SMEs and start-ups. France is at the
forefront of this challenge. Four out of the world’s top ten green bond book-runners are French
banks.  France  is  among  the  top  three  green  bond  issuers.  This  trend  is  being  supported  by
public action: a law has been introduced requiring investors and listed companies to disclose
their climate-related risks; the French State issued the largest green sovereign bond in 2017.
We  also  believe  that  central  banks  and  supervisors  must  play  their  part  as,  in  the  long  run,
climate stability is one of the main determinants of financial stability, which is their mandate. This
is a shared conviction. At the One Planet Summit in Paris in December 2017, the Banque de
France,  with  the  support  of  other  central  banks  and  supervisors,  launched  the  Network  for
Greening  the  Financial  System  (NGFS),  which  now  comprises  some  30  central  banks,
supervisors  and  international  organisations,  including  four  Asian  members,  and  will  certainly
attract more in the coming years.
 Let me now conclude by quoting Nassim Nicholas Taleb, the famous author of The Black Swan.
He  once  wrote  that  uncertainties  can  be  like  the  wind  which  “extinguishes  a  candle  and
energises fire”, and added the following: “You want to use them, not hide from them. You want to
be the fire and wish for the wind”. My wish is that the ongoing uncertainties will become the wind
that deepens our bilateral and multilateral cooperation. On that hopeful note, I wish you a very
Happy New Year and for the time being an inspiring and fruitful conference. 
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
