Shaktikanta Das: Dimensions of India’s external sector resilience
Speech by Mr Shaktikanta Das, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Bloomberg India
Economic Forum 2019, Mumbai, 19 September 2019.
 The  international  environment  is  clouded  with  very  challenging  conditions.  Global  growth  is
slowing  down  and  central  banks  across  the  world  are  bracing  up  to  counter  it  by  easing
monetary  policy;  but  there  is  no  recession  as  yet.  Trade  wars  have  pushed  world  trade  into
contraction  and  threaten  to  morph  into  tech  and  currency  wars,  with  no  evidence  of  any
significant gains accruing to anyone. Meanwhile, global commodity prices have weakened, with
collateral  benefits  to  net  commodity  importers  and  terms  of  trade  losses  for  commodity
exporters. The developments emanating from drone strikes on Saudi oil facilities are, however,
still playing out. Sporadic flights to safety are driving capital flows out of emerging markets into
advanced  economy  assets;  but 
is  growing
disconcertingly large, posing a potential threat to financial stability.
Strengths and Weaknesses
the  universe  of  negative  yielding  bonds 
2. In this hostile environment, India’s external sector has exhibited resilience and viability. The
current  account  deficit  has  averaged  1.4  per  cent  of  GDP  over  the  last  5  years  and  remains
comfortably  financed  in  spite  of  global  spillovers  imparting  risk-on-risk-off  volatility  to  portfolio
flows. The level of foreign exchange reserves was at US$ 429 billion on September 13, 2019,
sufficient to cover close to 10 months of imports or 21 months of debt of residual maturity up to 1
year. The Indian economy remains a preferred habitat for foreign direct investment (FDI) and is
among  the  top  10  destinations  for  greenfield  projects  (Source:  FDI  Report,  Financial  Times,
2018). Net foreign direct investment at US$ 18.3 billion in April-July 2019 was higher than US$
11.4 billion in the corresponding period of 2018–19.
3. Significant progress has been made in external debt management since the external payment
difficulties encountered in 1990 which triggered wide-ranging structural adjustments and reforms.
The  level  of  external  debt  at  19.7  per  cent  of  GDP  and  the  debt  service  ratio  (principal
repayments and interest payments as a ratio of current earnings) at 6.4 per cent of GDP are
among  the  lowest  in  emerging  market  peers.  This  places  India  among  the  least  externally
indebted  countries  of  the  world,  by  the  World  Bank’s  classification.  In  terms  of  a  broader
measure  of  external  liabilities  –  the  net  international  investment  position  (NIIP)  which  includes
both debt and equity liabilities, net of foreign assets – India’s exposure declined to 15.9 per cent
of  GDP  at  end-March  2019  from  a  peak  level  of  18.3  per  cent  at  end-March  2015.  Foreign
exchange reserves covered 76 per cent of external debt and 94.6 per cent of the NIIP at end-
March 2019, up from 68.2 per cent and 89.3 per cent, respectively, at end-March 2014. Short-
term debt by residual maturity declined to 57 per cent of foreign exchange reserves at end-March
2019 from a peak level of 59 per cent at end-March 2013. Short-term debt by original maturity
constitutes barely 20 per cent of total external debt.
4.  These  healthy  developments  are  underpinned  by  the  innate  strength  of  India’s  underlying
fundamentals. The degree of openness of the economy, measured by the ratio of exports and
imports of goods and services to GDP, has risen from 20 per cent in the first half of the 1990s to
44 per cent in the latest five-year period from 2014–19. The share of India’s merchandise exports
in world exports has gone up from 0.5 per cent in 1990 to 1.7 per cent in 2018.
5. In line with the expanding share of services in domestic output, India’s services exports have
grown rapidly over the past two decades. In fact, India’s services exports have shown a higher
degree of resilience to global shocks than merchandise exports. At US$ 81.9 billion, net services
exports financed 45 per cent of India’s trade deficit in 2018–19. In the area of traded services,
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
India  remains  a  world  leader  in  software  exports  and  information  technology  (IT)  enabled
services, accounting for around 12 per cent of world software exports. India’s IT sector, which
earned  US$  78  billion  through  net  exports  in  2018–19,  is  leapfrogging  into  new  technologies
including artificial intelligence, machine learning and robotics. The Indian diaspora is among the
largest  in  the  world  and  reflecting  this,  India  currently  receives  the  highest  amount  inward
remittances  in  the  world  from  Indians  working  abroad.  Alongside,  accretions  to  non-resident
deposits have provided stable and reliable support to the balance of payments over the years.
Financial openness, measured by the ratio of gross capital inflows and outflows to GDP, has
increased three-fold from 15 per cent in the first half of the 1990s to 45 per cent during 2014–19.
6.  Notwithstanding  these  achievements,  there  are  several  areas  of  concern  as  well  which
occupy centre-stage in the conduct of external sector management. First, merchandise exports
have  lost  momentum  under  the  weight  of  the  slump  in  world  trade.  In  spite  of  export  volume
growth  averaging  4.2  per  cent  during  2013–18  (UNCTAD,  2019),  India’s  export  growth  in  US
dollar terms has weakened – as in a host of emerging and advanced economies – to 2.2 per
cent over the same period, as falling unit value realisations have taken their toll. The slowdown in
global demand has affected our exports of petroleum products as well – they constitute 14 per
cent  of  total  merchandise  exports.  Second,  the  deceleration  in  domestic  demand  has  pulled
imports, especially non-oil non-gold imports, into contraction and this has reduced the inflow of
intermediates, capital goods and technology that is vital for modernising our infrastructure and
industry.  Third,  portfolio  flows,  which  on  average  account  for  about  23  per  cent  of  external
financing in a normal year, have turned highly volatile, with net outflows of US$ 0.6 billion in 2018–
19. During 2019–20 so far (up to September 13), portfolio equity outflows were of the order of
US$ 1.4 billion but lower than US$ 2.9 billion in the corresponding period a year ago. Net inflows
into the debt market of US$ 4.1 billion have, however, provided relief. Moreover, these portfolio
capital movements have turned out to be conduits of global spillovers, impacting domestic equity,
debt  and  forex  markets,  and  asset  prices.  Nonetheless,  the  underlying  resilience  of  India’s
external sector, anchored by the positive features I set out earlier, have cushioned these shocks
and insulated the domestic economy.
Managing the External Sector
7.  Against  this  backdrop,  I  would  like  to  turn  to  several  recent  initiatives  undertaken  by  the
Reserve Bank of India and the Government of India to fortify India’s external position and improve
the capacity of the economy to deal with the headwinds that confront us in these testing times.
Exports
8.  Exports  hold  the  key  to  a  sustainable  balance  of  payments  position.  In  the  final  analysis,
liabilities  in  the  form  of  debt  and  even  equities  cannot  entirely  substitute  for  foreign  exchange
earnings from exports of goods and services that create import purchasing power and liability
servicing  capacity.  Over  the  years,  the  policy  endeavour  has  been  to  secure  a  wide
diversification in India’s export profile in terms of both products and destinations. In particular,
product diversification has enabled India to broaden its export basket relative to BRICS peers and
reduce its vulnerability to trade shocks. Apart from diversification, India is now exporting sunrise
products  like  electronics,  chemicals  and  drugs  and  pharmaceuticals  for  which  demand  is
expanding  at  the  global  level.  In  the  smart  phone  segment  of  electronic  goods,  India  has
transformed itself from being a net importer to an exporter with the impetus from the phased
manufacturing programme.
9. Looking ahead, several initiatives have been put in place and others are being launched on an
ongoing basis to enable export industries to regain productivity and cutting edge competitiveness.
They include upgradation of export facilities, integration of Indian farmers and their products with
global  value  chains,  and  trade  facilitation  measures.  More  recently,  efforts  are  going  into
reimbursement of taxes and duties, including electronic refund of input tax credits in GST. An
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
action plan for 12 ‘champion’ services sectors, including IT, tourism and hospitality, and medical
services has been developed since February 2018. The Reserve Bank and the Government are
actively engaged in the promotion of e-commerce platforms that will boost the exports of both
merchandise and services. All these steps seek to create a more conducive climate for exports.
Capital Flows
10.  With  regard  to  capital  flows,  India  has  adopted  an  approach  marked  by  progressive
liberalisation  but  calibrated  to  the  realities  of  the  domestic  situation,  including  the  evolution  of
financial  markets.  A  diverse  range  of  instruments  for  managing  exchange  rate  risk  for  an
expanding  investor  base  has  come  into  play.  India’s  hierarchical  policy  approach  –  preferring
equity flows over debt flows, and preferring FDI flows over portfolio flows within equity flows and
long-term  debt  flows  over  short-term  flows  within  total  debt  flows  –  has  influenced  the
composition of capital flows.
11. Turning to equity flows, FDI policy has been progressively liberalised across various sectors
in  recent  years  to  make  India  an  attractive  investment  destination.  Sectors  that  have  been
opened up in recent years include defence, construction development, trading, pharmaceuticals,
power  exchanges,  insurance,  pensions,  financial  services,  asset  reconstruction,  broadcasting
and civil aviation. 100 per cent FDI has also been allowed in insurance intermediaries. In August
2019, FDI norms in single-brand retail trade have been further liberalised. FDI up to 100 per cent
has been permitted under the automatic route in contract manufacturing and coal mining.
12. With regard to foreign portfolio investment (FPI), several measures have been undertaken to
create an investor-friendly regime and to put in place a more predictable policy environment. FPI
limits are now being revised on a half yearly basis under the medium-term framework. FPI has
1
been  allowed  in  municipal  bonds  within  the  limits  set  for  State  Development  Loans  (SDLs).
Greater operational flexibility has been granted to FPIs under a Voluntary Retention Route (VRR)
which facilitates investment in G-secs, SDLs, treasury bills and corporate bonds while allowing
investors to dynamically manage their currency and interest rate risks. The initial response to the
VRR scheme has been encouraging. The Union Budget 2019–20 proposed to ease KYC norms
for FPIs and also merge the NRI portfolio route with the FPI route for seamless investment in
stock markets. Outward direct and portfolio investment have also been progressively liberalised
to give Indian entities a global scan and presence.
13.  External  borrowing  norms  have  also  been  simplified  under  two  tracks:  foreign  currency
denominated  ECBs;  and  rupee  denominated  ECBs.  The  list  of  eligible  borrowers  has  been
expanded to include all entities eligible to receive FDI, registered entities engaged in microfinance
activities,  registered  societies/trusts/cooperatives  and  non-government  organisations.  A  rule-
based dynamic limit for outstanding stock of ECBs at 6.5 per cent of GDP is in place. Rupee
denominated bonds or Masala bonds under the ECB route offer an opportunity to domestic firms
to borrow from international markets without the need for hedging exchange rate risk. ECBs up to
US$  750  million  or  equivalent  per  financial  year  are  permitted  under  the  automatic  route.
Recently, end-use restrictions relating to external commercial borrowings have also been relaxed
for specific eligible borrowers for their working capital requirements, general corporate purposes
and repayment of rupee loans. The mandatory hedging requirement had earlier been reduced
from 100 per cent to 70 per cent for ECBs with minimum average maturity period between 3 and
5 years in the infrastructure space. Net disbursement of ECBs rose to US$ 7.7 billion in April-July
2019, as against net repayments of US$ 0.8 billion in the corresponding period of 2018–19.
Exchange Rate
14. Before concluding, it is only fair to say a few words about the exchange rate of the rupee.
Over  the  last  couple  of  years,  the  exchange  rate  has  seen  large  two-way  movements  with
considerable volatility imparted mainly by global spillovers. During 2019–20 so far, the rupee has
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
traded in a narrow range, with modest appreciation in Q1 giving way to some depreciation in
August and the first half of September, accentuated by drone attacks on Saudi oil facilities on
September 14, 2019. In its External Sector Report of July 2019, the International Monetary Fund
(IMF)  has  employed  a  suite  of  models  to  assess  the  alignment  of  currencies  with  their
fundamentals.  For  the  rupee,  the  IMF  estimates  the  REER  gap  to  be  zero,  implying  that  the
currency is fairly valued and broadly in line with fundamentals. India’s exchange rate regime is
flexible and market-driven, with the exchange rate being determined by the forces of demand and
supply.  The  RBI  has  no  target  or  band  for  the  level  of  the  exchange  rate.  Interventions  are
intended to manage undue volatility. This is reflected in the two-sided interventions conducted
during the past two years – net purchases in 2017–18, followed by net sales in 2018–19. In fact,
it is in recognition of this flexibility that the US Department of the Treasury has removed India
from its watch list relating to currency manipulation.
Conclusion
15. Overall, the outlook for India’s external sector is one of cautious optimism, albeit with some
downside risks accentuated at this juncture. Among them, deepening of the global slowdown and
escalation  of  trade  and  geopolitical  tensions  appear  to  be  the  most  significant.  Volatile
international  crude  prices  also  continue  to  pose  potential  risks  to  the  viability  of  the  current
account  balance  through  trade  and  remittances  channels.  Yet,  there  are  underlying  strengths
that can be built upon to buffer the external sector from these risks. The search for new export
markets and new niches must go on so as to reap the benefits of changing dynamics of global
value chains. Indian IT companies need to accelerate market diversification and invest in new
skills  and  technologies  to  hone  their  comparative  advantage.  Remittances  and  non-resident
deposits are likely to remain shock-absorbers over the medium term and need to be assiduously
cultivated, including by ease of remitting/depositing and reducing transaction costs.
16. Ultimately, the strength of the external sector derives from domestic macro-fundamentals.
Investors and markets need to be credibly assured of our ability to maintain macroeconomic and
financial  stability  through  continued  focus  on  these  areas.  At  the  same  time,  we  need  to
persevere with structural reforms in various sectors of the economy to unlock productivity and
competitiveness gains. The overarching objective should be to keep the current account deficit
within  sustainable  limits  and  financed  by  a  prudent  mix  of  debt  and  equity  flows. As  I  stated
earlier,  the  global  environment  is  challenging,  but  it  offers  opportunities  as  well.  By  the  IMF’s
assessment, India will account for a sixth of global growth in 2020. Trade wars are presenting
new business relocation avenues that seem to be favourable to India from the point of view of the
economies  of  scale  and  scope.  Indian  entrepreneurship,  the  rupee  and  our  people  are
progressively  but  inexorably  internationalising.  Since  2018,  India’s  working  age  population  has
grown larger than the dependent population, and this demographic advantage is expected to last
till 2055. In this milieu, prudent external sector management with a close and continuous vigil on
areas  of  external  vulnerability  assumes  critical  importance  and  will  continue  to  receive  RBI’s
close attention.
Thank you.
1
 The limits for FPI investment in Central Government securities (G-secs), State Development Loans (SDLs) and
corporate bonds are fixed currently at 6 per cent, 2 per cent and 9 per cent of respective outstanding stocks of
securities for FY 2019–20.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
