Inflation Dynamics: Upside Down 
Down Under? 
Panel remarks delivered to Bank for International Settlements forum 
at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, Manila 
On 20 August 2019 
By Christian Hawkesby, Assistant Governor and General Manager of 
Economics, Financial Markets, and Banking 
Prepared with Cameron Haworth 
2 The Terrace, PO Box 2498, Wellington 6140, New Zealand 
Telephone 64 4 472 2029 Online at www.rbnz.govt.nz  
2 
Introduction 
Tēnā koutou katoa, 
Thank you for the opportunity to join the panel. 
Thirty years after the Reserve Bank of New Zealand first adopted an inflation targeting regime 
to deal with inflation that was too high, central banks now have a different problem: inflation 
being too low.   
One of the key challenges of our time is for central banks, academics and financial markets to 
comprehend this new environment  and deliver the appropriate policy response.  It is testing 
our understanding of what is normal and welcome for policymakers when it comes to inflation, 
interest rates, wage growth, and fiscal spending. 
So I would firstly like to thank the organisers and the presenters at this conference for their 
efforts as we explore “Inflation dynamics in Asia and the Pacific”. 
In these panel remarks, I will talk about the New Zealand experience, specifically: 
 Our assessment of what has caused this period of low inflation;
 What  we  have  learnt  as  policymakers  about  inflation  dynamics,  and  how  much  that
has changed our approach to setting monetary policy; and
 How we are applying all this to our monetary policy outlook for 2019.
While some past long-standing empirical relationships have been turned upside down, others 
have not.   
In particular, our assessment is that monetary policy is still effective in influencing inflation in 
New Zealand. This motivates our continuing determination to set policy to achieve our dual 
mandate of price stability and maximum sustainable employment. 
Low inflation has been a common challenge globally 
Inflation has been low around the world since the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), consistently 
undershooting forecasts and often undershooting inflation targets.  While headline inflation 
has briefly reached 2 percent in some inflation-targeting countries, in many places it has 
been a fleeting experience, as in New Zealand (figure 1).  
It is no wonder that the question of why inflation has been so low is one of the more-pressing 
areas of research in contemporary macroeconomics worldwide. 
3 
Figure 1: Annual inflation in New Zealand 
Source: Stats NZ, Reserve Bank of New Zealand estimates. 
Note: In the December quarter 2010, GST (a sales tax) was increased by 2 percentage 
points. 
The drivers of low inflation  
There are a number of usual suspects cited for what is causing low inflation.  
Many of them are slow-burning structural changes taking place throughout the world, some of 
which have been covered in depth at this conference: 
 Globalisation: Global supply chain integration has lowered the costs of manufactured
goods.1
 Technological  changes:  New  technologies  and  low-cost  software  services  are
continually driving down prices for these goods and services.2
 Demographics:  Populations  are  ageing  in  many  countries,  increasing  savings  and
decreasing inflationary pressures.3
 Labour market dynamics: Labour markets and work practices are evolving around the
world, creating more capacity and less wage pressure than in the past.4
These are deep and fundamental issues that deserve further research to truly understand their 
contribution to low inflation, and the policy implications for central bankers. 
However, while these types of structural factors are likely to explain part of the reason why 
inflation has been low, they cannot explain the whole story.   
1 Auer, Borio, and Filardo (2017). 
2 Spencer (2017). 
3 Liu and Westelius(2016). 
4 Duca (2018); Bracha and Burke (2017). 
4 
This is because many of these issues are long-term developments that have been playing out 
over decades.  So they struggle to explain the relatively abrupt weakness in inflation since the 
GFC or during the period of 2012 to 2016 when inflation was particularly low in New Zealand.  
This suggests that there have also been more short-to-medium-term cyclical factors keeping 
inflation low. 
Our analysis of the New Zealand business cycle highlighted a number of global factors that 
kept inflation lower than expected through this post GFC period, including:5 
 Global  growth:  Underlying  demand  in  advanced  economies  has  been  weaker  than
expected following the GFC, resulting in excess spare capacity and less inflationary
pressure.
 NZ dollar: The extent of monetary stimulus from foreign central banks required to offset
this economic weakness  put upward pressure on the New Zealand dollar (figure 2),
resulting in weaker tradables inflation. (More broadly, this factor raised questions about
the ability of small open economies to operate independent monetary policy during the
low-inflation period.)
 Commodity  prices:    Global  commodity  prices  were  weak  during  this  time  (figure  2),
with both weak import commodity prices (especially oil prices) weighing on tradables
inflation, and periods of weak export commodity prices (especially dairy) weighing on
domestic incomes.
Figure 2: US dollar and commodity price weakness 
Source: Bloomberg. 
Some factors were unique to New Zealand. The rebuild of our second-largest city following a 
major  earthquake  in  2011,  and  high  inward  migration,  were  both  less  inflationary  than  we 
expected.  These  were  material  factors  that  contributed  alongside  the  global  issues  facing 
many other countries in the Asia Pacific region. 
Consistent with our dual mandate, our research agenda has also placed a particular focus on 
understanding the labour market.  This work is ongoing, but has already provided some further 
insights. For example, we have found that large-firm bargaining power is not responsible for 
low  wage  inflation  in  New  Zealand.6  However,  a  fall  in  job-to-job  flows  may  provide  one 
5 Williams (2017). 
6 Ball (forthcoming). 
5 
explanation for weaker inflationary pressure, as fewer employees are switching employers for 
pay-rises.7 
Policy implications of changing inflation dynamics 
So if those structural and cyclical stories capture our understanding of why inflation has been 
so low, what changes have we made as policy makers in our approach to setting monetary 
policy? 
I would like to talk about two changes to inflation dynamics that we have incorporated into our 
approach over recent years, and one area where our assessment is that inflation dynamics 
have not changed – the effectiveness of monetary policy.  
The neutral interest rate  
The first change is that we have lowered our estimate of the neutral interest rate. 
The  neutral  rate  is  the  theoretical  rate  of  interest  that  is  neither  expansionary  nor 
contractionary,  supporting full  employment  with  inflationary  pressures  balanced  at  target.  It 
helps us gauge whether our monetary policy stance is boosting or weighing on the economy. 
The  fall  in  the  neutral  rate  reflects  many  of  the  structural  changes  touched  on  earlier.  We 
publish a suite of indicators for the neutral interest rate in our Monetary Policy Statements that 
capture  the  range  of  different  estimation  approaches.8  Our  current  estimate  of  the  neutral 
Official Cash Rate is a wide range centred on 3.25 percent, down from around 5 percent before 
the GFC (figure 3). 
Figure 3: Neutral interest rate estimates 
Source: Reserve Bank of New Zealand estimates. See Richardson and Williams (2015) for 
discussion of the various estimation approaches. 
Note: Data availability means that the full suite of indicators cannot be provided in the latest 
quarter.  
7 Ball, Groshenny, Karagedikli, Ozbilgin, and Robinson (forthcoming). 
8 Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2019). 
 6 
  
We have treated this gradual movement lower in neutral interest rates as largely mechanical 
in our modelling of the economy, rather than a significant policy choice or policy judgement at 
any one particular meeting. However, a lower neutral rate does have implications for the level 
of stimulus provided in the economy.9   
 
All else equal, a lower neutral rate implies that we need to set our Official Cash Rate lower to 
deliver the same amount of monetary stimulus to the economy.  
 
Adjustments to our inflation forecast assumptions 
 
The  second  change  that  we  have  made  is  to  our  assumptions  for  inflation  expectations, 
making them more influenced by past inflation.   
 
Domestically-generated non-tradables inflation is typically driven by rising capacity pressure 
(when unemployment is low, and actual output is greater than its long-run potential) and by 
inflation  expectations.    For  New  Zealand,  we  have  found  that  past  inflation,  rather  than 
surveyed  expectations,  has  been  a  better  forecaster  of  inflation  both  before  and  after  the 
GFC.10 In effect, this has meant that the global factors suppressing imported inflation have 
also spilled over into lower domestically-generated inflation. 
 
Based on this, we have in recent years assumed firms and households put greater weight on 
past  inflation  outcomes.  After  we  consistently  overestimated  domestic  inflationary  pressure 
through 2012 to 2015, this change in our approach has generated a more reliable gauge on 
future inflation (figure 4). 
Figure 4: RBNZ forecasts of annual non-tradables inflation  
 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, Reserve Bank of New Zealand estimates. 
 
Rather  than  undermining  the  importance  of  keeping  inflation  expectations  anchored,  this 
highlights  the  importance  of  getting  inflation  close  to  target  and  avoiding  a  long-lasting 
undershoot, as was experienced in Japan and Europe. 
                                                 
9 McDermott (2017). 
10Karagedikli and McDermott (2018); McDonald (2017). 
   7 
  
All  else  equal,  this  finding  suggests  a  more  active  and  decisive  approach  is  needed  from 
monetary  policy, to  ensure that  actual  inflation  and therefore  inflation  expectations  are  well 
anchored at target.  
 
 
Effectiveness of monetary policy 
 
As  well  as  identifying  where  inflation  dynamics  have  changed,  it  is  equally  important  to  be 
clear  where  we  have  made  a  conscious  judgement  that  long-standing  relationships  remain 
intact.   
 
One such area is the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
 
Many  commentators  have  questioned  whether  monetary  policy  still  works  in  the  current 
environment.11 Some cite the low level of interest rates globally as a sign of ineffectiveness. 
Others highlight the relationship between economic activity and inflation outcomes (the Phillips 
Curve)  being  weaker  than  in  the  past,  suggesting  this  points  to  a  fundamental  change  in 
dynamics (figure 5). 
Figure 5: Apparent flattening of the NZ Phillips Curve: 1996–2019 
  
 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, Reserve Bank of New Zealand estimates. 
 
Some  of  these  arguments  have  an  element  of  intuitive  appeal  –  in  particular, the  idea  that 
households  and  businesses  may  have  reached  debt  constraints,  limiting  the  historically 
important debt channel of monetary policy transmission.   
 
Testing empirically whether the effectiveness of monetary policy has changed is no easy task.  
It requires well-measured economic data, a sufficiently long sample that can be tested for a 
change in the relationship, and a sophisticated approach to hold all other influencing factors 
constant to extract the unique impact of monetary policy.   
 
We  have  recently  published  research  that  tackles  this  question  in  the  most  robust  way  we 
believe  we  can,  using  two  Vector  Autoregression  (VAR) models  and  a Dynamic  Stochastic 
                                                
11 Borio and Hoffmann (2017). 
   8 
 General Equilibrium (DSGE) model, each using data from 1993 with evolving estimates as the 
sample size expands through time.12    
 
These models both estimate how a change in short-term interest rates affects future inflation.  
At face value, two approaches find that the relationship is unchanged; the other actually finds 
that monetary policy has become even more effective (figure 6). As all these estimates come 
with wide error bands, the safest conclusion is that we have found no evidence of any change 
in the effectiveness of monetary policy in New Zealand in the past 25 years.  
 
Figure 6: Peak impact of a 25 basis point fall in the 90-day rate on annual CPI inflation 
  
 
 
This  finding  also  aligns  with  similar  research  from  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  on  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy in Australia.13 
 
Indeed, it fits with a number of other pieces of the puzzle. 
 
First,  it  fits  with  research  we  published  earlier  this  year  on  the  flattening  in  the  observable 
Phillips  Curve  –  that  is,  how  inflation  appears  to  have  become  less  responsive  to  falling 
unemployment and rising capacity pressure.  
 
Our research shows this to be driven by an increase in the volatility of business cycle surprises 
on the supply-side, rather than the demand-side.14 This reinforces the idea that supply-side 
shocks have been more responsible for low inflation than in the past, masking the underlying 
and continuing positive relationship between demand-led activity and inflation.  
 
Second, it fits intuitively that monetary policy should still be effective to some extent.  Even if 
debt constraints in certain sectors end up restraining parts of the transmission from interest 
rates to activity and inflation, the beauty of monetary policy is that it works through multiple 
channels (Figure 7).   
                                                
12 Culling, Jacob, Richardson, Truong, and  Vehbi (2019). 
13 Kent (2015); Kent (2019). 
14 Jacob and van Florenstein Mulder (2019). 
   9 
 Figure 7: Monetary Policy Transmission15  
  
Source: Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Monetary Policy Handbook. 
 
Even  with  the  same  debt  levels,  lower  interest  rates  reduce  servicing  costs  and  free  up 
cashflow.  Lower  interest  rates  will  also  be  associated  with  higher  asset  prices,  creating  a 
wealth effect through to consumption.16 Furthermore, many of the other channels, such as the 
exchange rate channel, will still work regardless of debt levels.   
 
Finally, it fits with recent experience that monetary policy does still have bite even in this low 
interest rate world.   
 
In New Zealand, we lifted the Official Cash Rate by 100 basis points over the course of the 
first half of 2014 to head off an expected increase in inflationary pressure.  When this did not 
arrive  as  expected,  the  tightening  in  monetary  policy  ended  up  being  one  factor  that 
contributed to the slowing in the economy into 2015.  Internationally, we have also seen the 
US Federal Reserve tighten monetary policy through to 2018, and this is one factor that has 
contributed to the moderation in US growth and inflationary pressure into 2019.  These are 
ongoing examples of monetary policy continuing to play a key role in inflation dynamics.  
 
So if we think that inflation dynamics are changing and that monetary policy is still an effective 
tool, how are we applying that in New Zealand’s current economic environment?  
                                                
15 More on the transmission mechanism and other topics can be found in the Monetary Policy Handbook, 
available at https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/about-monetary-policy/monetary-policy-
handbook. 
16 Wong, (2017). 
   10 
 Our August 2019 Monetary Policy Statement 
 
As  our  Monetary  Policy  Committee  met  earlier  this  month,  our  starting  point  was  a  New 
Zealand  economy  where  the  labour  market  was  operating  near  maximum  sustainable 
employment, but annual core inflation remained persistently below the 2 percent mid-point of 
our target range. 
 
We discussed the slowdown in global growth and global risks that lay ahead, and how this 
might affect New Zealand. We also addressed the loss of momentum in the domestic economy 
since  mid-2018,  through  both  tempered  household  spending  and  restrained  business 
investment. As part of the assessment, our discussion also touched on the decline that had 
occurred in both survey measures of inflation expectations and market-based measures, such 
as nominal and inflation linked bonds in global markets (figure 8).  
Figure 8. Global government bond yields in decline 
 Source: Bloomberg. 
 
We also discussed our secondary considerations, including having regard to the implications 
of any decision for financial stability, and seeking to avoid unnecessary instability in output, 
interest rates or the exchange rate.  
 
The Committee reached a consensus that, relative to the May Monetary Policy Statement, a 
lower path for the Official Cash Rate (OCR) over the projection period was appropriate.    
 
A key part of this judgement was a view that changes in the stance of monetary policy remain 
just as effective to influence growth and inflation in periods of low interest rates as they did in 
the period before the GFC with higher interest rates.  In particular, changes in the OCR were 
still translating through to movement in the interest rates for households and businesses, and 
eventually into economic activity and inflation. 
 
With the OCR at 1.50 percent before the decision, the Committee noted the limited space still 
available to use our conventional tool.  While not our core projection, as a contingency the 
Bank is undertaking further preparatory work on unconventional monetary policy tools.17 No 
                                                
17 The Bank’s published work on unconventional tools to date can be found in Drought, Perry and 
Richardson (2018). 
   11 
 future options have been ruled out, with foreign central banks having used a variety of tools, 
including  negative  interest  rates,  forward  guidance,  foreign  exchange  intervention,  and  a 
range of government and non-government asset purchase programmes.   
 
We debated the relative benefits of reducing the OCR by 25 basis points and communicating 
an easing bias versus reducing the OCR by 50 basis points now.   
 
A key part of the final consensus decision to cut the OCR by 50 basis points to 1.0 percent 
was that the larger initial monetary stimulus would best ensure the Committee continues to 
meet its inflation and employment objectives.  In particular, it would demonstrate our ongoing 
commitment  to  ensure  inflation  increases  to  the  mid-point  of  the  target.  This  commitment 
would support a lift in inflation expectations and thus an eventual impact on actual inflation. 
 
On balance, we judged that it would be better to do too much too early, than do too little too 
late.  The  alternative  approach  risked  inflation  remaining  stubbornly  below  target,  with  little 
room to lift inflation expectations later with conventional tools in the face of a downside shock.  
By contrast, a more decisive action now gave inflation the best chance to lift earlier, reducing 
the  probability  that  unconventional  tools  would  be  needed  in  the  response  to  any  future 
adverse shock. 
 
Conclusion   
 
I  hope  that  sharing  our  experience  in  New  Zealand  has  helped  advance  the  discussion  of 
inflation dynamics in the Asia Pacific region, and the role of central banks in this evolving story. 
 
Thirty years ago the Reserve Bank adopted an inflation targeting regime to deal with inflation 
that  was  too  high,  and  we  spent  the  next  twenty  years  largely focused on  the challenge  of 
ensuring inflation remained down at its target.    
 
In more recent times, it feels like everything that central banks learnt and practised in those 
early years has been flipped upside down:   
the challenge now is to lift inflation, not bring it down;  
 
interest rates in several countries are negative, not positive;  
fiscal stimulus can be welcomed as supporting our monetary policy goals, not criticised 
as conflicting;  
       higher wage growth can be greeted as a natural consequence of stimulatory monetary 
 policy, rather than the spectre of a wage-price spiral; and  
 
rising  inflation  expectations  can  be  seen  as  a  sign  of  success,  not  an  indicator  of 
failure.  
 
While some of these elements of inflation targeting feel like they have  been flipped around, 
we believe that some core elements of inflation dynamics have remained just the same.    
 
In particular, our assessment is that monetary policy is still effective in influencing inflation in 
New  Zealand,  through  a  number  of  channels.  This  is  one  of  the  factors  that  motivates  our 
continuing determination to set policy, whether with conventional tools or unconventional tools, 
to achieve our dual mandate of price stability and maximum sustainable employment. 
 
Kia ora tātou. Thank you. 
   12 
 References 
 
Auer, R., C. Borio and A. Filardo (2017), ‘The globalisation of inflation: the growing importance 
of global value chains’, Globalisation and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper, No. 300. 
 
Ball, C. (forthcoming), ‘Employer concentration and income growth in New Zealand’. 
 
Ball, C., N. Groshenny, Ö. Karagedikli, M. Ozbilgin and F. Robinson (forthcoming), ‘Low wage 
growth and job-to-job transitions: evidence from the administrative data in New Zealand. 
 
Borio, C. and B. Hoffmann (2017), ‘Is monetary policy less effective when interest rates are 
persistently low?’, BIS Working Paper, No. 628. 
 
Bracha, A. and M. A. Burke (2017), ‘Wage inflation and informal work’, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Boston: Current Policy Perspectives, No. 18-2. 
 
Culling,  J.,  P.  Jacob,  A.  Richardson,  E.  Truong  and  T.  Vehbi  (2019),  ‘Have  the  effects  of 
monetary  policy  on  inflation  and  economic  activity  in  New  Zealand  changed  over  time?’, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, AN2019/10.    
 
Drought, S., R. Perry and A. Richardson (2018), ‘Aspects of implementing unconventional  
monetary policy in New Zealand’, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 81(4). 
 
Duca, J. V. (2018), ‘Inflation and the Gig Economy: Have the Rise of Online Retailing and  
Self-Employment Disrupted the Phillips Curve?’, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Working  
Paper, No. 1814. 
 
Jacob, P., and T. van Florenstein Mulder (2019), ’The flattening of the Phillips cruve:  
Rounding up the suspects’, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, AN2019/06. 
 
Karagedikli, Ö., and J. McDermott (2018), ‘Inflation expectations and low inflation in New  
Zealand’, New Zealand Economic Papers, 52(3), pp. 277–288. 
 
Kent, C. (2015), ‘Monetary policy transmission – what’s known and what's changed’, public 
lecture at the Australian National University on 15 June 2015. 
 
Kent, C. (2019), ‘The usual transmission - monetary policy and financial conditions’, public 
address to Finance & Treasury Association on 13 August 2019. 
 
Liu, Y. and N. Westelius (2016), ‘The Impact of Demographics on Productivity and Inflation 
in Japan’, IMF Working Paper, No 16/237. 
 
McDermott, J. (2017), ‘Looking at the Stars’, speech delivered to HiFX in Auckland on 26  
July 2017. 
 
McDonald, C. (2017), ‘Does past inflation predict the future?’, Reserve Bank of New Zealand 
Analytical Note, AN2017/04. 
 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2019), August 2019 Monetary Policy Statement. 
 
Richardson, A., and R. Williams (2015), ‘Estimating New Zealand’s neutral interest rate’, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, AN2015/05. 
   13 
  
Spencer, G. (2017), ‘Low inflation and its implications for monetary policy’, speech delivered 
to the Institute of Directors in Auckland on 5 December 2017. 
 
Williams, R. (2017), ‘Characterising the current economic expansion: 2009 to present day’, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 80(3). 
 
Wong, M. (2017), ‘Revisiting the wealth effect on consumption in New Zealand’, Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, AN2017/03. 
  