Mario Draghi: Welcome remarks - 8th ECB conference on central,
eastern and south-eastern European countries
Welcome remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the 8th ECB
conference  on  central,  eastern  and  south-eastern  European  countries,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  12
June 2019.
Dear guests and colleagues,
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  the  eighth  ECB  conference  on  central,  eastern  and
south-eastern European (CESEE) countries.
There are many differences between the 18 economies in the CESEE region , but one thing they
have in common is that they have all experienced real economic convergence towards the EU
average since the 1990s. Over the last two decades, in particular, real GDP per capita growth
has averaged 3.8% in the region, compared with 1.4% in the European Union (EU) as a whole.
1
But there has been a clear difference in the pace of convergence.  Countries that have joined the
3
EU, and which are hereafter referred to as the central and eastern European (CEE) economies,
reached GDP per capita levels of 70% of the EU average. Within this group, the countries that
have joined the euro area have grown even faster, reaching almost 80% of the EU average. In
contrast, catching up has been markedly slower in the economies outside the EU, with income
5
levels below 40%  of the EU28 average.
4
2
EU and euro area membership acted as a catalyst for convergence, creating the institutional and
economic conditions for CEE economies to adopt highly effective growth strategies. Their faster
convergence shows that, with high-quality institutions in place, the EU Single Market can be a
powerful engine of growth, allowing not only the poorer countries to catch up, but also the richer
6
countries  to  benefit  from  a  larger  market  and  opportunities  to  increase  production  efficiency.
However, in order to maintain convergence and reap lasting benefits from the Single Market and
euro area membership, efforts to ensure institutional quality and good governance have become
all the more important given the headwinds facing CEE economies.
The role of the Single Market and the euro in promoting convergence
How  has  EU  membership  created  the  preconditions  for  stronger  growth?  One  of  the  most
powerful mechanisms has been its role in promoting the deep integration of CEE countries into
European value chains. This has happened in two ways.
First, accession to the Single Market led to the removal of trade barriers and the adoption of EU-
7
wide standards, which has considerably reduced the cost of doing business across countries.
Firms have unbundled their production networks and relocated production and assembly in line
with  the  relatively  lower  cost  of  production.  As  a  result,  trade  flows  of  intermediate  inputs
increased almost threefold  from 1990 to 2015. Supply chain linkages intensified at a faster pace
and  were  more  resilient  during  the  crisis  compared  with  supply  chain  linkages  with  countries
9
outside the Single Market.
8
Second, the adoption of the acquis communautaire led to a more predictable legal environment
and high-quality regulatory framework, which have increased investor confidence and contributed
to a rapid inflow of foreign investment and technology.
 The inflows of foreign direct investment
(FDI) in the region amounted to around 6% of GDP in the pre-crisis years, compared with only
3.4% in the EU as a whole.
10
 1 / 4
11
BIS central bankers' speeches
11
 and have been able
Countries that achieved a high level of institutional quality and governance,
to  adopt  the  single  currency,  further  benefited  from  the  reduction  of  trade  costs.
  Their
participation in value chains has been consistently higher than that of other EU countries and
they have made most progress in catching up with the average level of GDP per capita in the EU.
But  more  importantly,  the  single  currency’s  main  benefit  has  been  to  provide  stability  in  the
integration process. It has ensured that a critical mass of countries participating in the Single
Market  was  insulated  from  exchange  rate  volatility  during  times  of  economic  stress.  By
preventing competitive devaluations between countries within the bloc, the single currency has
guaranteed  the  continued  openness  of  the  Single  Market  and  strengthened  the  incentives  for
firms to increase their competitiveness through productivity gains.
12
13
All economies have gained from increased trade. Since the 1990s, intra-EU trade has risen in
real  terms,  even  as  emerging  economies  entered  the  global  market.
  Trade  has  in  turn
supported productivity growth.
14
CEE countries, in particular, have been able to accelerate the process of technology absorption
from firms at the productivity frontier, which has proved to be a key ingredient in the process of
convergence.  ECB  research  shows  that  technology  transfers  have  contributed  to  strong
productivity spillovers within European value chains.
 A 10% increase in total factor productivity
(TFP) growth of western EU firms at the value chain frontier contributed to 4.8% TFP growth for
CEE  firms  participating  in  value  chains,  which  in  turn  fostered  wage  convergence  in  these
economies.
Global headwinds: vulnerabilities to trade and financial shocks
15
Since the crisis, however, growth has slowed, mainly on account of a drop in TFP growth and
receding FDI inflows. In the new euro area countries, TFP growth remains, unlike in other CEE
countries, the main driver of growth.
But  the  general  slowdown  is  being  felt  in  all  economies  in  the  region,  which  suggests  that,
despite the ongoing benefits of the Single Market and the euro, the CEE business model has
become vulnerable to shocks to international trade and financial conditions. The benefits of the
Single  Market  for  sustained  convergence  thus  needs  to  be  consolidated,  by  implementing
reforms towards a more balanced growth model that is less vulnerable to changes in external
conditions, such as those that have emerged recently.
Global trade has faced headwinds in recent years as trade-restrictive measures have outpaced
liberalising measures.
 CEE economies have been disproportionately affected by this for two
reasons.
16
First, trade in CEE economies is especially responsive to cyclical developments. Since these
countries  have  consistently  been  more  open  to  trade  over  the  past  two  decades,  their  trade
elasticity is higher than in the rest of the EU. In addition, the value chains in which they participate
mainly involve trade in durable goods, which have a high level of income elasticity.
17
Second,  CEE  economies  have  increasingly  specialised  in  certain  industries,  which  may  have
made them more exposed to industry-specific shocks. In some countries, for instance, vehicle
exports represent nearly 30% of total manufactured exports, making them more vulnerable to the
threat of increasing car tariffs. Moreover, the effect of tariffs could be amplified, as a large share
of goods cross borders multiple times during the production process.
18
Headwinds could also result from changes in the international financial landscape. Net foreign
liabilities stood at over 70% of the CEE economies’ GDP in 2018, which is higher than in many
other emerging economies. In particular, FDI was comparably high and accounted for 50% of
total  external  financing  up  to  2010,  thus  providing  stability.  The  share  of  FDI  liabilities  has
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
declined  since  then  and  accounted  for  42%  of  total  external  financing  in  2018.  While  many
countries in the region have improved their current account balances in recent years, they may
remain vulnerable to changing external financial conditions due to their dependence on foreign
financing.
These  developments  confirm  that  sustained  policy  efforts  are  needed  to  maintain  a  steady
convergence  path.  The  region’s  economies  need  to  find  new  ways  to  boost  TFP  growth  and
deepen capital accumulation in order to “grow out” of their vulnerabilities.
The main long-term challenge is moving towards a more balanced growth and financing model,
which is more reliant on domestic innovation and on higher investment spending than it has been
so far. This will only be possible if domestic institutions and governance are improved.
Those  countries  that  joined  the  euro  area  have  continued  improving  their  institutional  quality,
partly owing to the accession process. In the other EU countries of the region, efforts to improve
institutional  quality  have  been  more  mixed  in  recent  years.  Overall,  institutional  quality  is  still
below  the  euro  area  average  in  almost  all  CEE  economies.
  Convergence  is  an  ongoing
process and reforms introduced over the past few years should not be rolled back. A high level of
institutional quality is necessary to fully reap the benefits of the Single Market and maintain the
sound  economic  structures  necessary  for  the  resilience  of  the  single  currency.  The  same
applies  to  structural  policies  which  were  introduced  to  improve  the  competitiveness  and
resilience of CEE economies.
Conclusion
19
The Single Market created prosperity in CEE countries, especially for those in the euro area, by
generating convergence in per capita income.
 Indeed, the EU has been a source of growth and
anchor of stability, allowing the region to catch up with EU living standards.
20
Conferences such as this one are valuable for policymakers to reflect on the region’s current
vulnerabilities and to discuss new avenues for growth. Today, we have with us a distinguished
guest who, through her leadership of the IMF, her experience as Minister of the Economy and
Finance and former Chair of the G20, will undoubtedly bring valuable ideas and new insights to
this conference.
Please give a warm welcome to Christine Lagarde.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
The CESEE region comprises Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Croatia, Estonia,
Hungary, Kosovo (this designation is without prejudice to positions on status and is in line with UNSCR 1244
and  the  ICJ  Opinion  on  the  Kosovo  Declaration  of  Independence),  Latvia,  Lithuania,  Montenegro,  North
Macedonia, Poland, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia and Turkey.
Zuk P., Polgar, K., Savelin, L., del Hoyo J. and König, P. (2018), “Real convergence in central, eastern and south-
eastern Europe”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, ECB.
Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Croatia, Hungary, Poland, Romania
Excluding Turkey
Owing in part to historical events that have delayed countries’ transition to a market economy.
Jan  in  ‘t  Veld  (2019),  “Quantifying  the  Economic  Effects  of  the  Single  Market  in  a  Structural  Macromodel”,
Discussion Paper 94, Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs, European Commission
Blind,  K.,  Mangelsdorf, A.,  Niebel,  C.  and  Ramel,  F.  (2018),  “Standards  in  the  global  value  chains  of  the
European Single Market”, Review of International Political Economy, 25(1), pp. 28–48.
Average ratio of intermediate goods exports to GDP in the EU.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Schmitz, M., Fidora, M. and Gunnella, V. (2017), “The impact of global value chains on the macroeconomic
analysis of the euro area”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 8, ECB.
ECB research finds that joining the EU increases inward FDI flows from other EU countries by close to 44%.
See  Carril-Caccia,  F.  and  Pavlova,  E.  (2018),  “Foreign  direct  investment  and  its  drivers:  a  global  and  EU
perspective”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4, ECB.
As measured by the World Bank Worldwide Governance Indicators (WG). The WGI delivery index is a simple
average of the regulatory quality, government effectiveness, control of corruption and rule of law sub-indicators.
By eliminating the costs of foreign exchange payments and settlements and hedging exchange rate risk.
See  Draghi,  M.  (2018),  “Europe  and  the  euro  20  years  on”,  speech  at  University  of  Sant’Anna,  Pisa,  15
December 2018
Intra-EU manufacturing trade rose from 28% of EU GDP in 1995 to 44% in2018.
See  Chiacchio,  F.,  K.  Gradeva  and  P.  Lopez-Garcia  (2018),  “The  post-crisis  TFP  growth  slowdown  in  CEE
countries: exploring the role of Global Value Chains”, Working Paper Series, No 2143, ECB.
See WTO (2018), “Report on G20 Trade Measures”, 22 November 2018
Schmitz et al. (2017), op. cit.
Gunella, V., Quaglietti, L. (2019), “The economic implications of rising protectionism: a euro area and global
perspective “, ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 3/2019.
As  measured  by  the  World  Bank  (Worldwide  Governance  Indicators  2018),  Transparency  International
(Corruption Perceptions Index 2017), Global Competitiveness Report 2018–19 (World Economic Forum), and
World Bank and International Finance Corporation (Doing Business 2018).
See del Hoyo, J.L., Dorrucci, E., Heinz, F. and Muzikarova, S. (2017), “Real convergence in the euro area: a long-
term perspective”, Occasional Paper Series, No 203, ECB.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
