Luis de Guindos: The euro area - current status and the monetary
policy stance
Remarks  by  Mr  Luis  de  Guindos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  Deusto
Business School, Madrid, 11 February 2019.
Recent economic developments
 Euro  area  data  have  been  weaker  than  expected  in  recent  months.  In  fact,  industrial
production growth fell in the second half of 2018 and the decline was widespread across
sectors and most major economies. Business investment weakened. On the external side,
euro area trade disappointed, with noticeable declines in net exports.
As a result, economic growth turned out to be weaker than expected: euro area real GDP
increased by 0.2% quarter-on-quarter in the last two quarters of 2018, down from 0.4% in
the first two quarters (on the basis of preliminary figures).
Factors  of  idiosyncratic  nature  have  been  pulling  growth  down  as  well.  These  relate  to
temporary  issues  in  the  automotive  sector  due  to  new  regulation,  street  protests  and
weather conditions. While there is uncertainty about the magnitude and persistence of these
factors, near-term growth in the euro area is likely to be weaker than previously anticipated.
Turning to the global environment, global growth is showing signs of a maturing economic
cycle. Global activity is still expanding, but growth in important euro area trading partners,
such  as  China,  has  been  moderating.  This  has  been  feeding  through  to  lower  euro  area
exports. Indeed, a large part of the growth slowdown in the third quarter of 2018 came from a
weaker contribution from net exports.
Moreover, geopolitical uncertainties, the threat of protectionism, vulnerabilities in emerging
markets  and  financial  market  volatility  have  proven  to  be  more  persistent  than  initially
foreseen. In Europe in particular, the state of play of the Brexit negotiations is adding to the
uncertainty.
All these elements have increasingly weighed on economic sentiment and are now reflected
in moderating business and consumer confidence.
Headline  inflation  figures  have  also  been  declining:  HICP  inflation  decreased  to  1.4%  in
January,  from  1.6%  in  December,  mainly  due  to  falling  energy  prices.  Looking  ahead,
headline  inflation  is  likely  to  decline  further  over  the  coming  months  on  the  basis  of  the
financial market’s outlook for oil prices.
Sound factors of resilience are however in place. The euro area expansion is expected to
continue,  supported  in  particular  by  favourable  financing  conditions,  further  gains  in
employment, rising wages and lower energy prices.
In fact, bank lending rates to euro area firms and households remain close to historically low
levels.  The  most  recent  bank  lending  survey  confirms  that  credit  standards  remain
favourable  and  loan  demand  continues  to  increase.  Together  with  solid  earnings
expectations and firms’ balance sheets, these favourable funding conditions should support
business investment. Labour market dynamics remain strong, with euro area unemployment
at 7.9% in December, its lowest level in more than ten years. Rising wages should continue
to underpin household income and private consumption. Lower energy prices are supporting
real incomes and should provide an additional impetus to domestic demand.
Turning to inflation, high levels of capacity utilisation should continue to strengthen labour
cost  pressures.  Growth  in  compensation  per  employee  increased  to  2.5%  in  the  third
quarter  of  2018,  having  increased  steadily  since  2016.  Growth  in  negotiated  wages  also
picked up in the course of 2018. Moreover, wage growth has become increasingly broad-
based in recent years. This, together with our monetary policy measures and the ongoing
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
economic  expansion,  is  expected  to  translate  into  higher  underlying  inflation  over  the
medium term.
Monetary policy stance
In this environment of downside risks to the growth outlook, the Governing Council decided
at  its  last  monetary  policy  meeting  in  January  to  retain  its  policy  stance,  confirming  the
enhanced forward guidance on policy rates and reinvestment.
The  Governing  Council  carefully  reviews  all  incoming  data  with  regard  to  their  possible
implications for the medium-term inflation outlook. More concretely, we continuously assess
whether inflation is converging towards our inflation aim – that is to levels of below, but close
to, 2% – in a sustained manner.
Although near-term growth is likely to be weaker than foreseen, in our view, the conditions
for ongoing economic growth remain in place – supportive financing conditions, favourable
labour market dynamics and rising wage growth. These will continue to underpin the euro
area expansion – and thereby contribute to gradually rising inflation.
At our meeting in January, we kept our current policy configuration in place. At the same
time, we acknowledged that persistent uncertainties and signs of lower than expected near-
term growth call for increased caution.
Significant  monetary  policy  stimulus  remains  essential  to  support  the  further  build-up  of
domestic price pressures and headline inflation developments over the medium term.
Indeed,  the  end  of  our  net  purchases  in  December  last  year  does  not  imply  that  our
monetary  policy  has  become  less  accommodative.  In  fact,  ample  monetary  policy
accommodation  is  still  provided  by  our  forward  guidance  on  the  key  ECB  interest  rates,
which is reinforced by our forward guidance on the reinvestments of the sizeable stock of
acquired assets.
The formulation of our forward guidance on our policy rates is crucial. There is the date-
based element – that interest rates are expected to remain at their present levels “at least
through  the  summer  of  2019”.  But,  in  addition,  there  is  a  state-contingent  element  –  that
rates will remain unchanged “in any case for as long as necessary to ensure the continued
sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium
term”.
The  date-based  element  ensures  that  our  stimulus  is  not  weakened  by  premature
expectations of a rate hike. The state-contingent element, in turn, ensures that the stance
will  continue  to  evolve  gradually  and  in  a  data-dependent  manner,  is  consistent  with  a
forward-looking and medium-term-oriented monetary policy strategy, and underscores the
credibility of the Governing Council’s commitment to its price stability objective.
Likewise, our reinvestment policy will ensure that the stock of assets on our balance sheet
remains in place for a long period and continues to support our accommodative stance.
Indeed,  we  intend  to  continue  reinvesting,  in  full,  the  principal  payments  from  maturing
securities purchased under the asset purchase programme for an extended period of time
past the date when we start raising the key ECB interest rates, and in any case for as long
as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary
accommodation.
In addition to maintaining this accommodative stance, the current environment underlines
the need for a monetary policy stance that is patient, persistent and prudent to guarantee the
return of inflation to our aim in the medium term.
Economic and Monetary Union governance
The monetary policy measures the ECB has introduced since 2014 have been essential in
supporting  the  robust  recovery  and  paving  the  way  for  inflation  to  return  towards  our
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
objective.
This  year,  we  are  celebrating  the  20th  anniversary  of  the  euro.  In  the  two  decades  of  its
existence,  the  euro,  underpinned  by  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU),  has  been  a
powerful tool of integration. But it has also faced a crisis so severe that its very existence
was at times questioned. This sparked a thorough revision of our institutional framework, in
the broader context of the international response to the global financial crisis.
The architecture of EMU is still incomplete in many ways. Ensuring its longer-term resilience
requires joint efforts at both the national and European levels.
At  the  national  level,  we  need  to  pursue  reforms  that  promote  sustainable  economic
convergence, and increase the growth potential and resilience of local economies.
At the European level, I welcome the agreement reached by the Euro Summit in December
last  year  on  a  euro  area  budgetary  instrument  aimed  at  fostering  competitiveness  and
convergence.  This  could  help  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  and  strengthen
resilience  in  the  euro  area.  However,  the  euro  area  would  also  benefit  from  a  common
stabilisation  function  –  which  is  not  foreseen  under  the  December  agreement.  Such  an
instrument could provide macroeconomic support in the event of euro area-wide recessions,
thereby maintaining convergence and reducing the burden on monetary policy.
With  a  predominantly  bank-based  financial  system,  completing  the  banking  union  also
remains a key priority. Agreeing on a backstop to the Single Resolution Fund through the
European Stability Mechanism is an important step in this direction.
Political momentum is also needed to agree on the missing third pillar of the banking union,
the European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS). There were calls to first reduce risks in
the banking sector before starting to share them, and considerable risk reduction has indeed
taken  place  in  recent  years.  EDIS  would  mitigate  the  risk  of  financial  fragmentation  by
providing an identical level of depositor protection across the euro area. With the end goal of
a fully fledged EDIS, the ECB welcomes the establishment of a high-level working group to
agree on the path we need to follow to achieve this goal.
Furthermore,  we  need  to  continue  making  progress  in  deepening  the  Single  Market,
including by developing a genuine capital markets union (CMU). Deep and well-integrated
cross-border  funding  would  improve  the  private  sector’s  capacity  to  absorb  local  shocks,
reducing  the  burden  on  fiscal  policies.  Here  as  well,  renewed  ambition  is  needed.
Revamping  the  CMU  agenda  can  play  an  important  role  in  adapting  the  EU’s  financial
architecture in view of  Brexit.  It  can  also  enhance  the  EU’s  attractiveness  to  international
investors, and thus help to strengthen the international role of the euro.
These reforms not only address the weaknesses of the institutional framework, they also
ensure that the euro will be able to face tomorrow’s challenges. As leaders renewed their
political  commitment  to  strengthen  EMU  at  the  Euro  Summit  in  December,  we  need  to
capitalise  on  this  commitment  and  translate  it  into  concrete  policy  actions  ahead  of  the
upcoming European elections.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
