Sabine Lautenschläger: Transformation of the retail and wholesale
payments landscape in Europe
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the European Association of Co-operative Banks, Berlin, 14 June 2019.
 The European payments market has come a long way since 1992 when the Maastricht Treaty
laid the foundation for the euro as a single currency.
The  road  may  have  occasionally  been  long  and  winding  but  the  facts  speak  for  themselves:
today, the euro is the second most used currency in the world and the Single Euro Payments
Area (SEPA) which extends beyond the EU affects the lives and businesses of over 500 million
people,  20  million  companies  and  4,000  payment  service  providers.  The  European  payments
market generates more than 130 billion non-cash payments per year, representing approximately
one-quarter of the global payments business.
For more than 20 years, Europe has strived to improve the efficiency and competitiveness of the
payments market. Substantial achievements have been made over the years and what some
people used to consider challenging, or even impossible, has now become part of our everyday
lives.
The SEPA project is a perfect example. Having enjoyed the ease of SEPA payments since 2014,
we  can  hardly  remember  a  time  when  credit  transfers  and  direct  debits  functioned  smoothly
within countries but not necessarily across borders.
Like many of Europe’s other achievements, advances in retail payments are all too easily taken
for granted. It took approximately 12 years to harmonise credit transfers and direct debits across
Europe, but today’s users can rely on a single account for their payments business within the
SEPA area and freely choose payment service providers based on quality and costs rather than
location. And competition between payment service providers now takes place on a level playing
field.
So what has been the key driver of past success? Beyond doubt, it is the cooperation between
payment stakeholders in Europe. Since the payments market is a network industry, cooperation
and coordination among market players are of utmost importance.
We at the ECB are well aware of the importance of European-wide cooperation.
In 2013, we established the Euro Retail Payments Board (ERPB) with the objective of further
deepening  such  cooperation.  This  high-level  strategic  body  brings  together  the  supply  and
demand sides of the European retail payments market. A great deal has been achieved under
the umbrella of the ERPB thanks to the efforts of all involved and I am pleased to see that further
work on developing innovative and competitive payment services is under way.
The ERPB’s most important work at the moment relates to instant payments. I will later explain
why  I  think  that  the  ERPB’s  work  on  instant  payments  is  so  important  for  the  future  of  an
integrated European payments market.
The ERPB can be considered the cradle of euro instant payments. In response to its call for the
development of a pan-European instant payment scheme, the market delivered: the European
Payments Council (EPC) developed the Instant Credit Transfer (SCT Inst) scheme in November
2017.
For the first time in Europe, a significant payment scheme was established with full stakeholder
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
involvement, both on the supply and demand sides, and in a remarkably short amount of time.
Some  51%  of  European  payment  service  providers  that  offer  credit  transfer  services  are
reachable for instant payments by now.
The  Eurosystem  also  responded  to  the  increasing  need  for  instant  payments  by  developing
TARGET instant payment settlement (TIPS), which is based on the SCT Inst scheme.
Launched in November 2018, this pan-European market infrastructure allows payment service
users  to  send  and  receive  payments  instantly  and  around  the  clock  within  Europe.  Offering
instant payment services at the European level ensures that any bank account holder in Europe
can  be  reached.  It  minimises  the  potential  risk  of  the  payments  market  fragmenting.  As
settlement  in  TIPS  takes  place  in  central  bank  money,  it  also  eliminates  credit  risk  for  the
participating banks.
Instant payments – a challenge and an opportunity for European payment stakeholders
So, why am I focusing so much on instant payments today? Well, I am convinced that instant
payments are the new challenge currently facing payment stakeholders in Europe. And I firmly
believe  that  only  a  pan-European  solution  for  instant  payments  will  turn  this  challenge  into  an
opportunity for Europe.
I would therefore encourage all payment service providers that have not yet implemented SCT
Inst, to do so as soon as possible.
In fact, instant payments may well be the game changer in the payments market, paving the way
for innovative European payment solutions.
We  are  embarking  on  a  new  era  in  which  the  pace  of  technological  change  is  challenging
policymakers  and  central  banks  as  well  as  incumbent  market  players.  Evolutions,  and
sometimes even revolutions, in both technology and user needs are facilitating the emergence of
new players in the payments ecosystem. This brings competition and boosts the range of choice
for consumers.
Changes  in  the  payments  industry  have  always  been  driven  by  customer  demand  for
convenience,  speed  and  efficiency.  New  technical  solutions  have  even  further  nurtured  these
developments.
Given the prevalence of smartphones and other mobile devices, today’s customers are used to
doing things on the spot. They want to make payments instantly, anytime, and anywhere, and
expect them to be as readily available as instant messages, instant videos or Instagram.
The EPC’s creation of the SCT Inst scheme came in response to these users’ expectations. And
instant  clearing  and  settlement  infrastructures  have  already  been  established,  most  notably
TIPS.
But,  in  the  long  run,  simply  being  reachable  for  incoming  payments  initiated  by  other  banks’
customers will not be enough. I am convinced that banks need to offer even more innovative and
efficient solutions for their customers and I would advise them to embrace the instant payments
space as an opportunity to remain relevant players in the payments business.
One area in which solutions have already emerged is payments between individuals, or so-called
person-to-person payments.
But  we  also  need  solutions  encompassing  payments  at  merchants,  at  the  point-of-interaction
(POI), both physical and virtual. In fact, some end-user solutions for instant payments at the point
of interaction are already emerging across Europe. But they tend to be limited geographically,
meaning that each solution is only usable in one or a few (neighbouring) countries. This certainly
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
does not point to an integrated European payments market.
In addition, in many instances, such regional solutions are not interoperable with each other. For
example, although many solutions use QR codes that consumers can scan with their mobile
devices, they have not implemented a common standard for these codes.
So,  there  is  a  clear  need  for  standardisation  to  enable  European  consumers  to  pay  EU-wide
using  interoperable  solutions.  In  this  context,  the  ERPB  set  up  a  working  group  to  analyse  in
detail the barriers to the pan-European reach of point-of-interaction solutions. It will report back
on the outcome of this work by November 2019. I hope to obtain useful input from this work.
Because if we do not achieve interoperability among national and regional solutions, as difficult
as it may be, we run a serious risk of fragmentation of the European market.
Let me explain why I am concerned about the risk of increasing fragmentation through national
point-of-interaction instant payment solutions.
At the moment, users who want to pay effortlessly at European level have to find alternatives to
this fragmented landscape. Appropriate solutions may not be based on the European schemes,
but they may be provided by large platforms which can offer the desired network effects thanks
to their large global customer base.
But there are currently only a limited number of providers allowing for payments at pan-European
level. This leads me to the following question: how should we consider the dependency on only a
handful of big payment providers from a competition and diversity point of view? In the long run, a
lack of competition may reduce the quality of services to the detriment of their users. Isn’t there a
need  for  truly  pan-European  instant  payment  solutions,  which  would  offer  support  to  many
payment providers?
The SCT Inst scheme – a pan-European scheme for instant payments – and the pan-European
market infrastructure for processing such payments, like TIPS, represent a unique opportunity for
developing a truly pan-European solution for instant payments at the point-of-interaction.
Such solution could be designed to be as convenient as existing solutions at point-of-interaction
that are based on other payment instruments. The inherent benefits of instant payments would
thus materialise for all stakeholders.
Consumers would be able to use them anywhere in Europe and eventually also at global level.
Users would also have a consistent payment experience within and between countries.
By accepting instant payments at the point-of-interaction, merchants across Europe, too, would
benefit from more efficient liquidity management and higher cost efficiencies. Those merchants
or  other  businesses  that  today  do  not  accept  cards  due  to  their  associated  costs  could  offer
users the opportunity to pay electronically.
And  finally  banks  could  also  benefit  from  higher  cost  efficiencies  and  generate  new  revenue
streams. They would also be in a position to design such a solution under their own governance
according to the needs of their customers.
To make this vision a reality, further actions from market participants are needed. These actions
do not need to be revolutionary. As I said before, Europe already has with SCT Inst scheme and
TIPS some of the necessary building blocks in place to develop such a solution.
In order to realise the potential of such a European solution, cooperation is once again essential.
Banks, merchants and other relevant stakeholders across Europe should work together to find
the best way forward.
Increasing efficiency in wholesale payments
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let me now briefly turn to the area of wholesale payments and our plans to increase efficiency in
this segment.
Since  well  before  TIPS,  the  Eurosystem  has  been  offering  efficient  and  safe  market
infrastructures that form the backbone of the financial sector. I am referring here in particular to
the two TARGET services: TARGET2-Securities (T2S) in the field of securities settlement and
TARGET2 in the field of wholesale or large-value payments.
The current economic and technological developments call for even more effective and efficient
liquidity management services. In order to meet this demand, the Eurosystem will extend and
enhance its provision of market infrastructure services for high-value payments. It will do so by
integrating TARGET2 with TARGET2-Securities and TIPS.
This consolidation will also allow TARGET2 to benefit from the state-of-the-art approaches and
technologies offered by T2S. This will be achieved through technical integration in the domains of
connectivity, data management and other key enabling components, such as billing.
There  are  further  advantages:  we  not  only  expect  a  decrease  in  the  running  costs  of  the
TARGET services. It will also act as a catalyst for smoother and stronger operability. And the
harmonisation of functionalities across all TARGET services should lead to major improvements
in their usability for participants and service operators alike.
The T2-T2S consolidation project is scheduled to go live in November 2021.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
Technological innovation and evolving user needs are reshaping the market infrastructure and
payments  landscape  on  a  global  scale.  Cooperation  between  European  market  players  is
essential  to  reap  the  opportunities  and  address  the  challenges  deriving  from  such  change.
Cooperation is also key to the continuous provision of efficient and safe payments services in
Europe.  And  cooperation  is  indispensable  for  Europe  to  remain  competitive  in  the  global
payments market. The ECB strongly supports such cooperative spirit, as shown by the work of
the ERPB.
With instant payments, European stakeholders have developed a competitive and new payment
instrument. Why not take advantage of this potential? Current achievements, such as SCT Inst
and  TIPS,  should  facilitate  future  work  towards  increasing  the  efficiency  of  the  European
payments market.
Pan-European solutions based on instant payments would be a chance for Europe to strengthen
its  role  in  payment  innovation  to  the  benefit  of  all  EU  citizens  and  businesses.  Let  us  work
together on this future-oriented approach and help Europe going forward.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
