Benjamin  E  Diokno:  Beyond  conventions  -  harnessing  the  BSP
multiplier amidst shifting sands
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Chamber  of  Thrift  Banks Annual  Convention,  Makati  City,  29
March 2019.
Introduction
 Distinguished officers, members, and trustees of the Chamber of Thrift Banks (CTB), ladies and
gentlemen, good morning!
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  in  this  year’s  annual  convention  and  induction  of  CTB’s  new  set  of
officers and trustees. I am pleased to be delivering this speech before the members of the thrift
bank community.
I say this because this industry has been an enabler of economic development by encouraging
retail savings and extending credit to crucial sectors of the economy.
Shifting Sands
Your chosen theme for today’s event – “Expanding New Markets,” reflects the current economic
and financial reality we are all facing.
As most of you already know, the global economy is in transition. The sands are shifting and we
are once again reminded of the constantly evolving dynamics of economics and finance.
If you ask me, policymaking in this time of transition requires some rethinking. As Nobel laureate
Joseph Stiglitz aptly puts it, there is a need to shift our focus from what is happening on the so-
called “average,” and take into account a broader spectrum of the society.   
In other words, we need to bring our policies closer to the people and aim for long-term stability
and inclusive growth.
Thus, in my remarks today, I wish to provide you with the BSP’s perspective on these tasks. In
particular, I wish to discuss the Philippine economy’s recent developments, potential challenges,
and the BSP’s policy thrust going forward.
On Solid Footing
The  good  news  is  that,  despite  the  challenging  operating  environment,  we  can  rely  on  the
Philippines’ solid macroeconomic fundamentals to provide us with a significant headway towards
a more robust and inclusive growth.
The domestic economy grew 6.2 percent last year. This extends the country’s growth streak to
80 quarters or roughly 20 years of uninterrupted growth.
It  should  be  noted  that  while  the  latest  figure  is  relatively  lower  compared  to  a  year  ago,  we
remain on track to outpace most of our Asian peers in 2019.  The economy has been growing
robustly at 6.0 percent and better for the last 15 quarters since the second quarter of 2015. 
Admittedly, we had to deal with a challenging inflation environment last year due to supply-side
pressures.  The  increase  in  international  crude  oil  prices,  supply  bottlenecks,  and  direct  and
indirect effects of the tax reforms pushed inflation beyond the government’s target range of  2 – 4
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
percent in 2018.
The  BSP’s  decisive  action  to  raise  its  policy  interest  rate  by  a  cumulative  175  basis  points
beginning in May 2018, coupled with the National Government’s implementation of non-monetary
measures to alleviate price pressures, helped rein in high inflation and ensure that it would revert
back to its target path.
In fact, latest figures are encouraging as inflation declined to 3.8 percent in February this year.
This is within the target range of 2-4 percent and is consistent with recent forecasts and market
expectations that a manageable inflation environment could be sustained in the near term. 
While the peso experienced episodes of depreciation, it should be noted that this was partly due
to the strong demand for imports of capital goods, partly because of Build Build Build program,
raw materials and intermediate products needed to support a growing economy.
The  country’s  external  payments  position  is  reliably  supported  by  strong  structural  foreign
exchange inflows. These include remittances from overseas Filipinos, revenues from the IT-BPO
industry,  receipts  from  the  vibrant  tourism  sector,  and  sustained  inflows  of  foreign  direct
investments.
With  these  inflows,  the  country’s  Gross  International  Reserves  (GIR)  now  stands  at  around
US$82.90  billion  as  of  end-February  2019.  This  is  roughly  equivalent  to  7.3  months’  worth  of
imports of goods and payments of services and primary income.
All of these could provide sufficient buffer against external headwinds.
A Second Pillar of Strength
The  sound  and  stable  condition  of  the  banking  community,  supported  too  by  the  thrift  bank
industry, has also served as a key pillar of strength of the economy.
As of end- January 2019, total resources of thrift banks (TBs) rose to P 1.2 trillion, a 7.0 percent
increase compared to its level a year ago.
Bank lending meanwhile continued to expand and was channeled mostly to production sectors.
Both consumer loans (CLs) and real estate loans continued to grow. As of end-December 2018,
the level of CLs of TBs expanded to P 561.9 billion, higher by 6.0 percent relative to the level a
year ago at P530.1 billion.  Meanwhile, loans for real estate activities increased by 8.0 percent to
P291.4 billion relative to last year. Sustained by core earnings mainly from lending activities, the
TB industry also remained profitable as net profit stood at P15.8 billion as of end-December 2018
returning 10.3 percent to owners’ equity.
Asset  quality  has  likewise  significantly  improved.  As  of  end-January  2019,  the  gross  non-
performing loans (NPL) ratio and non-performing assets (NPA) of thrift banks have significantly
declined  to  around  5.4  percent  and  5.7  percent,  respectively.  These  figures  were  significantly
lower  compared  to  their  end-December  2001  values  of  12.0  percent  and  17.0  percent,
respectively.  Lastly, the TB industry remains well-capitalized.
As  of  end-September  2018,  the  subsidiary  thrift  banks’  capital  adequacy  ratio  (CAR),  on  solo
basis, of 15.0 percent remains well above international standards  while the CAR of stand-alone
TBs stood at 18.2 percent.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  all  these  numbers  I  just  mentioned  reflect,  among  others,  the  thrift
banking sector’s critical role in supporting the country’s inclusive economic growth.
The Three Great Challenges Ahead
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Even as I say this, the evolving operating environment is beset with what I refer to as the three
great challenges that could potentially derail our growth trajectory.
First  is  the  imbalance  or  great  divergence  in  global  growth.    According  to  the  International
Monetary Fund (IMF), global growth prospects in 2019 remain fragile and uneven as recovery in
advanced  economies  (AEs)  is  expected  to  remain  steady,  while  activity  in  emerging  market
economies (EMEs) is projected to slow down.   
This  uneven  growth  trajectory  could  potentially  trigger  portfolio  rebalancing  and  capital  flow
reversal in emerging markets (EMs), including the Philippines.
Second is the emergence of what is referred to as the great fragmentation, where policymakers
tend to be less able and less willing to collaborate internationally.
Populist  sentiment  continues  to  gain  traction  in  countries  around  the  world.  This,  in  turn,  has
fueled  a  greater  inclination  among  governments  towards  “inward-looking,”  prisoner’s  dilemma
type of policies.
We are in the midst of protracted trade tensions between the US and China. While talks have
recently begun between the two countries to potentially outline the exit from the trade tension,
unwinding of the tariffs already imposed would still take some time.
Third, there is also the risk of great disruption stemming from the so-called rise of the Fourth
Industrial Revolution. While technological innovation in itself is not bad, and indeed often brings
benefits,  the  velocity  and  depth  of  transformation  could  have  potentially  disruptive  effects,
especially in the short term.
Consider for example the impact of financial technology on key areas of central banking such as
monetary  policy  and  banking  regulation.  Digital  currencies  can  potentially  alter  the  organic
composition  and  evolution  of  money  supply  and  affect  how  central  banks  can  influence
aggregate demand.
On top of these external risks, we also have risks emanating from the domestic sphere. These
include important challenges such as the impact of adverse weather disturbances- La Nina, El
Nino-,  infrastructure gaps, implementation bottlenecks, and delay in the passage of the 2019
budget of the National Government, among others.
BSP’s Policy Thrust
How do we respond to these challenges?
To my mind, successfully navigating this time of uncertainty entails a three-pronged approach.
Building on Strengths
First, there is a need to continue building our strengths.
In this regard, I am fortunate to inherit an institution that has a legacy of excellence, credibility,
and independence.
Rest assured, price and financial stability will remain the BSP’s top priority. On that note, you can
rely on the BSP to remain independent and steadfast in safeguarding our primary mandates and
implement timely and appropriate policies that are evidenced based.
Let me just say a few words about monetary operations. The BSP will continue to use market-
based monetary instruments in its operations.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In particular, the BSP will work to further fine-tune our monetary operations with refinements in
our Interest Rate Corridor (IRC) framework. The adoption of the IRC framework in June 2016,
has allowed the reduction of reserve requirements by 200 basis points in 2018, from 20 percent
to 18 percent, without sacrificing monetary control.
The goal of reducing the Reserve Requirement Ratio (RRR) can therefore resume provided that
domestic inflation and monetary conditions would allow it. 
This  commitment  to  a  gradual  reduction  in  deposit  reserves  will  lower  friction  costs  in  the
banking  sector,  create  more  efficient  financial  intermediation,  and  help  curb  shadow  banking
given the rise of strong alternatives offered by fintech and digital innovation.
Enhancing Policy Agility
This  brings  me  to  the  second  approach.  There  clearly  is  a  need  to  make  our  policies  more
responsive to the changing environment.
Just  recently,  the  amendments  to  the  BSP’s  Charter  was  enacted  into  law.  The  new  charter
amendments restore the BSP’s authority to issue debt papers, providing us greater flexibility in
determining the timing and size of our monetary operations.
The BSP is also given the authority to obtain information from private individuals and entities for
its policy formulation.  The law also widens the coverage of BSP-supervised financial institutions
to  include  money  service  businesses,  credit  granting  businesses  and  payment  system
operators. These reforms put the BSP in a stronger position to pursue our price and financial
stability mandates amid a rapidly evolving environment.
In terms of financial stability, the BSP continues to foster a regulatory environment that is both
enabling to emerging trends and effective in managing new risks.
The  BSP’s  policy  reform  agenda  aims  to  strengthen  risk  governance  in  banks  by  setting  out
standards that promote continued enhancement of banks’ risk management systems. The BSP
is  guided  by  the  principle  of  proportionality  while  pursuing  international  best  practice  in  its
strategic policy objectives.
For instance, the Monetary Board recently approved the extension of the observation period for
the Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) compliance of
thrift banks, that are subsidiaries of universal and commercial banks, up to end-December 2019,
moving the effectivity date of said ratios to 1 January 2020.  This provides covered banks and
quasi-banks sufficient time to build up their liquidity position given the combined impact of these
liquidity  measures.    Moreover,  enhancements  to  the  LCR  and  Minimum  Liquidity  Ratio  (MLR)
methodologies were also approved as a result of the BSP’s continuing discussions with the CTB
and the rest of the banking industry. Starting 1 January 2019, stand-alone thrift banks are already
subject to the 20 percent MLR which aims to ensure that covered institutions set aside a liquidity
buffer that will enable them to withstand liquidity stress events. 
To cope with the rapid advances of Fintech, we have upped our “RegTech” game by adopting a
regulatory  sandbox  approach.  This  allows  the  BSP  to  observe  and  study  new  products  and
create appropriate regulations in response.
Harnessing the BSP Multiplier
Third  and  the  last  approach  is  something  I  am  very  passionate  about.  The  magnitude  and
severity  of  today’s  challenges  also  call  for  the  BSP  to  go  beyond  convention  and  embark  on
goals outside the ambit of traditional monetary policy.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
I am talking about the need to  support inclusive growth.
The BSP’s effective pursuit of our primary mandate of maintaining price stability puts the country
in  a  better  position  to  attain  inclusive  growth.  We  foster  a  macroeconomic  environment
conducive for investments and supportive of job generation and employment.
However, maximizing the impact of the BSP’s policies on the lives of Filipinos entails that we
tackle  the  inclusive  growth  advocacy  directly.  I  am  heartened  by  the  thought  that  the  recent
Banking Sector Outlook Survey showed that most thrift banks believe that business growth may
be maintained by developing new capabilities and by expanding market reach, digitally or through
new products and services.
This is what I refer to as the BSP Multiplier or the BSP’s ability to improve every single Juan and
Maria’s quality of life.
Towards this end, you can expect the BSP to continue to focus on this goal and integrate our
financial inclusion advocacy with our traditional objectives.
The BSP is working hard to bring central banking operations to the people, of course with your
help. We are committed to advancing our financial inclusion, financial education, and consumer
protection  agenda  to  ensure  that  everybody  is  given  the  opportunity  to  ride  in  this  economic
growth.
A BSP that is Closer to the People
  For  us  to  be  able  to  succeed  in  a  transitioning  global  environment,  we  need  to  build  our
strengths, be more responsive, and sometimes go beyond conventions.
The  BSP  is  aware  that  our  efforts  cannot  stand  alone.  To  keep  the  engine  running,  both  the
public and private sectors must share in the responsibility of making sure that no Filipino is left
behind.
I therefore thank the CTB and the thrift bank community for supporting the BSP and its thrust on
financial inclusion.
Rest  assured,  you  can  count  on  the  BSP  to  walk  closely  with  you  in  our  country’s  journey
towards inclusive growth.
Thank you and mabuhay tayong lahat!
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
