Jens Weidmann: Opening statement at the 2019 press conference
on the annual accounts
Opening  statement  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and
Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the 2019 press
conference on the annual accounts, Frankfurt am Main, 27 February 2019.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
A very warm welcome to our press conference, at which we will present our annual accounts.
You could say that the annual accounts represent the essence of a year – 365 days condensed
into a set of figures occupying just two A4 pages. Drawing up the accounts means looking back
over past events. But I know you are also very keen to hear about current developments and the
outlook for the future, and I don’t want to disappoint you there.
So,  as  usual,  I  will  first  say  a  few  words  about  economic  activity  and  monetary  policy  before
moving on to the key points of our annual accounts.
Mr Beermann will then discuss selected aspects of our balance sheet with you in more detail. 
2 Economic situation 
Ladies and gentlemen,
Economic activity lost momentum last year – in Germany, the euro area, and around the world.
After  fairly  dynamic  growth  in  2017,  the  pace  of  expansion  slackened  at  the  global  level.  For
Europe and Germany, this translated into weaker stimulus from foreign business. 
This was compounded by more subdued activity in the euro area’s export markets than in the
international  environment  as  a  whole.  Turkey’s  economic  problems  played  a  role  here,  for
instance. 
Additionally, however, there were specific developments in Germany, in particular. All in all, the
slowdown  in  Europe  was  far  more  significant  than  it  was  at  the  global  level.  Euro  area GDP
expanded by 1.8% last year. Although this is a slower rate than in 2017, it is still higher than the
potential growth rates according to conventional estimates. 
In 2018, the German economy grew by 1.5% in calendar-adjusted terms, which was roughly in
line with the increase in its capacity rates. Aggregate capacity utilisation therefore remained high.
However, the annual average figures mask the slowdown in economic growth over the course of
the year, especially in the second half.
Reports from the German economy have generally been disappointing over the last few months.
German economic output even contracted in the third quarter – primarily due to the difficulties
which car makers encountered with the new vehicle emissions test procedures. 
The  motor  industry  took  far  longer  than  expected  to  resolve  this  problem.  Besides  this,
production  in  other  industrial  sectors  dipped  in  the  final  quarter.  As  a  result,  the  German
economy as a whole remained stagnant during the last few months of 2018.
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
New manufacturing orders stabilised at a significantly lower level. And at the current end, the
relevant sentiment barometers are pointing to a pronounced cooling of the business climate. 
There is plenty to suggest, then, that the dip in growth will continue into this year. As a result,
Germany’s economic growth will probably lag well behind the potential rate of 1½% in 2019.
We cannot sugar-coat these facts. But nor do I think we should use them to paint too bleak a
picture of the outlook for the economy.
The domestic economy depends in large part on the situation in the German labour market. And,
as before, this market is in excellent shape.
Unemployment has fallen to 5% (in seasonally adjusted terms) over the last few months – its
lowest level since German reunification.
What’s more, employment is constantly hitting new record highs: in December, the number of
people in employment surpassed the 45 million mark. 
And  demand  for  labour  by  enterprises  is  still  high.  For  instance,  the  Institute  for  Employment
Research (IAB) reported a new record last week of around 1.5 million job vacancies. 
The sustained improvement in the labour market was also reflected in wage growth – wages
rose sharply last year, even after adjustment for inflation.
And inflation was the strongest it has been since 2012. Consumer prices (as measured by the
HICP) climbed by 1.9%.
However, the short-term fluctuations in industry or other sectors have only a minor impact on
labour market developments, which are influenced more strongly by the underlying cyclical trend
over  the  medium  term.  As  a  result,  the  rise  in  employment  and  stronger  wage  growth  will
probably continue this year.
Economic  growth  in  Germany  is  solidly  underpinned  by  favourable  financing  conditions,  rising
employment levels and increasing wages. Fiscal easing this year will provide additional stimulus.
In other words, the economy is unlikely to go into reverse; it will probably just not accelerate as
quickly in 2019. 
I see this as the most likely scenario at present. All the same, this outlook is subject to a fair
amount of uncertainty.
3 Uncertainty and risk
Over the past few months, many people have begun to worry that increased uncertainty in the
economy could curb investment activity, in particular.
One argument is that it might make sense for enterprises to delay investment decisions until they
1
have a clearer idea of the situation.
It’s difficult to gauge effects like these accurately. Although various measures have been pointing
to a rise in uncertainty over the last few months, some of the indicators remain below their long-
term  average  or  do  not  display  any  close  correlation  to  aggregate  output  in  the  past.  This
suggests there are no significant dampening influences on economic activity at present.
Even  so,  uncertainty  is  always  a  key  issue  these  days,  especially  when  I  meet  with
entrepreneurs. Perhaps it’s affecting business sentiment because it has prevailed for so long.
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Added  to  this,  two  political  developments  with  an  uncertain  outcome  could  very  well  end  up
placing a real burden on the economy. 
The first is that the global trade dispute still hasn’t been resolved. So there is a continued risk that
protectionism might spread worldwide. 
What  this  means  is  illustrated  by  the  trade  dispute  between  the  United  States  and  China. A
model-based  analysis  by  the  Bundesbank  suggests  that  the  already  adopted  trade  barriers
could,  on  their  own,  shrink  both  countries’  respective  output  levels  by  0.5%  over  the  medium
2
term and diminish world trade by 1%.
And there is still a threat of extra tariffs on vehicle imports.
The United States has at least joined China and the EU at the negotiating table. If markets are
more open after these talks than they were before, this would, in fact, be real progress. 
these  bilateral  agreements  can  prevent 
Perhaps 
tariffs  and
countermeasures from spiralling into a larger conflict. But they certainly can’t replace what we’ve
achieved through a rule-based, multilateral trading facility. So it’s essential that we maintain and
enhance the global trade regime. 
the  harmful  cycle  of 
The second factor adding to the atmosphere of uncertainty is Brexit. As things stand, the United
Kingdom might leave the European Union on 29 March – and it’s not yet clear whether this will be
with or without a withdrawal agreement.
The Bank of England (BoE) has simulated a large number of different scenarios,   which also
reflects the wide range of potential macroeconomic effects.
3
If  the  close  economic  partnership  between  the  UK  and  the EU can be maintained, the British
economy could actually perform better than is generally believed at the moment.
On  the  other  hand,  the BoE  is  warning  that  a  disorderly  Brexit  could  trigger  short-term  trade
disruptions and the risk of a severe recession in the UK. In the worst case scenario, UK GDP
might  slump  by  as  much  as  8%.  This  would  also  affect  the  economy  in  the  euro  area  and
Germany.
Early on in the process, German banking supervisors strongly urged credit institutions to prepare
for a disorderly Brexit. And this has paid off – as far as we are aware, institutions have made
good progress with their preparations and some have already successfully completed them. 
Most British banks that need a licence for their units based in the euro area have received them
or are likely to do so by 29 March. This will allow them to maintain their business relationships
with their EU customers. 
A total of 16 credit institutions have decided either to relocate units to Ger-many or to significantly
expand their existing business here.
4 Monetary policy
Let’s move on to monetary policy.
The  biggest  decision  of  last  year  was  made  in  December,  when  the ECB  Governing  Council
decided to cease net asset purchases at the end of the year. This decision marks the first step
on the long road towards monetary policy normalisation.
Under the asset purchase programme (APP), the Eurosystem purchased securities worth a total
of just under €2.6 trillion.
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
While net asset purchases may have come to an end, the programme itself is still ongoing. This
is due to the fact that principal payments from maturing securities will be reinvested in full until
further notice. As a result, the total volume of securities on the Eurosystem’s books will remain
steadfastly high. And it is this stock of assets that gives the programme its economic impact.
On top of this are the persistently low key interest rates. The ECB Governing Council expects
these to remain at their present levels at least through the summer of 2019, and in any case for
as long as necessary.
Having interpreted the data, market participants currently believe that the ECB’s first key interest
rate hike may be delivered later than was anticipated even in early December. Taken in isolation,
this  expectation  is  depressing  capital  market  rates,  thus  supporting  financing  conditions  for
enterprises.
This also shows that our state-contingent forward guidance serves as an autopilot of sorts: more
or  less  automatically,  it  triggered  a  response  from  market  participants  –  all  without  monetary
policymakers getting involved.
All in all, then, monetary policy in the euro area remains exceptionally ac-commodative. This is
shown  by  various  measures  of  monetary  policy  ac-commodation,  such  as  short-term  real
interest rates or the divergence of Taylor interest rates from the policy rate. At present, they are
close to the values measured at the height of the crisis.
The  next  steps  towards  normalising  monetary  policy  will  depend  on  how  the  inflation  outlook
evolves in the euro area.
ECB staff will present their macroeconomic projections next week. I will leave it to them to say
more on this topic.
However, it is clear to me that short-term fluctuations in the oil price – such as the sharp decline
at  the  end  of  2018  –  as  well  as  revised  growth  expectations  for  2019  may  have  a  temporary
impact on the inflation outlook.
Remember,  though,  that  the ECB Governing Council defines price stability as a medium-term
measure, so we would do well to look beyond these fluctuations. As things currently stand, the
persistently  upbeat  labour  market  conditions  and  strong  wage  growth  will  strengthen  the
underlying upward price pressures in the euro area in the medium term. 
The  question  currently  at  the  forefront  of  monetary  policymakers’  minds  is  how  to  make
decisions in the face of uncertainty. 
The  recommendation  typically  made  in  the  academic  literature  is  to  exercise  caution  when
conditions  are  uncertain.  If  very  different  scenarios  appear  plausible,  monetary  policymakers
need to make sufficiently robust decisions and not overreact in their response to the ups and
downs of isolated indicators.
If, however, there is a risk of a scenario materialising that would have devastating consequences,
it  may  be  appropriate  to  take  preventive  policy-based  action  to  avert  the  threat.  For  example,
monetary  policymakers  made  the  right  move  during  the  financial  crisis  when  they  responded
swiftly and decisively to stave off a deflationary downward spiral of declining prices and wages. 
But deflation is not a cause for concern at this time. According to our calculations, the market-
based  probability  of  deflation  is  a  mere  1.5%.  While  market-based,  long-term  inflation
expectations  for  the  euro  area  may  have  dipped  in  recent  months,  survey-based  measures
remain in the range of below, but close to, 2%. 
Risks  that  should  not  be  ignored  also  include  the  adverse  side  effects  of  exceptionally
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
expansionary  monetary  policy.  During  the  financial  crisis,  we  witnessed  the  way  in  which  the
risks to financial stability can affect economic development and ultimately take their toll on price
stability, too.
In all likelihood, the normalisation of monetary policy will be a gradual pro-cess lasting several
years.  From  my  point  of  view,  this  makes  it  important  to  continue  along  this  path,  should  the
inflation outlook permit it. 
In this context, we need to keep an eye on more than just the risks to financial stability which can
build  up  in  a  persistent  low  interest  rate  environment.  Going  forward,  monetary  policymakers’
capacity for effective intervention should not be ignored, either. 
If,  contrary  to  expectations,  there  is  a  significant  deterioration  in  the  outlook  for  inflation,  the
Eurosystem  has  a  range  of  monetary  policy  instruments  at  its  disposal.  However,  this  non-
standard  toolkit’s  cost-to-benefit  ratio  differs  from  that  of  standard  monetary  policy.  In  this
respect, the trade-off between the effectiveness of certain instruments and their side effects may
be worse than it was in the past and could ultimately leave little room for manoeuvre.
5 Public finances
Furthermore, it needs to  be  clear  that  monetary  policymakers’  focus  is  on  safeguarding  price
stability. In the event of a major economic shock, fiscal policymakers would doubtless also be
called upon to take action.
Under existing fiscal rules, euro area countries with sound public finances would likewise have
the opportunity to do so.
Unfortunately, many countries have failed in recent years to take advantage of the low interest
rates  and  favourable  economic  conditions  to  sufficiently  improve  the  sustainability  of  their
government finances and scale back their high debt ratios. I fear that this has been a missed
opportunity to make hay while the sun shines. 
Failure  to  comply  with  the  ceilings  for  the  deficit  and  debt  ratios  defined  in  the  Stability  and
Growth Pact has been a far-too-frequent occurrence:
Since the introduction of the euro, participating countries have exceeded the reference value
of 3% for budget deficits in just under 40% of all cases.
When it comes to the debt ratio, the results are even more sobering: euro area countries
failed to comply with the limit of 60% of GDP in well over half of all cases.
In 2018, too, euro area government debt fell only moderately in spite of the favourable economic
environment and extremely low interest rates. Only ten euro area countries achieved a debt ratio
of below, or at least close to, the 60% ceiling.
Sound public finances are a key foundation for a stability-oriented monetary policy. They are also
vital in tackling the substantial, foreseeable impact of demographic change. 
In Germany, the statutory pension insurance scheme, in particular, is coming under pressure.
Right now, the issue frequently at the heart of the debate is the pension level. The consensus
previously reached on the topic involved cutting state pensions over time while encouraging the
adoption  of  supplementary  private  pension  provisioning.  In  principle,  I  still  believe  this  to  be  a
sensible  approach  and  would  like  to  caution  emphatically  against  allowing  today’s  highly
favourable financial situation to cause us to lose sight of tomorrow’s problems.
In particular, a sustainable overall concept needs to take account of both social contributions and
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  tax  burden.  Excessively  high  tax  and  social  contribution  rates  stunt  employment.  In  this
context, the labour supply is already being negatively affected by demographic trends.
In future, the priority must be to boost employment. In view of this, the Bundesbank has been
signalling for quite some time that, given increasing life expectancy and improved physical health
in old age, it would make sense to further raise the statutory retirement age. 
If  the  ratio  of  time  in  employment  to  time  in  retirement  were  to  be  kept  broadly  constant,  this
would not put future pensioners at a disadvantage. It would simply mean that static contribution
periods are not accompanied by longer and longer pension-drawing periods. 
All in all, I believe that the current basic tenet of the statutory pension insurance scheme – the
principle of equivalence – is the best way forward here. The more an individual pays in, the bigger
their pension will be. Social benefits independent of pensions should be financed out of general
taxation in a transparent and comprehensible manner. The same applies to any top-up of the
basic  pension,  which  forms  part  of  the  coalition  agreement  and  was  recently  the  subject  of
discussion.  
6 Stoking the engines of economic growth
Ladies and gentlemen,
Alongside sound public finances, stoking the engines of economic growth should be right at the
top of the political agenda. 
In this regard, too, Germany is faced with particular challenges due to demographic change. The
Bundesbank estimates that the labour supply (labour force potential) will already be in decline as
of  2022. At  that  point,  the  migration  gains  will  no  longer  be  sufficient  to  compensate  for  the
effects of ageing.
In recent years, labour has supported potential growth by around 1½% – also due to high levels
of immigration. However, from 2021, it is likely that labour will cause potential growth to gradually
decline – to as low as just under 1% by 2028, to be precise.
One  possible  lever  that  policy-makers  could  adjust  is  the  labour  force  participation  rate.  By
having a higher propensity to work, older people, in particular, as well as migrants can help to
stabilise the overall supply of labour.
Furthermore, the ratio of women working part-time in Germany remains considerably higher than
the EU  average.  Better  provisions  for  supervising  children  or  people  in  need  of  nursing  could
promote a greater supply of labour.
In the light of an ageing population, it will be even more important in the fu-ture than it is today for
each potential worker to be able to bring their skills onto the labour market. 
Beyond  the  labour  supply,  the  welfare  of  our  society  is  vitally  dependent  on  how  much  each
individual worker can produce.
In my opinion, the role of the state is to create favourable conditions for private enterprises to
offer innovative and consumer-oriented products and services. Not least, competition ensures
that  consumers  and  employees  can  also  share  in  the  gains  in  prosperity  that  have  been
generated.
Competition  for  customers  leads  to  lower  prices;  competition  for  labour  to  higher  wages.
Competition also fuels innovation, as enterprises can – at least for a time – gain an edge over
competitors by creating new products. This widened offering in turn benefits the consumer.
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Open  markets  foster  competition.  The  European  single  market  is  the  best  example  of  this.
4
Studies show that prosperity in Europe has risen substantially.
For this reason, the state should eliminate competitive distortions and rectify market failures. In
the past, however, governmental control and insulation have not proven themselves to be good
levers for increasing productivity and prosperity. The state is certainly not the better entrepreneur.
I believe that the size of enterprises is also the result of private sector deci-sions and market
forces. Small and medium-sized firms, in particular, with their “hidden champions” are one of the
strengths of our economy.
They do not owe their success to governmental guidance. Incidentally, this also applies to the
awe-inspiring rise of certain international tech companies. 
And, finally, we should not jeopardise the prosperity gains that result from the close economic
integration  with  our  partner  countries.  This  also  includes  international  value  chains  in  which
enterprises  focus  on  products  with  manufacturing  processes  that  offer  them  comparative
advantages. 
The  German  economy  in  particular  thrives  on  openness.  Last  year,  German  businesses
exported goods and services with a total value of almost €1,600 billion around the world. This
corresponds to nearly half of the country’s GDP. 
The counterpart to the export of goods is the export of capital.
The level of German direct investment abroad rose in 2016 to around €1,100 billion. More than
half of this total was invested in our partner countries outside of the EU. This also has positive
repercussions for economic growth in Germany. Studies show that investment abroad leads to
5
additional investment at home.
Conversely,  there  were  almost  17,000  companies  with  foreign  capital  interests  active  in
Germany in 2016. Foreign investors held direct investment stocks totalling nearly €500 billion.
They generated turnover of around €1,500 billion and employed 3 million people. 
Direct investment coming from Germany and coming into Germany are essential to prosperity in
our open economy.
In sensitive sectors, there may be legitimate security concerns. However, US foreign trade policy
in particular shows that the line between these concerns and protectionist motives is not always
objective and clear-cut.
And,  of  course,  state-owned  businesses  can  distort  international  competition.  But  we  must
respond by strengthening market forces and not by weakening them at home as well.  
7 Annual accounts – profit and risk provisioning
Ladies and gentlemen,
I would now like to move on to our annual accounts.
On  the  assets  side,  the  monetary  policy  purchase  programmes  were  again  the  key  driver  of
balance sheet growth, followed by liquidity inflows from other European countries.
On  the  liabilities  side,  the  euro  balances  of  resident  and  non-resident  investors  recorded  the
largest increases.
The profit and loss account for the 2018 financial year closed with a net profit of €2.5 billion. This
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
is roughly half a billion euros more than in the previous year. This rise is driven by higher interest
income due to the negative interest rates on increased deposits. 
Following allocation to the reserves, we have today transferred the remaining distributable profit
of €2.4 billion in full to the Federal Government. According to the 2019 budget plan, it will be used
to finance the budget.
With regard to the elevated interest rate risk, we had already increased our risk provisioning in
two tranches in the previous two years – by €1.75 billion in 2016 and €1.075 billion in 2017. And,
one year ago, I indicated that a third tranche would follow. On that basis, the Executive Board has
reviewed both the scope of our general risk provisions and the Bundesbank’s foreseeable risk
situation,  while  also  taking  into  account  our  current  risk  coverage  potential.  As  a  result,  the
general risk provisions will be increased by an additional €1.475 billion, bringing the total to €17.9
billion.
General risk provisions are traditionally used to hedge against exchange rate risk, but, due to the
non-standard monetary policy measures, also against default and interest rate risk. The latter are
largely a result of the wide discrepancy in maturities: we have very substantial holdings of low
interest-bearing assets, with very long residual maturities in some cases; our liabilities, however,
are mainly in the form of short-term deposits.
With that, I will now hand over to Dr Beermann, who will provide you with more details on the
annual accounts. We will then – as always – be happy to answer your questions.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
See  B.  S.  Bernanke  (1983),  Irreversibility,  uncertainty  and  cyclical  investment,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of
Economics, Vol. 98, pp. 85–106;
See Deutsche Bundesbank, The potential global economic impact of the USA-China trade dispute, Monthly
Report, November 2018, pp. 11–13.
See Bank of England, EU withdrawal scenarios and monetary and financial stability, November 2018
See, for example, H. Badinger (2005), Growth Effects of Economic Integration: Evidence from the EU Member
States, Review of World Economics, Vol. 141, pp. 50–78
See S. Goldbach, A. J. Nagengast, E. Steinmüller and G. Wamser (2019), The effect of investing abroad on
investment at home: On the role of technology, tax savings, and internal capital markets, Journal of International
Economics, Vol. 166, pp. 58–73.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
