Luis  de  Guindos:  Fostering  resilience  and  convergence 
Economic and Monetary Union
Keynote speech by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the
conference "Five Years with the Euro", Latvia, 7 January 2019.
in
 It is an honour to have been invited here today to celebrate the fifth anniversary of Latvia adopting
the euro. Of course, this year also marks the 20th anniversary of the euro. Such anniversaries
are a good opportunity to look back and reflect on what has been achieved over these years, and
to  think  about  what  steps  we  now  need  to  take  to  ensure  that  the  coming  years  will  be
prosperous for everyone in the euro area.
Latvia joined the euro area at a difficult time. Inflation in the euro area was low, and the risks of
deflation  and  a  de-anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  were  high.  Now,  the  monetary  policy
measures taken to foster recovery have paid off. Today the euro area can look back on more
than five years of economic growth, with over nine million more people employed now than at the
start of the recovery. In terms of growth, Latvia in particular has really shone during this time.
As a result of this continued growth, we in the Governing Council of the ECB confirmed at our
meeting last month that we are confident the sustained convergence of inflation to our inflation
aim will proceed. As a result, net purchases under our asset purchase programme ended last
month.
The end of net asset purchases does not mean that monetary policy accommodation has ended,
however. Substantial accommodation will continue to be provided by our forward guidance on
key policy rates and our policy of reinvesting the sizeable stock of assets acquired.
Moreover, further efforts are required to reinforce structural resilience, boost productivity growth
and  sustain  economic  convergence  within  the  euro  area.  Introducing  structural  economic
reforms, building up buffers and completing the Single Market are all key here. I would therefore
like to take this opportunity to draw some lessons from Latvia’s experience within the euro area
to consider what specific steps can be taken to ensure the long-term success of the euro.
Five years of the euro in Latvia
Joining  the  European  Union  and  the  euro  area  has  been  a  good  experience  for  the  Latvian
economy overall. When the euro was introduced 20 years ago, GDP per capita in Latvia was
around 30% of the average for the then 15 members of the EU. Today, that figure is around 60%.
Although Latvia certainly suffered during the financial crisis, its economic growth in the five years
since it joined the euro has been strong. During the first three quarters of 2018 growth was close
to 5%, one of the highest rates in the EU and the euro area.
This  convergence  towards  the  European  average  is  in  no  small  part  due  to  the  process  of
accession to the EU and the euro area. Implementing necessary reforms and taking steps to
reduce government indebtedness to meet the debt and deficit criteria have achieved results.
Latvian  credit  ratings  have  gradually,  and  stably,  improved.  Borrowing  costs  have  fallen
markedly, with spreads to German Bunds averaging around 40 basis points in 2018, compared
with 170 basis points before the adoption of the euro. These lower funding costs have in turn
1
resulted in significant government budget savings.
More importantly, economic growth in Latvia is more balanced than in the past and based on a
more resilient economy. Sustaining convergence, however, is a process, and cannot be ensured
by  a  one-off  set  of  reforms  for  accession. A  comparison  with  peer  Member  States  such  as
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Slovenia,  Slovakia  and  neighbouring  Baltic  countries  suggests  that  there  is  further  scope  for
Latvia to catch up in terms of GDP per capita.
Reforms boosting productivity growth and investment in innovation are essential to sustain the
high rates of wage growth currently seen in the economy – of close to 8% – and thus to prevent
competitiveness losses in the future.
Improvements  in  overall  institutional  quality  –  a  fundamental  pillar  of  long-lasting  economic
growth – have been somewhat slow in Latvia since it joined the euro area compared with several
other  EU  countries.  Nonetheless,  the  recent  policy  measures  taken  by  Latvian  authorities  are
welcome.
In particular, measures taken to prevent money laundering and the financing of terrorism, as well
as steps taken by banks serving foreign clients to refocus their business models, are examples
of notable reform efforts which need to be continued with persistence and determination. These
efforts should be buttressed by strengthening the foundations for sustainable economic growth,
for instance by building up fiscal buffers and taking appropriate macroprudential measures.
Fostering structural resilience and sustainable economic convergence in the euro area
Looking at the need for structural reforms more broadly, more needs to be done in the euro area
as  a  whole.  The  past  15  to  20  years  show  that  euro  area  countries  with  sound  economic
structures  from  the  outset  have  achieved  much  higher  long-term  real  growth  and  are  more
resilient. Countries which adopted ambitious reforms during the crisis, such as Latvia, recovered
faster  than  others,  with  these  improved  economic  conditions  leading  to  higher  employment
rates  – and the full effects are still materialising.
2
Nevertheless,  over  the  past  five  years  structural  reform  implementation  in  the  euro  area  has,
overall, been sluggish at best. Very few reforms identified in the European Semester have been
substantially  implemented.  Reversing  this  trend  and  putting  our  economy  on  a  higher
convergence trajectory is thus a priority.
In  parallel,  national  policymakers  should  make  it  a  priority  to  build  up  fiscal  buffers  to  ensure
policy space for future downturns. This is particularly important in countries where government
debt is high and for which adherence to the Stability and Growth Pact is critical for safeguarding
sound fiscal positions.
National  authorities  should  therefore  be  the  first  ones  to  step  up  their  efforts.  Nevertheless,
European policies can be a significant catalyst and provide a strong engine for both growth and
employment, in various ways.
First,  there  is  scope  for  a  better  use  of  the  EU’s  budget.  The  discussions  on  the  2021-27
multiannual financial framework offer an opportunity to enhance its role in addressing Europe’s
structural challenges, and I welcome the commitment made by leaders at the Euro Summit to
pursue this avenue.
Second, the Single Market as an engine for convergence should be used to its fullest potential.
This means expanding its reach into new areas, especially those relevant for innovation, such as
the  digital  economy.  This  is  an  essential  driver  of  economic  progress,  benefiting  consumers,
businesses and the economy as a whole, and will also provide a healthy ecosystem for financial
services.
It  also  means  increasing  the  depth  of  the  Single  Market.  In  the  area  of  financial  services,  the
completion of the banking union and the capital markets union agenda offer an opportunity to do
this,  and  would  also  provide  the  cross-border  private  risk-sharing  mechanisms  required  to
underpin the resilience of our economy.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  is  because  deeper  and  more  efficient  bond  and  equity  markets  in  Europe  would  allow
economies of scale to be achieved and capital to be allocated to its most productive uses at the
European  level,  in  line  with  the  Single  Market  objectives.  In  countries  such  as  Latvia,  this  is
particularly  relevant  because  capital  markets  are  less  developed  and  intermediation  remains
largely  bank-based,  which  results  in  fewer  options  for  financing  business  start-ups  and
3
expansion.
Creating  a  genuine  banking  union  where  banks  operate  across  borders  and  diversify  their
sources  of  income  would  also  enhance  cross-border  private  risk  sharing,  with  the  result  that
banks would be able to continue lending to the real economy even when faced with localised
shocks.
For these benefits to materialise, we need to pursue a more ambitious long-term approach to the
capital markets union agenda. At the local level, decisive action is needed to develop the scale
and depth of capital markets in countries with large catching-up potential, such as Latvia.  At the
EU  level,  measures  need  to  be  prioritised  in  areas  which  will  make  a  real  difference  to  the
development  of  capital  markets,  notably  measures  to  address  barriers  in  national  insolvency
frameworks and in taxation.
4
We also need to be ambitious in our endeavours to complete the banking union. The statement
of the Euro Summit adopted in December paves the way for operationalising the backstop to the
Single Resolution Fund, which will create market confidence that bank resolutions will take place
in an orderly fashion. There is also recognition that it is time to start political discussions on the
missing third pillar of the banking union – a European deposit insurance scheme.
This does not mean that we do not need to make further progress in risk reduction. Substantial
risk  reduction  has  been  achieved,  and  the  process  is  ongoing  and  should  continue.  The
European  regulatory  framework  is  already  making  Europe’s  banks  more  resilient  and  gives
authorities  the  tools  to  act  when  risks  build  up.  Banks  now  hold  more  and  better-quality
capital,   and  have  improved  their  liquidity  positions  and  leverage.  Progress  in  tackling  legacy
issues such as high levels of non-performing loans, which have fallen by 30% since 2014, and
the framework for resolution, including the implementation of the minimum requirement for own
funds and eligible liabilities, have also helped to increase buffers and reduce risk and thereby the
scope for risk sharing.
5
The crisis demonstrated how important it is for banks to build up capital buffers in good times. In
my view, the current economic and financial conditions call for more action by macroprudential
authorities to enhance the resilience of the banking sector and ensure the system has buffers in
place that can be released in times of stress. In an increasing number of countries, authorities
are considering activating a countercyclical buffer, as it hedges against economic and financial
shocks, further contributing to risk reduction.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
There are numerous reasons to celebrate the success of Latvia’s first five years in the euro area.
And  there  are  numerous  reasons  to  celebrate  the  euro  as  a  powerful  convergence  tool  that
brings tangible benefits to the lives of European citizens.
But ensuring the longer-term success of the euro requires continued reform efforts to reduce
risks  in  the  financial  and  public  sectors  and  measures  to  reform  our  economies  to  boost
productivity. It requires building up the necessary buffers so that public authorities have the fiscal
leeway to act in times of crisis and the financial sector can continue to finance the economy
throughout its cycle.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Importantly,  it  also  includes  risk  sharing  across  national  borders:  through  the  pooling  of
resources at the EU level to face shocks, through integrated financial markets, and through a
complete banking union.
This  is  essential  to  build  up  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area,  foster  stability  and  growth,  and
improve the lives of the people of Europe.
1
2
3
4
5
According  to  Latvijas  Banka  this  has  resulted  in  savings  of  around  0.6%  of  GDP,  or  €150  million,  in  the
government budget over the five-year period. See the article entitled “Four years in the euro area – have the
promises come true?”, Latvijas Banka Monthly Newsletter, January 2018.
See “Competitive adjustment and recovery in the Spanish economy”, Annual Report 2015, Banco de España,
pp. 39–63; Vansteenkiste, I., “Did the crisis permanently scar the Portuguese labour market? Evidence from a
Markov-switching Beveridge curve analysis”, Working Paper Series, No 2043, ECB, April 2017; and Sestito, P.
and Viviano, E., “Hiring incentives and/or firing cost reduction? Evaluating the impact of the 2015 policies on the
Italian  labour  market”, Questioni di economia e finanza (Occasional Papers), No 325, Banca d’Italia, March
2016.
For instance, Latvia’s total stock market capitalisation was 4% of GDP in 2013, which was the lowest rate
among the EU Member States. See “Capital Markets Union factsheet”, European Commission, 30 September
2015, p. 2.
See,  for  instance,  the  recommendations  included  in  the  “Report  by  the  Working  Group  on  Capital  Markets
Union”, EBCI Vienna Initiative, March 2018.
The fully loaded CET1 ratio of significant institutions was 13.8% in the second quarter of this year, up by 2.6
percentage points compared with the last quarter of 2014.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
