Vitas Vasiliauskas: Central bank digital currencies
Speech  by  Mr  Vitas  Vasiliauskas,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Lithuania,  at  the
Reinventing  Bretton  Woods  Committee  conference  "Managing  the  Soft  Landing  of  the  Global
Economy", Washington DC, 12 April, 2019.
Good morning, dear Ladies and Gentlemen,
 First of all, let me thank the organizers for the opportunity to participate in this conference. I must
say that I was pretty surprised when I received the invitation to cover the topic of central bank
digital currencies – or CBDCs. This probably happened because the Bank of Lithuania has been
seen lately as one of the frontrunners in the broader FinTech domain.
Yet despite being an innovation-friendly regulator, in terms of CBDCs, we do not have much in-
house  projects  to  share,  at  least  at  this  point.  This  is  apart  from  the  digital  collector  coin  of
course, which is quite another thing.
However, I will do my best to cover the topic: in my view, issuing CBDCs represents one of the
most intriguing and complex ideas in current discussions on the monetary system.
Let me begin with a basic question: what exactly are CBDCs?
Well, it is in fact easier to first say what they are not.
 Under  the  current  financial  architecture  central  banks  issue  two  sorts  of  money:  currency  in
circulation  in  the  form  of  the  good  old  banknotes  and  coins,  and  digital  money,  available  as
reserve or settlement accounts with the central bank. Accordingly, households and businesses
cannot hold claims on the central bank in a digital form. The banks and certain other financial or
public institutions can.
And yet, when we talk about the concept of CBDC, we have in mind something new, something
unlike what we currently have.
The  CBDC  would  be  a  novel  type  of  central  bank  money. Although  also  digital,  it  should  be
distinguished  a  traditional  reserve  account.  The  CBDC  would  also  be  fundamentally  different
from private crypto assets. This is because it would be… money! It would serve as a medium of
exchange, a means of payment and a store of value, just like the current forms of central bank
money.
It is thus simple to define what the CBDC is not: not a conventional reserve account, and not a
private crypto asset. But once you start explaining what it is, the picture gets complicated. The
complexity lies in the variety of combinations of different properties that the CBDC can feature.
To somewhat simplify this complexity, let us take one key property – accessibility. The debate is
whether CBDCs should be retail, or wholesale only currencies, or perhaps both. In the first case,
the CBDC would be available for the general public. The accessibility to the wholesale currency
would be restricted to a limited counterparty circle, mostly financial institutions. In between these
two general CBDC types, multiple theoretical sub-models also exist.
One  example  would  be  the  value-based  wholesale  CBDC.  Some  argue  it  could  be  run  on  a
distributed ledger. In such case, it would replace or complement reserves at the central bank
with a restricted-access digital token. A token would be a bearer asset, meaning that during the
transaction  the  sender  would  transfer  value  to  the  receiver,  without  intermediaries.  This  is
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
something fundamentally different from the current system in which the central bank debits and
credits the accounts without transferring actual values.
But here is only one of several possible scenarios for the wholesale CBDC.
Another  basic  variation  would  be  the  value-based  retail  CBDC.  In  this  model,  the  value  –
theoretically – could be stored locally, on some sort of device or a mobile wallet. It could thus
resemble cash – universally available digital cash, guaranteed by the central bank.
We may also discuss account-based retail CBDCs. These would simply come in a form of an
account at the central bank, available to each and every member of the society.
 One  might  ask:  why  would  we  ever  have  to  bother  going  through  this  classification?  For  me,
knowing the basic models allows to better understand the driving factors and motivations behind
the idea.
Let us turn first to the wholesale currency. According to the Bank of International Settlements
(BIS),  some  central  bank-operated  wholesale  payment  systems  are  at  the  end  of  their
technological life cycles, making the current system subject to errors. Thus the rationale for the
wholesale CBDC could be to enhance payments and securities settlement efficiency, as well as
to reduce counterparty credit and liquidity risks.
In terms of the retail CBDCs, different motivating factors are in play. Clearly, we live in an age
characterized  by  the  rise  of  electronic  payment  methods.  Although  these  are  often  more
convenient  and  efficient  than  paper  banknotes,  such  digital  payment  solutions  are  based  on
commercial bank money.
The amount of cash in circulation is declining in some countries. This could mean that one day –
even if it seems like a distant prospect – every single person will have to have an account with a
private entity just to make payments. Unfortunately, this may lead to increased levels of financial
exclusion.  Note  that  we  still  have  vulnerable  groups  which,  for  one  reason  or  another,  are
underbanked.
Therefore, amid the evolving payments market, one of the key motivations for the retail CBDC is
to ensure people’s continued access to the central bank money.
 Beyond payments, CBDCs could have important and, perhaps, desirable implications in other
areas as well.
Some  say  that  issuance  of  the  interest-bearing  retail  CBDC  could  potentially  improve  the
transmission of monetary policy – if indeed it is used widely. First, it may strengthen the pass-
through of the policy rates to deposit and lending rates. Second, the CBDC may alleviate the
effective lower bound constraint, making it possible to go deeper into the negative territory.
Arguably, the retail CBDC could also have positive effects on financial stability. Commercial bank
money  bears  liquidity  risks:  for  instance,  the  risk  of  commercial  bank  default.  Central  bank
money – by definition – is more secure than claims on any private financial institution.
This holds true despite the existing deposit insurance schemes and no matter how sound the
banking system is. Even the finest financial supervisor will not beat the textbook truth.
Knowing this, the retail CBDC would further ensure that the funds stored in bank accounts can
indeed be easily converted to risk-free central bank money. This could provide confidence in the
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
monetary system.
Dear colleagues,
 I am not sure if a digital coin has a reverse side. But a proper physical one certainly does. So
let’s  look  at  the  other  side  of  the  coin  –  the  underlying  risks  and  uncertainties  related  to  the
CBDC.
Let me begin with the retail version of the currency. As a matter of fact, we could have introduced
it a while ago, at least the account-based model. The technology to do so is available. However,
this has not been done, and probably for a reason.
The issue here is that central bank money being risk-free also means that the retail CBDC would
be a safe asset. As such, it might essentially substitute for, let’s say, bank deposits. Being more
secure, and more convenient than cash, it could also be more attractive relative to a claim on a
private bank.
Such a substitution effect could facilitate a flight towards a central bank. In the extreme scenario,
CBDCs could encourage “digital” sector-wide bank runs which could occur in an unprecedented
speed and scale.
The role of the central bank would probably have to change as well, to the point where it may
have  to  extend  credit  to  the  economy.  Here  I  have  to  admit  that  central  bankers  tend  to  be
competent officials. However, market forces are generally more efficient in allocating resources.
As the CBDC crowds out cash and commercial bank deposits, a larger central bank balance
sheet  may  be  needed  to  maintain  bank  reserves  through  liquidity-injecting  open  market
operations.  This  might  increase  credit  risk  for  the  central  banks,  especially  if  it  becomes
necessary to widen collateral eligibility. Larger-scale accumulation of assets could also distort
financial markets.
There also other more general drawbacks applicable to most types of the CBDC.
First,  the  robustness  of  the  proposed  underlying  technologies  for  issuing  the  CBDC  is  quite
uncertain.  For  instance,  the  DLT  is  relatively  immature  and  we  are  still  learning  the  way  it
operates.
Also, the crucial issue is the adherence to the money laundering requirements. Given the ease
with  which  large  amounts  can  be  transferred  electronically,  how  are  we  to  apply  the  AML
standards  to  the  anonymous  forms  of  CBDC?  The  AML  compliance  would  place  a  huge
prevention burden on central banks, on any level of anonymity of the currency.
 Having taken the bird’s-eye view, let us now zoom in at some of the positions of central banks.
The Riksbank in Sweden seems to be the closest to actually issuing a CBDC, the so-called e-
Krona. The bank has been working on it since early 2017, and a possible pilot program is the
pipeline. The underpinning argument is that the state needs to maintain the role in the payment
system, considering the trend of dramatically declining cash use in the country.
Interestingly, the central bank of another Nordic country – Denmark – is on the opposite side of
the pole. It has announced that it has no plans to issue CBDC since it would not improve the
existing  payment  solutions  and  may  also  increase  financial  stability  risks.  Such  divergence  of
opinions in otherwise a relatively homogenous region only illustrates the controversial nature of
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the issue at hand.
Beyond  the  discussion  on  Sweden  and  Denmark,  only  a  few  national  central  banks  (with  the
central  bank  of  Uruguay  being  a  notable  example)  globally  have  taken  real  practical  steps
towards developing CDBCs or have an intention to issue them in the medium term . Most of the
activities have been limited to conceptual research or initial proof-of-concept experiments.
1
 With regard to the Bank of Lithuania, we are generally fond of financial innovation. For instance,
we  even  have  plans  to  open  a  new  generation  technological  sandbox  for  testing  blockchain
solutions (called LBChain).
We therefore do not reject the potential that CBDCs carry. Yet at this point we remain cautious.
I also have to stress that the Bank of Lithuania is part of the Eurosystem. For us, any significant
step in the field of CBDCs would require action at the ECB level. For now, this seems like quite a
distant prospect.
In any case, our future positions in this domain will be based on a rigorous cost-benefit analysis.
We will take into account the possible alternatives. For instance, the Bank of Lithuania already
provides an effective payments infrastructure titled Centrolink. The system supports 24/7 instant
payments and is accessible for all payment service operators, including FinTech companies. By
creating  a  level  playing  field  for  different  types  of  market  players,  we  aim  to  encourage
competition.  This  creates  the  necessary  conditions  for  the  emergence  of  new  and  efficient
private retail payment products.
In some sense, such developments limit the potential added-value of the retail CBDC.
Therefore, assessing the balance between risks and benefits from the perspective of generally
conservative central banks, the wholesale CBDC seems like a more viable option going forward.
However, we feel the need to acquire a better theoretical understanding of the way any sort of
CBDC  would  function,  and  learn  from  practical  pilot  experiments.  Notably,  research  and
monitoring carried out by international organizations, such as the IMF or standard-setting bodies,
could play an important part in finding an optimal future design.
1
As shown by the survey conducted by the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) last year.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
