Yves Mersch: Economic and monetary policy at a turning point –
where  is  the  economy  heading  in  Europe,  the  United  States  and
China?
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Petersberger Sommerdialog, Königswinter, 29 June 2019.
 Despite the escalating trade dispute between the United States and China, the global economy
continues to grow robustly, albeit at a slower pace.
Looking at developments in major economies beyond the euro area, activity in the United States
is supported by the strong labour market, accommodative financial conditions and current fiscal
stimulus. However, economic growth is expected to decelerate.
At  the  same  time,  in  China  the  slowdown  in  domestic  demand  has  been  cushioned  by  the
implementation of a series of fiscal and monetary policy measures. Although the escalation in the
trade dispute with the United States is foreseen to weigh on trade, China is expected to continue
its orderly transition to a more balanced growth path.
The incoming data for the euro area in the first quarter of 2019 have been somewhat better than
expected. Euro area real GDP increased by 0.4% quarter on quarter in the first quarter of 2019,
bolstered by resilient domestic demand.
However, survey information and economic indicators point to somewhat weaker growth in the
second and third quarters of this year. This reflects the ongoing weakness in global trade and the
prolonged presence of uncertainties that continue to weigh on euro area growth, in particular in
the manufacturing sector.
Consequently, the Eurosystem staff projections see euro area real GDP growth of 1.2 % in 2019,
which will accelerate further, to 1.4 %, in both 2020 and 2021. Compared with the March 2019
staff projections, the outlook for real GDP growth has been revised up slightly for 2019, largely
owing to a stronger than expected first quarter. At the same time, real GDP growth has been
revised down for 2020 and 2021, mainly reflecting a somewhat weaker contribution of foreign
demand.
The  fundamental  factors  supporting  the  euro  area  expansion  remain  broadly  in  place.  Labour
market  dynamics  remain  robust,  with  unemployment  at  7.6%  in April,  the  lowest  level  since
August 2008. Employment increased by 0.3% quarter on quarter in Q1 2019, as in the previous
quarter.  The  cumulative  increase  in  the  number  of  people  employed  between  Q2  2013,  the
trough of euro area employment, and Q1 2019 amounts to 10.8 million.
Nevertheless, the risks surrounding euro area growth are tilted to the downside, on account of
the prolonged presence of uncertainties related to geopolitical factors, the threat of protectionism
and vulnerabilities in emerging markets.
Turning to inflation, headline inflation was 1.2% in June, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate,
unchanged from May, which conceals lower energy prices and a recovery in services inflation,
while measures of underlying inflation remained very subdued. On the basis of current futures
prices  for  oil,  headline  inflation  is  likely  to  decline  over  the  coming  months  before  rebounding
towards the end of the year. Oil prices (as measured by the USD price of Brent crude oil) have
risen by more than 20% since the start of the year.
This scenario is broadly in line with the latest Eurosystem staff projections, which foresee annual
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
headline inflation of 1.3% in 2019, rising gradually to 1.4% in 2020 and 1.6% in 2021, broadly
confirming the March outlook.
At  the  same  time,  labour  cost  pressures  have  strengthened  and  broadened.  In  Germany,  for
example, wages rose in the first quarter of 2019 by 2.5% in nominal terms, and by 1.2% in real
terms. This is due to high levels of capacity utilisation and tightening labour markets, which is
translating into a pick-up in wage growth.
Summing up, although the incoming data for the first quarter of 2019 have been somewhat better
than expected, weak global trade and the prolonged presence of uncertainties continue to act as
a drag on euro area growth.
The monetary policy stance
This led the ECB’s Governing Council, at its meeting on 6 June, to take a series of decisions in
pursuit of its price stability objective.
First, we decided to adjust our forward guidance on the key ECB interest rates. We now expect
them to remain at their present levels at least through the first half of 2020, and in any case for as
long as necessary to ensure the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
The decision to shift the date-based part further into the future, from “at least through the end of
2019” to “at least through the first half of 2020”, transparently conveys to the public the Governing
Council’s genuine expectation that the current outlook for price stability very likely will not warrant
a tightening of monetary policy at least for another year.
Second, we confirmed the ongoing full reinvestment of the principal payments from the maturing
securities purchased under the asset purchase programme for an extended period of time past
the  date  when  we  start  raising  the  key  ECB  interest  rates,  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as
necessary  to  maintain  favourable  liquidity  conditions  and  an  ample  degree  of  monetary
accommodation.
Finally,  we  determined  the  modalities  of  the  new  series  of  quarterly  targeted  longer-term
refinancing operations (TLTRO III), which were announced in March. TLTRO III operations will
start in September 2019 and end in March 2021, each with a maturity of two years. We decided
that the interest rate in each operation will be set at a level that is 10 basis points above the
average  rate  applied  in  the  Eurosystem’s  main  refinancing  operations  over  the  life  of  the
respective TLTRO. For banks whose eligible net lending exceeds a benchmark, the rate applied
in TLTRO III will be lower, and can be as low as the average interest rate on the deposit facility
prevailing over the life of the operation plus 10 basis points.
The schedule defining the borrowing costs under TLTRO III is marginally less generous than that
applied under the outstanding TLTRO II, in line with our intent of not discouraging banks that can
afford to fund themselves in the market on attractive terms from doing so at TLTRO II maturity. At
the  same  time,  the  pricing  schedule  incorporates  features  that  can  greatly  enhance  our
accommodative monetary policy stance, as banks with strong lending performance will retain the
opportunity to borrow at negative interest rates.
The pricing remains sufficiently generous – especially when compared with alternative sources
of funding – for banks to keep credit flowing to firms and households on a scale that can continue
to support the economy and inflation.
All in all, this set of decisions will provide the monetary accommodation necessary for inflation to
remain on a sustained path towards levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium
term,  while  also  preserving  favourable  bank  lending  conditions  and  supporting  a  smooth
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
transmission of our monetary policy. This being said, the Governing Council remains ready to act
in case of adverse contingencies and to use its instruments – as appropriate – to ensure price
stability.
A  reliable  strategy  is  an  anchor  for  credible  monetary  policy.  Erratic  policy  debates  for  the
purpose of creating short-term stimulus risk undermining that credibility in the long run.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
