Benoît Cœuré: Euro interest rate benchmark reform: achievements
and remaining challenges
Opening remarks by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the annual dinner of the working group on euro risk-free rates, Frankfurt am Main, 26
February 2019.
 Good evening and welcome to the first annual dinner of the working group on euro risk-free rates.
On this very day one year ago, the working group on euro risk-free rates held its first meeting in
Frankfurt, hosted by the ECB. Looking back, your achievements have been impressive, almost
on a par with the challenges that lie ahead.
In its short existence, the working group has recorded two prominent achievements.
The first is the choice in September 2018 of the ECB’s overnight rate as the new euro risk-free
rate. This decision provided clarity to market participants and planning certainty for the transition
towards more robust benchmarks in the euro area. It also brought the euro area closer in line
with other currency areas in preparing for new benchmarks.
The second achievement is that, at the roundtable on euro risk-free rates in November 2018, the
working group took a major step in reaching out to stakeholders and raising awareness of its
activities.
Sound communication and transparency are vital for spreading awareness about the transition to
risk-free rates beyond a small circle of informed parties. By getting the message across to a
more diverse audience, the working group lends more legitimacy to its recommendations and
does as much as it can to promote market consensus. This first roundtable was a successful
exercise in this regard. In time, I would expect such open communication to play a pivotal role in
the transition to more robust interest rate benchmarks.
Besides these two very concrete achievements, I know that a great deal of work on building a
consensus has been going on behind the scenes in the various sub-structures of the working
group over the past year.
Reaching  agreement  on  recommendations  that  reflect  the  views  of  such  a  wide  variety  of
institutions is not an easy task. Over the course of last year, the working group and subgroups
members held no less than 80 teleconferences and seven working group meetings, which give
some idea of the work that went into aligning views within such a tight time frame.
I would like to thank all of you, including the team supporting the working group chair, for your
contributions, as well as the Secretariats of the ECB and the European Securities and Markets
Authority for their coordinating work and dedication.
These  combined  efforts  seem  to  be  paying  off.  The  working  group  is  now  preparing  several
important recommendations with regard to: (i) the transition away from EONIA towards the new
ECB  euro  short-term  rate,  (ii)  the  most  suitable  methodologies  for  building  derivatives-based
term rates as a fallback to EURIBOR, and (iii) guiding principles for fallback provisions in new
contracts for euro-denominated cash products.
While  these  recommendations  are  still  work  in  progress,  it  seems  that  we  are  nearing  a
consensus on the way forward, which I find encouraging compared with the situation one year
ago. I understand that the feedback received on the working group’s recent public consultations,
which you will discuss in detail at tomorrow’s meeting, was supportive and reflected the views of
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
a good number of respondents. That gives the working group a solid basis for proposing feasible
solutions which can win market acceptance.
The ECB will do its part with the launch of its own overnight rate. We are aware that the launch of
the new rate is essential in the sequencing of events for the year to come. In this regard, I am
glad  to  confirm  that  the  recently  launched  “shadow  production”  of  the  ECB  overnight  rate,  is
working well.
As you know, the daily production of the new rate is planned by October 2019. In the meantime,
the  data  referred  to  as  “pre-ESTER”,  which  are  published  every  maintenance  period,  should
enable future users to familiarise themselves with how the rate behaves.
That  said,  the  quality  and  success  of  the  ECB  overnight  rate  crucially  depends  on  market
participants. In this regard, we expect the members of this group to lead by example, mainly for
two  reasons:  first,  because  many  of  you  represent  banks  reporting  under  the  Money  Market
Statistical  Reporting  Regulation  and  we  count  on  the  timeliness  and  quality  of  your  data
submissions to ensure the quality of the rate that the entire industry will use. Second, as future
users,  it  seems  natural  that  you  should  promote  the  usage  of  the  rate  which  you  yourselves
recommended to the industry.
Let me conclude by saying that, in only one year of existence, the working group on euro risk-free
rates  has  established  itself  as  the  forum  for  benchmark  reforms  in  the  euro  area.  Its
recommendations have so far been widely supported by market participants and it has shown
that the euro area is catching up with other currency areas.
The private sector will face the biggest challenge in view of its role in preparing for the transition,
including reviewing and amending contracts and, crucially, adopting the new benchmarks in its
own day-to-day business. For the working group, the greatest challenge ahead might eventually
be  to  bring  the  whole  industry  on  board  in  preparing  for  an  orderly  transition  to  more  robust
benchmarks.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
