    
 
 
Payments: Diversity Matters 
 
 
Speech given by 
Victoria Cleland, Executive Director, Banking, Payments and Innovation 
 European Women Payments Network Annual Conference, Amsterdam 
5 June 2019 
  I would like to thank Samantha Leighton, Richard Lewis and Sara Ward for their help in preparing this 
speech. 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
1 
  I am delighted to be speaking today at the European Women Payments Network (EWPN) Annual 
Conference.  Amsterdam, as home to what is reputedly the world’s oldest stock exchange, founded in 16021, 
is an apt location to discuss payments.  While people’s fundamental requirements when exchanging value 
probably have not changed very much since then, the choice of how people make payments, and the 
technology which facilitates this, certainly has. 
 Such changes can only come about through listening to what is needed and harnessing innovation.   How 
much more quickly would these changes have come about if EWPN had been around a few centuries ago?  
EWPN’s focus is ‘making diversity matter in fintech’, by building a community for women and by championing 
a more diverse and inclusive payments industry for all.  In keeping with this, I want to set out how, through 
the lens of our work in payments, we are embracing the changes that fintech can bring and why diversity 
matters to the Bank of England.   
 The Bank’s mission is to promote the good of the people of the United Kingdom by maintaining monetary 
and financial stability.  We also have a complementary interest in enabling innovation and encouraging 
competition – including in the fast-moving payments landscape.   
 To deliver against these objectives, we must embrace diversity in the broadest possible sense.  As the  
Bank of England Governor Mark Carney recently stated, ‘a public institution should reflect the public it 
serves.’2  If we want to respond to the needs of the public, we need to understand what matters to them  
– and what better way of doing that than having a diverse range of staff reflecting the population?  Diverse 
teams can reduce group-think and excessively optimistic views, and ultimately reduce the likelihood of poor 
decisions.  And research has shown that companies with more diverse leadership teams tend to outperform 
their peers in terms of profitability and that diversity in companies is positively correlated with innovation. 3 4    
 Payments is an area which is responding well to an increasingly vocal and diverse range of preferences and 
demands across the world.  Different people want - and may need - different ways to pay.  They want 
genuine choice in how, when and where they make payments: they want a new finance.5  Back in the 17th 
century, the Amsterdam stock exchange would have been relying on exchanging coins and printed stocks 
and bonds.  The world of payments has grown significantly – banknotes, cheques, credit/debit cards, and 
now a plethora of mobile payments, e-wallets and even the ability to pay using a watch.  While the wave of 
new fintech providers has greatly increased this choice, for many cash remains the preferred or sole means 
to pay (17% of the UK population are unsure how they would cope, or would not cope at all in a cashless 
society).6  Facilitating access to cash, maintaining confidence in the currency and ensuring that people have 
 1 http://www.worldsfirststockexchange.com/the-worlds-first-stock-exchange.html 
2 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2019/investing-in-ethnicity-and-race-speech-by-mark-carney.pdf  
3 https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-insights/why-diversity-matters   
4 http://media-publications.bcg.com/22feb2017-mix-that-matters.pdf  
5 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2019/a-platform-for-innovation-remarks-by-mark-
carney.pdf?la=en&hash=49FE92075B4C7DBB0C7E0975CDF38488BB0A02FB  
6 https://www.accesstocash.org.uk/media/1087/final-report-final-web.pdf  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
2 
 
2 
 a diverse range of safe and efficient payment methods to choose from, are strategically important for the 
Bank.   
 A diverse set of firms providing a diverse set of payment options is also important for financial stability and 
the operational resilience of the industry.  This gives the public confidence when making and receiving 
payments.  The Bank plays a role in this resilience through the safe functioning of our own payment 
operations such as banknote issuance and the Real-Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) service.  We also 
deliver this through monitoring and mitigating systemic risk across the payment industry, defending the Bank 
and financial sector against increasingly sophisticated cybercrime, conducting risk assessments and 
supervisory activity on those firms that use the Bank’s payment infrastructure, as well as supervising the 
systemically important payment systems themselves.  And we consider the benefits and risks to financial 
stability from the rapidly changing fintech industry.     
 The Bank enables diversity in payment types and providers through the policy and rules we set and the 
infrastructure we operate.  An important catalyst is the renewal of RTGS, where we are making both policy 
and infrastructure changes to support not just a resilient payment system, but one that new players can enter 
and where innovation and competition can thrive.  For those not familiar with RTGS, it is a critical piece of 
national infrastructure and the backbone of UK payments.  Well in excess of £600bn every working day is 
settled through RTGS, including from CHAPS, the Bank-operated high-value payment system, and from the 
final settlement of the UK’s retail payment systems. 
 The Bank has established the RTGS Renewal Programme to develop a new service which will not only 
enhance resilience but will also be fit for the future and promote innovation.  Having defined the Programme 
scope, with input from the payments industry, we are now running a competitive public procurement process 
to appoint a Technology Delivery Partner.  They will work with the Bank on the design and build of the core 
settlement engine.  In supplementing the skills and resources we have in-house, the procurement provides 
the opportunity to benefit from diverse views and to draw on world-class expertise and cutting-edge 
experience on how we design and build RTGS for the future.   
 In renewing RTGS, we are seeking to achieve five key outcomes, all of which will support a safe and diverse 
payment landscape. 
 Despite being over 20 years old, the current RTGS service remains highly resilient.  But we want to do more.  
The new service will be materially stronger and more resilient in an increasingly complex and 
sophisticated environment.  It will be flexible to protect against the threats we understand today and the ones 
we will need to adapt to in the future.   
 RTGS Renewal will promote greater access to payment systems.  We have already made policy changes to 
allow non-bank payment service providers direct access to payment systems and RTGS Renewal will reduce 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
3 
 
3 
 some of the barriers that we know exist today.  It will speed up on-boarding times to the system and reduce 
the operational overheads of membership.  These changes will further accelerate the number and range of 
firms that can gain direct access to payment systems.  Since 2018 five non-bank payment service providers 
have opened accounts in RTGS and around twenty further firms are exploring the possibility of joining.  
These firms can benefit from faster transaction times and reduced individual transaction costs. 
Consequently, the Bank hopes to encourage a greater diversity of players in the payments market, thereby 
encouraging innovation and competition through development of new business models and ultimately 
creating a more diverse payments landscape.  This will increase efficiency and reduce concentration risk 
thus supporting financial stability.   
 RTGS Renewal will also promote resilience and efficiency through greater interoperability across payment 
systems.  An important step to achieving this is the introduction of a new payment messaging standard for 
UK payments: ISO20022, the emerging global standard for payments messaging.  This will bring significant 
and long term benefits for a wide range of firms.  In particular, the Bank and Pay.UK will introduce a 
Common Credit Message across CHAPS, Bacs and FPS which will bring message harmonisation for the 
UK’s main interbank payment systems and compatibility with the emerging international consensus.      
 We will provide improved user functionality in the new RTGS service and build a flexible infrastructure 
capable of adapting easily to new and changing requirements, enabling us to respond to continued 
innovation from new fintech firms as well as established players.  Improved functionality will include read and 
write APIs and richer payment and liquidity data. 
 In 2017 we brought the operation of CHAPS into the Bank to strengthen end-to-end risk management and 
to enhance the safety and security of the £330bn of payments that flow through CHAPS on an average day.  
We are increasingly able to draw on the diverse set of tools and expertise available within the Bank, e.g. 
cyber security skills, to support CHAPS.  We are starting to reshape the requirements that apply to CHAPS 
direct participants, reflecting the expanding range of participants: up from 14 in 1987 to 34 today.  CHAPS 
access criteria and requirements already accommodate a wider range of participants than five years ago – 
including three Financial Market Infrastructures and one non-bank payment service provider. 
 In designing the new RTGS infrastructure to achieve these five key outcomes, and in running the current 
CHAPS and RTGS services, we believe it is important to engage a wide range of firms across the 
payments industry, as well as their customers.  This goes much wider than the current membership: we 
need to think about prospective participants too and to understand the evolving needs of end-users.  To 
bring a range of perspectives and diversity of thought to our approach, the RTGS/CHAPS Board7 has four 
independent members with commercial and international experience and is attended by a representative 
from the National Cyber Security Centre. 
                                                       
7 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/payment-and-settlement  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
4 
 
4 
 We have a number of channels to facilitate engagement, including the RTGS Renewal External Advisory 
Body, the Standards Advisory Panel and the CHAPS Strategic Advisory Forum.8  Membership spans current 
CHAPS direct and indirect participants and not just the traditional large banks, but also new players, trade 
bodies, regulators, various UK government departments, software vendors and end users such as 
corporates.  We work closely with the Prudential Regulation Authority, Financial Conduct Authority and 
Payment Systems Regulator on a range of topics.  And the Bank also engages extensively with Pay.UK, who 
are delivering change across the retail payment schemes through their New Payments Architecture9 
programme. 
 Understanding the needs and challenges of a diverse set of firms and their customers informs our decision 
making.  It means we are better able to reflect the requirements of the firms that use the services we provide 
and ultimately the people of the UK.  And we can balance the potentially competing needs of different 
stakeholders on an informed basis rather than relying only on the views of longstanding contacts. 
 A key piece of engagement took place in summer 2018 when we ran a joint consultation10 with Pay.UK and 
the Payments Systems Regulator on the implementation of ISO 20022. Over 70 organisations replied and 
their responses11 helped refine our approach, for example on Legal Entity Identifiers (LEIs).  Responses 
showed widespread support for making LEIs mandatory for transactions between financial institutions in 
CHAPS.  Many respondents also saw the benefits of mandating LEIs for a wider range of payments but 
flagged the need for wider adoption of LEIs before these benefits could be fully reaped.  The Bank has 
committed to working with key stakeholders including HM Government and the Global LEI Foundation 
(GLEIF), as well as providing further education about the wider economic value of the LEI.  This will lay the 
foundations to make LEIs mandatory for a much wider set of CHAPS payments in the future.  
 We are also seeking industry views on whether the renewed RTGS service could facilitate synchronised 
settlement and importantly what the demand might be.  Synchronisation, or atomic settlement, is the concept 
that two or more transactions (payments or movements of assets) are linked in such a way as to ensure that 
each transaction completes if, and only if, they complete together.  This is an innovative proposition, and we 
are working in close collaboration with the payments industry and potential users on the policy, technical and 
operational design.  Later this year we will provide an update on our August 2018 call for interest on this 
topic.  
 This is an exciting time for payments internationally as well as domestically.  We therefore have a strong 
engagement programme with other central banks and overseas authorities.  We work with our peers to set, 
and role model, global best practice and to find ways to drive harmonisation.  And we can learn from their 
 8 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/payment-and-settlement 
9 https://www.wearepay.uk/new-payments-architecture-programme/  
10 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/payments/rtgs-renewal-programme/iso-20022/iso-20022-consultation-paper.pdf  
11 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/payments/rtgs-renewal-programme/iso-20022/iso-20022-consultation-response.pdf  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
5 
 
5 
 experiences.  This collaboration will be all the more important as we seek to address issues around  
cross-border payments.   
 To deliver the intended outcomes for the RTGS Renewal Programme we will continue with our extensive 
industry engagement and outreach.  And as the transition approaches we also need the payments industry 
to act: to start preparing for the changes needed to their own organisations and to harness the benefits for 
their own firms and customers.  
 Listening, and responding, to a diverse range of views is important in enabling the Bank to advance its 
objectives to benefit the public.  But to be able to react effectively we also need diverse technology and 
diverse and talented staff.    
 Developments in technology, both to enhance resilience of existing payments and to innovate in new forms 
of payments, are important to support the Bank in advancing its objectives.  This is equally true for physical 
and electronic payments.   
 In my previous role as Chief Cashier, I led our work to issue banknotes printed on polymer.  We harnessed 
innovative technology both in the security features selected, and in introducing a tactile feature on the new 
£10 polymer banknote to help blind and vision impaired people identify our notes.  This meant we exploited 
technology to produce banknotes which are not only secure, but inclusive. 
 And now we are assessing how we can embrace diverse technologies through RTGS Renewal.  Although 
the Bank has concluded that Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) is not yet sufficiently mature to provide 
the core for the next generation of RTGS, we still place a high priority on ensuring the new service is capable 
of interfacing with DLT.  In summer 2018 we ran a Proof of Concept12 with four firms to develop payment 
arrangements using innovative technologies.  Importantly, the results demonstrated that participants using 
such technologies could connect to and settle in RTGS.  This has informed our thinking on how RTGS could 
support settlement in a more diverse range of systems, and provided broader insight into the range of 
functionality the Bank might need to offer to support this sector.   
 We are also seeking to develop a renewed service that will be message network agnostic: capable of 
sending and receiving payment messages from multiple sources and interfacing with multiple messaging 
networks without compromising on levels of security or proof.  And we will continue to support the resilience 
of the renewed RTGS by diversifying operations across two sites with a third stand-by settlement platform 
which is geographically remote. 
 As I stressed at the start, the Bank needs to reflect the diversity of the people it serves and so increasing the 
diversity of the Bank’s workforce is at the top of our agenda.  We have set ourselves stretching but 
                                                      
12 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/payments/rtgs-renewal-proof-of-concept.pdf  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
6 
 
6 
 achievable targets in respect of increasing the representation of women and BAME colleagues at all levels of 
the business.13  And we have implemented a wide range of initiatives designed to improve diversity in our 
recruitment, development and retention of talent across a range of protected characteristics. 
 As a member of the Bank’s senior leadership team, I have personal accountability for delivering a step 
change in the Bank’s diversity.  This is crucial in my own Directorate but also for the Bank as a whole.  I am 
the Executive Sponsor of the Bank’s disAbility Network, a staff-led network whose objectives are to: 
    Raise awareness of the full spectrum of disabilities, be they visible or not; and 
  Provide support by identifying and removing barriers for individuals with disabilities and enabling 
them to reach their full potential. 
The Network celebrated its 10th Anniversary last year, and during that time has seen physical changes to the 
building, including an external wheelchair lift (no mean feat in a listed building), hearing loops in key rooms, 
and accessible toilets.  But it is also important to create an inclusive and supportive culture that works for 
everyone.  The disAbility Network is just one of ten staff networks, and it is only through fostering these 
initiatives, ideas and enthusiasm that we can attract and retain a truly diverse range of staff.  
 So to conclude, diversity in payments does matter.  It matters to the Bank; to the firms providing payment 
services; and to the businesses and individuals that use payments every day.  The Bank is playing a leading 
role in facilitating and enabling that diversity through our policy-making, and through our current and 
renewed RTGS infrastructure, in order to promote a diverse, resilient and thriving financial system.  
                                                        
13 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2019/gender-diversity-speech-by-joanna-place.pdf  
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/speeches 
7 
 
7 
 