   26.02.2019 
Keynote speech 
Bloomberg Capital Markets Forum Madrid 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Introduction 
Let me begin by thanking Bloomberg for their kind invitation to participate in the opening 
session of the Bloomberg Capital Markets Forum Madrid. 
In my address I shall refer firstly to the phenomenon of banking disintermediation in Spain 
in the European context, discussing the main implications. And secondly, I shall focus on 
the importance of the Capital Markets Union project as a private risk mitigation and sharing 
mechanism  in  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  which,  in  conjunction  with  the 
Banking Union, will provide for an increase in financial stability in the euro area. 
Banking disintermediation in Europe and in Spain  
As is well known, in the continental European countries banks have traditionally played  a 
key  role  in  the  intermediation  of  economies’  financial  flows.  However,  recent  years  have 
seen an increase in European firms’ preference for tapping capital markets.  
Fixed-income  financing  has  thus  risen  from  accounting  for  8%  of  European  firms’  total 
financial debt at end-2007 to 12% in the third quarter of 2018.  
Spain has been no stranger to these global trends of banking disintermediation. Indeed, the 
proportion  of  fixed-income  securities  relative  to  the  business  sector’s  financial  debt  has 
risen over the same period by 10 percentage points (pp). This has been mirrored by a fall, 
since 2010, of 9 pp in banks’ weight in the total financial assets of the financial sector.  
This gradual increase in business financing on the capital markets by means of the issuance 
of fixed-income securities is due to a series of factors, some transitory and others more 
structural in nature. 
Notable  among  the  transitory  factors  common  to  all  Euro  area  countries  was  the 
introduction in 2016 of the Eurosystem’s Corporate Sector Purchase Programme, which is 
part  of  the  Asset  Purchase  Programme.  This  programme  has  contributed  to  boosting 
corporate  funding  through  fixed-income  issues,  by  reducing  their  cost  relative  to  bank 
financing.  In  any  event,  analyses  by  Banco  de  España  economists  show  that  this 
programme also contributed indirectly to improving the access by SMEs to bank funding. 
This was because banks allocated a high proportion of resources freed up by the repayment 
of  loans  by  securities-issuing  firms  to  funding  smaller-sized  firms  without  access  to  the 
securities markets. 
Following  the  end  of  net  asset  purchases,  since  early  2019  the  Eurosystem’s  Asset 
Purchase  Programme  has  remained  active  by  reinvesting  the  amounts  maturing  on  the 
securities purchased. It is thus expected that this programme will continue to be conducive 
to the issuance of corporate debt.  
Among the more permanent factors behind the rise in capital markets in Europe are, firstly, 
the new international banking regulations in response to the crisis. True, the new regulatory 
requirements to improve banks’ resilience to adverse shocks contribute to strengthening 
financial stability. But they might also hamper banks’ ability to compete in the intermediation 
of some financial flows. 
 3/7 
 Secondly,  the  influence  of  the  alternative  fixed-income  and  equity  markets  is  worth 
highlighting.  The  launch  of  these  markets,  geared  to  luring  medium-sized  firms,  is  also 
contributing  to  the  development  of  the  capital  markets.  In  particular,  in  Spain  we  have 
witnessed the development of the alternative fixed-income market MARF. That said, their 
size is still small in most European countries. 
In the future, this trend towards the greater development of capital markets might continue 
if progress is made on the European project to create a Capital Markets Union, as I shall 
later discuss. 
A further factor pointing in this same direction is the potential increase in long-term saving 
associated with population ageing. The reason is that, for this investment horizon, capital 
markets  may  be  a  comparatively  more  attractive  option  than  in  the  case  of  short-term 
saving.  
Moreover, technological progress might prompt an increase in the activity of new non-bank 
competitors with innovative technologies. So far, market penetration by this type of player 
in  the  credit-supply  business  is  limited  in  most  European  countries.  Initiatives  like  the 
regulatory sandbox currently being designed in Spain, have the objective of promoting the 
emergence of these type of players.  
These  controlled  test  environments  aim  to  provide,  with  all  due  security  measures  for 
participants and the system as a whole, a nimble framework that provides for the viability 
testing of the new business models based on new technologies. 
They will also enable the supervisory community to gain knowledge on how new business 
models and technologies function and the new risks associated with them. In turn, this in 
depth  knowledge  will  allow  supervisors  to  fully  exploit  the  proportionality  principle 
embedded in regulations for those viable projects that might finally exit the test environment. 
Because we should not forget that such test environment should have a temporary nature. 
Hence,  for  those  projects  that  prove  viable,  the  principle  of  same  regulation  for  similar 
activities  and  risks  should  prevail.  In  any  event,  it  is  currently  difficult  to  foretell how the 
development of these disruptive technological players will evolve in the future. 
Like any process of change, financial disintermediation will involve significant benefits for 
society; but it is not free from challenges for banks, for the regulator and, naturally, for the 
Banco de España itself, in its role as guarantor of financial stability.  
Among the benefits for those demanding funds, associated with a more diversified financing 
structure, are, on one hand, their greater stability in the face of shocks that affect specific 
institutions in the financial sector.   
Indeed, the international financial crisis highlighted the greater difficulties in gaining access 
to funding for those firms depending exclusively on bank lending, in contrast to those with 
a more diversified financial structure. These problems were more acute for those firms  – 
chiefly SMEs – operating with a small number of banks more harshly affected by the crisis, 
since the possibilities of replacing their usual lenders with new banks was not always easy 
owing to asymmetrical information problems.  
4/7 
  On the other hand, the development of non-bank funding sources may also contribute to 
providing readier financing for specific investment projects; for instance, those undertaken 
by innovative or newly created firms, for which the availability of bank lending may be more 
limited. It should be borne in mind that the launch of some of these projects may have a 
positive impact on firms’ productivity growth.  
Naturally, these advantages for those demanding funds may have positive effects for society 
as a whole, insofar as they result in higher and more stable economic growth.  
From the standpoint of fund suppliers, the existence of alternative means of investing their 
saving may result in more attractive return/risk combinations for various savers, depending 
on their needs and preferences.  
So  that  households  and  firms  may  benefit  fully  from  all  the  advantages  of  banking 
disintermediation, they will need to have sufficient financial knowledge. This is something 
that the Banco de España, along with other bodies such as the CNMV, is firmly committed 
to through financial education programmes such as “Finance for all”.    
Evidently,  disintermediation  poses  substantial  challenges  for  banks.  Greater  competition 
from  non-bank intermediaries  may  affect  both  banks’  business  volumes  and  net  interest 
income. This potential loss of income is significant at the current juncture, at which banks 
are posting modest levels of profitability, the economy is slowing and private-sector demand 
for funding remains sluggish. 
In  response  to  this  more  competitive  and  challenging  environment,  banks  could  adopt 
various strategies such as greater income diversification, the containment of operating costs 
and increased investment in technology. 
From the regulatory standpoint, the main challenge will involve maintaining a level playing 
field for all financial system participants, so that similar activities posing similar are subject 
to a comparable level of regulation.  
As the supervisor of banks and guarantor of financial stability, the Banco de España also 
faces very important and specific challenges as a result of disintermediation.  
In this new environment, the relative importance of the main risks to financial stability will 
foreseeably  change  with  an  increase  of  those  linked  to  market  risk.  As  a  result,  the 
supervision and analysis of the financial risks arising outside the banking system and of the 
interconnections between banks and other financial system participants will become more 
important. These interrelations will not only take the form of cross-balance sheet or income 
statement positions; similarities between the portfolios of different types of participants may 
also  mean  that  shocks  initially  affecting  one  institution  or  a  group  of  institutions  may 
ultimately have repercussions for all other financial market participants.  
In  this  respect,  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  Banco  de  España  is  responsible  for 
activating  and  deactivating  certain  macroprudential  tools  introduced  under  legislation  to 
mitigate systemic risk in the financial sector. Most of these instruments are applied almost 
exclusively to banks. Thus, growing banking disintermediation might diminish the general 
effectiveness  of  such  instruments,  if  other  participants  in  the  financial  system,  to  which 
these tools were not applicable, were to engage in activities similar to those of banks. 
 5/7 
 To mitigate this risk, the forthcoming creation of a Spanish Macroprudential Authority will 
provide  the  appropriate  forum  in  which  all  financial  system  supervisors  may  share  their 
analysis  of  risks  and  coordinate  the  most  suitable  response,  without  leaving  “gaps”  that 
might restrict effectiveness 
Private risk mitigation measures in the Economic and Monetary Union 
In  any  event  we  should  be  mindful  that,  to  ensure  greater  stability  in  European  financial 
systems, it does not suffice to adopt measures at the national level; it is also necessary to 
push through a greater level of development and integration of European capital markets so 
that, in conjunction with the Banking Union, the risk-sharing and mitigation mechanisms at 
the level of the euro area as a whole are strengthened. 
In this connection, allow me to dwell on the importance of private risk mitigation measures. 
The  crisis  highlighted the  scant  power of these  channels  in the Economic  and  Monetary 
Union, compared with other monetary unions. It also became evident that these channels 
diminish, or even disappear, precisely when they are most needed. 
It is estimated that in the United States the cross-border ownership of capital across states 
enables  40%  of  the  asymmetric  shocks  affecting  a  State  to  be  diluted  among  the  rest 
through private capital markets. However, in the euro area such dilution is only 10%, owing 
to a greater national bias in asset holdings. 
The main private channel for risk dilution in the euro area at present is that of lending by the 
European  banks  that  operate  in  different  Member  States.  But  this  channel  becomes 
unstable  and  may  even  shrink  or  disappear  in  situations of  uncertainty  owing  to  the  link 
between sovereign States and their domestic banks. 
As is known, capital markets in Europe are less developed and less integrated than in the 
United States. Corporate financing on equity markets is very limited and, moreover, shows 
a strong national bias. 
In the United States, cross-border holdings of assets play a significant role in mitigating the 
shocks that affect a State. However, in Europe this mechanism is very limited.  
This  is  why  it  is  crucial  to  complete  the  Capital  Markets  Union  project  so  as  to  achieve 
greater depth and integration of European Union capital markets. That will allow for greater 
risk-sharing in private euro area channels and less reliance on bank financing, which will 
result in greater stability in the euro area.  
The aim of this project is to provide new financing sources for firms at a lower cost, and at 
the same time to attract more foreign investment towards the European Union. To achieve 
this, the European Commission proposed a plan of action in 2015 with over 30 measures to 
construct an integrated capital market in the European Union, to be completed by 2019. 
However, so far, the implementation of these measures has been slow and incomplete.  
It  is  a  far-reaching  project  requiring  highly  diverse  measures,  including  most  notably  the 
creation of market infrastructure, the harmonisation of market regulation and supervision, 
and the strengthening of the European supervisory authorities.  
6/7 
  There is also a need to move towards harmonising insolvency arrangements, both for banks 
and non-financial corporations, and to tackle aspects such as the bias in some countries’ 
tax systems towards debt as opposed to equity financing. 
Moreover,  this  project  takes  on  particular  importance  in  the  context  of  the  exit  from  the 
European  Union of  the  United Kingdom,  which  currently  plays  a  key  role  as  a  European 
financial centre.  
In connection with the Capital Markets Union, some initiatives have been adopted to provide 
financing  for  those  segments  with  scant  access  to  bank  lending.  One  example  is  the 
innovation projects for which the promotion of venture capital funds is being considered.  
Measures  have  also  been  adopted  to  promote  the  use  of  simple,  transparent  and 
standardised securitisations in order to provide bank lending to small firms. These examples 
evidence the complementarities between bank markets and capital markets, and also how 
the Banking Union and the Capital Markets Union reinforce one another. 
Turning to equity markets, progress has been made to provide firms with access to these 
markets.  Further,  many  studies  have  been  undertaken  to  identify  the  obstacles  to 
international investment.  
Yet, in order to equip the euro area with greater stability, resolute headway must also be 
made in European bank integration. Pan-European banks are an essential requirement if we 
are to have a single market for wholesale and retail financial services. That will provide both 
for  gains  in  efficiency  and  cost  reductions  in  banking  services.  And,  moreover,  it  would 
contribute to improving the euro area’s stability in the face of shocks. 
In this respect, the culmination of the Banking Union with its three pillars and the subsequent 
creation of pan-European banks would also enable the link between sovereign risk and bank 
risk to be substantially mitigated.  
There  has  been  significant  progress  on  the  first  two  pillars,  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism and the Single Resolution Mechanism. But the third pillar  – the creation of a 
European Deposit Guarantee Scheme – remains pending.  
In conclusion, in Europe, and in Spain in particular, we have witnessed a phenomenon of 
greater  disintermediation in  recent  years.  Associated  with it is  a  more  significant  role  for 
capital  markets  when  it  comes  to  providing  financing  for  the  economy  and  channelling 
citizens’ savings. In parallel, technological change conducive to disintermediation is under 
way, and is prompting the creation of new services and risks that must be addressed by the 
supervisory community.  
To harness these market trends so as to promote the soundness and stability of Economic 
and  Monetary  Union,  resolute  progress  must  be  made  towards  the  greater  European 
integration of banking markets, fomenting at the same time the development and integration 
of capital markets throughout the Union.  
Thank you. 
  7/7 
