Carlos  da  Silva  Costa:  Why  we  must  complete  banking  union  -
financial stability threats would hit citizens' trust
Article by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, in the 100th edition of the
OMFIF Bulletin, 21 January 2019.
 Following the 2008 crisis, reforms were needed in Europe’s financial sector. The establishment
of the single rulebook and the launch of the European Union’s banking union with its rules and
institutions constitute a commendable success in this regard.
The  banking  union  is  currently  based  on  two  pillars:  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and
Single  Resolution  Mechanism.  However,  since  these  were  put  in  place,  the  political  will  to
complete the banking union has waned. 
The  banking  union  is  missing  critical  elements  –  a  fully-fledged  European  deposit  insurance
scheme, a backstop to the Single Resolution Fund and the provision of liquidity in bank resolution
– which jeopardises its fundamental benefits. As we progressed along the road, new and bigger
hurdles emerged. Policy-makers focused excessively on ‘risk reduction v. risk sharing’ and lost
sight of the banking union’s overall objectives.
Incomplete setup
In  this  incomplete  setup,  banks  are  ‘European  in  life  but  national  in  death’.  Supervisory  and
resolution decisions are mostly taken at the European level, but the ensuing consequences still
lie with taxpayers at the national level. This may have a potentially serious impact on national
budgets, as the ultimate guarantor of financial stability remains national.
In  view  of  the  mismatch  between  European  oversight  and  national  liability,  the  different
stakeholders’ objectives and interests are unaligned. It is important to consider who is actually
looking after financial stability.
Four years after the SSM became operational, much has been accomplished. Danièle Nouy, the
former chair of the Supervisory Board (2014–18), must be praised for her decisive contribution to
this success. Her perseverance was essential to establish the mechanism’s credibility.
As Andrea Enria takes over Nouy’s mandate, now is a good opportunity to reflect on the many
achievements of Europe’s crisis management set-up and draw some preliminary lessons from
the current (incomplete) architecture.
Looking ahead
With the benefit of hindsight, we should reflect on the need to strengthen the SSM’s decision-
making  process,  the  need  to  draw  a  line  clearly  between  regulatory  powers  and  supervisory
oversight,  and  ensuring  the  application  of  the  principle  of  EU  ‘financial  stability  responsibility,
regulatory responsibility and supervisory responsibility’.
Strengthening  the  decision-making  process  of  the  SSM  would  ensure  shared  ownership  of
problems  and  decisions,  encouraging  a  broader  vision  on  the  implications  of  the  SSM’s
decisions on financial stability. This could be achieved through the establishment of intermediate
committees similar to those of the ECB’s monetary policy function.
The  separation  of  supervisory  functions  from  regulatory  ones  is  necessary  for  the  political
legitimation  of  regulatory  standards.  The  overlap  of  regulatory  and  supervisory  territories
guarantees  compliance  with  the  principle  of  central  responsibility  for  financial  stability.  In  this
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
context, it is necessary to find ways to ensure and safeguard this basic principle within banking
union.  It  is  also  essential  to  determine  which  coordination  and  convergence  mechanisms
between territorial regulatory and supervisory authorities can be established between the banking
union and the remaining EU member states.
One should not underestimate how much has been achieved in recent years. Nevertheless, the
foundations  of  Europe’s  financial  architecture  are  still  not  sufficiently  robust  to  withstand  the
impact of a future crisis. This should be a priority for policy-makers and relevant institutions.
Decisive political will to move forward with the completion of the banking union is required. In the
absence of this will, Europe must revisit its existing rules to safeguard financial stability. This is in
the  best  interests  of  its  people  as  few  things  can  be  more  destructive  to  citizens’  trust  in
European institutions than threats to financial stability.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
