Olli Rehn: Global economic outlook - a European perspective
Speech by Mr Olli Rehn, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas,
Dallas, 19 August 2019.
Accompanying slides of the speech.
 I would like to thank the Dallas Committee on Foreign Relations and the Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas for your kind invitation to give a talk here today. It is a great pleasure to have the chance to
discuss the economy and monetary policy in such company.
I will start with some thoughts about life in a monetary union that is something that unites us, as
Texas  is  a  classic  case  study  in  the  US  dollar  union,  and  my  country  Finland  is  a  founding
member of the European Monetary Union.  I will then present a European view on the near-term
global economic outlook. Finally, I will discuss euro area monetary policy.
1
One relevant perspective on the economics of a monetary union is provided by the well-known
theory  of  optimum  currency  area.  This  emphasizes  the  significance  of  asymmetric  shocks,
normally country-specific, which can cause costly adjustment problem for an individual member
state when the interest rate is set for the entire currency area and the exchange rate towards the
other member countries is fixed. Within currency unions, labour mobility and income transfers
have been regarded as key elements for adjusting to asymmetric shocks.
Generally,  an  economy  living  on  a  single  commodity  and  its  refining  industry,  and  therefore
exposed  to  cyclical  fluctuations  of  this  particular  commodity,  is  assumed  to  be  particularly
vulnerable to asymmetric shocks. In economics, this is often called the ‘Texas phenomenon’,
since the difficulties of the oil-rich state of Texas in adjusting to the often large fluctuations in
crude oil prices in the US dollar union (i.e. in the absence of a state-level Texan currency of its
own) has been considered a classic example of an economy susceptible to asymmetric shocks.
It may surprise you, although it should not, but the Texas phenomenon was widely discussed in
Finland in the 1990s when European Monetary Union was being developed. I am not sure how
relevant the Texas phenomenon still is here, as I have understood that the Texan economy is
today well diversified, with many thriving industries.
But for a small economy in a monetary union, in the presence of large asymmetric shocks, the
Texas  phenomenon  certainly  is  relevant.  Oil  has  not  been  found  in  Finland,  but  we  do  have
industries  that  have  experienced  large  swings  in  fortunes,  such  as  the  forest  and  electronics
industries – including what was, for a period of time, the very successful mobile phone business
of Nokia Corporation.
In order to adjust to the shocks to above mentioned industries, together with the global financial
crisis, we eventually had to restore our cost competitiveness through an internal devaluation, as
an  external  adjustment  was  no  more  possible.  Following  difficult  negotiations  with  the  trade
unions and employers, the social partners agreed on a ’competitiveness pact’ in 2016. Together
with some other measures, it has helped to reduce unit labour costs by 6.5% in 2014–17, and
our economy has recovered from zero growth to 2-3% growth in the last years. Employment rate
has increased from 68% to over 73%.
Today,  the  production  of  mobile  phones  does  not  play  a  major  role  in  the  Finnish  economy
anymore, and the role of traditional paper production has also diminished. The sustainable bio-
economy has, however, given the Finnish forest industry a new lease of life. Various branches of
technology-intensive industries have become more important in Finland, including healthtech, as
well as various forms of cleantech.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is a fact of life that asymmetric shocks are always a feature of a monetary union. They are one
important reason to reform and improve the structures of European Monetary Union.
The euro was introduced twenty years ago in order to insulate the Single Market of the European
Union from exchange-rate crises and competitive devaluations. The most difficult moments of
European  Monetary  Union  followed  the  Great  Recession,  when  the  European  sovereign  debt
crisis  ran  wild  in  2010–12.  The  roots  of  the  crisis  lay  in  the  systemic  weaknesses  of  the
monetary union, which were not recognized in the first two decades of the euro in 1990–2010.
A lot has been learned from the crisis and done to strengthen European Monetary Union since
then.  The  most  important  steps  still  to  be  taken  concern  the  financial  system.  The  European
Banking  Union  needs  to  be  finalised,  and  progress  is  needed  in  building  the  Capital  Markets
Union. At the same time, every member state of EMU should work to strengthen the structures of
its  economy,  pursue  growth-enhancing  reforms  and  ensure  the  sustainability  of  its  public
finances.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
[SLIDE 2]
Let  me  now  turn  to  recent  developments  in  the  global  economy.  We  are  experiencing  a
widespread slowdown. Growth has slowed in basically all major economic areas during the past
year.
I  would  identify  three  main  reasons  for  this  subdued  global  growth.  The  first  reason  is  trade
tensions. Tariffs and other trade barriers have been raised. And even if the direct effects of the
actions taken so far may be limited, they have already increased uncertainty about the future of
international  trade.  Looking  ahead,  there  is  a  risk  that  projectionism  becomes  the  norm.  This
would  be  very  harmful  for  the  world  economy,  not  to  mention  economic  areas  like  Texas  or
Finland.
[SLIDE 3]
Trade  barriers  have  a  negative  impact  on  investments  and  purchases  of  durable  goods,  in
particular.  They  explain  part  of  the  recent  stagnation  in  the  volume  of  global  trade.  Pervasive
uncertainty has hit its growth, which has fallen from +4-5% evento below zero.
Secondly,  the  many  twists  and  turns  of  Brexit  have  increased  uncertainty  about  under  what
terms the EU will trade with the UK in the future. This has already affected euro area trade with
the UK. If a so-called hard Brexit materializes, it would certainly have a negative effect on euro
area growth. For euro area exports, the UK is the second largest destination, almost as large as
the United States.
In addition to the disturbances related to international trade, we can also ask whether the long
upswing after the Great Recession is maturing. The United States economy is experiencing the
longest period of growth in its history and seems to be enjoying almost full employment.
The  third  reason  for  the  deteriorating  global  outlook  is  the  slowdown  in  China.  This  has  been
going on for a while already and seems to be partly structural in nature. But trade tensions and
vulnerabilities in China’s domestic economy have also contributed to the slowdown. Alternative
estimates of China’s GDP already suggest significantly lower growth rates.
[SLIDE 4]
Overall, many risks have materialized in the global economy recently. The change in the global
economic outlook has also been felt on the financial markets, not least in the expected path of
policy  interest  rates.  Earlier  expectations  of  a  gradual  normalization  of  monetary  policy  have
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
recently been replaced by expectations of further policy easing, including rate cuts. Long-term
interest rates have declined significantly.
The global slowdown has also been felt in the euro area. While in 2017 euro area GDP still grew
by  2.4%,  the  economy  began  to  cool  in  the  second  half  of  2018.  Current  macroeconomic
projections for the euro area foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.2% in 2019.
[SLIDE 5]
As  in  many  other  developed  economies,  recent  developments  in  the  euro  area  have  been
especially weak in manufacturing. The Purchasing Managers’ Index for the manufacturing sector
has declined significantly. Recently, manufacturing output has declined in Germany.
During 2018, it was thought that the headwinds for the euro area economy were mostly coming
from idiosyncratic factors related, in particular, to the auto industry. In the course of this year it
has become more likely that we are witnessing a more lasting deterioration.
However,  all  this  recent  gloom  in  international  trade  and  manufacturing  does  not  necessarily
mean a serious slump in the euro area economy as a whole. Domestic demand has remained
quite robust, supported by an accommodative monetary policy and strong labor markets.
[SLIDE 6]
The unemployment rate in the euro area stood at 7.5% in June, close to an all-time low. The
labor  force  participation  rate  has  risen  from  59%  to  67%,  the  highest  level  ever  recorded.
Moreover,  since  reaching  the  trough  of  the  business  cycle  over  six  years  ago,  euro  area
employment  has  increased  by  about  10.5  million  persons.  So,  the  strong  labor  market
development is supporting domestic demand in the euro area and partly compensating for the
decline in external demand.
[SLIDE 7]
However,  despite  the  stronger  labour  market  and  accelerating  wages,  inflationary  pressures
remain  muted  and  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  have  declined  with  the  weakening
economic  outlook.  Therefore,  a  significant  degree  of  monetary  stimulus  continues  to  be
necessary to ensure that financial conditions remain very favourable and to support euro area
growth and domestic price pressures.
In  its  meeting  in  July  25,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  communicated  the  need  for  a  highly
accommodative monetary policy stance for a prolonged period, as inflation rates, both realised
2
and projected, have been persistently below levels that are in line with our aim.
If the medium-term inflation outlook continues to fall short of our aim, the Governing Council is
determined  to  act,  in  line  with  its  commitment  to  symmetry  in  the  inflation  aim.  With  the
symmetric approach, inflation may vary around 2% in the short-term, to reach our target in the
medium term, thus supporting the anchoring of inflation expectations.
We  stand  ready  to  adjust  all  of  our  instruments,  as  appropriate,  to  make  inflation  converge
towards its aim in a sustained manner. We are currently examining options, including ways to
reinforce  our  forward  guidance  on  policy  rates,  mitigating  measures  related  to  the  negative
deposit  facility  rate  –  such  as  the  design  of  a  tiered  system  for  reserve  remuneration  –  and
options for the size and composition of potential new net asset purchases. Key to success here
is that the measures form a package of complementary and mutually reinforcing elements.
It  is  noteworthy  how  much  we  have  in  common  with  the  central  banks  of  most  developed
countries. We have independence, as well as clearly defined mandates. We aim at price stability
and  have  floating  exchange  rates.  We  have  not  adopted  any  fixed  monetary  policy  rule.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Accountability  and  transparency  ensure  public  confidence.  We  understand  the  importance  of
expectations and communication. We have used non-standard monetary policy measures and
have included them in our regular toolboxes.
At the same time, many central banks are reviewing their monetary policy strategies. The Fed is
conducting such a review, as you well know. So is the Bank of Canada, which does it regularly. I
have personally been advocating a review of the ECB’s monetary policy framework.
The ECB – much like other central banks – operates in an environment where long run trends,
such as population aging and lower long-term interest rates, as well as concerns about inequality
and  climate  change  can  have  important  societal  effects.  It  is  acknowledged  that  the  central
banking community needs to understand better the implications of these structural changes for
growth, employment and inflation dynamics, so as to deliver more effectively on our mandates.
There are other pertinent arguments for a strategy review. In the first place, monetary policy is
conducted in an economic environment with low interest rates, inflation and even growth. This
environment  is  very  different  to  that  of  2003,  when  the  ECB  last  conducted  a  review  of  its
strategy. Secondly, monetary policy is done with very different tools from those of 16 years ago.
And  thirdly,  it  is  good  practice  to  periodically  bring  the  brightest  minds  in  the  academic
community  together  with  practical  decision-making  to  evaluate  our  monetary  policy  strategies
and conduct a systematic dialogue with civil society.
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
Regarding  the  economic  outlook  in  general,  a  major  challenge  concerns  the  prospects  for
international trade and more generally various forms of international cooperation – not least the
battle against climate change.
A multilateral approach to decision-making may sometimes be cumbersome and slow. However,
we  can  ask  whether  is  at  all  possible  to  deal  with  the  current  global  challenges  without  a
multilateral approach.
Here, global institutions play an important role. It is essential to maintain them, but at the same
time  to  reform  them  to  face  new  challenges.  While  the  IMF  has  been  able  to  adapt  itself
successfully  to  the  post-crisis  era,  the  World  Trade  Organisation  is  in  great  need  of  reform
today. That could be one important transatlantic project for the coming years.
When we join forces, we are stronger. I am always happy to see Europe and the United States
acting together and improving the multilateral system. I’d like to see more of that.
Thank you very much for your attention!
1
2
The official name is Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), but I use European Monetary Union here to adapt to a
U.S. audience.
The June 2019 Eurosystem staff forecast for the euro area foresees annual HICP inflation at 1.3% in 2019, 1.4%
in 2020 and 1.6% in 2021.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
