Cleviston Haynes: Driving change toward the new economy
Address by Mr Cleviston Haynes, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the Opening of
the 2019 Week of Excellence, Bridgetown, 25 February 2019.
 Good Morning and welcome to the Courtney Blackman Grande Salle.
When I spoke at this event a year ago, I drew attention to the difficult circumstances in which the
Barbados  economy  found  itself,  the  need  for  urgent  decisive  action  by  government  and  the
critical supportive role of the private sector and labour in meeting the challenges ahead. We can
all  agree  that  much  has  happened  since  that  time.  The  newly  elected  political  administration
quickly  adopted  the  Barbados  Economic  Recovery  and  Transformation  plan,  with  the
endorsement  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  The  Social  Partners  have  been  actively
engaged  in  helping  to  develop  a  programme  that  achieves  its  objectives  while  mitigating  the
potential adverse effects on the most vulnerable.
Already, we are seeing encouraging signs. Our public finances have been reordered to the extent
that we are on target to achieve a primary surplus of 3.3% of GDP for FY 2018/19. Tax refund
payments have resumed and the central government is now making payments on a timely basis.
The implementation of the domestic debt restructuring has facilitated a reduction in the debt ratio
which  is  now  targeted  to  fall  to  60  percent  by  2033.  Our  demonstrated  commitment  to
adjustment and structural reforms has garnered the support of the IDB and the CDB and our
Gross  International  Reserves  now  exceed  the  benchmark  of  12  weeks  of  import  cover.
Confidence, so necessary for investment and growth, is returning.
However, we cannot relax as a sustainable path requires us to build on these successes and
implement  reforms  including  those  needed  to  strengthen  the  financial  management  of  public
enterprises,  improve  the  quality  of  service  delivery  within  the  public  sector  and  enhance  tax
administration. These reforms when fully implemented will be closely, no doubt, aligned with your
theme of “Driving Change Toward the New Economy”.
The  new  economy  is  knowledge-based  and  services  and  technology  driven.  It  promotes
innovation  and  creativity.  It  is  fast  paced  and  customer-focused.  The  new  economy
is  competitive  and  it  calls  for  and  requires  resilience.  It  is  characterised  by  volatility,
uncertainty, complexity and ambiguity. It reminds us that change is constant.
As  a  small  open  economy,  we  have  transitioned  from  agriculture  to  one  led  by  tourism  and
international business.   As  demonstrated  last  year  when  government  altered  its  corporate  tax
structure  to  address  external  challenges  in  the  international  business  sector,  we  have  to  be
prepared  to  adapt  to  tectonic  shifts  in  the  economic  environment.  In  this  era  of  modern
communications, competition may originate from within or outside our territorial boundaries. We
have to be assessing constantly our ability to adapt to the threats posed by our competitors and
to  the  potential  shocks  on  the  horizon.  As  an  economy,  we  have  to  embrace  emerging
opportunities that promote diversification and enhance competiveness. Firms and industries that
are reluctant or unable to adapt risk extinction.
Facing this new economy, therefore, requires change. The Barbados Economic and Recovery
Transformation (BERT) programme symbolizes one aspect of this change as we seek to restore
economic and fiscal discipline. However, there is also a need for a change in attitudes, a change
in behaviours, a change in mind-set and a change in culture.  
William Jefferson Clinton, the 42  president of the United States said that “In the new economy,
information, education and motivation are everything.”
nd
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
If technology is what will drive this new economy, data is the fuel. Data and analytics will better
allow us to innovate and will inform real-time decision-making. From a Central Bank perspective,
having timely and accurate data will allow us to monitor what is happening in the economy, to
recognise trends and to make sound recommendations for public policy. More broadly, it will help
Barbados  to  better  understand  our  markets,  whatever  the  sector,  and  to  target  them  more
precisely, so that we can best utilise what are often limited resources. It will help us to navigate
the volatility, the uncertainty, the complexity and the ambiguity of which I spoke earlier.
Whether your department or organisation provides the Central Bank with statistics directly, or
whether  it  is  called  upon  to  provide  information  to  other  agencies,  such  as  the  Barbados
Statistical Service, I encourage you in the public sector to cooperate, ensuring that the data you
provide is accurate and submitted in a timely manner. Remember, it is based on this data that
Government makes policy decisions: decisions about new taxes; decisions about expenditure
cuts; decisions about capital projects.
But using data to guide our decision-making is only half of the equation. The other half is our
ability and willingness to embrace the changes that will come with the new economy. That is the
education and motivation of which President Clinton spoke.
Whether you are in the public sector or in the private sector, you will be called upon to do more
with less because of the fiscal and economic constraints. Public sector leaders who now have
smaller budgets need, therefore, to be more nimble and flexible, and to improve efficiency in their
operations. New approaches to traditional tasks are now needed.
The Bank is committed to playing its part in helping the new economy to become a reality by
supporting  those  who  will  power  it.  The  financial  sector  is  changing  rapidly,  and  we  have  to
adapt. Already,  the  Bank  is  working  with  government  and  the  private  sector  to  modernise  the
framework for payments. And, we are automating more of our internal processes and systems to
improve our service to you.
The new economy is not something that will just happen. It is something that we have to make
happen. Let us use this Week of Excellence to jumpstart our thinking and our actions in this area.
Let us use the opportunity provided by these difficult economic times to finally resolve some of
the  issues  with  which  we  have  struggled  in  the  past.  I  want  to  wish  you  a  good  week  of
discussions and I look forward to the outcomes.
I thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
