 Ghana Stock Exchange “Ring the Bell for Gender Equality 2019” in 
Collaboration with the International Finance Corporation 
 Keynote Address from Mrs. Elsie Addo Awadzi 
2nd Deputy Governor, Bank of Ghana 
  
 
The Chairperson 
The Managing Director, Deputy M.D., and staff of the Ghana Stock Exchange 
The Country Director of the IFC 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen 
 It  is  a  great  honour  to  be  invited  to  speak  at  this  august  event  to  commemorate 
International Women's Day 2019! It is humbling to share this moment with my good old 
friends  at  the  Ghana  Stock  Exchange  with  whom  I  labored  over  the  years  to  develop 
various  aspects  of  Ghana’s  capital  market  infrastructure.  I  am  also  humbled  to  stand 
here today on behalf of all the women (many of whom are in this room today including 
some  from  the  BoG)  and  others  who  are  not  here  today  but  who  have  devoted  their 
time, energy, intellect, and other resources to advance economic development in Ghana 
in their own small way, sometimes at great personal sacrifice.  
 I  am  reminded  today  that  all  around  the  world,  women  of  all  colour,  all  ages,  faiths, 
and  backgrounds,  are  being  celebrated  for  their  incredible  contributions  to  their 
societies and the world at large. 
 1 
 I  would  like  to  thank the  Ghana  Stock  Exchange  immensely  for  hosting  this  “Ring  the 
Bell  for  Gender  Equality”  event  to  commemorate  International  Women’s  Day,  joining 
stock exchanges around the world who are taking a stand for gender equality. 
 The significance of the occasion should not be lost on us who are gathered here today. 
This year’s theme of “Balance for Better” challenges us all to “Think Equal, Build Smart, 
and Innovate for Change” to promote more a gender-balanced world in every sphere of 
human life. 
 Chairperson,  remarkable  progress  has  been  made  in  providing  equal  opportunities  for 
both  men  and  women  over  the  last  few  decades  in  all  spheres  of  human  endeavour.  
Given  this  progress,  there  is  sometimes  the  tendency  to  dismiss  lingering  constraints 
that  some,  especially  women,  face  all  over  the  world  to  carve  out  and  maintain  their 
place in society. 
 Study after study reveals some troubling statistics: 
   Globally,  women  still  lag  behind  their  male  counterparts  in  economic,  educational, 
health, political, and other areas (the so-called gender gap). Women are 26 percent 
less  likely  to  be  employed  than  men,  and  are  likely  to  earn  about  24  percent  less 
compared to men (WEF 2018); 
 2 
  In its Global Gender  Gap Report of 2018, the  World Economic Forum  noted that it 
could  take 108 years to  close  the  global  gender  gap  and 202 years to  bring  about 
parity  in  the  workplace.  Ghana  placed  89th  among  149  participating  countries  in 
2018 in terms of the gender gap (WEF 2018); 
   Female  talent  is  reported  to  be  among  the  least  utilized  economic  and  business 
resources around the world. A recent Mckinsey study posits that making even small 
inroads  in  closing  the  global  gender  gap  could  potentially  increase  global  GDP  by 
$12 trillion by 2025; 
   Further studies show that the contributions of African women to economic activities 
on  the  continent  are  considerable,  albeit  mostly  informal.  The  UN  FAO  estimates 
that  women  in  Africa  are  responsible  for  70%  of  crop  production,  50%  of  animal 
husbandry  and  60%  of  market  activity.  Women  undertake  nearly  100%  of  food 
processing  activities,  in  addition  to  child  care  and  other  responsibilities  in 
households; 
   An Ernst & Young report asserts that women in Africa make up over 50% of Africa’s 
growing population, and yet are “a powerful untapped economic force” that should 
be further harnessed as an important contributor to the African growth story; 
   According to the latest World Bank Enterprise Survey, in both the public and private 
sectors,  only  1  in  26 salaried  African  women  is  employed  in  a  senior  management 
 3 
  position,  compared  with  1  in  every  6  men.  Women’s  formal  ownership  of  SMEs 
currently  stands  at around  a  third of  all  registered  SMEs  in  Africa,  and women-
owned  SMEs are  more  likely  to  have  lower  sales  and  annual  turnover,  less 
employees, and smaller size than those enterprises owned by men. 
In  spite  of  these  statistics,  there  is  hardly  any  controversy  about  the  immense  role 
played  by  women  in  building  homes,  communities,  societies,  nations,  and  beyond.  At 
least in Ghana, the hard work and sacrifices of women in every sphere of our national 
life  from  time  immemorial,  are  well  recognized  and  praised  often.  Yet  we  must  ask 
ourselves why are there so few women in the corporate board rooms or in Parliament? 
Why are so many women confined to the informal sector? Why do women own only a 
third  of  all  SMEs  in  Africa?  Why  are SMEs  owned  by  women  more  likely  to  be  smaller 
than  those  owned  by  men?  Why  do  women  remain  “a  powerful  untapped  economic 
force”  in  a  continent  that  is  seeking  to  emerge  from  the  tag  of  being  the  world’s 
poorest?  How  can  we  tap  more  into  the  talents,  gifts,  intellect,  and  perspectives  of 
women to advance our nation-building efforts? 
 What will it take for women to bridge the gap?  To be clear, women  have no inherent 
limitations. Let us also be clear that what is needed in most cases is not singling women 
out for special favour. What is needed is a concerted effort by women and men alike, 
businesses,  schools,  Governments,  and  everyone  to  identify  formal  and  informal 
constraints  that  sometimes  work  against  women  in  their  quest  to  reach  their  full 
 4 
 potential.  Sometimes  sub-conscious  cultural  and  social  norms  and  stereotypes  are  the 
culprit.  Sometimes  women  themselves  have  to  make  choices  that  put  the  interests  of 
others  ahead  of  theirs.  The  proverbial  “a  woman  can’t  have  it  all”  means  that 
sometimes women must choose to put their own economic and social advancement on 
hold  while  they  care  for  children,  husbands,  or  aging  relatives.  Nothing  wrong  with 
these  choices.  Research  however  shows  that  women  are  sometimes  more  able  to 
participate fully in business and formal work while playing these other roles well, given 
the right support structures such as good and affordable child care, good healthcare for 
the family, reliable transportation, and access to finance. It is these types of constraints 
that  need  to  be  addressed  to  help  make  our  socio-economic  development  agenda  all-
inclusive.  
 The  contributions  of  both  the  private  and  the  public  sector  are  required  to  promote 
opportunities for women to participate fully in the formal economy, in order to improve 
their  earning  potential,  assist  families  to  move  out  of  poverty  and  contribute  to  the 
overall  economy,  while  empowering  those  in  the  formal  sector  to  move  up  the 
corporate  ladder.  Designing  equal-opportunities  employment  policies  and  laws,  family-
friendly  work-place  policies  and  anti-discriminatory  practices,  and  promoting  increased 
technical and coaching support for women-owned small businesses will go a long way. 
 Ghana’s  financial  services  industry  is  blessed  with  a  fair  representation  of  women. 
Today is a good day to celebrate the contributions of the women who have contributed 
 5 
 to  the  development  of  Ghana’s  financial  sector  whether  in  the  securities,  banking, 
insurance, and pensions industry. The financial industry has a key role to play in helping 
to remove formal barriers to women’s socio-economic development, chief among which 
is access to finance. We must ensure that women are able to access appropriate forms 
of finance in order to sustain and grow their businesses. The GSE should encourage the 
listing  of  more  female-owned  and  run  businesses  and  promote  diversity  in  the 
management and boards of listed companies, with a fair representation of women. We 
must encourage more women to take advantage of emerging technologies to run their 
businesses and to improve their access to finance. We must harness the opportunities 
presented  by  the  rapid  growth  of  mobile  money  to  make  more  finance  available  to 
women  in  the  informal  sector  and  encourage  them  to  formalise  their  economic 
activities. 
 I can say that the Bank of Ghana is an equal-opportunities employer that is committed 
to  fostering  an  all-inclusive  work  place,  with  equal  opportunities  for  all,  including 
women. Today, there is a significant number of women in senior leadership positions at 
the Bank, and Management will continue to promote equity and create an environment 
where women feel supported to give off their utmost best.  
 To  conclude,  let  us  all  renew  our  commitment  to  promoting  more  balanced 
representation of women in every way we can. The business case for it is self-evident.  
  6 
 To quote Ms. Condoleezza Rice, Former US Secretary of State, “So often, it takes only 
one woman to make a difference. If you empower that woman with information, and 
training, or a microloan, she can lift up her entire family and contribute to the success 
of her community. Multiply that one woman’s impact by a hundred or a thousand, and 
perhaps a million lives can change.”  
Let us all “better the balance”, and better our world! 
I thank you for your attention! 
   7 
