Benjamin E Diokno: The road to financial inclusion and sustainable
economy
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Philippine  Exporters  Confederation,  Inc.  (PHILEXPORT)  3rd
General Membership Meeting, Manila, 16 August 2019.
 To  Chairman  Paterno  Dizon,  Dr.  Sergio  Ortiz-Luis,  Jr.,  President,  officers  and  members  of
PHILEXPORT;  colleagues  from  the  government;  partners  in  development;  and  distinguished
guests: good morning.
I  am  pleased  to  join  you  for  the  3rd  General  Membership  Meeting  of  PHILEXPORT  as  we
recognize the country’s export industry as a key driver of growth and employment generation.
I am equally pleased be invited to speak on financial inclusion and economic growth. By bringing
financial products to the unserved and underserved, we can empower them and at the same
time, nurture economic activity and invigorate static industries by linking businesses to new and
untapped markets. I also believe that financial inclusion is vital in bringing about a sustainable
economy.
For this occasion, allow me to tell you about the BSP’s financial inclusion journey, which has
been filled by highlights, milestones, and interesting developments. It is, however, by no means a
smooth  sailing  one  –  we  at  the  BSP  are  aware  of  the  challenges  to  serving  the  financially
excluded that persist until today.
Nevertheless, as I recount BSP efforts and share our current initiatives, I hope you will realize
new opportunities for enterprise and collaboration.  I also hope to drive the message that our
recognition of micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) lies at the heart of our steadfast
push for financial inclusion.
The BSP financial inclusion journey started in the 2000s with the adoption of microfinance as a
flagship program for poverty alleviation.  This was reinforced by the General Banking Law of 2000
that recognized microfinance as a unique banking activity.
When the BSP embraced microfinance as an advocacy, it sought to expand access to credit
among  the  entrepreneurial  poor  (e-poor).  The  BSP  has  always  believed  in  the  viability  of  the
country’s e-poor as a market segment, especially when they are provided with financial products
and services appropriate to their needs and capacities.  Such mindset has led BSP to issue over
40 microfinance-related circulars and foster an enabling regulatory environment.
The  BSP’s  microfinance  work  gradually  expanded  into  financial  inclusion.  In  fact  in  2007,  the
BSP was the first central bank in the world to establish an inclusive finance unit.
Today, financial inclusion is not merely an institutional advocacy—it is a strategic imperative. Our
amended  charter  states  that  we  in  BSP  should  increase  access  to    financial  services  and
consider the interest of the general public.
But BSP cannot do it alone. BSP has to reach out and collaborate with various stakeholders to
synergize all efforts in financial inclusion.
BSP is spearheading  the implementation of the National Financial Inclusion Strategy (NSFI), an
important mechanism for multi-stakeholder coordination of financial inclusion initiatives.
  1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
As the principal driver of the NSFI, the BSP serves as Chair of the 17-agency Financial Inclusion
Steering Committee (FISC) which adopted MSMEs and agriculture as priority sectors. 
This  is  because  we  recognize  the  immense  potential  and  unique  challenges  of  MSMEs. 
Together with agriculture, MSMEs form the backbone of the Philippine economy.  In fact, MSMEs
account for 99.6% (911,768) of the country’s enterprises and generate 61.6% of employment.   
Despite having considerable growth  prospects  and  being  a  source  of  livelihood  for  millions  of
Filipinos, the MSME sector has not realized its potential. MSMEs only account for 3.32% of the
country’s gross domestic product (GDP), while their gross value added (GVA) sits at 35.7%. 
Capital  investment  remains  low,  with  MSME  loans  in  the  banking  system  accounting  for  only
6.2% and 9.2% share in total business loans.
Knowing that a significant number of members of Philexport are MSMEs, I’m sure you know that
the  lack  of  access  to  credit  remains  a  fundamental  obstacle  to  the  further  development  and
sustainability of our MSMEs.
 On  the  supply  side,  issues  include  the  prevalent  perception  that  MSMEs—compared  to  the
corporate  and  consumer  markets—are  low-profit  and  high-risk.  This  aggravates  the  lack  of
understanding of the MSME segment. It results in the scarcity of appropriate financing products
and inability of banks to cater effectively to MSMEs.
On the demand side, MSMEs are reluctant to approach banks due to the lack of collateral and
credit  history  needed  for  loan  application.  They  have  limited  business  capacity  and  financial
management skills to capably meet loan requirements. In addition, the have limited knowledge of
alternative modes of financing.
Recognizing  these  challenges,  the  BSP  is  set  on  strengthening  the  country’s  financial
infrastructure, supporting innovation, and bridging the information gap.
To build the foundation for a robust financial infrastructure, we work in close coordination with
government agencies and partners in development.
Let me go through each one briefly.
The BSP has been working with the Credit Information Corporation (CIC) in building a strong and
reliable credit information system.  Likewise,  we  are  working  with  the  Government  of  Japan  to
establish  a  Credit  Risk  Database  (CRD)  that  will  produce  scoring  models  predicting  the
creditworthiness of SMEs to help improve their access to finance through risk-based lending and
lessen the dependence of banks on collateral.
The  BSP  also  supports  law  relevant  to  financial  inclusion.  One  of  which  is  the  Philippine
Identification System Act (PhilSys Law, RA 11055) passed in August 2018. This will overcome
the problem of the lack of verifiable identity documents faced by many Filipinos. 
Meanwhile, the Personal Property Security Act (PPSA, RA 11057) – also passed in August of last
year – will enhance the access of MSMEs to business and consumer credit by enabling the use
of alternative collateral such as equipment, inventory, and warehouse receipts.
Following these developments, the BSP is also supporting the passage of a new Warehouse
Receipts Law, as well as the review and amendment of the Agri-Agra Reform Credit Act of 2009
(RA 10000). The introduction of updated and more flexible provisions in these laws would help
MSMEs, especially those that are agriculture-related, to gain access to credit; leverage innovative
models; and induce banks to venture into MSME and agriculture financing with better terms and
standards for compliance.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  addition  to  lending  legislative  support,  the  BSP  implements  the  Credit  Surety  Fund  (CSF)
together  with  the  Cooperative  Development  Authority  (CDA).    The  CSF  program  enables
cooperatives,  businessmen,  and  MSMEs  to  boost  their  credit  worthiness  by  providing  surety
cover of up to 80% for bank loans.  As of September 2018, there are 54 CSFs throughout the
country with over 17,000 loan beneficiaries.
In 2015, the BSP also launched the National Retail Payment System (NRPS, Circular 980). As
part of this, PESONet and InstaPay were launched in 2017 and 2018 with the aim of boosting
interoperability among banks and propelling electronic retail payments to at least 20% by 2020.
As of December 2018, there are 47 participating institutions for PESONet and 36 for InstaPay. 
PESONet  transactions  reached  approximately  PHP  86.8  billion  while  InstaPay  transactions
totaled approximately PHP 8.2 billion.  We foresee a healthy rise in these figures with greater use
of the funds transfer schemes by the public. And I encourage everyone here to try and make use
of these systems.
Towards  achieving  financial  inclusion  in  the  country,  the  BSP  likewise  continues  to  champion
innovation. 
In 2014, the BSP issued Circular 855 on risk-based lending, which provides banks the latitude to
focus on capacity to pay rather than collateral, waives documentary requirements (e.g., income
tax return and financial statements) for microfinance loans, and provides reasonable loan options
for start-up businesses.
In 2016, the BSP issued Circular 908 on the agriculture value chain financing (AVCF) framework,
which identifies guidelines and incentives for banks planning to engage in AVCF.  This policy was
designed to encourage banks to adopt new financing approaches so that much needed funds
can be directed towards enterprises in the ambit of the agriculture sector.   
As part of the push for AVCF, the BSP has pursued a number of projects in recent years.  These
include the conduct of a study and forum on AVCF. 
This year, the BSP will be undertaking a pilot AVCF project for selected banks and value chain
commodities, with the aim of building the technical capacity of banks in AVCF and optimizing
existing government programs on value chain development. 
By  aligning  with  priority  commodities  for  this  project,  we  hope  that  further  development  can
enable the country’s participation in regional and global value chains.  The project is set to be
launched in September.   
In the last two years, the BSP has also created a policy package to address the commonly cited
barriers to participation in the formal financial system, such as the lack of funds, documentary
requirements,  and  means  to  travel  to  financial  institutions.  These  policies  aim  to  help  the
unserved and underserved establish a financial footprint that would enable them to avail of and
maximize products and services in the market.
In 2017, the BSP issued a pair of regulations: Circular 940 on cash agent operations and Circular
987 on the establishment of branch-lite units (BLUs). These policies were crafted with the goal of
expanding  the  network  of  low-cost  touch  points  to  efficiently  deliver  financial  products  and
services to the public.
Cash agents and branch-lite units, with their high visibility and convenient setup and functions,
allow small business owners and country folk to save on time, travel, and transaction costs.
There are currently 1,874 BLUs and over 40,000 cash agents actively operating in the country.
In  February  last  year,  the  BSP  issued  one  of  its  most  pivotal  policies  for  financial  inclusion  –
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Circular  992,  which  outlines  the  framework  for  Basic  Deposit  Accounts  (BDA).    By  easing
financial and documentary requirements, the BDA aims to encourage account ownership among
the  country’s  unbanked  and  low-income  population,  and  provide  them  an  entryway  into  the
country’s financial ecosystem.
Since the issuance of Circular 992, the BDA has garnered considerable interest from the public
and key industry players.  To date, there are 77 banks offering BDA.  We hope and expect an
even greater take-up in the coming years as the BDA enters the market mainstream.  
With the advent of the digital age, the BSP has also turned to innovation to take central banking to
the next level.  As a regulator, we strive to stay ahead of the curve and keep abreast of industry
developments and trends. 
The  BSP  was  in  fact  one  of  the  early  adopters  of  the  “test-and-learn”  approach,  which  has
allowed the entry of pioneering technologies, business models, and products such as e-money
into the domestic market.  The test-and-learn approach remains a cornerstone of our innovation
mindset and enduring pursuit of an enabling regulatory environment.
As the BSP leverages on digital technology to fast-track financial inclusion, it continues to open
doors to new players such as fintechs that can diversify and transform the market, as well as
pave  the  way  for  the  banking  industry  to  make  the  technological  leap  forward  by  laying  the
regulatory groundwork for digital financial services (DFS).
In 2017, the BSP endorsed the country’s first cloud-based banking project for one of the largest
rural banks in Mindanao.  I am pleased to share that this project has been very successful. 
The  bank  now  fully  operates  on  a  cloud-based  system  and  has  also  participated  in  a  cross-
border remittance scheme.  We see this project as a model for large-scale replication and one
that will encourage greater receptiveness to banking innovations.           
In February this year, the BSP issued Circular 1033 to streamline the licensing requirements of
our supervised institutions intending to offer electronic payment and financial services (EFPS). 
These initiatives, together with the passage of the National Payment Systems Act (NPSA, RA
11127)  that  grants  the  BSP  with  regulatory  oversight  over  payment  systems,  will  significantly
advance our digitization agenda. 
But in order for these developments and initiatives to be relevant, there needs to be a systematic
collection and dissemination of relevant data, one that would inform policymaking and lead to a
better, deeper understanding of the MSME market.
With this in mind, we have embarked on two initiatives designed to bridge the information gap –
the  national  demand  side  survey  on  MSME  finance  and  the  strategic  partnership  with  the
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), Microfinance Council of the Philippines, Inc. (MCPI), and
Alliance  of  Philippine  Partners  for  Enterprise  Development,  Inc.  (APPEND)  to  expand  the
Negosyo Center financing ecosystem.
The national demand side survey on MSME finance, which is currently under development, will
enable  us  to  address  the  need  for  comprehensive  data  on  the  MSME  sector  and  formulate
responsive policies and programs. 
Meanwhile,  an  essential  component  of  the  Negosyo  Center  partnership  is  the  creation  of  an
information database on Negosyo Centers and microfinance institutions (MFIs) nationwide.  This
database  will  enable  Negosyo  Centers  to  refer  clients  to  various  financing  options  and  help
microfinance institutions design products and services appropriate to clients’ needs.
Finally,  let  me  say  this  again.  Financial  inclusion  is  a  necessary  condition  for  a  sustainable
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
economy. To realize this vision means pursuing change and reform however difficult they may
be.  The BSP’s enduring financial inclusion journey attests to this.  We craft our policies not only
for the present, but also with the future in mind.       
I    am  optimistic  that  the  various  financial  inclusion  initiatives  of  the  BSP  that  I  discussed  this
morning will help improve access of MSME exporters to financial services,  and consequently
enhance our country’s  export competitiveness. 
With these thoughts, let me say that the best for all of us is yet to come.  Maraming salamat po.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
