  M a y   2 9 ,   2 0 1 9 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
 
 Opening Remarks at the 2019 BOJ-IMES Conference 
Hosted by the Institute for Monetary and 
Economic Studies, Bank of Japan 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
 I. Introduction 
Good  morning.  I  am  honored  to  welcome  such  distinguished  guests  from  around  the 
globe  to  the  25th  BOJ-IMES  Conference.  On  behalf  of  the  conference  organizers,  I 
thank all the guests in this room.   
This year’s conference is titled “Central Bank Design under a Continued Low Inflation 
and Interest Rate Environment.” The current theoretical framework for monetary policy 
was  developed  before  the  Global  Financial  Crisis.  At  that  time,  inflation  and  interest 
rates in most advanced economies – with Japan being the notable exception – were high 
enough  to  make  conventional  monetary  policy  effective.  To  stimulate  the  economy, 
central banks  had sufficient safety  margins to reduce  short-term nominal  interest rates. 
After  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  however,  this  situation  changed  significantly.  Both 
inflation  and  nominal  interest  rates  have  remained  far  below  their  pre-crisis  levels  for 
more than a decade.   
In my opening remarks, I will briefly review the policy  agenda for central banks at the 
moment under a continued low inflation and interest rate environment. 
 II. Policy Agenda under a Continued Low Inflation and Interest Rate 
Environment 
This  year’s  conference  focuses  on  four  topics:  the  monetary  policy  framework, 
monetary  policy  instruments,  the  relationship  between  price  stability  and  financial 
stability, and spillovers to emerging and developing economies.     
 A.  Monetary Policy Framework 
Regarding  the  monetary  policy  framework,  textbook  New  Keynesian  models  assume 
that  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  anchored  around  the  inflation  target  and  the 
central  bank  sets  the  policy  rate  mechanically  referring  to  the  natural  rate  of  interest. 
When  these  assumptions  hold,  all  that  the  central  bank  needs  to  do  to  stimulate  the 
economy  is  to  keep  real  interest  rates  below the natural  rate of  interest.  However, this 
conventional policy framework currently faces two major challenges.   
The  first  challenge  concerns  the  question  to  what  extent  policy  makers  should  rely  on 
 1 
 the  natural  rate  as  a  benchmark  for  monetary  policy  conduct.  This  problem  is  partly 
associated with  the difficulty  of  measuring the natural rate of  interest.1  Of course, this 
problem  can  be  overcome  to  some  extent  by  looking  at  common  trends  in  a  range  of 
estimates of the natural interest rate. In fact, various recent estimates of the natural rate 
of  interest  suggest  that  the  current  level  appears  to  be  much  lower than  before,  giving 
rise to concerns about a secular decline in the natural rate of interest. 
The  other  major  challenge  is related to the stability of  long-term  inflation expectations 
under  “missing  inflation.”  In  fact,  a  good  number  of  advanced  economies  have 
experienced  very  sluggish  price  developments  in  spite  of  significant  improvements  in 
economic  activity.  This  raises  concerns  over  the  credibility  of  inflation  targets,  since 
central  banks’  track  record  in  hitting  their  target  provides  the  foundation  for  the 
credibility  of  such  targets.  Japan’s  experience  shows  that  it  is  difficult  to  re-anchor 
long-term inflation expectations from inflation below the target level. That suggests the 
importance  of  maintaining  well-anchored  inflation  expectations.  At  the  same  time,  if 
missing inflation comes from structural factors such as globalization and digitalization, 
central  banks  should  continue  examining  how  best  to  manage  inflation  expectations, 
while  securing  stability  in  economic  and  financial  conditions,  within  the  flexible 
inflation targeting framework. 
 B.  Monetary Policy Instruments 
Regarding the  monetary policy instruments, under normal circumstances, central banks 
pursue their mandate by adjusting short-term nominal interest rates. However, following 
the Global Financial Crisis, central banks have been forced to find alternatives – policy 
instruments that are often  labeled as  unconventional such as  forward guidance and the 
active use of the size and composition of their balance sheet – to overcome the effective 
lower bound on nominal interest rates.   
The recent experience with regard to  unconventional policy  shows that  such new tools 
are  effective  to  counter  massive  adverse  shocks  even  after  hitting  the  effective  lower 
bound.  At  the  same  time,  our  understanding  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  is 
limited.  In  fact,  while  policy  makers  have  developed  a  wide  range  of  unconventional 
policy tools, their effectiveness and transmission mechanisms may differ depending on 
 1  See, for example, Powell (2018b). 
 2 
 financial conditions and economic structure. It is also important to explore how central 
banks  should  use  those  unconventional  policy  tools  in  the  future.  In  that  regard,  an 
interesting  question  is:  will  those  unconventional  policy  tools  become  conventional 
policy tools in normal times? 
 C.  The Relationship between Price Stability and Financial Stability 
Regarding  the  relationship  between  price  stability  and  financial  stability,  it  is 
increasingly  recognized  that  the  prolonged  low  interest  rate  environment  raises  two 
major issues. 
The first issue is that continued low interest rates can change the risk-taking behavior of 
financial  institutions  and  affect  financial  stability.  Along  this  line,  two  types  of  risks 
have  been  pointed  out.  The  first  is  that  low  interest rates  lead  banks  to  take  excessive 
risks,  and  the  second  is  that  any  further  cuts  in  policy  interest rate  beyond  a  “reversal 
interest  rate”  discourage  risk-taking  by  banks.  While  empirical  studies  on  this  issue 
have been accumulating, they are not conclusive about the nature of risks including their 
probability distribution.2 
The  second  issue  is  how  to  implement  policy  instruments  for  safeguarding  financial 
stability.  To  address  this  issue,  two  different  approaches  are  explored.  One  approach 
proposes  a  division  of  labor  in  the  policy  toolkit  based  on  the  Tinbergen  rule:  that  is, 
monetary  policy  instruments  are  assigned  to  the  pursuit  of  price  stability,  while 
macroprudential  policy  instruments  are  assigned  to  the  achievement  of  financial 
stability.3  The  other  approach  is  to  “lean  against  the  wind,”  that  is,  monetary  policy 
instruments are implemented not just to achieve the price stability goal but also give due 
consideration  to  financial  stability  goals,  under  the  premise  that  monetary  policy 
influences  broad areas of  financial activities.4  It should be noted that, however, a wide 
range  of  people  including  those  supporting  the  first  approach  recognize  that  no 
macroprudential policy toolkit is perfect, and that a key part of the second approach is to 
stave off a  catastrophic  financial disruption rather than to moderate financial  cycles  in 
an  orderly  manner.  In  that  regard,  the  two  approaches  should  not  be  regarded  as 
 2  For example, Maddaloni and Peydró (2011) documents findings consistent with the first type of risks, and Heider, 
Saidi, and Schepens (2018) shows a negative relationship between the policy rate and lending volume. 
3  See, for example, Svensson (2010).   
4  See, for example, Borio and Lowe (2002) and White (2006).   
3 
  completely different ones. 
 D.  Spillovers to Emerging and Developing Economies   
Regarding  the  spillovers,  clearly,  one  of  the  issues  on  the  policy  agenda  relating  to 
prolonged  low  inflation  and  interest  rates  is  challenges  for  emerging  and  developing 
economies.  The  reason  is  that  such  an  environment  in  advanced  economies  could 
amplify  capital  flows  into  emerging  and  developing  economies  where  inflation  and 
interest  rates  tend  to  be  higher.  Although  these  capital  inflows  help  boost  domestic 
economic  activity,  they  also  carry  the  risk  of  economic  disruptions  such  as  a  sudden 
outflow  of  capital  or  losses  by  borrowers  due to  exchange  rate  fluctuations.  Recently, 
there has been a growing awareness among developing and advanced economies of the 
potential adverse impact of volatile capital flows.5   
 III. Conclusion 
We are now about to start the 25th BOJ-IMES Conference. Following my remarks, this 
year’s Mayekawa lecture will be given by the former president of the European Central 
Bank, Mr. Jean-Claude Trichet. I am looking forward to hearing his views based on his 
long experience in macroeconomic policy management in the euro area.   
In the keynote speech, Professor Carl Walsh of the University of California, Santa Cruz, 
the  new  Honorary  Adviser  to  IMES,  will  share  his  views  on  monetary  policy 
frameworks  under  a  low  inflation  and  interest  rate  environment  from  an  academic 
perspective.  As  the  author  of  the  textbook  Monetary  Theory  and  Policy,  which  is  a 
must-read for central bank economists, and of various other significant contributions to 
the literature, he is one of the most influential academics in this field. 
Next,  the  paper  presentations  will  focus  on  the  following  four  topics:  first,  optimal 
monetary  policy  taking  international  capital  inflows  into  account;  second,  the  reversal 
interest  rate;  third,  the  Tinbergen  Rule  for  financial  stability  and  price  stability;  and 
fourth, the impact of prolonged low nominal interest rates on banking stability.   
The  final  and  concluding  session  will  be  the  policy  panel  discussion,  moderated  by 
 5  See Powell (2018a) for the current view of the Federal Reserve Board. See Rajan (2015) for a discussion of the 
spillover. 
 4 
 Professor Athanasios Orphanides of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, another 
Honorary  Adviser  to  IMES.  As  panelists,  we  will  have  Mr.  Christian  Hawkesby, 
Assistant Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand; Mr. Klaus Masuch, Principal 
Adviser  to  the  Director  General  Economics  of  the  European  Central  Bank;  and  Mr. 
Masazumi Wakatabe, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan.   
I  hope that  the theoretical  and  practical  discussions  in  this  conference  will  deepen  our 
understanding  of  central  bank  design  under  a  continued  low  inflation  and  interest  rate 
environment.   
Thank you for your attention. 
   5 
 References 
 
 
Borio, Claudio E. V., and Philip William Lowe, “Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary 
Stability:  Exploring  the  Nexus,”  BIS  Working  Paper  No.  114,  Bank  for 
International Settlements, 2002. 
Heider,  Florian,  Farzad  Saidi,  and  Glenn  Schepens,  “Life  below  Zero:  Bank  Lending 
under  Negative  Policy  Rates,”  ECB  Working  Paper  Series  No.  2173, European 
Central Bank, 2018. 
Maddaloni,  Angela,  and  José-Luis  Peydró,  “Bank  Risk-Taking,  Securitization, 
Supervision, and Low Interest Rates: Evidence from the Euro-Area and the U.S. 
Lending Standards,” Review of Financial Studies, 24(6), 2011, pp. 2121–2165. 
Powell,  Jerome  H.,  “Monetary  Policy  Influences  on  Global  Financial  Conditions  and 
International Capital Flows,” speech at “Challenges for Monetary Policy and the 
GFSN in an Evolving Global Economy,” Eighth High-Level Conference on the 
International  Monetary  System  sponsored  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund 
and Swiss National Bank, in Zurich on May 8, 2018a. 
Powell,  Jerome  H.,  “Monetary  Policy  in  a  Changing  Economy,”  speech  at  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City’s  Economic  Policy  Symposium  on  “Changing 
Market  Structure  and  Implications  for  Monetary  Policy,”  in  Jackson  Hole  on 
August 23–25, 2018b. 
Rajan,  Raghuram  G.,  “Competitive  Monetary  Easing:  Is  It  Yesterday  Once  More?” 
Macroeconomics and Finance in Emerging Market Economies, 8(1–2), 2015, pp. 
5–16. 
Svensson,  Lars E. O., “Monetary Policy  after the Financial Crisis,” presentation  at the 
Second  International  Journal  of  Central  Banking  Fall  Conference  in  Tokyo  on 
September 17, 2010. 
White, William R., “Is Price Stability Enough?” BIS Working Paper No. 205, Bank for 
International Settlements, 2006. 
 6 
