Yaron Amir: Are we again taking financial stability for granted? (Or:
Do we need central banks?)
Speech by Mr Yaron Amir, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Israel Economic Association
Conference at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 6 June 2019.
 "In recent weeks that has been an increase in uncertainty in Israel.  While the financial
markets have so far not been tremendously agitated by it, we cannot assume that there
is no damage, and it is clear that we must deal with it and that this is a challenging
period.  In order to prevent harm to the economy, all policy makers and public officials
must act responsibly and do all that they can in order to reinstill certainty and fiscal
responsibility soon after the elections."
Summary:
The  volatility  in  consumption  and  income  may,  under  certain  circumstances,  have  a
significant  negative  impact  on  well-being,  such  that  the  central  banks’  stabilizing  policies
may be very valuable. The volatility may have an impact on the path of growth, such that the
stabilizing policies also have an impact on growth.
There  is  “bad”  uncertainty,  because  of  which  we  must  guard  stability,  but  there  is  also
“good” uncertainty.  We must maintain stability while enabling that good uncertainty, which is
reflected  in  innovation  and  technological  improvements,  research  and  development,  and
competition.
The stabilizing policy is particularly important to prevent financial crises, since the damage
from such crises is significant.  Therefore, the financial stability committee becomes all the
more important as a vital layer in the early identification of risks.  The establishment of the
committee is a very important step in view of the reforms in the financial system that are
being formulated.
The Bank of Israel advises the government on how to increase the long-term growth rate,
and  indicates  main  policy  measures  that  can  increase  the  long-term  growth  path:  in  the
areas of education, infrastructure, and bureaucracy.  The Bank is currently working diligently
on a formal report containing the Bank’s recommendations to the government regarding the
advancement of productivity in  the  economy  and  an  analysis  of  their  expected  costs  and
benefits in the long term, which we will publish soon.
 I  chose  to  deal  today  with  this  question,  because  I  think  that  this  conference  is  the  proper
platform  for  such  a  discussion,  which  combines  economic  theory,  policy  measures,  and  the
current public discourse in Israel, a decade after the Global Financial Crisis.
There is a model by a very famous economist behind this question, and his insights can lead us
to the conclusion that the value of stabilizing policy, mainly by the central banks, is not great.  But
there is also widespread economic literature that proves otherwise, as well as insights that are
specific to Israel.  These insights have become clearer to me in recent months, since I took on
the  position  of  Bank  of  Israel  Governor  and  saw  how  the  Bank  of  Israel’s  measures,  in  their
various forms, have contributed to the economy’s growth and its resilience to shocks.
First, let us mention the Objectives of the Bank of Israel, according to the Law:
To maintain price stability, as its central goal;
To support economic policy, especially growth, employment and reducing social gaps;
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
To support the stability and orderly activity of the financial system.
It  is  common  in  the  economic  literature  to  assume  that  one  of  the  central  bank’s  roles  is  to
moderate  the  volatility  of  the  business  cycle,  since  the  widespread  assumption  is  that  this
volatility is undesirable among consumers and firms.  And in fact, since the mid-1980s, there has
been a decline in the volatility of business cycles in the advanced economies, which has been
reflected in GDP, production, employment, and more.  The success in reducing the volatility is
mostly attributed to the policies of the central banks, which, thanks their independence, can act in
the interest of macroeconomic stability.
If  so,  it  is  worth  examining  whether  the  effort  to  stabilize  economic  activity,  which  has  in  fact
borne fruit in recent decades, is actually important and worthwhile.
The economist Robert Lucas examined this question in 1987 by estimating the negative impact
to  well-being  that  results  from  volatility  in  consumption,  assuming  that  potential  consumption
increases  at  a  fixed  rate  while  actual  consumption  is  volatile.    Lucas’s  model  shows  that  the
consumption  value  that  individuals  will  agree  to  pay  for  completely  cancelling  volatility—for
convenience,  let’s  call  it  the  “insurance  premium  for  nonvolatile  consumption"—is  near  zero. 
This means that the value to the consumer of smoothing consumption is negligible, and we can
theoretically conclude that there is no tremendous value to a stabilizing policy.  This leads to a
similar potential interpretation regarding the importance of the central banks.  Is this really true? 
Where does the gap between the intuitive notion that volatility should be moderated and Lucas’s
conclusion come from?  The answer has to do with three components that are not reflected in
Lucas’s paper:
       1.The single individual is exposed to greater risks than the average individual.
       2.The path of growth on its own is subject to volatility and is not certain.
       3.The significant impact of financial cycles on the business cycles.
For now, I will expand a little on each of them.
A more correct assumption for the model, which is closer to the economic reality, is that the
single individual is exposed to greater risks than the average individual.  Therefore, when
the distribution of risk among the individuals is not uniform, aggregate data do not necessarily
provide the complete picture.  A more simplistic description of this assumption is used a lot in
describing the statistical average, ignoring variance and volatility: “You can also drown in a pool
with an average depth of 20 cm."  So when examining the change in the effect of volatility on
different  population  groups  in  different  situations,  the  “consumption  insurance  premium”  that
Lucas thought was negligible becomes positive in the model and significant in “real life".  For
instance, during a recession, most of the public that continues to work and receive wages feels
the recession only on the margins, while workers who have been laid off take a serious hit.  From
the point of view, a reduction in volatility would have led to a very large advantage.
is  subject  to  volatility  and 
Another  parameter  that  needs  to  be  taken  into  account  is  that,  as  opposed  to  Lucas’s
assumption, the  path  of  growth  actually 
is  not
certain. Economists who took this into account in their models, such as Obestfeld (194), and
Dolmes  (1998)  actually  found  that  the  effect  of  shocks  is  prolonged.   As  such,  if  the  shocks
affect consumption over time, and are not limited to short-term volatility of consumption, then the
value  of  stability—the  “consumption  insurance  premium"—is  high.    Those  shocks  that  we
mentioned have an effect that is not uniform.  Positive business cycles accelerate the economy,
while  negative  business  cycles  moderate  it  asymmetrically,  so  that  the  volatility  itself  has  a
negative  impact  on  the  path  of  growth.    A  study  by  Yellin  and  Eckerloff  (2004)  shows  that
unemployment  responds  asymmetrically  to  changes  in  inflation,  such  that  a  stabilizing  policy
may increase GDP by 0.5–0.8 percent per year on average.  One of the studies that helps to
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
explain this positive outcome was done by DeLong and Summers (1988), in which they show
that  a  stabilizing  policy  can  have  a  medium-term  impact  because  it  is  not  necessarily
symmetrical, and hence its  importance.    The  troughs  can  be  smoothed  without  “shaving”  the
peak periods in the business cycles.
Another way of examining the cost of volatility, or alternatively the value of stability, is to examine
investment in the economy, which has a large effect on GDP and on consumption.  Uncertainty
affects  production  decisions,  when  firms  must  made  decisions  in  advance  regarding  the
technology that they will use and the means of production they will employ.  Firms may therefore
inefficiently  allocate  their  resources.    Ramay  and  Ramay  (1991)  also  found  a  statistically
significant value to the “consumption insurance premium".  In addition, Bar-Levy (2004) found
that an increase in investment during peak periods contributes less to growth than the negative
impact  to  growth  from  a  reduction  in  investment  during  a  recession.    Therefore,  a  stabilizing
policy is not limited to smoothing consumption volatility, but contributes to the growth rate and to
improving  per  capita  consumption.    It  is  important  to  note  that  there  is  “bad”  uncertainty,
regarding  which  we  must  guard  stability,  but  there  is  also  “good”  uncertainty,  as  shown  by  a
study  I  conducted  with  Segal  and  Shaliastovich  (2015).    We  must  maintain  stability  while
enabling  that  good  uncertainty  that  is  reflected  in  innovation  and  technological  improvements,
research and development, and competition.
Until  now,  the  discussion  has  been  regarding  volatile  business  cycles.  But what about the
significant effect of financial cycles on that volatility?
"Financial  cycle”  is  a  term  that  is  described  and  analyzed  in  the  Bank  of  Israel’s  upcoming
Financial Stability Report.  It is a method of identifying cyclical behavior of financial activity.  The
financial cycle is defined as “deviations from the long-term trend of a group of variables that are
important to financial stability".  The definition first requires us to choose the relevant variables,
and  then  to  choose  the  method  of  identifying  deviations  in  the  trend.    In  accordance  with  the
literature, the Bank of Israel examined a number of estimations for identifying the financial cycle,
including private credit, home prices, share prices, and the slope of the real yield curve.  It was
found  that,  except  for  private  credit  and  home  prices,  the  rest  of  the  estimations  that  were
examined vary at a different (high) rate, and therefore do not contribute to identifying the financial
cycle.
We can see that recessions accompanied by a downturn in the financial cycle (movement from
a high point to a low point) are the deepest and most serious.  This finding significantly increases
the “consumption insurance premium", as shown in a study I conducted with Bansal and Kiku
(2010).   An  examination  in  the  forthcoming  Financial  Stability  Report  tested  the  effect  of  the
intensity of the financial cycle on periods of slowdown in Israel.  It shows that during downturns in
the financial cycle, there was a significant negative impact to the real cycle (-3.3 percent at the
beginning of the 2000s, compared with 0.2 percent in the mid-1990s and –2.0 percent during the
Global Financial Crisis, when the financial cycle in Israel was in an upward path).  One of the
issues  raised  by  such  an  analysis  is  the  question  of  the  need  for  setting  anti-cyclical  capital
buffers: a demand that the banks hold higher levels of capital during boom periods, which can be
decreased  during  economic  downturns,  thereby  releasing  the  credit  supply  constraint  during
such periods.  The use of anti-cyclical capital buffers obviously requires precise identification of
the financial cycle.  A number of countries, such as the UK, the Czech Republic, Hong Kong, and
the  Scandinavian  countries,  are  already  implementing  anti-cyclical  policy  in  setting  capital
buffers, in accordance with the Basel 3 guidelines.
As such, we can say that volatility in consumption and in income may, in some circumstances,
have a significant negative impact on well-being, such that a stabilizing policy on the part of the
central banks can have tremendous value.  The path of growth on its own may be affected by
volatility, such that a stabilizing policy also affects growth.  The stabilizing policy is particularly
important for preventing financial crises since financial crises have a very strong impact.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
How does the Bank of Israel, in practical terms, implement the insights from these analyses and
studies in order to contribute to the stability, prosperity and growth of the Israeli economy?
First  we  examine  long-term  price  stability,  which  influences  many  of  the  decisions  previously
discussed.    We  can  see  that  the  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  anchored  around  the
midpoint  of  the  target  range,  meaning  that  the  Bank’s  policy  is  credible  and  the  market
participants benefit from certainty regarding long-term inflation. The monetary policy that enabled
this  outcome  was  accompanied  by  macroprudential  measures  taken  by  the  Bank,  which
succeeded in preventing overleverage despite the low interest rates, thereby protecting financial
stability with a long-term systemic view, and enabling monetary policy to focus on achieving its
main objectives.  At the same time, the Bank of Israel worked to strengthen the capital buffers in
the  banking  system  in  order  to  increase  its  resilience  to  crises,  and  increased  the  foreign
exchange reserves to around 30 percent of GDP in order to strengthen the economy’s financial
safety buffer.
Notwithstanding these actions, there is room for advancing further measures, partly because the
credit  market  is  becoming  more  varied  and  requires  a  more  integrated  regulatory  view.    The
volume of credit issued by nonbank entities has been expanding in recent years, partly due to the
reforms in this market.  Regulation of nonbank financial entities, particularly over the granting of
consumer credit, is not the same as regulation over the banks.  While the difference in the type
of activity between the entities justifies certain differences in regulation, it is important to make
sure  that  these  differences  don’t  develop  into  regulatory  arbitrage  that  could  under  certain
circumstances  create  a  systemic  risk.    Therefore,  the  Financial  Stability  Committee  that
convened  for  the  first  time  in April  2019  is  increasingly  important,  and  provides  an  important
element in reducing regulatory arbitrage and in the early identification of risks.  The establishment
of  the  committee  is  a  very  important  step  in  view  of  the  reforms  taking  place  in  the  financial
system.    The  multiplicity  of  participants  in  the  credit  market,  and  the  division  of  responsibility
between  the  various  regulators  require  a  view  of  the  entire  system  and  close  coordination
between the regulators.
If we have so far discussed the Bank of Israel’s contribution to reducing volatility, I would like to
mention that volatility and growth are connected to each other in certain ranges.  This brings up
another area under the Bank of Israel’s responsibility, where, as opposed to most other central
banks, the Governor of the Bank of Israel also serves as economic advisor to the government. 
As such, the Bank advises the government on how it can increase the long-term growth rate. 
The  Research  Department  indicates  main  policy  measures  that  can  increase  the  long-term
growth path: in the areas of education, infrastructure, and bureaucracy.  The Bank is currently
working diligently on a formal report containing the Bank’s recommendations to the government
regarding  the  advancement  of  productivity  in  the  economy  and  an  analysis  of  their  expected
costs and benefits in the long term, which we will publish soon.
In  conclusion,  it  is,  of  course,  important  to  enable  and  promote  innovation  and
competition, but as I have emphasized throughout this discussion, it is no less important
to avoid taking stability for granted.  There is tremendous value to overall well-being
from a policy that stabilizes volatility and uncertainty in the short term, the medium term
and the long term, and certainly when volatility increases to the point of a financial crisis.
In recent weeks that has been an increase in uncertainty in Israel.  While the financial
markets have so far not been tremendously agitated by it, we cannot assume that there
is  no  damage,  and  it  is  clear  that  we  must  deal  with  it  and  that  this  is  a  challenging
period.  In order to prevent harm to the economy, all policy makers and public officials
must  act  responsibly  and  do  all  that  they  can  in  order  to  reinstill  certainty  and  fiscal
responsibility soon after the elections.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
