M a r c h   6 ,   2 0 1 9 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
 
 Economic Activity, Prices, 
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Yamanashi 
Yutaka Harada 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
 Introduction 
Thank you for giving me this opportunity to exchange views with you and for having taken 
the time to be here despite your busy schedules. It is indeed a great honor to be here today. 
Please  allow  me  to  express  my  gratitude  for  your  great  cooperation  with  the  business 
operations of the Bank of Japan, particularly of the Kofu Branch. 
 The Bank introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing -- or QQE for short -- in 
April  2013  with  the  aim  of  achieving  the  inflation  target  of  2  percent,  and  since  then  has 
strengthened the QQE framework. 
 Today, I first would like to explain the achievements thus far of the Bank's monetary easing 
measures,  excluding  those  regarding  prices,  and  then  describe  recent  developments  in  the 
economy and prices. 
 I. The Achievements of Monetary Easing 
Improvements in Employment 
The  first  thing  that  should  be  mentioned  as  an  achievement  of  monetary  policy  is  the 
improvement  in  employment.1  Chart  1  shows  the  number  of  regular  and  non-regular 
employees. As can be seen, at the start of QQE, it was primarily non-regular employment 
that increased. However, since around the beginning of 2015, regular employment also has 
expanded.  Moreover,  the  share  of  non-regular  employees  (non-regular  employees  divided 
by all employees excluding executives), which had been rising, also has leveled off. 
                                                  
1  Regarding how monetary easing lifts productivity, see Yutaka Harada, "Economic Activity, Prices, 
and  Monetary  Policy  in  Japan:  Speech  at  a  Meeting  with  Business  Leaders  in  Ishikawa,"  Bank  of 
Japan, July 2018. 
 1 
  Improvements in Employment of Women and the Elderly 
Chart 2 shows that the employment of both women and the elderly (those aged 65 years and 
over)  has  been  growing.  Nevertheless,  despite  women's  entry  into  the  labor  market,  most 
women  work part-time,  and  I  am  well aware  of  the  criticism  that there  are few  women  in 
top  positions  in  Japan.  According  to  the  World  Economic  Forum's  Global  Gender  Gap 
Index (2018), which measures the degree of gender equality, Japan ranks only 110th among 
149  countries.  However,  some  progress  is  being  made.  As  can  be  seen  in  Chart  2,  the 
number of women in regular employment has been increasing. Moreover, the proportion of 
women who are non-regular employees, which had been rising, has remained flat since the 
start  of  QQE.  This  means  that  the  number  of  women  gaining  experience  at  work  and 
 2 
 moving  into  managerial  positions  also  should  increase.  In  fact,  the  share  of  managerial 
positions occupied by women has been on a rising trend.2 
  Moreover, Chart 2 also shows that employment of the elderly has been growing. However, 
in the case of the elderly, the share of non-regular employees has been rising. The reason is 
likely that many are hired as temporary or part-time workers after reaching retirement age. 
                                                 
2  For details, see Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, FY2017 Basic Survey of Gender Equality 
in Employment Management (available only in Japanese), July 2018. 
 3 
 Because  Japan's  population  is  aging,  this  means  that  it  is  unlikely  that  the  share  of 
non-regular  employees  in  employment  as  a  whole  will  decrease.  However,  looking  at 
employees  between  15  and  64  years  of  age,  the  share  of  non-regular  employees  has  been 
declining since around 2014. 
 While it is difficult for the elderly to obtain regular employment, the fact is that more and 
more are gaining the opportunity to work. In September 2017, the government launched the 
"Council  for  Designing  a  100-Year  Life  Society,"  and  in  June  2018  it  released  the  report 
"[B]asic [D]esign for the Human Resources Development Revolution," calling for increased 
employment of the elderly.3 
 At the same time, however, the proliferation of the notion of a  "100-Year Life" may have 
made people aware of the longevity risk again, which may have led to the rise in the savings 
rate, or in other words, the decline in the consumption rate, which I will talk about later. 
 Decrease in Suicides 
When unable to find a job in the face of a difficult employment situation, being under such 
stress  causes  one  to  question  their  worth  to  society.  Indeed,  studies  show  that  suicides 
increase  in  tandem  with  a  rise  in  the  number  of  unemployed.4  Assuming  that  this  is  true, 
suicides  should  decrease  if  the  unemployment  rate  were  to  decline.  Chart  3,  which  shows 
the number of suicides and the unemployment rate, indicates that the two are linked: as the 
unemployment rate rises, the number of suicides increases, and vice versa. While I do not 
think that suicides are caused by economic problems alone, what is clear is that the number 
of suicides per year has fallen by 7,000 or more since 2012 as a result of the upturn in the 
economy and the decline in the unemployment rate. 
                                                  
3  At  the  G-20  Symposium  "For  a  Better  Future:  Demographic  Changes  and  Macroeconomic 
Challenges" held in January 2019, seven out of 13 speakers stressed the importance of labor force 
participation by the elderly in overcoming demographic challenges posed by the aging population. 
4   See,  for  example,  Yasuyuki  Sawada,  Michiko  Ueda,  and  Tetsuya  Matsubayashi,  Economic 
Analysis of Suicide Prevention Towards Evidence-Based Policy-Making, Singapore: Springer, 2017. 
 4 
  Slight Increase in the Birth Rate 
I think that a small improvement in the birth rate also has been achieved. Chart 4 shows the 
unemployment  rate,  the  marriage  rate,  and  the  birth  rate  for  the  population  of  20-  to 
39-year-olds. It is a well-known fact that the marriage rate and the birth rate are correlated, 
as is more or less evident from the chart.   
     5 
  Let us take a closer look at this. The birth rate per 1,000 population aged 20 to 39 (hereafter 
birth rate), which previously had been on a declining trend, has been rising since 2005 along 
with the decline in the unemployment rate.   
 The  bar  graph  in  the  chart  illustrates  this  trend  in  terms  of  live  births  per  population 
(hereafter live births). Note how, when comparing two age groups with the same birth rate, 
the number of live births increases for the age group with a greater number of constituents. 
Given that second-generation baby boomers (children of baby boomers born between 1947 
and 1949) reached their average marriage age sometime between 1995 and 2000 or, if we 
take  the  rise  in  the average  marriage  age into account,  sometime  between  2000  and  2005, 
the number of live births subsequently would have increased had there been a reversal in the 
 6 
 birth rate around this time. There turned out to be no such increase, however. The reason is 
that,  during  the  approximate  period  from  1995  to  2005  and  in  the  few  years  after  the 
outbreak  of  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008,  young  people  of  this  generation  were  not 
able to find stable employment due to the so-called employment ice age, which led them to 
think  twice  about  marriage  and  having  children. 5 , 6   Put  differently,  had  QQE  been 
introduced at an earlier stage, second-generation baby boomers would not have had to cope 
with  the  repercussions  of  the  employment  ice  age,  likely  resulting  in  an  increase  in  the 
number of live births from around 1995. 
 Improvement in Government Finances 
An  improvement  in  employment  means  that  incomes  increase.  Firms  hire  people  because 
their  profits  are  rising.  When  employment  grows,  both  profits  and  wages  increase.  When 
there is an increase in profits and wages -- that is, the income of the country as a whole -- 
the  government's  tax  revenue  also  rises.  Chart  5  shows  the  general  government  fiscal 
balance (relative to GDP) and government debt (also relative to GDP). While Japan's fiscal 
situation is severe, its deficit in fiscal 2017 shrank to 2.7 percent of GDP. Compared with a 
deficit of 8.3 percent in fiscal 2012, this is an improvement of about 5.5 percentage points. 
The reason is that the economy has been doing well and the government's tax revenue has 
been increasing.  The increase in tax  revenue  due to  the  consumption  tax  hike  from  5 to 8 
percent is said to amount to about 8 trillion yen (1.5 percent of GDP). While the remaining 
improvement  of  4.0  percentage  points  is  partly  attributable  to  the  effects  of  a  positive 
turnaround in overseas economies, it owes in large part to the improvement in the economy 
                                                 
5  For  details  on  the  employment  ice  age,  see  Genda  Yuji  et.  al,  Shūshoku  hyōgaki  sedai  no  keizai 
shakai  e  no  eikyō  to  taisaku  ni  kansuru  kenkyū  iinkai  hōkokusho,  Research  Institute  for 
Advancement of Living Standards, November 2016. 
6  In his recent book, former Bank of Japan Governor Shirakawa argues that the immediate response 
of many major Japanese firms to the large demand shock brought about by the bursting of the bubble 
and  the  outbreak  of  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008  was  to  reduce  graduate  recruitment  and 
increase  non-regular  employment.  During  this  so-called  employment  ice  age,  the  young  bore  the 
brunt of the employment adjustment. University graduates entering the labor market during this time 
-- the so-called second-generation baby boomers  -- found it difficult to accumulate sufficient skills 
as  young  workers,  leading  to  lower  income  levels,  which  in  turn  has  had  a  lasting  social  impact 
including  an  increase  in  the  rate  of  those  who  are  unmarried  and  the  consequent  decrease  in  the 
number of births (available only in Japanese). Shirakawa Masaaki, Chūō Ginkō (Tokyo: Toyo Keizai, 
2018), p. 112. 
 7 
 as  a  result  of  QQE.  Moreover,  the  ratio  of  government  debt  to  GDP  also  has  declined 
slightly from its peak of 239 percent in fiscal 2015. 
  Decline in Personal Income Inequality 
Furthermore,  income  inequality  has  declined.  Results  of  statistics  show  that  income 
inequality  in  terms  of  equivalized  disposable  income  has  declined.7,8  Meanwhile,  Chart  6 
                                                 
7  See Statistics Bureau, Ministry of  Internal Affairs and Communications,  "Analytical [Results of] 
Income  Distribution,"  2014  National  Survey  of  Family  Income  and  Expenditure  (available  only  in 
Japanese), October 2016. 
8  Equivalized  disposable  income  is  obtained  by  adjusting  the  quotient  of  household  disposable 
income and the square root of the number of household members. In its international comparisons, 
the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD)  uses  the  Gini  coefficient 
(see footnote 11) and the relative poverty rate for each country calculated on the basis of equivalized 
disposable income. 
 8 
 shows the trend in the relative poverty rate.9  As the chart shows, the relative poverty rate 
has declined, regardless of whether we look at the overall rate, the child poverty rate, or the 
poverty  rate  of  single-parent  households.  Since  most  single-parent  households  are 
single-mother  households,  the  chart  indicates  that  the  poverty  rate  of  single  mothers  has 
declined  from  62.0  percent  in  2009  to  47.7  percent  in  2014.  While  it  is  shocking  that  the 
poverty rate for single mothers is close to 50 percent, I view the rate's decline to this extent 
as a substantial achievement.10 
                                                   
9  The  relative  poverty  rate  of  a  country  is  the  proportion  of  its  household  members  whose 
equivalized  disposable  income  falls  below  the  poverty  line  (one-half  the  median  equivalized 
disposable  income).  Inequality  has  fallen  from  2009  to  2014  in  terms  of  the  Gini  coefficient  for 
equivalized  disposable  income.  For  details,  see  2014  National  Survey  of  Family  Income  and 
Expenditure (available only in Japanese). 
10  Similarly,  the  relative  poverty  rate,  the  child  poverty  rate,  and  the  poverty  rate  of  single 
working-age households with at least one child have all declined from 2012 to 2015. See Ministry of 
Health, Labour and Welfare, Summary Report of Comprehensive Survey of Living Conditions 2016, 
June 2017. 
 9 
 Decline in Regional Income Inequality 
Regional  income  inequality  also  has  been  declining.  The  left  panel  of  Chart  7  shows  the 
ratio  of  the  average  per  capita  prefectural  income  of  the  top  five  prefectures  weighted  by 
population  to  that  of  the  bottom  five  prefectures  weighted  by  population  (top  five 
prefectures  divided  by  bottom  five  prefectures)  and  the  Gini  coefficient  of  prefectural 
income.11  The  chart  seems  to  exhibit  that,  after  dipping  in  fiscal  2010  following  the 
outbreak  of  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008  (reflecting  the  decrease  in  income  in 
wealthier  regions), inequality  increased again; however,  compared to  fiscal 2012,  the  year 
before  the  introduction  of  QQE,  inequality  appears  to  have  decreased.  In  other  words, 
regional  income  inequality  is  falling.  Moreover,  as  seen  in  the  right  panel  of  Chart  7, 
income  both  in  the  top  five  and  the  bottom  five  prefectures  is  growing,  which  is  why  it 
cannot be said that inequality has been falling because the top prefectures other than Tokyo 
-- with the highest income level in Japan  -- have become poorer. While I would not go so 
far as to say that the decline in inequality is due solely to QQE, I think it can be said that the 
decline is due to the benefits of the economic expansion extending to all regions. However, 
it  also  is  argued  that  the  decline  in  regional  inequality  is  not  necessarily  something  to 
celebrate. The reasoning for this is that Tokyo has fallen behind in the competition among 
major  global  cities,  as  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  the  average  per  capita  income  in  Tokyo 
today is still lower than in fiscal 2007. 
                                                  
11  The Gini coefficient represents the degree of concentration in the distribution of income, etc., and 
is an indicator to measure inequality. The closer the coefficient is to zero, the smaller the extent of 
inequality, and the closer it is to one, the greater the extent. Here, the Gini coefficient is calculated 
on the basis of population-weighted per capita prefectural incomes. 
 10 
  Japan, a More Open Country Today 
Lastly, with the economy continuing to grow, Japan appears to be becoming more interested 
in  and  open  to  foreign  cultures,  people,  services,  and  products.  Amid  growing  anti-free 
trade  sentiments  in  many  advanced  economies,  Japan  concluded  the  Comprehensive  and 
Progressive  Agreement  for  Trans-Pacific  Partnership  (CPTPP,  which  came  into  effect  in 
December  2018)  and  the  Japan-EU  Economic  Partnership  Agreement  (EPA,  which  came 
into effect in February 2019). Japan is now a global standard bearer of free trade. Moreover, 
with the amendment to the Immigration Control and Refugee Recognition Act in December 
2018,  Japan  is  seeking  to  attract  overseas  workers  and  improve  their  employment 
conditions. 
  11 
 II. Recent Economic Developments 
In  my  description  of  the  achievements  of  monetary  policy,  I  have  focused  so  far  on 
developments  other  than  short-term  economic  indicators.  I  would  now  like  to  talk  about 
recent economic developments. 
 Charts 8 and 9 provide an overview of key economic indicators. Almost all the indicators in 
Chart  8  --  for  production,  investment,  and  exports  --  have  been  improving.  Some  of  these 
were sluggish following the consumption tax hike in April 2014 and thereafter, particularly 
in  the  period  from  the  second  half  of  2014  to  the  first  half  of  2016,  when  global  trade 
volume  was  sluggish.  However,  there  also  are  some  indicators  that  are  falling  currently.  I 
will elaborate on this later. 
   12 
 Chart 9 looks at wages, employment, employee income, which is obtained by multiplying 
wages  by  the  number  of  employees,  and  consumption.12  The reason why real wages per 
worker have not increased is that the number of non-regular workers working short hours has 
increased. On  the  other  hand,  real  employee  income  was  sluggish  only  in  fiscal  2014,  the 
year of the consumption tax hike; apart from that, it has grown more or less steadily. The 
unemployment rate also has steadily declined.   
                                                   
12  In  my  past  speeches,  I  defined  real  employee  income  as  the  number  of  regular  employees 
multiplied  by  real  wages  based  on  the  Monthly  Labour  Survey.  However,  taking  into  account  the 
difference in the level  of  the number of regular employees for January 2018, I have redefined real 
employee income as the product of the number of employed based on the Labour Force Survey and 
real wages based on the Monthly Labour Survey. 
 13 
 Among  the  different  indicators,  the  one  showing  the  weakest  improvement  is  real 
consumption. Consumption as measured by the consumption activity index is still below the 
level in 2013; that is, before the spike in demand due to the frontloading of purchases prior 
to the consumption tax hike. This is a bit strange given that real employee income, on which 
consumption  expenditure  rests,  has  been  on  a  steady  upward  trend  and  exceeds  the  2013 
level,  albeit  with  greater  fluctuation  since  the  start  of  2018.  One  of  the  reasons  that  the 
consumption  rate  (consumption  divided  by  employee  income)  as  defined  here  has  been 
falling is that disposable income has not increased as much as employee income due to the 
consecutive  annual  0.354  percentage  point  increases  in  employee  pension  insurance 
premiums.  However,  because  insurance  premiums  were  not  raised  from  18.3  percent  in 
September 2018 and will not rise any further, this should lead to a rise in the consumption 
rate in the future. Since it is difficult to imagine that the consumption rate will continue to 
fall forever, I think that consumption can be expected to recover. 
 As  mentioned  earlier,  the  economy  has  been  recovering  due  to  QQE.  However,  there  is 
concern about the risk of a deterioration in economic activity going forward due to the fall 
in stock prices since the end of 2018. Often, a decline in stock prices is seen as a harbinger 
of  a  future  decline  in  economic  activity.  While  this  is  the  case,  stock  markets  frequently 
seem to overreact to such risks, and whether this leads to deterioration in economic activity 
warrants careful monitoring. 
 Given the risks to economic activity going forward, there certainly are a number of issues to 
consider,  such  as  the  conduct  of  economic  policy  in  the  United  States,  trade  friction 
between the United States and China, the United Kingdom's exit from the European Union 
(EU), developments in the European economy, and the slowdown of the Chinese economy. 
Among these, I would like to take a closer look at the Chinese economy.   
 While trends in the Chinese economy are often discussed in terms of real GDP, the decline 
in  the  growth  rate  appears  neat  --  having  been  level  or  declining  by  0.1  percentage  point 
every  quarter  --  and  thus  there  are  doubts  as  to  whether  GDP  figures  are  an  accurate 
representation  of  developments  in  economic  activity.  Chart  10  shows  the  level  of  China's 
real  GDP  (quarterly)  and  import  quantity  as  well  as  Japan's  industrial  production  and 
 14 
 exports. Keeping in mind that GDP and imports correlate with each other in general, while 
the chart shows that there is no such correlation in the case of China, Japan's production and 
exports are linked with China's import quantity. This means that, if China's import quantity 
were to decrease further, this would be cause for concern regarding the outlook for Japan's 
production and exports.   
  If  the  risks  I  explained  earlier  were  to  materialize,  I  think  it  would  be  necessary  to 
implement  additional  monetary  easing  without  delay  through  quantitative,  qualitative,  and 
interest rate policy measures. 
 Meanwhile,  until  last  year,  there  had  been  debate  on  financial  imbalances  and  a  potential 
bubble.  However,  because  stock  prices  have  dropped  substantially  since  then,  it  would  be 
rather unreasonable to argue that there are financial imbalances in the stock market now.   
  15 
 III. The Bank's Monetary Easing Policy and the Profitability of Private Banks 
While  QQE  has  led  to  the  long-term,  structural,  and  short-term  improvements  in  the 
economy that I have described, it also has been argued that a prolonged period of monetary 
easing has undermined the profitability of financial institutions. I would like to explain my 
views on this.13 
 First of all, since bold monetary easing has produced favorable results for Japan's economy 
as  a  whole,  I  feel  that  it  is  a  bit  curious  that  the  same  cannot  be  said  about  financial 
institutions. 
 Chart  11  shows  nominal  GDP  of  the  financial  and  insurance  industry  (hereafter,  financial 
industry) and the manufacturing industry, as well as overall nominal GDP of Japan and the 
United  States.  The  chart  shows  that,  whereas  in  the  United  States,  the  financial  industry's 
GDP  has  been  growing  along  with  the  growth  in  overall  nominal  GDP,  in  Japan,  the 
financial  industry's  GDP  has  been  particularly  stagnant  amid  the  sluggishness  of  nominal 
GDP overall. Next, let us look at how nominal GDP has recovered since 2009,  the trough 
following the outbreak of the global financial crisis in September 2008. Following the drop 
in  2009,  Japan's  nominal  GDP  stagnated  until  2012  but  then  recovered  from  2013,  when 
QQE  was  introduced.  While  nominal  GDP  of  the  manufacturing  industry  has  been 
recovering  along  with  the  recovery  in  overall  nominal  GDP,  that  of  the  financial  industry 
does not appear to have recovered. However, as shown in the table underneath the chart, the 
financial industry's GDP,  which had been decreasing at an annual  rate of 2.5 percent until 
2012, stopped contracting following the introduction of QQE. This shows that, if nominal 
GDP grows, the financial industry's GDP also is likely to grow. 
                                                   
13  What is described hereafter owes in large part to Harada Yutaka, "Kin'yū kanwa seisaku no kōka 
wa kin'yū kikan ni mo todoku," Shūkan Kin'yū Zaisei Jijyō, October 8, 2018. 
 16 
  Turning to nominal GDP figures for the United States in Chart 11, overall nominal GDP has 
continued  to  grow  after  the  global  financial  crisis  and,  in  line  with  that,  nominal  GDP 
figures for the manufacturing and financial industries also have been growing. Furthermore, 
there is no change in the growth trend after 2012 like the  one seen in Japan's case. This is 
because  the  Federal  Reserve  conducted  bold  monetary  easing  immediately  following  the 
global  financial  crisis.  Meanwhile,  while  the  fact  that  the  growth  rate  of  the  financial 
industry exceeds that of overall nominal GDP likely reflects the entrepreneurial spirit of the 
U.S.  financial  industry,  if  nominal  GDP  had  not  grown  in  the  first  place,  I  think  that  the 
growth rate of the financial industry also would have been lower.   
 The  bold  monetary  easing  policy,  which  aims  at  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2 
percent,  has  led  to  an  improvement  in  employment,  a  rise  in  wages,  and  an  increase  in 
corporate  profits,  as  seen  in  the  rise  in  stock  prices.  Since  nominal  GDP  is  the  sum  of  all 
 17 
 wages and profits, an increase in wages and profits naturally means that nominal GDP also 
increases. If nominal GDP increases, banks' nominal GDP also can be expected to increase. 
Moreover,  the  business  conditions  of  firms  borrowing  money  from  banks  also  should 
improve,  so  that  among  them  would  be  firms  that want  to  borrow more.  Credit costs  also 
have declined as a result. 
 Monetary Easing Is Creating Demand for Loans 
Chart  12  shows  the  loans  and  deposits  of  domestic  banks.  Starting  with  loans,  these 
followed a declining trend after the collapse of the bubble economy. While in the wake of 
the  introduction  of  quantitative  easing  (QE)  in  2001  it  took  a  while  for  loans  to  start 
increasing,  they  soon  started  to  do  so  after  the  introduction  of  QQE.  While  loans  have 
increased by 74 trillion yen from March 2013 to  December 2018, deposits have increased 
by as much as 147 trillion yen. For banks, deposits can be regarded as their "products" and 
loans as their "sales." The difference between "sales" and "products" represents "inventory." 
An increase in deposits in excess of the increase in loans thus is equivalent to an increase in 
inventories. What is needed, then, is a reduction in inventories. The fundamental reason for 
financial  institutions'  difficulties  is  that  they  are  accumulating  funds  but  there  are  no 
borrowers. 
    18 
  Policy Tightening Does Not Guarantee a Steepening of the Yield Curve   
A decline in interest rates brought about by bold monetary easing results in a deterioration 
in private banks' profitability -- this most likely is the case because of the assumption held 
by many in the financial communities that the yield curve will steepen, the term spread will 
increase, and hence the loan interest rates will increase when the Bank raises interest rates. 
Given  that  private  banks  borrow  short-term  debt  and  finance  longer-term  lending,  their 
profits grow if the term spread increases. This is not to say, however, that the term spread 
increases with every rise in the interest rate.14  Whether the yield curve flattens or steepens 
when  short-term  interest  rates are  raised  depends  on  the  economic  situation as  well  as the 
market's view of monetary policy at the time. Therefore, it is  not necessarily the case that 
the yield curve will steepen if short-term interest rates are raised. 
                                                  
14  Regarding  details  of  the  relationship  between  policy  changes  and  the  yield  curve,  see  Yutaka 
Harada,  "Economic  Activity,  Prices,  and  Monetary  Policy  in  Japan:  Speech  at  a  Meeting  with 
Business Leaders in Ishikawa," Bank of Japan, July 2018. 
 19 
 If Prices Decline, So Will Interest Rates 
If  prices  decline,  so  will  nominal  interest  rates.  Given  that  the  real  growth  rate  normally 
declines under such circumstances, so does nominal GDP, or the product of prices and real 
production. A decline in nominal GDP represents economic deterioration. This means that 
credit costs -- costs resulting from bankruptcies of borrowing firms -- will rise, demand for 
loans will decrease, and ultimately interest rates will decline.15 
 One factor that has a significant impact on financial institutions' profitability is the fact that 
many  people  today  have  a  sufficient  amount  of  cash  and  deposits,  which  has  naturally 
caused the number of borrowers to decrease. Another is credit costs  -- in other words, the 
devaluation  costs  of  impaired  assets.  Sales  growth  for  borrowing  firms  is  expected  to  be 
weak  without  nominal  GDP  growth,  and  their  loans  could  very  well  turn  into 
nonperforming ones. 
 Following the introduction of QQE, the nominal GDP growth rate, which had been negative 
since  the  global  financial crisis,  has  turned  positive.  Looking  back,  Japan's  nominal  GDP, 
which had posted more or less negative growth since 1998, resumed positive growth from 
2004  as  the  economy  enjoyed  the  effects  of  QE  introduced  in  2001.  The  significant 
economic downturn that began in 2008 is attributable to the global financial crisis and not 
necessarily due to the Bank's decision to discontinue QE, although I must admit that there 
should have been a better time to cease monetary easing than before the storm. Barring the 
implementation of both QE and QQE, Japan's nominal GDP growth would have remained 
in  negative  territory  this  whole  time  since  1998.  To  make  an  educated  guess,  financial 
institutions' profitability could have deteriorated much further than it actually did. 
 When  private  banks  call  for  interest  rate  rises,  this  is  an  indication  of  their  belief  that  the 
yield  curve  will  steepen  and  the  term  spread  will  increase  with  a  rise  in  interest  rates. 
However, as I have explained, the facts prove that a rise in interest rates does not guarantee 
a  steepening  of  the  yield  curve.  Moreover,  if  monetary  easing  is  discontinued,  prices  will 
decline,  the  economy  will  deteriorate,  and  nominal  interest  rates  will  decline.  Financial 
                                                 
15  For more on this point, see Harada Yutaka, "Naze nihon no kinri wa hikui no ka," Keiki to saikuru, 
no. 62, Japan Association of Business Cycle Studies, November 2016. 
 20 
 institutions  seem  to  expect  that,  in  the  case  of  a  rise  in  interest  rates,  only  the  rates  on 
investment will increase without any changes in foreign exchange rates as well as prices of 
stocks  and  bonds,  or  a  decline  in  firms'  willingness  to  borrow.  I  am  afraid  this  is  not 
realistic. 
 Rather, premature policy tightening in the past caused economic deterioration, a decline in 
both prices and production, and lowered interest rates in the long run. It can be said to have 
played a role in creating the challenges faced by the financial industry today. 
 IV. The Economic Outlook and the Price Stability Target of 2 Percent 
I  mentioned  earlier  that  the  economy  currently  may  be  weak,  and  the  same  can  be  said 
about  prices.  Even  so,  if  the  economy  continues  to  recover,  the  labor  market  will  tighten 
and  prices  eventually  will  rise.  There  are  some  hurdles  to  overcome  in  achieving  stable 
price rises, however.   
 First is the difficult situation the economy currently faces, as you are already familiar with. 
Looking  back  at Japan's  past  trends,  the economy  often  would  enter  a  recession  when  the 
sluggishness of the global economy held back exports, leading to a decline in business fixed 
investment and consumption. While a typical example of this is the recession following the 
outbreak of the global financial crisis in 2008, the stagnation in Japan's economy from the 
latter half of 2015 also can be said to have been affected significantly by the sluggishness of 
the global economy, especially China. 
 Second is consumption tax hikes. Tax hikes could push the economy into recession, and a 
resultant decrease in demand could push down prices. Regarding the hike scheduled to take 
place in October 2019, its effects are likely to be smaller than those of the previous hike in 
April 2014 due to the following reasons: the rate increase -- from 8 percent to 10 percent -- 
is smaller than that of the previous hike; a reduced tax rate will be applied to some items; 
permanent  measures  such  as  those  concerning  the  provision  of  free  education  will  be 
implemented; and a variety of measures are to be taken so as to smooth out the effects of 
the  front-loaded  increase in  demand  and  its  fallback.  However,  the  effects  of  the  previous 
tax  hike,  which  many  economists  expected  to  be  limited,  have  proved  significant  and 
 21 
 lasting.16  A  decline  in  demand,  such  as  the  one  seen  after  the  previous  hike,  naturally 
would contain inflation. 
 Third  is  price  declines  associated  with  the  scheduled  consumption  tax  hike.  Measures 
concerning  the  provision  of  free  education  will  be  implemented  alongside  the  hike.  The 
Bank  estimates  that  the  measures'  effects  on  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the 
consumer  price  index  (CPI)  for  all  items  less  fresh  food  will  amount  to  minus  0.3 
percentage point for fiscal 2019 and minus 0.4 percentage point for fiscal 2020. Meanwhile, 
the Bank estimates that the hike will push up the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for 
all  items  less  fresh  food  for  fiscal  2019  and  2020,  each  by  0.5  percentage  point.  The 
upcoming tax hike is thus a key factor affecting prices. As it is evident that consumption tax 
hikes exert both positive and negative effects on the CPI, these effects should be taken into 
account when speaking in this context.   
 Another factor -- although not directly related to the consumption tax hike -- is a reduction 
in mobile phone-related prices. At the moment, a precise figure cannot be given as to how 
large  its  impact  will  be,  but  an  estimation  by  private  economists  shows  that  the  reduction 
will push down the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items less fresh food by 
0.5 to 1.0 percentage point.17  Assuming that this estimation is correct, achievement of the 2 
percent price stability target inevitably would be delayed. 
 Regardless of these setbacks, I am not too pessimistic. These are no different from tax cuts, 
and people's real income increases by an amount equivalent to the degree of price declines. 
Hypothetically,  at  times  when  everyone  feels  that  the  economy  has  been  booming,  extra 
money arising from the provision of free education and a reduction in mobile phone-related 
prices  would  be  spent  immediately,  which  would  lead  to  inflation  through  a  demand 
increase, whereas in today's economy, it likely will take time for demand to increase. Extra 
                                                 
16  See Miyazaki Hiroshi, "Shōhi zeiritsu hikiage no eikyō ga yosougai ni ōkikatta no wa naze ka," 
chap.  6  in  Abenomikusu  no  shinka,  ed.  Harada  Yutaka  and  Masujima  Minoru  (Tokyo: 
Chuokeizai-sha, 2018). 
17  For more on this estimation, see Kobayashi Shunsuke and Yamaguchi Akane, "2018-nen jyūgatsu 
zenkoku 
shōhisha 
bukka,"  Daiwa 
Institute 
of 
Research,  November 
2018, 
https://www.dir.co.jp/report/research/economics/japan/20181122_020468.html. 
 22 
 money will not disappear into thin air, however. These factors are capable of delaying the 
achievement of the price stability target but do not hamper the achievement itself. This also 
could be said about other price declines, including those in crude oil prices. Nevertheless, 
there  is  a  risk  that  the  current  sluggishness  in  observed  prices  will  spill  over  to  inflation 
expectations, further delaying inflation. 
 My Thinking on the Bank's Policy Change on July 31, 2018 
Lastly, I would like to explain my views regarding the Bank's policy change in 2018. At the 
Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  on  July  31,  2018,  with  a  view  to  strengthening  the 
framework  for  continuous  powerful  monetary  easing,  the  Bank  (1)  introduced  forward 
guidance  for  policy  rates,  stating  that  "the  Bank  intends  to maintain the current extremely 
low levels of short- and long-term interest rates for an extended period of time, taking into 
account  uncertainties  regarding  economic  activity  and  prices  including  the  effects  of  the 
consumption tax hike scheduled to take place in October 2019" and (2) decided that, under 
yield  curve  control,  "the  [10-year  JGB]  yields  may  move  upward  and  downward  to  some 
extent mainly depending on developments in economic activity and prices." With regard to 
long-term yield movements, Governor Kuroda stated in the press conference given after the 
Monetary  Policy  Meeting  that  the  Bank  would  conduct  monetary  policy  while  bearing  in 
mind that the yields might move upward and downward at about double the range observed 
until then of around plus or minus 0.1 percent. 
 I opposed the proposal for this policy change for the following reasons. 
 First,  as  for  forward  guidance,  I  considered  that  this  should  not  be  related  to  timing  but 
rather to economic indicators in such a way that it further clarified its relationship with the 
price  stability  target.  In  other  words,  it  was  my  view  that  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy 
should  be  data-dependent,  not  calendar-based.  From  this  viewpoint,  regarding  the 
expression "for an extended period of time," I viewed it as appropriate to add such phrases 
as "unless prices show stronger movements than currently anticipated." Let me note that, at 
the time, there was strong anticipation in the market of an early interest rate hike regardless 
of  the  consumption  tax  hike  scheduled  in  October  2019.  I  therefore  thought  that  it  was 
reasonable to convey the message that such an early interest rate hike was not possible. To 
 23 
 take  a  step  further  and  strengthen  this  message,  and  to  respond  flexibly  when  there  are 
changes  in  economic  developments,  I  considered,  as  just  mentioned,  that  it  should  be 
emphasized  that  the  forward  guidance  ought  to  be  data-dependent.  This  is  based  on  the 
thinking that, if the economy deteriorates more than anticipated, additional easing measures 
will  be  necessary  while,  on  the  contrary,  if  it  improves,  it  will  be  necessary  to  weaken 
monetary easing. 
 Second,  I  also  opposed  allowing  the  long-term  yields  to  move  in  a  more  flexible manner; 
namely, because  it was too ambiguous as the guideline for market operations. Prior to the 
policy change, the guideline that the Bank will purchase JGBs so that the long-term yields 
will  remain  at  around  0  percent  meant  that,  if  the  economy  improved  further,  the  Bank 
would  increase  its  JGB  purchases  to  maintain  the  yields  at  around  0  percent  and  thereby 
strengthen the monetary easing effects. Given this, announcing at this point that "the yields 
may move upward and downward to some extent" would in fact weaken such effects.   
 Concluding Remarks 
I have reviewed the achievements of the Bank's QQE introduced in 2013.   
 First,  I  talked  about  its  long-term  effects,  centering  on  the  improvement  in  employment. 
Women  and  the  elderly  have  made  advances  in  society,  Japan's  fiscal  situation  has 
improved in the long run, and it is expected that the number of suicides will decline and the 
birth  rate  will  rise.  I  also  noted  that  such  improvement  in  the  economic  situation  is 
accompanied by a decline in income inequality.   
 Second, I explained that short-term economic indicators have been improving continuously. 
However,  consumption  has  been  weak  relative  to  the  increase  in  income,  and  downside 
risks to the economy have been increasing since the end of 2018.   
 Third,  I  pointed  out  the  relationship  between  QQE  and  the  profitability  of  private  banks. 
What  I  think  is  strange  is  that,  in  the  eyes  of  bank  managers  at  least,  although  Japan's 
economy as a whole has been improving due to QQE, the positive effects of QQE have not 
been felt among financial institutions.   
 24 
 Fourth,  I  described  the  economic  outlook  and  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent.  In 
addition to the consumption tax hike, measures concerning the provision of free education 
are  to  be  implemented,  the  latter  of  which  will  directly  cause  a  decline  in  prices. 
Nonetheless,  I  am  not  too  pessimistic  because,  while  the  hike  is  in  itself  a  tax  increase, 
measures  concerning  the  provision  of  free  education  are  no  different  from  tax  cuts.  In 
relation  to  economic  activity,  tax  increases  are  a  cause  for  concern  but  tax  cuts  produce 
positive  effects.  However,  if  the  economy  deteriorates  to  the  extent  that  achieving  the  2 
percent  price  stability  target  in  the  long  term  becomes  difficult,  I  view  it  as  necessary  to 
strengthen monetary easing without delay. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
  25 
