              In service to society 
New Zealand’s revised monetary policy framework and 
the imperative for institutional change 
 A speech delivered at Wharewaka Function Centre, Wellington, New Zealand  
On 29 March 2019 
 By Adrian Orr, Governor  
Written with Omar Aziz, Economic Advisor 
     2 The Terrace, PO Box 2498, Wellington 6140, New Zealand 
Telephone 64 4 472 2029 Online at www.rbnz.govt.nz  
 
   Introduction 
 
Tēna koutou katoa. 
Thank you for joining us today to discuss New Zealand’s new monetary policy framework.  
The  recent  amendment  to  the  Reserve  Bank’s  legislation  sets  up  a  Monetary  Policy 
Committee that is responsible for a new dual mandate of keeping consumer price inflation low 
and stable, and supporting maximum sustainable employment.    
The  Committee’s  deliberation  process  will  ensure  that  all  decisions  benefit  from  a  diverse 
range of views, and offer greater transparency and accountability to monetary policy decision-
making. 
Before I outline the features of the new framework and its underlying principles, I would like to 
paint the backdrop to this institutional change.   
The business of central banking is evolving as circumstances change.  Some of the change 
is favourable, some is confronting.   
On  the  favourable  side,  we  have  low  and  stable  inflation,  low  unemployment,  and  broad 
financial stability. This advantageous position must never be taken for granted. I thank all of 
the  wise  people  –  past  and  present  –  who  have  worked  hard  on  creating  the  current 
environment. 
On the challenging side, in addition to maintaining the status quo, we have new and significant 
long-term  economic  challenges  among  which  central  banks  operate.    For  example,  in  the 
financial  system  alone,  we  must  deal  with  global  economic  inter-dependence,  dominant 
financial  institutions,  significant  debt  burdens,  technological  change  that  challenges 
employment and financial inclusion norms, climate change, and much more.  The list is long 
and the challenges have intergenerational implications. I spoke about many of these issues in 
a recent speech about the dangers of short-term thinking.1  
The refreshed Reserve Bank Act and monetary policy practices, and the ongoing reviews of 
our legislation, position us to adapt to these changes. The aim is to ensure that the Reserve 
Bank can continue to achieve its fundamental purpose, which is “to promote the prosperity 
and well-being of New Zealanders, and contribute to a sustainable and productive economy”.2 
 Institutions, Legitimacy & Identity 
 
Let’s  take  a  step  back  and  talk  about  the  backdrop  to  recent  and  pending  changes  to  the 
Reserve Bank’s frameworks.   
The key role of a public institution is to bring to life the terms of a contract that arises between 
society and its representative government.  This ‘social contract’ will always evolve, with its 
terms negotiated via the democratic process.  
                                                           
1 Orr, A., (2018), Geopolitics, New Zealand and the Winds of Change, Reserve Bank of New Zealand 
speech delivered to the "Shaping Futures National Conference" Financial Services Council in 
Auckland, 7 September 2018 
2 Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act (1989).  
 Page 2 of 11 
Institutions must therefore adapt in keeping with shifting political, economic, environmental, 
and social realities, so as to serve the well–being of the people.  After all, it is from people that 
institutions derive their ‘social license’ to operate - their legitimacy.  
Earning and retaining institutional legitimacy is an evolving challenge. Similar institutions may 
serve  similar functions  across  countries,  but  they  operate  in  a  unique  national  and  cultural 
context.  Hence,  they  best  earn  local  legitimacy  when  they  appeal  to  a  collective  national 
identity.  
It is therefore important to reflect on the national and cultural context in which the Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand exists.3  
This is why we have chosen the significant Māori legend of Tāne Mahuta to tell our story during 
these times of change.  
Central to the Māori belief system is the narrative of the earth mother / Papatūānuku and the 
sky father / Ranginui who needed to be separated to allow the sun to shine in so that life could 
flourish.   
Tāne Mahuta – the god of the forest and birds – stepped up to the task and, after some false 
starts,  achieved  this  with  help  from  his  wider  whānau  (family).4  A  life  of  economic,  social, 
cultural  and  environmental  sustainability  took  hold.  Knowledge,  trade  and  exchange 
flourished,  and  Māori  found  affinity  with  the  land,  the  sea,  and  the  native  flora  and  fauna 
around them.5  
Thereafter, Tāne Mahuta served as the kaitiaki (guardian) of this ecosystem – protecting it 
against threats to its existence, and enhancing the well-being of all within it.  
What does this story say about the role of the Reserve Bank and the journey of change it has 
embarked on?  
No, we are not anointing ourselves a god. Instead we are using the legend of Tāne Mahuta to 
tell a story.   
The establishment of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand in 1934 gave our country the flexibility 
and benefits of its own currency, monetary policy and financial system.  Sunshine was allowed 
into  New  Zealand’s  own  monetary  and  financial  system,  and  the  Bank  was  given  the 
responsibility to act as a guardian of this system.6 
I draw two significant lessons from the legend of Tāne Mahuta. 
First, while we all love progress, we resist change.  Just as Tāne Mahuta struggled to create 
change, we recognise there are many hurdles to overcome, many interests to balance, and 
many compromises needed to reach a collective greater good.  Sometimes change means 
letting go of, or carefully scrutinising, that which has worked in the past - so that we are more 
resilient for the future.     
                                                           
3 The Journey of Te Pūtea Matua: Our Tāne Mahuta, Reserve Bank of New Zealand, September 
2018, https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/news/2018/09/the-journey-of-te-putea-matua-our-tane-mahuta  
4 Ibid. 
5 Ibid. 
6 For further historical background, see Wright (2006), The Policy Origins of the Reserve Bank of New 
Zealand, RBNZ Bulletin, Vol. 69. No. 3. Sep 2006 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research-and-
publications/reserve-bank-bulletin/2006/rbb2006-69-03-01  
 Page 3 of 11 
Second, just like Tāne Mahuta, change cannot happen in isolation. The role of a kaitiaki is to 
protect.  However, the fulfilment of that role depends on the approval and help of others.   
The Reserve Bank has a social license to serve as a guardian of our monetary and financial 
system because it is unique to the identity and heritage of New Zealand.     
Te Pūtea Matua. It is New Zealand’s central bank.    
 The Changing Landscape of Central Banking 
 
Let’s tie this discussion about legitimacy and institutional change to the current landscape of 
central banking. 
Over  the  past  decade,  countries  have  looked  to  central  banks  to  mitigate  the  dire 
consequences of the global financial crisis (GFC). During, and after, the GFC, central banks 
around the world rallied to stabilise financial systems and provide renewed vigour to damaged 
economies.  This challenge remains, and securing sustainable prosperity for all requires our 
continued attention.   
In the world today, the dynamics of global and national economies are interacting to a greater 
extent and, at times, working at cross-purposes.  Underlying these interactions are social and 
political  movements  driven  by  a  desire  for  greater  well-being,  both  for  current  and  future 
generations.   
More recently we have been confronted with the issue of climate change, and its complex and 
powerful economic and financial impact.  
We have barely scratched the surface in understanding the intergenerational impacts of these 
developments. 
This  desire  for  well-being  is  regularly  reflected  in  discontent  along  the  lines  of  economic, 
gender, racial, and intergenerational inequities - to name just a few. Therefore, ensuring social 
inclusion as a way forward in capitalist societies is necessary.  
As such, these developments continuously alter the landscape in which central banks conduct 
their business. 
This is why we have been led to ponder the impact the Reserve Bank can have in securing 
the well-being of New Zealand’s current and future generations.  It is also useful to do so while 
the pervasive ill-effects of the GFC remain in our memories and continue to shape the policy 
landscape.       
The  success that  central  banks  had  in  addressing  the  early  impacts  of  the  GFC,  and their 
effectiveness during earlier decades in transitioning economies from high- to stable-inflation 
regimes, is due in large part to their ability to act decisively, within a clearly defined remit. 
They must continue to be empowered to do so.  
The challenge for us now is a more nuanced one:7  
                                                           
7 In New Zealand, the scope of this debate, is informed by the Bank’s remit and the letter of 
expectations (LoE) from the Minister of Finance to the Governor of the Reserve Bank outlining broad 
expectations of the Bank's relationship with the Minister and areas of particular interest. LoE 2018/19: 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/about-us/letters-of-expectations/letter-of-expectations-2018  
 Page 4 of 11 
  Do the remits of central banks reflect the objectives most important to the welfare of 
their  societies  in  the  post-GFC  world?  And  do  they  have  the  requisite  policy 
instruments to address these objectives? 8 
   
  Are central banks using their influence in an inclusive and transparent manner befitting 
of the trust societies have invested in them? 
 
  Are  central  banks  fulfilling  their  role  as  stewards  of  sound  and  efficient  financial 
systems by creating effective regulatory regimes? 
 
  And  is  there  alignment  across  a  country’s  economic  policy  establishment  to  offer  a 
coherent and unified response to future crises? 9   
 These are hard questions that we continue to confront.  
At the Reserve Bank we believe that it is timely to review our policy frameworks and the role 
we play in wider society to ensure we remain fit for purpose.  
Over the past year, we have embarked on several review and public consultation processes. 
These  processes  –  some  of  which  are  still  underway  –  have  spanned  our  monetary  and 
financial policy frameworks, as well as the role of physical currency. 
We are not alone in conducting such reviews. Our counterparts in Sweden (Riksbank) and 
Norway (Norges Bank) recently have, or currently are, undertaking reviews of their monetary 
policy  frameworks  and  legislation.10  11  The  US  Federal  Reserve  has  initiated  a  review  of 
                                                           
8 Historically, central banking objectives have evolved with the wider political economy concerns faced 
by countries. See Smith, C, O. Aziz (2019),  Monetary Policy Objectives, Reserve Bank of New 
Zealand Bulletin, Vol. 82, No. 2 (forthcoming). 
9 Paul Tucker argues that “[a] central bank regime for all seasons cannot be designed without a good 
fiscal constitution existing too. Setting boundaries to the authority of central banking needs to factor in 
what is on the other side of the border”, The Governance of Monetary & Financial Stability Policy, 
Banking Perspective, Quarter 2 2018 (http://paultucker.me/the-governance-of-monetary-and-financial-
stability-policy/)  
10 The Riksbank’s monetary policy was reviewed by Marvin Goodfriend and Martin King over 2010 – 
2015 and a report published in 2016. The review was commissioned by the Committee on Finance of 
the Riksdag and made several recommendations. Following this review the Riksbank Executive 
Board has made several changes to its framework in May 2017, the rationale for these changes are 
further explained in a memorandum produced by the executive Board, and in the Riksbank Economic 
review. In addition, a parliamentary review of the Riksbank Act has been initiated. The 
recommendations from the Riksbank Act review are due no later than 31 May 2019.  
11 The Norges Bank has had two reviews which have translated into changes in the Norges Bank Act, 
and the Regulation on Monetary Policy. The Gjedrem review was an external review conducted by the 
Norwegian Law Commission and chaired by a previous Governor Sevin Gjedrem.  ReFIT (Review of 
Flexible Inflation Targeting) was an internal review over 2013 to 2017 and explored possible 
improvements to the monetary policy framework in Norway. See: https://www.norges-
bank.no/en/about/Research/ReFIT--Review-of-Flexible-Inflation-Targeting/ 
And https://www.regjeringen.no/en/aktuelt/report-of-the-law-commission-on-the-act-relating-to-norges-
bank-and-the-monetary-system/id2558679/ 
 Page 5 of 11 
“strategies, tools and communication practices” that service its dual mandate.12 And, the Bank 
of Canada is well into a regular five-yearly review of its “inflation control agreement”. 13 14       
Beyond this, calls to build further resilience in the financial system – especially in its interface 
with the wider economy – is an emerging theme on the international agenda.15 
The first review of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989 to be completed was that of 
monetary policy. Now enacted in law, New Zealand’s new monetary policy framework is being 
formally introduced on 1 April 2019.   
I will now elaborate on the specifics of the revised monetary policy framework with reference 
to its history, locating it in the wider context of other external policy reviews and consultation 
processes that the Bank is involved in.  
 Reserve Bank Act 1989: Objectives & Accountability 
 
The Reserve Bank Act of 1989 was introduced at a time when there was great uncertainty 
about economic conditions in New Zealand.  
In the 1970s and 80s, our country, like many others, had adopted a variety of strategies to 
deal with high and volatile inflation; none were successful.  
The 1989 Act gave the Reserve Bank operational independence to achieve the objective of 
price stability. 
A  single  decision  maker  model  was  introduced  making  the  Governor  responsible  and 
singularly accountable for the substance of monetary policy.   
The Policy Targets Agreement (PTA) between the Minister of Finance and the Governor set 
explicit goals for monetary policy to pursue.16  
An  agreement  between  a  single  decision  maker  and  the  government  provided  sufficient 
flexibility to make the appropriate revisions to the inflation target as we adjusted from high to 
low inflation.  
Over time, there have been several revisions to the inflation target, settling in recent times on 
a band of 1 – 3 percent with a focus on the 2 percent midpoint.17 
                                                           
12 Federal Reserve to review strategies, tools, and communication practices it uses to pursue its 
mandate of maximum employment and price stability, Press Release,  15 November 2018, 
(https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20181115a.htm)  
13 Wilkins, C., A., Choosing the Best Monetary Policy Framework for Canada, Speech, 20 November 
2018 https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2018/11/choosing-best-monetary-policy-framework-canada/  
14  https://www.bankofcanada.ca/toward-2021-reviewing-the-monetary-policy-framework/ 
15 Lagarde, C., The Financial Sector: Redefining a Broader Sense of Purpose, 32nd World Traders' 
Tacitus Lecture, London, United Kingdom, February 28, 2019 
16 PTA’s were renegotiated between the Minister and Governor each time the latter was appointed or 
reappointed, although there is precedence to revisit the terms of the agreement during a change of 
government as well. 13 PTA’s were signed from 1990 onwards, each ratification reflecting incremental 
adjustments to inflation targets. See Wadsworth (2017), “An international comparison of inflation 
targeting frameworks”, RBNZ Bulletin 80(8) for more information. 
17 In the versions of the PTA from 1990 to 1992, annual inflation was to be kept within a target band, 
initially 3 - 5 percent, then 1.5 – 3.5 percent before settling on 0 – 2 percent as inflation was initially 
 Page 6 of 11 
When you look at the contrast between inflation in the years before and after 1989 (figure 1), 
the  Reserve  Bank’s  record  of  servicing  its  price  stability  objectives  over  the  last  30  years 
stands on its own merit.  
Figure 1: Annual CPI Inflation (target range shaded) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand 
  Such has been the success and influence of New Zealand’s inflation targeting regime, that in 
2014 – on  the eve of the 25th anniversary of the Reserve Bank Act –  the New York Times 
declared  it  to  be  “virtually  an  economic  religion”  and  “global  economic  gospel”  among  the 
international central banking community.18 
Amendment to the Reserve Bank Act 
 
We have prospered in the certainty and security of a low and stable inflation regime for the 
past  30  years.   What  then  is  the  imperative  for  any  change  to  the  way  monetary  policy  is 
conducted in New Zealand? 
Simply put: our Act has been amended to address emerging policy challenges, and to operate 
with greater transparency and accountability. 
To reinforce our societal legitimacy. 
The  Reserve  Bank  Act  now  sets  monetary  policy  with  a  dual  mandate:  to  maintain  price 
stability and support maximum sustainable employment.  
The remit – which replaces the earlier PTA – provides the Bank with its specific inflation target 
and direction on how to consider its contribution to maximum sustainable employment.19 
While unemployment is currently low in New Zealand, it is, and will continue to be, one of the 
defining issues of any society.   
                                                           
brought under control. Through the mid-90’s onwards, 0 – 3 percent, then up to 1 – 3 percent (our 
current target) in 2002. The focus on the 2 percent midpoint was added in 2012.  
18 Irwin, N., Of Kiwis and Currencies: How a 2% Inflation Target Became Global Economic Gospel, 
New York Times, Dec. 19, 2014. 
19 The remit and charter can be accessed at: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/about-
monetary-policy/monetary-policy-framework. 
 Page 7 of 11 
Labour  market  dynamics  both  within  and  across  countries  have  changed  significantly  as  a 
consequence  of  recent  rapid  globalisation,  the  impact  of  the  GFC,  and  as  ongoing 
technological developments have reshaped the needs of the workforce. 
Likewise,  concerns  about  income  and  wealth  inequities,  low  productivity  growth,  and  the 
impact  of  population  ageing,  all  intersect  at  some  level  with  the  functioning  of  the  labour 
market.      
Historically,  the  Bank  has  always  taken  labour  market  developments  into  account  while 
formulating monetary policy.  
Over  time,  “this  has  been  encouraged  by  our  increasingly  flexible  approach”  to  inflation 
targeting.20  
The shift to a dual mandate is to acknowledge the impact monetary policy has on employment 
and economic activity, and also the prominence given to labour market outcomes when the 
Bank is formulating monetary policy.21  
Our new mandate means the Bank is legally obliged to provide a more detailed assessment 
of, and outlook for, the labour market.22 This obligation recognises that ‘maximum sustainable 
employment’ cannot be measured using a single metric, and that there are limits to the degree 
to which monetary policy can affect employment outcomes.         
Let’s now talk process. 
The  changes  enacted  as  part  of  the  phase  1  review  of  the  Reserve  Bank  Act  made  the 
processes and principles underlying the Bank’s earlier monetary policy decisions explicit. 
I mentioned that up until now the Bank had operated with a single decision maker model for 
monetary  policy.    In  reality  however,  successive  Governors  relied  on  internal  advisory 
committees consisting of senior members within the ranks to discuss ideas, build consensus 
and guide decisions on monetary policy.23 
The  amendment  to  the  Act  formalises  a  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  consisting  of 
members internal and external to the Bank.24  
A  committee  structure  will  add  further  rigour  to  monetary  policy  decisions,  drawing  on  the 
diverse views and perspectives of its members. 
                                                              
20 McDermott & Williams (2018), “Inflation targeting in New Zealand: An experience in evolution”, 
speech delivered to the Reserve Bank of Australia conference on central bank frameworks, in Sydney 
12 April 2018. 
21 The former being the stabilisation role of monetary policy. 
22 Ibid. For example, the Bank has dedicated a chapter to output and employment in each Monetary 
Policy Statement since May 2018, and has also included tables and discussion of indicators of 
maximum sustainable employment.  
23 This was formalised in practice, if not it law, by the creation of a Governing Committee in 2013. See 
Wheeler (2013) “Decision making in the Reserve Bank of New Zealand”, speech delivered to the 
University of Auckland Business School on 7 March 2013, and Richardson (2016) “Behind the scenes 
of an OCR decision in New Zealand”, RBNZ Bulletin 79(11). 
24 With the majority internal (and including the Governor and Deputy Governor ex officio). 
 Page 8 of 11 
Figure 2: Secondary Instruments to Direct the MPC 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act (1989)
Remit
Charter
Code of conduct
  The Act and remit set out the economic and operational objectives for the MPC respectively.  
The charter governs the committee’s decision-making and ensures accountability.  
The charter emphasises that the MPC should aim to reach decisions by consensus, informed 
by  rigorous  discussion  taking  into  account  a  diverse  range  of  views  and  perspectives  on 
emerging issues. In the event consensus cannot be reached, each member has an equal vote 
to determine a decision.25   
Furthermore, accompanying the remit and charter, is a code of conduct that sets the standards 
of ethical and professional conduct that must be adhered to by the Committee.26   
All this sounds very technical, but these instruments bring to life the principles that underpin 
the Bank’s major monetary policy decisions.  
An MPC with a diverse set of opinions that is committed to inclusive and constructive debate 
about important policy issues, will ultimately be of great service to New Zealand society.27 
 Interconnectedness of Institutions & Policy Regimes  
 
The story of Tāne Mahuta is a metaphor for change, but also one for interconnectedness.  This 
is a theme I would like to end with. 
Each year, the Minister of Finance issues a Letter of Expectations that sets out the strategic 
priorities for the Reserve Bank. 28  In 2018, the Bank was given a renewed strategic direction 
underscoring the imperative for institutional change.  
As the letter states, in fulfilling its monetary policy mandate, the Bank is expected to “support 
sustainable and inclusive growth”. And in promoting a sound and efficient financial system, 
the  Bank  is  expected  to  contribute  “to  the  living  standards  of  New  Zealanders  by  being  a 
conscientious, high performing regulator”.29  
                                                           
25 The charter refers to the provision in the Act for each member to have an equal vote to determine a 
decision. 
26 Monetary Policy Framework, https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/about-monetary-
policy/monetary-policy-framework  
27 Principles and processes behind monetary policy committee deliberation at the RBNZ, Forthcoming 
RBNZ Bulletin, Price, G., & Wadsworth, A., 2019 
28 Letter of Expectations 2018/19: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/about-us/letters-of-expectations/letter-of-
expectations-2018  
29 Ibid. 
 Page 9 of 11 
The  flagship  strategic  projects  on  the  Bank’s  current  work  agenda  all  align  with  the 
“Government’s  broader  economic  objectives  while  maintaining  the  Bank’s  operational 
independence”. 30 
These ongoing projects at the Bank include: 
the implementation of our new monetary policy framework  
the review of the Bank’s prudential and regulatory functions  
the bank capital adequacy consultation that is currently underway, and  
- 
- 
- 
-  exploratory work on the emerging impact of technology on the Bank’s currency functions 
and research on digital currencies 
 
The  imperative  for  this  work  program  also  arises  from  the  global  policy  environment  that 
central  banks  are  presented  with:  that  is,  balancing  uncertain  growth  and  continued  low 
nominal  interest  rates - against  inflated central bank  balance  sheets,  and  the  ever-present 
threat of asset price bubbles. 
More  specifically,  as  a  small,  open  economy  New  Zealand  is  especially  vulnerable  to 
downturns in its trading partner economies. And with a high reliance on banks for overseas 
borrowing, we are vulnerable to the transmission of financial instability through the banking 
system.   
This is why we are thinking holistically at the Reserve Bank about the collective impact of our 
various monetary, financial, and currency policy initiatives.  For example,  
  What effect do low nominal interest rates have on wider financial stability? 
   How can monetary-fiscal coordination be better managed, and in a low interest rate 
environment, what role will fiscal policy play in the event of a downturn? And, 
 
  Recognising that the “impact of bank failures would be broader and harsher the larger 
and  more  intertwined  the  failed  banks  are  with  New  Zealand’s  economy”  what 
regulatory and prudential settings would mitigate the risk of failure?31   
 These  are  all  immediate  challenges  being  confronted  by  your  team  working  at  Te  Pūtea 
Matua.  
Furthermore,  our  mandate,  to  support  sustainable  and  inclusive  growth,  and  higher  living 
standards,  necessitates  the  Bank  to  work  more  interactively  with  wider  society  and  public 
institutions. We will do so without loss of focus on our core activities.  
Our  Te  Ao  Māori  strategy  includes  engagement  with  the  ‘Māori  economy’,  which  has 
undergone a rapid renaissance.32  This work is necessary and a gateway into assisting wider 
financial inclusion in New Zealand and the region.    
We remain focused on our role in our region and the wider international economy.  The Bank 
is  currently  refreshing  its  international  engagement  strategy  to  give  greater  focus  to  New 
Zealand’s  bilateral  and  multilateral  engagements.33   We  are  working  on our  contribution  to 
                                                           
30 Ibid. 
31 Bascand (2019), “Safer Banks for Greater Wellbeing”, speech delivered to the Institute for 
Governance and Policy Studies, Victoria University in Wellington, 26 February 2019 
32 RBNZ’s Strategic Approach to Te Ao Māori, Forthcoming RBNZ Bulletin, 2019 
33 One example being contributing to New Zealand’s progress towards the UN Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs). In 2019, New Zealand is presenting its first progress report (Voluntary 
 Page 10 of 11 
building  capacity  and  capability  in  central  banks  through  our  region  –  including  the  central 
banks of the South Pacific and East Asia.   
Finally, underscoring our need to be a good global citizen, we have embarked on our climate 
change strategy, playing our part in the link between necessary global climate action and the 
role of the financial system.34      
I want to assure you all that the Reserve Bank – Te Pūtea Matua – remains grounded and has 
not lost focus on its core business.   
We  are  committed  to  meeting  the  currency  needs  of  the  people,  ensuring  low  and  stable 
inflation, maximising sustainable employment, and promoting a sound and efficient financial 
system.  These activities are necessary for economic well-being.   
But, I also want to assure you we will work beyond just the ‘necessary’.   
We will ensure that both ‘necessary’ and ‘sufficient’ work is done so that the Bank is best able 
“to promote the prosperity and well-being of New Zealanders, and contribute to a sustainable 
and productive economy”.35   
I am told that the first step to running a marathon is to tell everyone of your intentions.  Commit.  
You have just been told of our intentions to work collectively – locally, regionally, and globally 
– in pursuit of maximising our mandate.   
We desire to be a great team and the world’s best central bank. The resounding results that 
past and present people at the Reserve Bank have achieved provides a fantastic platform to 
progress this work.    
Me mahi tahi tātou mo te oranga o te katoa. 
Work together for the wellbeing of everyone 
Meitaki 
Thank you  
                                                            
National Review) on the national implementation of the SDGs. Several SDG targets can be mapped 
to the core functions of central banks, for instance: inclusive access to banking, insurance and 
financial services (target 8.10), regulation and monitoring of global financial markets (10.5), reducing 
transaction costs of migrant remittances (target 10.c), reducing illicit financial flows (16.4), enhancing 
macroeconomic stability (17.13) and providing data capacity-building support to developing countries 
(17.18) (https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/indicators-list/) 
34 Reserve Bank Climate Change Strategy, https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/financial-stability/climate-
change/strategy  
35 Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act (1989).  
 Page 11 of 11 
