Haruhiko Kuroda: The Bank's Semiannual Report on Currency and
Monetary Control
Statement  by  Mr  Haruhiko  Kuroda,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  before  the  Committee  on
Financial Affairs, House of Councillors, Tokyo, 9 May 2019.
I. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan
I will first explain economic and financial developments in Japan.
 Japan’s  economy  has  been  on  a  moderate  expanding  trend,  although  exports  and  production
have  been  affected  by  the  slowdown  in  overseas  economies.  Looking  at  this  in  more  detail,
Japan’s exports and production have shown some weakness recently, mainly in terms of capital
goods and IT-related goods specific to China. However, domestic demand has continued to be
firm.  With  corporate  profits  having  stayed  at  favorable  levels  on  the  whole,  albeit  with  some
weakness  observed  in  part,  business  fixed  investment  has  continued  on  an  increasing  trend.
Private consumption also has been increasing moderately, albeit with fluctuations, against the
background  of  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation.  Going  forward,
Japan’s economy is likely to continue on a moderate expanding trend, despite being affected by
the slowdown in overseas economies for the time being. Risks to the outlook are skewed to the
downside,  particularly 
the
consequences of protectionist moves, developments in the Chinese economy, and the degree of
progress in global adjustments in IT-related goods.
in  overseas  economies, 
regarding  developments 
including 
On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) has been
positive  but  has  continued  to  show  relatively  weak  developments  compared  to  the  economic
expansion and the labor market tightening. Recently, however, firms increasingly have reflected
rises in prices of raw materials and personnel expenses in their prices. As such moves continue
to spread with the output gap remaining positive, people’s inflation expectations are projected to
rise gradually. The momentum toward achieving the price stability target is maintained, and the
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to increase gradually toward 2 percent.
II. Conduct of Monetary Policy
Next, I will explain the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy.
The Bank has been conducting powerful monetary easing under the framework of “Quantitative
and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control.” In terms of yield curve control,
with a view to facilitating the formation of the yield curve that is considered most appropriate for
achieving the price stability target, the Bank has conducted purchases of Japanese government
bonds (JGBs) under the guideline for market operations, in which it sets the short-term policy
interest  rate  at  minus  0.1  percent  and  the  target  level  of  10-year  JGB  yields  at  around  zero
percent.
Japan’s  economy  has  continued  on  a  moderate  expanding  trend  and  already  is  no  longer  in
deflation in the sense of a sustained decline in prices. However, it is likely to still take time to
achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent.  In  addition,  there  remain  high  uncertainties
regarding  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  including  developments  in  overseas
economies. Based on this recognition, the Bank considers it important to make clearer its policy
stance to persistently continue with powerful monetary easing toward achieving the price stability
target. Thus, the Bank decided last month to clarify forward guidance for policy rates introduced
in July 2018 and maintain the current extremely low levels of short- and long-term interest rates
for  an  extended  period  of  time,  at  least  through  around  spring  2020,  taking  into  account
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
uncertainties  regarding  economic  activity  and  prices  including  developments  in  overseas
economies and the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike. The Bank also decided to
take  such  measures  as  the  expansion  of  eligible  collateral  for  the  Bank’s  provision  of  credit,
thereby  contributing  to  smooth  fund-provisioning  as  well  as  to  securing  market  functioning.
These  measures  likely  will  strengthen  public  confidence  in  continuing  with  powerful  monetary
easing,  thereby  further  ensuring  the  achievement  of  the  price  stability  target  and  leading  to
stability in financial markets.
The Bank will continue to examine the risks considered most relevant to the conduct of monetary
policy  and  conduct  its  policy  in  an  appropriate  manner,  taking  account  of  developments  in
economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
