Vitas Vasiliauskas: Real estate taxation and macroprudential policy
Welcome remarks by Mr Vitas Vasiliauskas, Chairman of the Board of the Bank of Lithuania, at
the Macroprudential Policy Conference "Real estate taxation and macroprudential policy", Vilnius,
2 July 2019.
Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen:
 It is my pleasure to join you today at this already-traditional conference, and to thank you all –
speakers, panellists and participants – for gathering to discuss this very timely topic. I would also
like to express special thanks to our keynote speakers – Professor Klaas Knot, president of De
Nederlandsche Bank, and Henrik Braconier, chief economist at Sweden’s Finansinspektionen,
who delivered the keynote speech yesterday.
Regretfully, I was not able to be here when you began discussing the interlinkages between real
estate  taxation  and  macroprudential  policy  instruments,  and  shared  country  experiences  in
residential  real  estate  taxation.  Still,  today’s  agenda  promises  us  another  intensive  day  with
engaging discussions and, hopefully, some helpful answers.
Dear Colleagues:
In  welcoming  you  all  today,  I  hardly  need  to  list  the  benefits  of  macroprudential  policy  and  its
instruments. I am sure that macroprudential policy works – especially as a preventive tool. Let’s
take current Lithuania as an example. The economy is growing, but we do not observe economic
agents – creditors and borrowers – acting irresponsibly (what we had prior to the financial crisis).
I  believe  that  other  countries  experiences,  the  ESRB  framework  and  the  policy  instruments
prove, if not the effectiveness, than at least their potential.
It is worth noting that we still lack clear evidence on the interactions of various macroprudential
measures with other policy areas.
This is true, despite the fact that macroprudential policies have been gaining recognition and use
among policymakers in many countries. In fact, data shows that the usage of macroprudential
measures increased persistently in the immediate post-crisis years. This trend is evident in both
advanced and emerging market economies, albeit to a different extent.
In my opinion, measures directed at affecting crediting in the economy are effective tools with an
impact on the economic cycle – especially in the low interest rate environment.
We consider current timing to be appropriate to deepen our understanding of the links between
macroprudential  and  other  policies,  as  policy  makers  need  to  think  in  the  frame  of  a  well-
balanced policy mix. I believe that policy makers’ cooperation is a desirable outcome, but it may
be hard to implement. Ideally it would be beneficial, but in reality it is quite difficult to achieve,
primarily due to different goals and horizons, as far as policy is concerned.
Unlike before the crisis, today, the mandate of the Bank of Lithuania includes both micro and
macroprudential responsibilities. In practice, this means that, with respect to decision-making,
we  act  as  an  autonomous  entity  and  do  not  require  separate  approval  from  other  national
institutions. Yet, as tax policy is obviously beyond our mandate, we need broader discussions
that often involve delicate political issues.
Although most taxes affect individual behaviour, property taxation is generally perceived as less
distortionary  than  labour  or  capital  taxation.  Furthermore,  property  tax  can  produce  a  positive
externality:  it  may  contribute  to  ensuring  financial  stability.  It  is  widely  believed  that  demand
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
shocks  tend  to  amplify  when  property  taxes  are  low,  inducing  excessive  price  volatility.  This
notion has some empirical support; for instance, many researchers argue that property taxes
can reduce house price volatility.
But here too, I believe that it is important to analyse the possible implications for the economic
cycles  of  different  policies.  The  intermediate  objectives  of  macroprudential  and  fiscal  policies
might  differ.  Nevertheless,  the  underlying  goal  of  all  policies  is  to  achieve  a  stable  and
sustainable rate of economic growth. As such, it is crucial that policy makers make time to listen
to each other.
One of the main areas where fiscal and macroprudential policies intersect is the housing market.
In many countries – and in both advanced and emerging economies – governments intervene in
the  housing  market.  Such  policy  decisions  can  indeed  contribute  to  financial  stability  –  or
instability, for that matter.
Additionally,  there  is  some  evidence  that  government  housing-related  interventions  (e.g.,
mortgage  interest  deduction  and  state-supported  mortgage  insurance  schemes)  can  lead  to
larger house price volatility. This is especially the case when policymakers target policy goals
other than financial stability, such as increasing home ownership rates.
In the period leading to the financial crisis, here in Lithuania we also had some fiscal incentives.
First, before the crisis (from 2002 until 2008), there were income tax incentives for individuals
taking housing loans. As a result, mortgage interest rates were effectively reduced by a third.
Looking back, now we can say that those incentives were probably one of the factors, which
escalated irresponsible borrowers’ behavior before the crisis, especially since it was not stopped
early enough. Second, there was a housing loan insurance scheme, which shifted the risks of
the riskiest borrowers from banks to the state-owned mortgage insurance company. Naturally,
this created grounds for moral hazard concerns.
In other words, such government policy stance, together with other economic factors (such as
EU membership, plans to introduce euro in 2007, the enthusiasm regarding economic expansion
etc.) clearly fostered credit and house price growth. Looking back, it is evident that policymakers
failed  to  acknowledge  the  excessive  boom  in  the  economy.  Subsequently,  they  did  not  make
effective use of fiscal stabilization tools.
The  introduction  of  a  universal  property  tax  (or  at  least  a  credible  plan  to  do  so)  and  the
abolishment of the tax incentive could have had a suppressing impact on property prices. Indeed,
according to OECD research, reduction of tax deductions related to mortgage financing costs
can  reduce  house  price  volatility.  That  would  probably  not  have  prevented  the  bubble  from
emerging, but it might have limited the damage.
Returning to today, we see that Lithuania still does not have a universal residential real estate tax.
Last year, the Bank of Lithuania released suggestions concerning the tax system. One of those
suggestions was primarily related to the residential real estate tax – we suggested broadening
the base of residential real estate taxation. Our proposals have not yet found their way forward
politically.
What we have today in Lithuania is a situation in which real estate taxation exists – but more in
theory than in practice. For example, last year, residential real estate taxation generated only 1.7
m euro as budgetary income, which is only a tiny fraction – 0.02 % – of the total state budget
income.
OECD  also  reports  that,  in  total,  real  estate  taxation  in  Lithuania  constitutes  around  0.4%  of
GDP. Is that enough? To compare, total real estate taxation in Latvia constitutes around 0.9% of
GDP, while in Poland – around 1.2% of GDP. The OECD average is around 1%. So due to the
current  tax  design  real  estate  taxation  in  Lithuania  has  little  real  effect.  This  is  clearly  not  a
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
suitable outcome.
The current discussion is relevant not only internationally, but also for Lithuania in particular –
especially given our past experiences. We – I mean many of us – still need to do our homework
on the taxation design side. My understanding is that countries experience different problems and
come up with different “recipes” for solving them. So, today’s policy discussion on whether real
estate taxation and macroprudential policies are complements or substitutes is highly relevant.
We will also continue looking into country-specific experiences – successful and less so – with
residential real estate related tax systems. In this respect, the experience of other countries can
play  a  crucial  role.  Thus,  I  look  forward  to  hearing  from  our  keynote  speaker  about  the  policy
recipes chosen and implemented in the Netherlands.
To wrap up, this is the third macroprudential conference organized here in Vilnius, and I am glad
to  see  that  the  agenda  is  filled  with  interesting  presentations  by  people  from  many  different
institutions.
I’m  excited  to  open  the  floor  to  the  discussions.  I  believe  that  we  have  a  good  mix  of
policymakers, researchers and representatives of international institutions for this to happen. I
wish us an interesting day and a fruitful exchange of views, hopefully leading to positive policy
outcomes.
And now, I gladly pass the microphone to our keynote speaker – Professor Klaas Knot. I look
forward to hearing your thoughts on the possible effects of the taxation of residential real estate,
and the possible interlinkages with macroprudential policy.
Please, Klaas, the floor is yours.
  3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
