Anita  Angelovska  Bezhoska:  The  Republic  of  Macedonia  has
accessed the highest statistical data dissemination standard of the
IMF - SDDS Plus
Address by Ms Anita Angelovska Bezhoska, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of
Macedonia,  at  the  event  marking  the  adherence  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  to  the  IMF’s
Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) Plus, Skopje, 1 February 2019.
 Dear ladies and gentlemen,
It  is  my  great  pleasure  that  the  idea  which  at  the  national  level  was  initiated  by  the
National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia several years ago, and accepted and actively
supported by the State Statistical Office and the Ministry of Finance, today is already a reality. On
28  January  this  year,  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  officially  became  a  member  of  the  highest
statistical standard of the International Monetary Fund – SDDS Plus. We have jointly succeeded
our country to become part of an international data dissemination initiative, which so far included
only seventeen countries, including the United States, Canada, France, Germany, Austria, Italy,
Sweden, Japan...  The Republic of Macedonia is the eighteenth country in the world, the second
from Southeast Europe, and the first among the countries of the region that are still not members
of the European Union. This successful project is a clear confirmation of the commitment of the
three institutions for the continuous upgrading of national statistics and their harmonization with
the latest, highest international statistical standards.
What actually does this standard represent? As  emphasized  by  the  Director  of  the  State
Statistical Office, Mr. Apostol Simovski, the Republic of Macedonia has long been integrated into
the system of the so-called IMF’s Data Standards Initiatives. This system is extremely dynamic
and started to develop since the mid-1990s, in response to the then international financial crisis,
in order to promote transparency of both economic and financial data. I say dynamic, given that
its  construction  blocks  have  been  continuously  changing  and  increasing.  Its  last,  third
construction block is the SDDS plus which reflects the weaknesses identified in the statistical
data infrastructure that surfaced with the latest global economic and financial crisis from 2008.
It is a fact that the genesis of the crisis was not located in the lack of data, but fact is also the
identified need for an enriched data set for conducting more effective economic policies. This
crisis  has  clearly  shown  how  inadequate  regulation  and  excessive  risk-taking  can  lead  to  a
collapse of the financial system. It has shown how the underestimation of the strength of the links
of  the  financial  system  with  the  real  sector,  as  well  as  the  underestimation  of  cross-border
exposures  of  economies  and  financial  integration,  could  lead  to  inadequate  assessment  of
macro-financial links and underestimation of risks. The SDDS plus is actually a response of the
international financial community to these statistical gaps.  This initiative means enrichment of
statistics,  in  both  scope  and  quality,  in  order  to  timely  recognize  and  appropriately  react  to
vulnerabilities that may arise in an economy.
Our cooperative journey to the SDDS Plus began in 2013, when, after the achieved national
consensus on the usefulness of the accession to this standard, we officially informed the IMF of
the efforts that we will make in the medium-term period to meet the membership criteria. Then, in
the next years, we worked on the production, promotion and publication of the required data.
We  faced  the  challenge  to  prepare  and  submit  nine  new  or  appropriately  adjusted
categories of data, out of which seven are within the competence of the NBRM, and two
within the competence of the Ministry of Finance:
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
-real sector data - statistics of sectoral financial accounts which is actually an overview of the
structure of financial assets and liabilities of individual sectors, their mutual exposure, financial
flows and, accordingly, possible accumulation of risks;
- financial sector data – statistics of non-bank financial institutions (more detailed data not only
for the banking system, but also for the pension funds, insurance companies, investment funds,
financial companies, leasing companies), statistics of debt securities and seven financial stability
indicators that enable better identification of the risks in the financial system;
- external sector data – data on the currency structure of the foreign reserves, the coordinate
direct  investment  questionnaire  and  the  coordinate  portfolio  investment  questionnaire  which
provide more detailed findings for cross-border links and the
possibility of transfer of the effects from the external shocks to the domestic economy, and
-  fiscal  sector  data  –  general  government  statistics  and  data  on  gross  debt  of  the  general
government.  
Aware of the challenges that the countries faced with and the need for making extremely great
efforts to produce them, the IMF allowed, at the time of application for this standard, fulfillment of
the dissemination requirements of at least five from the nine mandatory indicators. For the other
four indicators, an adjustment period is envisaged, for their fulfillment in a period of five years
from the date of accession. 
As a result of all these activities, by providing the necessary five from nine indicators, in
April  2017,  the  NBRM  officially  launched  the  initiative  to  join  this  highest  data
dissemination standard. At that time, we were already sure that we passed the right path and
that  we  came  within  an  ace  of  attaining  our  goal  –  to  the  moment  that  we  mark  with  today’s
event.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
On a global scale, it has long been resolved that quality data dissemination is key to use the
benefits of statistics. Therefore, I can say for certain that 28 January 2019 is a date of historical
significance  for  the  Macedonian  statistical  system.  But  also  for  the  Macedonian  economy,
because it now has an opportunity to be one of the eighteen economies in the world that have a
set of statistical indicators according to the highest international data dissemination standard.
Our cooperative journey to the SDDS Plus does not end here.  We  will  have  to  fight  off
more challenges. We need to continue to work with the same commitment as so far to deliver
the other four indicators. We are already actively working in this field and some of these data, in
particular  the  data  on  the  sectoral  financial  accounts  produced  by  the  NBRM,  have  been
experimentally submitted to Eurostat.
I am sure that we will successfully reach our final destination. We have a vision, we have
teams of responsible professionals who work every day to achieve the goals set by the SDDS
Plus, we have excellent interinstitutional cooperation... And all this, which is also necessary to
build and develop modern and quality statistics, guarantees us that we will succeed to the end.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
