Benjamin E Diokno: Sustaining the Philippine growth momentum
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Rotary Club of Manila centennial year celebration, Manila, 6 June
2019.
 President  Susing  Pineda,  fellow  rotarians,  friends,  all  the  RCM  Journalism Awardees  special
guests, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  be  one  of  your  speakers  in  this  historical  centennial  anniversary
celebration of the Rotary Club of Manila. Not many organizations have the distinction of reaching
the all-important “century” milestone. Attaining this momentous landmark is certainly not a walk in
the park for any organization. That the RCM have lasted this long is a reflection not only of its
long-standing  commitment  to  its  ideals  and  goals,  but  also  of  its  dynamism,  relevance,  and
influence to the community it serves. For this, the men of the RCM deserve our congratulations!
(Governor leads applause).
I  thus  consider  it  a  privilege  that  I  stand  here  before  you  today  to  share  with  you  the  BSP’s
assessment of the country’s growth prospects. The Philippine economy is sound, its prospects
are bright. Along many dimensions, allow me to highlight several factors that continue to steer
our  story  of  resilience  and  stability,  and  to  point  out  some  key  challenges  that  need  to  be
addressed in our drive towards sustainable and balanced growth.
Let me begin with this slide which shows that overall prospects for the Philippine economy for
2019  and  in  2020  remain  bright,  amid  mounting  global  uncertainties  along  with  emerging
domestic challenges.
While the Q1 2019 growth of the Philippine economy of 5.6 percent was short of our target of 6.0
to  7.0  percent,  it  remains  one  of  the  highest  in  the  region  and  perhaps  the  world.  This
performance was achieved notwithstanding the delay in the approval of the 2019 national budget
which held back the implementation of key programs and projects.
Based on the statistics by the National Economic Development Authority (NEDA), the Philippine
economy should have grown by at least one percentage point higher, at 6.6 to 7.2 percent in the
first quarter, had the 2019 fiscal program been approved on time. Nonetheless, the government
has crafted a “catch-up” plan to make up for the lower-than-planned state spending in the first
quarter. And the consensus is that we will hit our target of 6-7% growth this year.
On  the  supply  side,  economic  activity  was  boosted  mainly  by  the  services  sectors’  robust
performance. Meanwhile, the strong expansion in both investments and consumer spending also
supported growth on the demand side. With the sustained 81 consecutive quarters (spanning
more than 2 decades from 1999 to 2019) of uninterrupted growth, we remain optimistic that the
Philippine economy can sustain its growth momentum over the medium term.
Third-party assessors share the same optimism. Shown in this slide are the growth projections
released  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  the  World  Bank  (WB)  and  the  Asian
Development Bank (ADB) in their latest surveillance reports.
The World Bank just reaffirmed, they are sticking to 6.4 percent growth this year for our country.
These third-party assessments are also not far from the NEDA’s target for 2019. It may be noted
that the Development Budget Coordination Committee (DBCC), during its meeting on 13 March
2019,  approved  a  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP)  growth  target  range  of  6.0  percent  –  7.0
percent for 2019, 6.5 percent – 7.5 percent in 2020, and 7.0 percent – 8.0 percent from 2021 to
2022.  
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In addition, the strength of the Philippine economy was further validated with the upgrade in our
sovereign credit rating by Standard & Poor’s to BBB+ with a stable outlook. This is the highest
letter  grade  for  the  foreign  currency  and  an  improvement  from  the  BBB  grade  for  the  local
currency  rating.  At  the  same  time,  Fitch—another  rating  agency—recently  affirmed  the
Philippines’ investment BBB rating, also with a stable outlook.  
Recent demand indicators continue to point to overall firm domestic growth prospects in the near
term. In fact, results of the Q1 2019 survey-based consumer and business sentiment showed an
improved outlook. The consumer outlook index registered an all-time largest quarter-on-quarter
increase since the start of the nationwide survey in Q1 2007.
At the same time, the confidence index for business showed marked improvement after declining
for four consecutive quarters.
Furthermore,  with  the  end  of  the  2019  budget  impasse,  the  continued  implementation  of  the
government’s infrastructure program – which we fondly call “Build, Build, Build” – is envisioned to
generate an “impressive multiplier effect” on the economy by increasing its productive capacity,
creating jobs, raising incomes, and enhancing the investment climate in the country.
Moving on to inflation dynamics, price pressures have gone down significantly, falling toward the
midpoint (at 3.0 percent in April 2019) of the target band. This brought the year-to-date (January –
April) average to 3.6 percent year-on-year for 2019. This is firmly within the government’s 2-4
percent target range.
This is a stark contrast to last year’s rapidly rising inflation figures that was only arrested through
the adoption of timely monetary action by the BSP and non-monetary measures by the Executive
department.
Looking ahead, we expect inflation to remain on a target-consistent path for 2019 and 2020. The
latest baseline forecasts (as of 9 May 2019 MB policy meeting) indicate that inflation is projected
to average at 2.9 percent this year while inflation forecast for next year is slightly higher at 3.1
percent. This is due largely to the rebound in global crude oil prices.
Similarly, forecasts of other institutions generally convey the same expectations. Results of the
BSP’s April 2019 survey of private sector economists showed lower mean inflation forecast for
2019  at  3.1  percent  down  from  3.3  percent  in  the  previous  survey  round.  The  mean  inflation
forecasts  for  2020  and  2021  both  declined  to  3.3  percent  from  3.4  percent.  Meanwhile,
projections from other institutions also show inflation within target for this year and the next.
Given prevailing conditions, the BSP decided to reduce its policy rate by 25 basis points (bps) to
4.50 percent from 4.75 percent, effective 10 May 2019. The BSP also pre-announced a phased
200-bp  reserve  requirement  reduction  for  universal  and  commercial  banks,  thrift  banks  (TBs)
and non-bank financial institutions with quasi-banking functions (NBQBs); as well as a 100-bp
RR  reduction  on  demand  deposits  and  NOW  accounts  for  rural  and  cooperative  banks.
Moreover,  long-term  negotiable  certificates  of  time  deposit  (LTNCDs)  will  have  uniformed  RR
ratio of 4.0 percent.
In reducing the BSP’s policy rate and reserve requirement ratios, the Monetary Board recognized
the  progressive  decline  in  domestic  inflation.  It  was  further  guided  by  the  target-consistent
inflation path with inflation expectations converging with the government’s target. This is also part
of  the  BSP’s  ongoing  initiative  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  and  deepen
domestic money market.
Nevertheless,  we  recognize  the  uncertainty  in  the  global  economic  environment,  with  the  IMF
further  revising  down  its  global  growth  prospects  due  to  volatilities  in  commodity  prices,
uncertainty over advanced economies’ policy normalization, as well as ongoing trade tensions as
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
a result of the US-China [trade] war.
But while the external environment is challenging, I am cautiously optimistic about the current
state of the Philippine economy.
“Keeping  our  house  in  order”  remains  the  first  and  best  line  of  defense.  We  are  improving
economic  openness  through  liberalization  of  trade  and  foreign  direct  investment,  we  are
enhancing  external  competitiveness  by  strengthening  domestic  industries;  we  are  diversifying
products  and  markets  to  non-traditional  growing  economies;  and  we  are  sustaining  domestic
economic  resilience  by  building  adequate  buffers.  These  are  some  of  the  policy  actions  and
reforms  that  we  can  pursue  or  continue  to  pursue  in  order  to  ward  off  the  potential  negative
effects of external shocks, especially from rising protectionist measures and heightened policy
uncertainty.
Let me talk briefly about the US-China trade dispute. There was no direct imposition against the
Philippines in terms of the country’s exposure to the products imposed with tit-for-tat measures
between US and China. But the extent of impact would depend on the industries affected. For
instance, the Philippines could possibly boost exports of food and agricultural products to the US,
taking advantage of the tariffs imposed on Chinese goods of similar nature. The same goes for
US agricultural goods imposed with steep tariffs by China.
We see one positive impact that the US-China trade war could have on the Philippine electronics
industry.  That  is  if  companies  on  either  or  both  of  the  countries  use  the  Philippines  as  an
alternative manufacturing site. This scenario, however, would take time and the Philippines would
have to compete with other potential relocation sites like Vietnam and Indonesia. The potential
upside may not come about for a few years as firms would need to complete the lengthy process
of shifting production sites.
We  also  recognize  that  the  continued  trade  friction  could  negatively  affect  overall  investment
sentiment and increase caution and uncertainty in the global growth prospects. This could take
its toll on the country’s external sector. Nevertheless, given that the economy’s growth is mainly
driven by domestic demand, the trade friction would have limited negative impact on Philippine
exports.
Before  I  close,  let  me  emphasize  the  importance  of  sustained  collaboration  between  the
government and the private sector in pursuing hard yet necessary structural reforms to fuel the
Philippine growth engine over the long-term.
Towards the end of the administration of the late president Corazon Aquino, a world class team
of economist, headed by no less than Paul Krugman, analyzed the Philippine economy. And they
concluded that given the economic conditions at that time, during President Cory Aquino’s time,
the long-term growth of the Philippine economy was in the neighborhood of 3 percent. Repeat, 3
percent. We could only grow at 3 percent. That was then. Things are significantly different now.
Over  the  past  25  years,  meaningful  reforms  have  helped  build  and  fortify  the  institutions  that
facilitate  growth  by  expanding  the  role  of  market  forces  in  key  sectors  of  the  economy;
encouraging investments and private sector activity; removing bottlenecks for doing business in
the country; and strengthening the country’s fiscal position and the financial sector, to name just
a few.
No doubt, the Duterte administration is in a strong position to push for reforms by leveraging on
its strong political capital as evidenced by the number of laws enacted in less than 3 years of the
current administration’s leadership. These include, among others, recent enactment of the tax
reforms, amendments to the BSP Charter and Rice Tariffication Law. These reforms, along with
the other structural reforms in the pipeline, will continue to play a significant role in propelling the
economy on a path of balanced, sustainable, and inclusive growth.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let me take the chance to talk about Republic Act No. 11211 which was signed on 14 February
2019. This is a monumental milestone for the BSP. Our three pillars of central banking—price
stability,  financial  stability,  and  an  efficient  payments  and  settlements  system—were  further
boosted with the expansion of the BSP’s policy toolkit.  
RA 11211 restored the BSP’s authority to issue its own debt papers as part of its regular
monetary operations, establishes a stronger prudential regulatory framework to promote a
safe  and  sound  financial  system  through  the  expansion  of  supervisory  coverage  and
authority to prescribe metrics attuned to international standards and practices.
The  amendment  likewise  empowers  the  BSP  to  oversee  the  country’s  payment  and
settlement  systems  (PSS)  including  critical  financial  market  infrastructures  that  are  vital
components of the PSS.
Looking ahead, we will continue to monitor domestic and global developments to ensure that the
BSP is able to meet its inflation targets. The BSP is also ready to use all appropriate measures
as needed to ensure an inflation environment conducive to sustainable growth of the Philippine
economy.
Rest assured that the future policy actions of the BSP will continue to be guided by the following
principles:
1.  Our primary focus will be price stability.
2.  We will be pre-emptive rather than reactive and
3.  Our policy will be data-driven and evidence-based.
Finally, let me leave you with the assurance that the Philippine economy is sound. It is one of the
best performing economies in the world. Its prospects are bright—extremely bright.
And if you have money to invest, and I can see, some people here have money to invest, this is
the best time to invest, invest, invest in the Philippines. Do not delay, do not waver. Because if
you do, you will regret it.
 To wrap up, let me end my presentation with these key take-aways.
The BSP’s monetary policy actions will help ensure that 2019 and 2020 inflation targets are
achieved. Nevertheless, the BSP will remain watchful and vigilant, utilizing its analytical and
surveillance tools for any potential risks to its monetary and financial stability objectives.
The Philippine economy has demonstrated uninterrupted economic expansion and has built
domestic sources of resilience to help cushion against uncertainty in external environment
and emerging domestic challenges
Strategic policy and structural reforms, addressing infrastructure gaps, and leveraging the
country’s  demographic  opportunities  have  played  a  significant  role  and  will  continue  to
underpin the economy’s path towards balanced, sustainable, and inclusive growth.
Commitment  to  pursue  infrastructure  and  reform  agenda  will  help  promote  globally
competitive industries in order to sustain the country’s economic growth momentum.
Lastly,  on  behalf  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  I  congratulate  all  the  energetic  and
irrepressible members of the Rotary Club of Manila, both young and old, for reaching 100 years! 
Mabuhay ang Rotary Club of Manila!  Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! Mabuhay po tayong lahat!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
