 Integration or Fragmentation? International Capital Flows in the Post-crisis World 
How the Revised OECD Codes Can Improve Transparency, Accountability, Credibility, and Trust 
Session : “Next Vulnerabilities: Capital Flows and the Migration of Risks to New Corners of the Financial System” 
September 11, 2019 – OECD Conference Centre, Paris, France 
 “Capital Flows and the Migration of Risks: The Recent Chilean Experience” 
Remarks by Mario Marcel, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
   1. 
Issues for discussion 
a.  Which new sources of vulnerabilities are building up a decade after the 2008 crisis?  
-  Risks associated with the growing importance of non-bank lenders. In some EMEs, this may result in 
credit lending going informal due to a relatively higher cost in credit provision due to regulation. 
-  Risks  that  can  emerge  from  a  less  developed  financial  infrastructures  outside  the  regulatory 
perimeter. 
-  Risks attributed to disruptive FinTech activities, such as the development of crypto-assets markets, as 
well as cybersecurity issues. 
-  Risks  and  challenges  associated  with  the  changing  nature  of  banks’  business  model.  In  particular, 
those coming from the internationalization of banks’ activities.  
b.  How  to  better  consider  a  cost-benefit  framework  for  financial  regulation,  such  as  currency-based 
measures (CBM)? 
-  While the  banking regulation  and supervision  arising  from the  80s-banking crisis  was  restrictive  in 
 several ways, it was supported by sound monetary and fiscal policies. 
In  addition, the  development  of  pension  funds,  mutual  funds,  and  insurance  companies,  provided 
support for banks’ funding needs, and help to develop the FX derivative market that has allowed both, 
banks and corporations to deal with currency exposure without the need of imposing currency-based 
measures as we have observed in other emerging economies (this includes regulations imposing a 
different  treatment  between  domestic  and  FX-denominated  operations  by  banks,  such  as  reserve 
requirements on FX denominated banks’ deposits).   
-  Because of this, over the past decades, and despite global financial turmoil and crises, the size of the 
Chilean-banking system has increased steadily to reach levels similar to developed economies. 
 
c.  Which policy actions could ensure the stability of unregulated corners of the financial system without 
affecting negatively global financial integration?  
-  Coordination between regulators and supervisors. 
-  A legal framework that help to avoid fragmentation and the existence of blind spots. 
- 
- 
Policy actions towards high quality data on a comprehensive registry of household credit and debt. 
Prospective analysis of emerging risks in the traditional banking system that take into account indirect 
exposures to the non-banking system. 
-  Adapt and/or develop methodologies and models to assess the spillover effect of non-bank lenders 
in times of stress, as well as considering them in traditional stress test assessments.   
                                                           
 Some context on OECD support to the use of CBM: 
  A recent OECD document (De Crescenzio et al., 2015) emphasizes that mainly countries facing the “original sin” use CBM. Chile 
is one of them. This issue is important because measures of the “original sin” come from Panizza’s work, who will be part of the 
panel (Eichengreen et al., 2002; Hausmann and Panizza, 2003). 
Based on the previous point, it is worth clarifying what kind of CBM are in place in Chile. In addition, does the fact that in Chile 
almost all-international bond issuing is in foreign currency represents a constraint/vulnerability for the local financial system? 
 Page 1 of 12 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
   Financial literacy and educational programs to support better decisions at the household level. 
2.  Background 
 
In Chile, the current approach to deal with potential vulnerabilities associated to volatile capital flows can be 
seen as orthodox, as we rely heavily on the importance of a flexible exchange rate regime and capital account 
openness, in conjunction with a consistent monetary and fiscal policy framework, and a sound banking regulation 
and supervision. However, it is important to remind to the public that we have come a long way. 
 
In fact, nearly 40 years ago, Chile faced one of the world’s costlier financial crises precisely because the lack of 
several of these elements.  In particular, FX exposures at a heavily leveraged and unsupervised banking sector 
contributed to the spread of the banking crisis after the fixed exchange rate regime collapsed in the early 1980s.  
 
As  a  result  of  this  experience,  banking  regulation  and  supervision  was  substantially  upgraded.  In  1986,  the 
General  Banking  Law  introduced  limitations  on  currency  mismatch,  constraints  on  related  party  lending,  and 
restrictions  for  banks  to  receive  goods  instead  of  liquid  resources;  all  of  them,  elements  that  were  common 
practice before the 1982 crisis. 
 
Paradoxically,  what  could  be  considered  harsher  regulation  did  not  hamper  financial  deepening.  Instead,  it 
fostered  solvency  and  credibility  of  the  banking  system  and  allowed  its  healthy  development  in  the  ensuing 
decades. At the core of this development was the creation of a funded pension system, and subsequent capital 
market reforms, together with capital market openness, which dramatically changed the size, composition, depth, 
and strength of the financial sector in Chile. 
Now, during the transition toward fully implementing the current policy framework, Chile experienced a period 
of  capital  control  that  have  been  highly  reviewed  in  the  literature.  The  unremunerated  reserve  requirement 
(URR) implemented in Chile during the 1990s helped to change the composition of capital flows toward longer 
terms but was less effective in terms of reducing the aggregate level of capital flowing into the country. 
 
After removing the URR completely by the end of the 90s and allowing the exchange rate to fluctuate freely, 
the banking and corporate sector learned to operate in a completely different environment, characterized by 
an extensive used of the derivative market.  In In particular, corporations have learned to operate in a flexible FX 
environment by using both, natural and market-based FX risk hedging instruments. This development has been 
supported by the development of the derivatives market, in which Pension Funds have been key counterparts as 
well. Banking regulation, in turn, have result in limited currency mismatches at the bank level, which have made 
the introduction of new regulation to deal with FX risk unnecessary, as we have observed in many emerging 
market economies after the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). 
 
While may be true that other emerging economies have been increasingly active in the implementation of CBM 
in their banking systems, in Chile, we have followed a different approach to deal with FX  risk at the banking 
level.  This  approach  has  been  mainly  characterized  by  limiting  banks’  direct  FX-currency  exposure  (limited 
currency mismatches) as part of our overall capital requirements for market risk purposes. Also, by acknowledging 
the potential indirect FX risk through the credit provisioning requirements. 
 
In  fact,  in  Chile,  the  main  regulatory  changes  introduced  has  been  the  recent  modification  of  the  General 
Banking Law (GBL), which constitutes a major step forward for the local banking industry, in that it will contribute 
to  reducing  the  gap  with  international  regulatory  standards  established  under  Basel  III.  The  new  regulatory 
 Page 2 of 12 
 
framework raises important challenges for the industry in terms of compliance with the new, more demanding 
solvency requirements, especially for entities with a smaller capital cushion. 
 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
    Let me add one more thing regarding the use of CBM by several EMEs, which have targeted the banking system, 
rather than the general resident-non-resident relationship, as is usually done by capital controls. The Figure 
below, for example, based on De Crescenzio et al. (2015), shows that EMEs countries exposed to the original sin 
(unable  to  borrow  internationally  in  local  currency)  appear  as  tightening  CBMs  on  banks’  liabilities  during  the 
2013-2015  period.  Our  understanding  is  that  the  databases  used  in  cross-country  analysis  still  contain  a  high 
degree  of  self-judgement  by  reporting  countries  that  sometimes  affect  the  quality  and  consistency  of  the 
information  provided.  At  least  this  is  our  experience  regarding  answering  the  IMF’s  survey  on  exchange  rate 
 Page 3 of 12 
 
arrangements and exchange restrictions (AREAER), which is used in the majority of cross-country comparison of 
CBM and capital controls usage.  
 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
  
Recent evidence on the evolution of capital controls shows that Chile has taken more liberalization actions than 
tightening actions on both inflows and outflows (Pasricha et al., 2018). The following Figure shows the cumulated 
weighted net inflow easing actions and weighted net outflow easing measures in Chile and in a group of EMEs 
(excluding Chile).  
 
Pasricha (2017) shows that policymakers use capital inflows tightening for macroprudential concerns, while use 
capital  outflows  easing  for  competitive  purposes.  In  Chile,  the  dynamic  of  outflows  easing  reflect  mainly  that 
Pension Funds’ limits on investing overseas have loosen. Nonetheless, Chile is among those EMEs that are less 
active when it comes to capital control actions over the past decades. The challenge, however, still remains in 
terms of addressing the actual level of capital account openness rather than it’s tighten/loosen evolution. 
 
 Page 4 of 12 
 Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
  
Besides the Chilean approach to deal with FX risk at the banking level and the recent trend that has deepened 
financial liberalization, the possibility to activate capital controls under extreme circumstances is still part of 
our constitutional law.  In Chile, we are under the process of simplifying our FX regulation, as well as improving 
our Financial Market Infrastructures (FMIs), including the FX dimension to them. Thus, the Central Bank of Chile 
is currently working to allow the clearing of USD denominated large-value payments through its Real Time Gross 
Settlement payment system. Also, it is developing a Trade Repository for OTC derivatives, and it is about to issue 
the  regulation  for  FX  clearinghouses.  Finally,  the  onboarding  of  the  Chilean  Peso  into  the  Continuous  Linked 
Settlement (CLS) System is a priority for the Central Bank of Chile. These measures may contribute to increasing 
the likelihood of issuance of local currency bonds overseas. 
 
Now, let me address some of the concern raised regarding new vulnerabilities, in particular at the non-banking 
sector. A reasonable concern is to what extent the low level of FX-risk at the banking sector in Chile have pushed 
for higher FX-risk in the non-banking sector? Our assessment is that the rising vulnerabilities observed in the non-
banking sector can be associated to the stronger bank regulation, but it does not correspond to the evolution of 
FX risk.  In fact, the evolution of the non-banking sector reflects mainly issues of information asymmetries and the 
fact that some of these institutions can take advantage of payroll direct charges to enhance their consumer credit 
business.  
 
While non-bank lenders (NBL) provide commercial loans, their main business is  to lend to households in the 
form of consumer and mortgage loans. In the consumer portfolio, NBLs include retailers, family compensation 
funds (CCAF), savings and loan associations (S&Ls), factoring and leasing companies (F&Ls), and car dealerships. 
The mortgage portfolio includes endorsable mortgage loans (“mutuos hipotecarios”) issued by banks and mutual 
societies  included  among  the  assets  held  by  life  insurance  companies  (LICs).  Finally,  factoring  and  leasing 
companies mainly provide trade credit to businesses. Therefore most, if not all, of the lending activities of this 
sector is done in local currency. 
 
Having said that, we monitor this sector carefully, since the household debt issued by NBLs has increased a 
share of total consumer debt. Nonbank loans had a real annual growth rate of 11.5% in the fourth quarter of 
2018. The contribution of debt with retailers was 4.5%; car dealership, 3.9%; CCAFs and F&Ls,1.2%; and S&Ls, 
 Page 5 of 12 
 
0.8%.  In  the  same  period,  bank  consumer  loans  grew  around  5.7%.  Nonbank  consumer  loans  together  were 
equivalent  to  about  58%  of  total  bank  consumer  loans.  This  rate  has  been  stable  since  2012,  although  the 
composition has changed. Specifically, the share of retailers has been steadily increasing since mid-2013, while 
the share of companies oriented toward car financing has expanded more recently. As of December 2018, retailers 
accounted for 24.3%; car dealership, 12.1%; CCAFs, 12.1%; S&Ls, 6.6%; and F&Ls, 2.8%.  
 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
  The  steady  growth  of  the  nonbank  portfolio  is  a  potential  source  of  vulnerability,  given  that  most  of these 
lenders are outside the consolidated debt  perimeter.  In terms of arrears in the  nonbank consumer portfolio, 
retailers recorded a slight improvement relative to end-2018, to 3.8%. In contrast, for the CCAFs, delinquency has 
increased steadily since 2013—when they began to use accounting criteria more similar to the banks—and it is 
currently more than double the rates for the rest of the nonbank consumer lenders.  
 
Moreover,  the  banking  sector  has  significant  exposure  to  the  NBLs,  through  commercial  loans  to  these 
institutions.  In particular, loans to this segment have increased among medium-sized banks in recent years. 
Thus, the exposure—to NBL debt—of the large and medium-sized banks, as of February 2019, represented 12.7 
and 27.2% of their regulatory capital, respectively. The profitability of the NBLs, measured through ROA, has been 
relatively stable, standing at 4.6% at year-end 2018 for retailers; 3.8% for S&Ls; and 2.6% for factoring, leasing, 
and car dealership (FL&A) together. In the case of the CCAFs, ROA has increased in the last two years. The leverage 
ratio, in turn, is highest for the FL&A group, and it increased for the retailers in 2018. 
 
 Page 6 of 12 
 Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
  
Now, regarding potential trade-offs associated to the Chilean regulatory framework: Has the Chilean regulatory 
framework in place be repressive? The evidence shows that Chile’s banking strength have not undermine its 
financial  development  under  different  perspectives.  The  Chilean  financial  system  has  evolved  significantly  in 
recent  decades,  and  its  contribution  has  been  key  in  the  economic  development  of  the  country  and  the 
construction of a more prosperous, healthy and modern economy.  
 
Today, the Chilean financial sector is one of the most developed in the emerging world. In five decades, it has 
gone from being almost exclusively made up of traditional banks, to include several other market participants, 
such  as  Pension  Funds,  General  Fund  Administrators  and  Insurance  Companies,  among  others.  The  Chilean 
financial system relatively outperforms with respect to other comparable countries in dimensions such as market 
capitalization, number of branches per inhabitant, and participation in domestic credit. On the other hand, the 
banking  system  in  particular  is  positioned  among  the  strongest  in  the  reference  group  of  emerging  countries 
according to comparable international assessments. 
 
 Page 7 of 12 
 Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
   
Over  time,  markets  have  developed  adequate  FX  hedging  mechanisms  having  lower  currency  mismatches, 
inflation expectations have become firmly anchored at the monetary policy target level, the CBC has overcome 
fear of floating and the economy exhibit one of the lowest FX pass-through to domestic prices, financial markets 
have deepened and the  labor market  has gained some flexibility. As the Chilean economy is not  immune  to 
external  shocks,  the  ability  to  cushion  them  through  FX  and  countercyclical  policy  response  has  improved 
significantly.  
 
 
Regarding the risk at the public sector, in normal times the fiscal space is determined by the fiscal rule and 
public indebtedness. Fiscal policy in Chile is based on a structural (cyclically-adjusted) balance rule adopted in 
2000, but after seven years of strict compliance of a 1% surplus target, a tacit escape clause was called at the time 
  Page 8 of 12 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
 
of  the  GFC,  raising  the  structural  deficit  from  0.5%  of  GDP  to  3.1%.  Despite  fast  economic  normalization 
afterwards,  the  actual  structural  balance  never  returned  to  pre-crisis  levels  and  even  softened  targets  were 
frequently not met in the ensuing 10 years. It is currently conducted based on an explicit commitment of the fiscal 
authority to attain a previously defined target. However, during times of crisis and periods of emergency Chile’s 
experience suggests that the space of fiscal policy is limited. In fact, the fiscal impulse of 2009 generated a fiscal 
deterioration that is still under consolidation.  Nonetheless, in the current juncture, the Chilean economy appears 
to be prepared to face external shocks, but with some gaps to be filled in the fiscal front.   For these reasons, 
several  measures  are  being  taken  to  achieve  fiscal  consolidation.  Among  others:  (i)  a  gradual  path  to  reduce 
structural deficit by 0.2% of GDP per year, to 2022, (ii) first step above target: structural deficit reduced 0.5% of 
GDP,  (iii)  a  Debt/GDP  ratio  currently  at  24%  should  level  off  in  the  next  two  years,  (iv)  Fiscal  Council  given 
independent status, (v) preferential regime for defense spending in course of reform, and (vi) fiscal sustainability 
a central concern in discussion of tax and pension reforms. Not all emerging economies are equally prepared to 
react, and Chile is relatively well positioned when compared to other emerging economies. 
 
In order to deal with the undesired effects of volatile capital inflows, several EMEs have implemented different 
policies  to  deal  with  the  appreciation/depreciation  cycle  and  credit  booms  (e.g  reserve  requirements,  FX 
intervention, capital controls). There is substantial evidence that capital flows to EMEs are volatile and that in 
part  depend  on  “push”  factors  that  are  unrelated  to  the  marginal  productivity  of  the  host  economy.  Volatile 
(boom-bust-cycle) capital inflows are a significant concern for policymakers. The surge of capital flows is usually 
associated with booms in asset prices, appreciation, credit booms, and increasing current account deficits. While 
the sudden stop is associated with asset prices adjustment and financial distress. 
  
In Chile, free floating and FX volatility has helped reduce incentives for arbitrage and carry trade. Besides, the 
exchange rate flexibility facilitates asset price adjustment. Providing the right incentives for resident investors 
(pension funds and the government) to counteract the non-residents behavior, smoothing net capital flows! 
Nonetheless, sectorial mismatches in banks, non-banks, and households, still need to be monitored. In Chile, as 
mentioned above, these mismatches are limited due to FX hedging and regulation. 
 
The CBC was an early adopter of an inflation-targeting regime, shortly after its independence granted in 1989. 
A fully floating FX regime was adopted in September 1999 and capital controls where abolished in a necessary 
step to complete a coherent framework to effectively control inflation. Since then, the Central Bank has kept its 
commitment of no intervention in the FX market, except when required by extraordinary circumstances. 
 
 Page 9 of 12 
 Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
 
All these elements allow monetary policy to operate as a first defense mechanism against external shocks in 
normal  times.  Besides  monetary  policy,  the  CBC  has  a  financial  stability  mandate.  Such  mandate  should  be 
pursued by a combination of regulation, information, and macroprudential management. In particular, monetary 
policy tools should be used primarily to achieve the price stability mandate, and only as a last resort to deal with 
financial instability. The free-floating FX regime is perfectly consistent with achieving both mandates (price and 
financial stability), as (i) the inflation targeting regime is highly credible, and (ii) the corporate sector is well hedged 
against exchange rate volatility. 
 
  
The  ability  to  overcome  the  fear  of  floating  was  helped  with  the  buildup  of  capacities  for  companies  and 
financial intermediaries to manage the risks associated to a more volatile FX. Consequently, derivatives markets 
were  deepened  as  well  as  institutional  investors  provided  a  natural  base  for  financial  market  deepening  and 
  Page 10 of 12 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
 
market-based  FX-risk  coverage  instruments.  The  Chilean  financial  market  has  transited  from  being  largely 
dominated  by  traditional  banking  to  being  composed  by  several  other  market  participants,  including  Pension 
Funds, General Fund Administrators and Insurance Companies; among others. Assets under management of these 
non-bank investors went from less than 1% of GDP in 1984, to 65% in 2000, and to almost 100% of GDP in 2018. 
Currently,  around  85%  of  total  domestic  corporate  bonds  and  around  65%  of  sovereign  bonds  are  held  by 
institutional investors, as a result of which reliance on banking credit of these corporations has gone from 91% of 
financial debt in 1986 to around 25% in the recent years. 
 
 
This framework has basically remained in place for almost two decades and its effectiveness has improved as 
markets, agents and institutions have adapted to it. The learning and effectiveness of the framework  can be 
understood not only with the expectations anchored to the target, but also in the low volatility of interest rates 
in exchange for a (covered) higher FX volatility. 
 
  Page 11 of 12 
  Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
   
References 
Cerutti, E., Claessens, S., and Laeven, M.L. (2015), “The Use and Effectiveness of Macroprudential Policies: New 
Evidence,” Working Paper No. 15/61, International Monetary Fund. 
  
De Crescenzio, A., Golin, M., and Ott, A.C. (2015), “Currency-based Measures Targeting Banks - Balancing National 
Regulation  of  Risk  and  Financial  Openness,”  OECD  Working  Papers  on  International  Investment,  No.  2015/03, 
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/5jrp0z9lp1zr-en. 
  
Eichengreen,  B.,  R.  Hausmann,  and  U.  Panizza  (2002),  “Original  Sin:  The  Pain,  The  Mystery,  and  the  Road  to 
Redemption,” paper presented to a conference at the Inter-American Development Bank (November 2002). 
  
Hausmann, R., and U. Panizza (2003), “On the Determinants of Original Sin: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of 
International Money and Finance 22(7): 957-990. 
  
Pasricha, G.K., M. Falagiarda, M. Bijsterbosch, J. Aizenman (2018), “Domestic and Multilateral Effects of Capital 
Controls in Emerging Markets,” Journal of International Economics 115: 48-58. 
 
Pasricha, G.K. (2017), “Policy Rules for Capital Controls,” BIS Working Papers 670. 
  
 Page 12 of 12 
