  Council of Europe Development Bank conference, 
“From Imperative to Urgency: Investment for Social Inclusion” 
Concluding remarks by Governor Carlos da Silva Costa1 
 
Good afternoon, 
 It is a great pleasure and honour for me to close this conference on social inclusion promoted 
by the Council of Europe Development Bank.  
 The lively debates and the range of issues touched upon in the previous sessions illustrate how 
challenging and complex the topic of social inclusion is.  
 In this closing statement, I will briefly comment on three interrelated issues: 
•  First, I will argue that the dynamics taking place at different jurisdictional and territorial 
levels are critical to our understanding of the factors promoting or threatening social 
inclusion.  
•  Secondly, I will comment on the main policy instruments available at national level to 
promote social inclusion; 
•  And finally, I will stress the key role of a community’s culture and values in determining 
its ability to generate and sustain inclusion dynamics.  
  1.  The dynamics taking place at different jurisdictional and territorial levels 
At a global level, we are witnessing the resurgence of nationalism and protectionist policies. The 
arguments by those defending such policies are largely based on the notion that globalisation 
has benefited the elites and penalised a large number of workers.  
                                                                          
1 As prepared for delivery. 
 www.bportugal.pt 
1 
  With  globalisation  and  technological  progress,  international  flows  of  people  and  firms  have 
intensified, and production became increasingly automated and integrated into global value 
chains.  A  number  of  workers  in  advanced  economies,  especially  those  with  lower 
qualifications,  have  lost  their  jobs  and  seen  their  relative  wages  and  living  standards 
deteriorate.  As  a  result,  populist  forces  have  risen,  and  the  risk  of  reversal  of  the  global 
integration process is currently very high. 
 This has occurred in spite of notable gains at a macro level over the last few decades. The world 
has  become  much  richer,  and  poverty  has  declined.  According  to  World  Bank  indicators, 
between 1981 and 2015, the share of the world population in extreme poverty declined from 
42% to 10%, and the world’s real GDP per capita grew by 63%.  
 Naturally, these global dynamics have produced asymmetric impacts across regions.  
 In 2012, the World Bank report Golden Growth described Europe as a “convergence machine”, 
fuelled by trade and financing. The region had gone through the largest and deepest regional 
integration process in recent history, generating a sizeable convergence in living standards. 
 However, the convergence machine has left some people and regions behind. A more recent 
World Bank report, Growing United, identifies two emerging divides that interfere with the 
convergence  process:  a  productivity  divide  between  countries  and  regions;  and  household 
income inequality within countries. If growth and wealth are not spread equitably in European 
regions and their several communities of citizens, the Union will be politically challenged and 
may even cease to be desired.  
 The report goes one step further to show that, within countries, regional divides are widening. 
And World Bank research found that the main reason for this is low economic potential: lagging 
regions have poorer institutions, a lower share of skilled workers, and limited access to markets. 
   www.bportugal.pt 
2 
  Interestingly, Portugal had a contrasting experience in the recent past. An empirical study from 
Universidade do Minho shows that, between 2008 and 2015, inequality among the Portuguese 
regions  in  terms  of  real  GDP  per  capita  actually  decreased  by  12%.  This  is  an  encouraging 
performance  compared  to  European  peers,  especially  when  compared  to  those  that  were 
implementing financial assistance programmes during that same period. On a less positive note, 
in 2016, the vast majority of Portuguese regions were still below the European Union average in 
terms of GDP per capita in purchasing power parity.    
 This subnational regional analysis is important for two main reasons:  
•  On  the  one  hand,  within-countries  inequalities  in  advanced  economies  have  been 
intensifying – they are the ultimate expression of global and supranational dynamics 
and are giving rise to growing social and political tension; 
•  On the other hand, policy instruments tailored to address inequality remain mostly in 
the hands of national authorities. 
 This brings me to the second point I would like to cover. 
  2.  Coping effectively with inequality at the national level 
The World Bank’s Growing United report argues that the revival of the European convergence 
machine should be pursued by ensuring equal opportunities for people and firms.  
 This is crucial advice to all policy authorities responsible for addressing inequality: the most 
effective and sustainable path to reducing inequality is not by redistributing income, but rather 
by ensuring everyone has comparable opportunities to take part in the generation of income. In 
other words, although redistribution remains an important complementary tool, the strongest 
instrument to promote social inclusion is inclusive growth.  
 Three  institutions  are  particularly  relevant  for  generating  inclusive  growth:  education,  the 
labour market and the business environment. 
  www.bportugal.pt 
3 
  Let me start with education. As already pointed out by many studies, universal access to high-
quality  education  ensures  equal  access  to  opportunities,  and  subsequently,  equal  access  to 
income. But the education system needs to be adequately tailored to respond to the evolving 
needs of labour and product markets.  
 As technological progress changes the nature of work at an increasing pace, firms become more 
demanding with respect to the human capital they hire. For example, while demanding for more 
cognitive skills, they are also requiring better socio-behavioural skills, which are crucial for agile 
adaptation to change.  
 The education system also needs to take into account the development stage of the economy. 
Any serious mismatch between the skills offered by recent graduates and those demanded by 
firms  inevitably  leads  to  exclusion. A  recent  study  by  Associação  Empresarial  de  Portugal,  a 
Portuguese business association, shows that, between 2011 and 2017, the share of unemployed 
people with post-primary education increased from 34% to 48%.  
 Such  a  growing  share  of  high-quality  untapped  human  resources  highlights  the  need  for  an 
adequate interconnection between the education system and the next institution I would like 
to discuss: the labour market. 
 In  turn,  a  sound  and  dynamic  labour  market  not  only  optimises  initial  matches  between 
workers and firms, but also promotes fluid movements of workers across industries, regions and 
skills. While employment protection legislation and wage-setting institutions have successfully 
reduced wage inequality, excessive protection jeopardises firms’ productivity and job creation 
– especially for low-skilled workers and new entrants. Despite having become less restrictive 
since the 1990s, employment protection for permanent contracts in most of the European Union 
remains above the OECD average. 
  www.bportugal.pt 
4 
  Lifelong learning is another critical element when considering the labour market, in the face 
of  accelerating  technological  change.  This  means  that  authorities  must  search  for  the  right 
balance between expenditure on passive labour market measures, such as income support and 
early retirement, and expenditure on active labour market measures, such as training or start-
up incentives – for most EU countries, passive measures absorb more resources than active 
measures. 
 But  as  the  World  Bank’s  Growing  United  report  rightly  states:  “opportunities  for  firms  and 
people are complementary and jointly determine the potential to grow inclusively”. If it’s true 
that an economy with few opportunities for people loses economic and political viability, it is 
also true that the lack of opportunities for firms promotes the migration of both people and 
firms towards more dynamic economies.  
 This leads me to the third institution behind inclusive growth: the business environment. 
 The business environment must be, simultaneously, supportive and challenging.  
 One relevant component of the environment in which firms operate is physical infrastructure. 
Firms need to communicate at an increasingly faster pace, and for that they need not only a 
good and efficient road network, but also high-speed broadband connections. It is the role of 
public  investment  to  provide  such  conditions,  without  overlooking  or  crowding  out  private 
investment. 
 A second important element of the business environment is the ease of reallocating resources 
towards more productive sectors. The simplification of insolvency procedures, the acceleration 
of judicial decisions, or the reduction of red tape are of the essence here. 
 A  third  element  is  the  innovation  ecosystem  and  its  ability  to  involve  entrepreneurs  in  the 
production  of  knowledge  and  its  successful  transformation  into  innovative  technologies, 
processes or products. Empirical research shows that a pro-competitive business environment 
fosters innovation, and that innovation is a powerful driver of employment growth. Innovation 
 www.bportugal.pt 
5 
  is thus instrumental for any society to remain economically, politically and socially included in 
today’s global economy. Conversely, international trade and investment are strong drivers of 
domestic innovation. 
 In brief, these three institutions – education, labour market and the business environment – 
must be designed to generate a context that fosters personal initiative, either in the form of 
educational attainment, job searching or entrepreneurial activity.  
 Nevertheless, one needs to realise that these are necessary – but not sufficient – conditions. The 
World Bank points out a set of factors that undermine the success of some of its social inclusion 
projects. Among these, one can find cultural preferences and social perceptions. This leads me 
to third and last topic I promised to address. 
 3.  The key role of a community’s culture and set of values 
 No institutional framework can ever be successfully established against or even in spite of the 
set of values, preferences and perceptions of the communities it intends to serve. 
 A case in point is the dichotomy between the North and South of Italy. In spite of sharing the 
same institutional framework, these two regions show quite different development paths, due 
to their distinct historical backgrounds and sets of values. 
 In the case of Portugal, many industrial areas appeared due to the entrepreneurial initiative of 
a given person, family or firm, which led by example, inspiring the surrounding community and 
generating adjacent businesses. In such a socio-economic fabric, social exclusion appears when 
a  given  community  lacks  success  cases  to  look  up  to,  ceasing  to  believe  in  the  power  of 
education, dynamic labour markets or friendly business environments. 
 Socio-cultural  factors  must  therefore  be  taken  into  account  in  the  design  of  public  policy, 
including in the design of the education system or in territorial planning.   
  www.bportugal.pt 
6 
  Empirical evidence2 points to social segregation in schools as a driver of skills inequality. The 
relatively poor performance by students from disadvantaged backgrounds is partly correlated 
to the fact that they are clustered together in lower quality schools.  
 Likewise,  social  housing  policies  should  not  bring  about  the  creation  of  loser  and  winner 
communities.  Each  community  should  include  individuals  considered  winners  and  losers,  in 
order  for  the  former  to  be  inspired  by  the  latter  and  never  stop  believing  they  have  equal 
opportunities to generate income. Inclusive social housing is precisely one area of public policy 
that has benefited extensively from the expertise and contribution of the Council of Europe 
Development Bank, which has the noble mission of supporting social inclusion in Europe.  
 Conclusion 
 In conclusion, let me highlight the following key messages. 
 •  Globalisation’s impact operates in at least two dimensions – income and employment. 
Globalised trade impacts the level and distribution of income, but it also impacts the 
way employment is distributed across territories and across sectors.  
 
•  Redistribution will always be the reverse side of globalised trade. There will always be 
gains, but also losses… there will always be creation, but also destruction. Low-skilled 
workers and sectors competing with imports are evident examples. Studies show that 
redistribution  costs  rapidly  surpass  trade  gains.  And  some  of  those  costs  are  not 
reversible. When, for example, a given regional cluster disappears due to competition, 
it may never resurge again.  
 
If  there  are  no  compensation  mechanisms,  discontent  will  rise.  The  European 
convergence  machine  has  partially  compensated  for  the  impacts  of  globalisation 
through cohesion policies. Public transfers are adequate as a first, more agile, response. 
 
                                                                         
2 Ridao-Cano, Cristobal; Bodewig, Christian (2018). 
 www.bportugal.pt 
7 
  •  However, public transfers won’t effectively solve the problem of loser communities, 
socially  and  geographically  marginalised.  This  redistribution  across  communities  has 
been  shown  to  be  empirically  more  important  than  redistribution  across  skill  levels. 
Without any other complementary policy, public transfers may generate dependency 
and destroy incentives. This problem can only be effectively solved  
o  By adapting policy to the cultural preferences of those communities; 
o  By designing basic institutions in a way that every community is involved in the 
production process and becomes the owner of its own destiny; 
o  And  by  submitting  globalisation  to  a  set  of  basic  rules  ensuring  everyone 
benefits from a fair level playing field and public intervention is dully framed. 
 
 In  sum,  a  fine  balance  is  needed  between,  on  the  one  hand,  inclusive  rules  and 
institutions,  and,  on  the  other,  compensatory  transfers.  Both  must  be  constantly 
calibrated, given that  
o 
o 
the destructive power of each shock depends on its intensity and duration,  and 
there will always be a shock that no rule or institution may ever prevent – and 
that is technological innovation. 
The  most  effective  strategy  to  overcome  the  challenges  posed  by  technological 
innovation  consists  of  ensuring  an  inclusive  growth  of  potential  output.  This  means 
promoting the sustainable growth of GDP per capita while simultaneously involving all 
the communities and classes of the working age population in the production process. 
Entrepreneurs and managers are particularly prominent actors in such a strategy.  
 So, let me stop here, and congratulate the Bank for its increasingly relevant mission, and for 
bringing us together today to reflect on it.  
 Thank you. 
     www.bportugal.pt 
8 
  Bibliography: 
 Alexandre,  Fernando,  Hélder  Costa,  Miguel  Portela,  Miguel  Rodrigues  (2018),  Asymmetric 
regional dynamics: from bust to recovery, Working Paper Series, NIPE, Universidade do 
Minho  
Amador, João (2017), Portugal e o Comércio Internacional, Essays Series, Francisco Manuel dos 
Santos Foundation 
Associação Empresarial de Portugal (2019), Dinâmicas Socioeconómicas Regionais, AEP Estudos 
e Estratégia 
Baldwin,  Richard  (2016),  The  Great  Convergence:  Information  Technology  and  the  New 
Globalization, Harvard University Press 
Coady, David and Allan Dizioli (2018), Income Inequality and Education Revisited: Persistence, 
Endogeneity and Heterogeneity, Applied Economics, Vol. 50, No. 25, pp. 2747–61 
de Mello, Luiz, Dutz, Mark A. (2012), Promoting Inclusive Growth: Challenges and Policies, Paris: 
OECD and the World Bank 
Farole,  T.,  M.  Roberts,  J.  Park,  and  C.  Hooton  (2018),  Assessing  the  Economic  Potential  of 
Europe’s Regions, Washington, DC: World Bank 
Gill,  Indermit  S.,  Raiser,  Martin  (2012),  Golden  growth:  restoring  the  lustre  of  the  European 
economic  model  (Vol.  2):  Main  report  (English),  Europe  and  Central  Asia  Studies, 
Washington DC, World Bank. 
International Monetary Fund (2017a), Government Finance Statistics Yearbook, 2016, Vol. 40, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C. 
(2017b), The IMF and Social Protection: IEO Survey of IMF Staff, Background Document 
No. BD/17-01/03 
(2008), A Strategy for IMF Engagement on Social Spending, IMF Policy Paper No. 19/016 
Lang and Tavares (2018), The Distribution of Gains from Globalization, IMF Working Paper 
Ridao-Cano,  Cristobal;  Bodewig,  Christian  (2018),  Growing  united:  upgrading  Europe's 
convergence machine (Vol. 2) (English), Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group 
 www.bportugal.pt 
9 
  Rossi,  Federico  (2018),  Human  Capital  and  Macro-Economic  Development:  A  Review  of  the 
Evidence,  Policy  Research  Working  Paper  No.  8650,  (Washington:  The  World  Bank 
Group) 
Standing, Guy (2014), The Precariat: The New Dangerous Class, Bloomsbury Academic 
Schioppa, Tommaso Padoa (2010), “Markets and Government: Before, During, and After the 
2007-20XX Crisis”, Per Jacobsson Foundation, BIS 
World  Bank  (2018),  Inclusive  Growth:  A  Synthesis  of  Findings  from  Recent  IEG  Evaluations, 
Washington, D.C. 
                 www.bportugal.pt 
10 
  Appendix 
Figures and tables from… 
 Gill, Indermit S., Raiser, Martin (2012), Golden growth: restoring the lustre of the European 
economic  model  (Vol.  2):  Main  report  (English),  Europe  and  Central  Asia  Studies, 
Washington DC, World Bank. 
     www.bportugal.pt 
11 
           www.bportugal.pt 
12 
  Ridao-Cano, Cristobal; Bodewig, Christian (2018), Growing united: upgrading Europe's  
convergence machine (Vol. 2) (English), Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group 
 www.bportugal.pt 
13 
     www.bportugal.pt 
14 
       www.bportugal.pt 
15 
      www.bportugal.pt 
16 
  Associação  Empresarial  de  Portugal  (2019),  Dinâmicas  Socioeconómicas  Regionais,  AEP 
Estudos e Estratégia 
     www.bportugal.pt 
17 
  Lang and Tavares (2018), The Distribution of Gains from Globalization, IMF Working Paper 
       www.bportugal.pt 
18 
