Euromed Workshop
“Non-Bank Finance and Financial Intermediation”
Non-Bank Finance: opportunities and risks
Speech by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy 
Luigi Federico Signorini
Naples, 18 June 2019
Access  to  financial  resources  is  essential  for  growth.  The  financial 
system  channels  resources  through  intermediaries  and  markets,  allocating 
them within the economic system. The mix of banks, other intermediaries 
and market-based finance varies across countries and over time, depending 
on  history,  institutions,  and  stage  of  financial  development,  but  certain 
common trends have emerged in the last decade. 
Since  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  regulation  of  banks  has  been 
redesigned to address the vulnerabilities that led to accumulation of excessive 
risks. The reforms resulted from a reassessment of the role of banks in the 
post-crisis world, justified by the adverse systemic effects of their distress. 
As banks’ role has somewhat shrunk, non-bank financial intermediaries 
have taken on an increasing role in the global financial system.1 At the same 
time,  advances  in  technology  have  fuelled  the  emergence  of  technology-
enabled financial innovation (“FinTech”), which is one of the areas where 
non-bank finance is expanding most rapidly. 
A diversified financial system benefits savers and borrowers because it 
offers multiple ways of channelling financial resources, including to support 
long-term investment, and diversifying risks. The non-bank financial sector 
competes with banks, thereby stimulating efficiency and innovation. It can 
reduce  the  vulnerability  of  the  real  economy  to  financial  shocks  because 
funding sources for the real economy can be diversified.
At  the  same  time,  the  expansion  of  non-bank  finance  poses  new 
challenges to regulators, as the activities of non-bank financial intermediaries 
can  have  their  own  significant  implications  for  systemic  risk.  In  the  case 
of  the  asset  management  industry,  on  which  I  shall  mostly  focus  today, 
identifying, monitoring and preventing the build-up of risks from non-bank 
1  Based on BIS data, in 2007 banks in the euro area accounted for 70 per cent of financing to the private 
sector,54 per cent in the United Kingdom, and 34 per cent in the United States; in June 2018 their share 
declined by 12 and 2 percentage points in the euro area and the United Kingdom, respectively, while it 
has remained unchanged in the United States, where it was lower. FSB data on total assets of financial 
corporations in 21 jurisdictions and the euro area show that the share of banks declined by almost 5 
percentage points since 2007.
finance appears to require fresh thinking, more data, deeper analysis, and, 
quite possibly, new policy instruments. 
FinTech opens financial intermediation and credit markets to new players 
and,  at  the  same  time,  is  bound  to  change  the  way  traditional  intermediaries 
operate.  It  can  expand  access  to  financial  services,  increase  competition  and 
efficiency, by lower transaction costs; but it may also mean that old risks take 
new forms and that new (or substantially increased) risks, such as cyber risk, 
arise. Detecting such evolving and emerging risks requires understanding and 
closely monitoring FinTech activities, especially with a view to closing regulatory 
loopholes:  among  them  deviations  from  the  key  principle  that  the  same  risk 
should be subject, in effect, to the same regulatory and supervisory treatment, 
regardless of the nature of the agent and its technical means of operation.
There is substantial scope for international cooperation and coordination in 
these fields because developments in asset management and FinTech tend to cross 
borders quite easily. There is also a lot to be done in cooperation between different 
authorities.  International  coordinating  bodies,  such  as  the  Financial  Stability 
Board, are the natural fora for the authorities to elaborate common strategies.
I  shall  first  review  the  benefits  of  non-bank  finance;  then  I  shall 
highlight the potential sources of systemic risk, particularly those from asset 
managers, and make some considerations about how they are being / should 
be  approached  by  the  supervisory  authorities.  I  shall  also  touch  upon  the 
potential risks from Fintech. As testified by the agenda for these two days 
of  discussion,  these  issues  are  relevant  for  countries  facing  very  different 
economic and financial conditions.
The benefits of a diversified financial system 
The role of non-bank finance in the global economy has been increasing, 
and is now at least as significant as that of banks. Data collected by the Financial 
Stability  Board  (FSB)  show  that  at  the  end  of  2017  the  assets  of  non-bank 
financial  intermediaries  reached  180  trillion  dollars,  about  48  percent  of  the 
global financial sector’s total assets; the assets of banks accounted for 39 percent 
of the total.2
2 
FSB, Global Monitoring Report on Non-Bank Financial Intermediation 2018, 4 February 2019. The 
data refer to 21 countries and the euro area, and include insurance companies, pension funds and other 
financial intermediaries.
4
The non-bank financial sector includes a variety of intermediaries. Some 
of them perform credit intermediation functions, either issuing loans directly 
or facilitating credit provision through financial market instruments; others 
support equity financing in various ways. In certain business models, entities 
that  intermediate  market  instruments  engage  in  liquidity  transformation, 
maturity  transformation,  and  the  creation  of  leverage  just  as  banks  do. 
These activities used to be referred to as “shadow banking” because they are 
usually subject to less stringent prudential regulation and supervision than 
banks. Last year the FSB decided to avoid using this definition, recognising 
that non-bank credit intermediation can be beneficial, provided its risks are 
appropriately monitored and regulated.
Activities that could generate bank-like risks are identified by the FSB 
under a narrow definition of non-bank financial intermediation, and include 
various  entities,  such  as  collective  investment  vehicles  with  features  that 
make them susceptible to runs; finance companies engaging in loan provision 
that is dependent on short-term funding; market intermediaries that depend 
on  short-term  funding  or  secured  funding  of  client  assets  (mostly  broker-
dealers); trust companies and structured finance vehicles.3 The assets of these 
entities represent 14 percent of total global financial assets in the jurisdictions 
monitored by the FSB, and have grown by almost 60 percent since 2007.4 
The  importance  of  non-bank  finance  varies  across  jurisdictions,  and 
depends,  among  other  things,  on  the  degree  of  financial  development. 
Non-bank  finance  tends  to  be  quantitatively  more  significant  in  countries 
with well-developed markets. In the United States, the assets of non-bank 
financial institutions account for 62 per cent of the total assets of financial 
corporations, exceeding those of banks. In the larger European economies 
the sector is less developed: the corresponding figure is about 35 per cent in 
France and Germany and below 30 percent in Italy and Spain. While in most 
emerging markets banks are still the largest sector of the financial system, in 
some of them non-bank finance has grown very rapidly.
Banks traditionally perform a key role in the financial system because 
of  the  monetary  nature  of  their  main  funding  source  (deposits),  and  their 
3  The FSB definition based on economic function is described in its report on “Strengthening Oversight 
and Regulation of Shadow Banking: Policy Framework for Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of 
Shadow Banking Entities”, 29 August 2013. 
4  Data refer to 29 jurisdictions.
5
ability to bridge the gap between lenders and borrowers through the creation 
and  accumulation  of  knowledge  on  the  behaviour  of  the  former  and  the 
creditworthiness of the latter. One of the advantages of banks with respect 
to other institutions is that they bundle different information-based products, 
exploiting  synergies  between  payment  services,  liquidity  provision  and 
monitoring.  There  is  an  enormous  literature  to  explain  why  banks  exist, 
which I cannot even start to summarise here. 
At the same time banks may be less efficient than other intermediaries 
in  providing  certain  standardised  services  in  isolation.  While  bundling 
can  provide  synergies  and  economies  of  scope,  unbundling  can  allow 
specialised intermediaries to operate at a lower cost and to exploit other 
advantages of specialisation. FinTech is widely expected to enhance the 
ability of non-banks to challenge banks on this ground.
In other cases non-bank intermediaries profit from the ability to tailor their 
services to specific needs. In developing economies, to make one example, 
finance companies may be important, as they can cater to households and 
micro and small enterprises, improving financial inclusion; small loans are 
often bundled with the provision of liquidity services to clients that are too 
small to be profitable for banks.5 To make another, quite different, example, 
bank  loans  might  not  be  suitable  –  or  available  –  to  support  businesses 
engaging in research and development as banks require collateral to mitigate 
risks; venture capital firms and private equity funds could be more effective 
in this specific domain.6 
From the point of view of savers, collective investment vehicles, such 
as mutual funds and pension funds, provide investors with a wide range of 
investment options, with different risk-return profiles. Institutional investors 
such  as  insurance  companies,  and  pension  funds  can  focus  on  long-term 
“patient” finance more than banks, due to the nature of their liabilities. 
Non-bank  financial  intermediaries  also  facilitate  the  deepening  of 
financial  markets.  They  channel  savings  towards  market  instruments, 
5 
See A. N. Berger and G. Udell, “A more complete conceptual framework for SME finance”, Journal 
of Banking and Finance Volume 30 (11), 2006, on the role of different lending technologies to address 
business opacity. 
6  A survey of the role and distinct features of venture capital can be found in B. H. Hall and J. Lerner, 
“The Financing of R&D and Innovation”, Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Volume 1, 2010, 
Elsevier.
supporting issuers and providing liquidity and diversification to savers. Asset 
managers, and other entities that specialise in market finance, increase the 
efficiency and liquidity of capital markets, and investors’ opportunities for 
diversification. 
A vibrant non-bank financial sector increases competition in the financial 
system,  reducing  transaction  costs  and  improving  the  quality  of  services. 
Incumbents, including banks, can see some of their advantages eroded as new 
players enter the market, exploiting economies of scale in specific business 
segments.  Examples  of  this  are  institutions  offering  payment  services  or 
asset managers specialised in catering to the needs of investors with certain 
risk-return profiles. 
New  digital  technologies  are  increasing  the  options  for  alternative 
providers of financial services, because they can be used to unbundle some 
of the services offered by banks. Technology-driven financial innovation 
can  be  particularly  beneficial  for  developing  countries  because  it  makes 
services  more  affordable  and  accessible;  but  it  can  increase  access  to 
finance in advanced economies too. Thanks to technology there are greater 
opportunities  to  acquire  and  process  information,  reducing  some  of  the 
traditional advantages of banks. Banks of course can adopt these technologies 
themselves, but non-bank entities sometimes are in apposition to exploit 
them more effectively, because they do not have to upgrade legacy systems 
and internal procedures; they can effectively “leapfrog” them. 
Some  see  these  developments  as  an  existential  threat  to  banks.  The 
banks’ future is linked to their ability to exploit the unique features of their 
core mix of activities to the full; but they need to evolve and adapt.7 The 
benefits of physical proximity to clients afforded by the banks’ traditional 
large, costly networks of branches, are becoming less important as savers 
and borrowers can access financial service providers remotely. Banks are in 
fact reducing the number of branches to cut costs. But in order to reap the 
benefits of technology they will need to go beyond cost-cutting and adopt 
farsighted and possibly quite far-reaching innovations in their approach to 
business and customers. Banks that are both creative and efficient in the use 
7 
See R.G. Rajan, “Why banks have a future: Toward a new theory of commercial banking”, Journal of 
Applied Corporate Finance 9 (2), 1996; and A.W.A. Boot, “Banking at the crossroads: How to deal 
with marketability and complexity?”, Review of Development Finance 1, 2011.
7
of  technology,  while  preserving  their  traditional  business  advantages,  are 
likely in my view retain a key role.
What is the optimal mix between banks, non-bank financial institutions 
and  markets?  The  academic  debate  used  to  contrast  intermediary-based 
financial systems with market-based ones, often looking for evidence that 
one or the other was superior. A more nuanced view is now usually held.8 
The optimal structure of the financial system is often found to change with 
economic development9. 
Whatever  the  nuances,  I  suppose  most  would  nowadays  agree  that 
a  balanced  financial  system  with  multiple,  lively  channels  of  financial 
intermediation  is  likely  to  provide  both  healthier  competition  and  better 
resilience  to  shocks.  Research  has  shown  that  when  banks  are  distressed 
frictions  in  credit  provision  have  negative  real  effects;10  in  countries  that 
have well-developed markets, firms can borrow by issuing securities when 
banks tighten credit supply conditions.11 On the other hand, banks can smooth 
temporary  shocks  affecting  borrowers  and  somewhat  shield  them  from 
financial market shocks by supporting financial flows, as suggested by the 
evidence from studies using microeconomic data on bank-firm relationships.12 
Cross-country evidence on various stages of the recent financial crisis has 
8  R. Levine, “Bank-Based or Market-Based Financial Systems: Which is Better?,” Journal of Financial 
Intermediation 11 (4), 2002; for a review of the finance and growth literature see R. Levine, “Finance 
and Growth: Theory and Evidence,” Handbook of Economic Growth Vol. 1, Part A, 2005.
9  A. Demirgüç-Kunt, E. Feyen, and R. Levine, “The evolving importance of banks and securities markets,” 
World  Bank  Economic  Review,  27(3).  –  As  economies  evolve,  the  benefit  of  further  developing 
traditional financial institutions tends to decline whilst that of markets increases. Moreover, an IMF 
study shows that the relationship between financial development and growth is bell-shaped: financial 
development increases growth, but the effect weakens at higher levels of financial development, and 
eventually  becomes  negative.  Considering  sub-indices  of  an  overall  financial  development  index, 
this bell-shaped relationship is due only to the “depth” components of the index; “access” exhibits 
a  positive  linear  relationship  with  growth,  while  “efficiency”  has  no  robust  association  with  long-
term growth (IMF Staff Discussion Note “Rethinking Financial Deepening: Stability and Growth in 
Emerging Markets,” 15/08, May 2015).. 
10  G. Dell’Ariccia, E. Detragiache, and R. Rajan, “The real effects of banking crises,” Journal of Financial 
Intermediation,  17  (1),  2008;  R.  Krozner,  L.  Laeven,  D.  Klingebiel,  “Banking  crises,  financial 
dependence, and growth,” Journal of Financial Economics 84, 2007.
11  T.  Adrian,  P.  Colla,  and  H.  S.  Shin,  “Which  Financial  Frictions?  Parsing  the  Evidence  from  the 
Financial Crisis of 2007-9,” NBER Working Paper No. 18335, 2012. 
12  See for example E. Sette and G. Gobbi, “Relationship lending during a financial crisis,” Journal of 
European Economic Association 13, 2015; P. Bolton, X. Freixas, L. Gambacorta, and P. E. Mistrulli, 
“Relationship  and  Transaction  Lending  in  a  Crisis,”  Review  of  Financial  Studies  29  (10),  2016;  
W. Jiangli, H. Unal, and C. Yom, “Relationship Lending, Accounting Disclosure, and Credit Availability 
during the Asian Financial Crisis,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 40 (1), 2008.
8
thus provided evidence for both views, which should therefore be seen as 
complementary rather than mutually exclusive.
Another key message from the research literature is that an overly 
rapid expansion of finance can lead to financial instability, especially if 
it is accompanied – as is often the case – by equally excessive leverage 
and  risk-taking.  This  reconciles  the  long-standing  view  that  financial 
development is beneficial for growth with post-crisis analyses suggesting 
that too much finance can be detrimental.13 Stable growth is promoted by 
the ability of financial systems to provide financial services and perform 
their allocation function effectively, while keeping risks in check. This 
rather general and even obvious observation leads me to the second part 
of my speech, where I shall endeavour to make its implications a bit more 
specific, and thus also possibly a bit less uncontroversial.
The risks from non-bank finance: the case of asset management
Benefits do not come without costs. There would be little development 
without  a  financial  system,  yet  the  economic  functions  that  the  financial 
system  performs,  such  as  credit  provision  and  maturity  /  liquidity 
transformation, imply the creation of risks. These risks not only affect the 
stability of individual financial intermediaries: they can also have an impact 
on the financial system as a whole, with adverse effects on the real economy. 
A long experience with banking informs the regulation and supervision of 
the risks generated by banks, imperfect as it will always remain; but as the 
financial  system  becomes  more  complex,  risks  take  different  forms  and 
extend to different types of intermediaries; the authorities will need to adapt 
and evolve in response. 
I shall focus here on the risks from one industry that I find particularly 
challenging from a supervisory point of view: asset management. This industry 
manages a very significant volume of assets, and influences the allocation of 
financial resources globally. It includes a variety of asset management models, 
and families of funds investing in products with different risk profiles. Some 
types of funds, like hedge funds, feature leveraged financial risk, which may 
13  See J.L. Arcand, E. Berkes, and U. Panizza, “Too Much Finance?,” Journal of Economic Growth, 2015; 
S. G. Cecchetti, and E. Kharroubi, “Why Does Financial Sector Growth Crowd Out Real Economic 
Growth?,” BIS Working Paper, No. 490, 2015; S. H. Law and N. Singh, “Does too much finance harm 
economic growth?,” Journal of Banking and Finance 41, 2014.
9
be further compounded by securities lending activities and the creation of 
synthetic leverage via derivatives.14 Others, particularly open-ended funds, 
perform (among other things) liquidity and maturity transformation, because 
they invest in financial instruments that often have a longer maturity than the 
funds’ shares. 
Asset managers mostly provide investment services as fiduciary agents 
for their clients; hence, the risks associated with the investments are borne by 
the owners of the funds’ shares, not by the fund managers. The risks that are 
traditionally of concern for the authorities mainly involve agency problems 
and information asymmetries between the investors and the asset managers 
(misconduct, lack of transparency in the behaviour of the asset managers or 
investors not fully understanding financial risks). Accordingly, the purpose 
of market regulation and the mandates of market authorities mainly concern 
conduct and transparency.
When  markets  function  smoothly,  liquidity  and  maturity  mismatches 
can  be  managed  because  the  asset  managers  deal  with  a  large  number  of 
investors with diversified liquidity needs. In certain situations, however, the 
collective behaviour of investors can generate significant externalities, leading 
to excessive procyclicality, amplifying the cyclical properties of asset prices 
and credit flows. It is well understood that in financial markets procyclicality 
can be determined by behavioural phenomena (euphoria and panics), such as 
herding.15 In the case of the asset management industry, procyclicality can be 
exacerbated by the pricing rules for fund shares, the incentive structure for 
fund managers and the benchmarking of fund performance.16
14  Some asset managers provide their clients with indemnification, a type of insurance associated with 
securities lending. When the borrower of a security defaults on the loan and the collateral received 
is  insufficient  to  cover  the  repurchase  price  of  the  lent  securities,  the  shortfall  is  borne  by  the 
indemnification provider.
15  See  for  example  D.S.  Scharfstein  and  J.C.  Stein,  1990.  “Herd  Behavior  and  Investment.”  American 
Economic Review 80; T. Lux, “Herd Behaviour, Bubbles and Crashes,” Economic Journal 105, No. 431, 
1995; and Shiller, R. J., “Conversation, Information and Herd Behavior,” American Economic Review, 
Vol. 85 (2), 1995. For a review of the literature D. Hirshleifer and S. H. Teoh, “Herd Behaviour and 
Cascading in Capital Markets: a Review and Synthesis,” European Financial Management 9 (1), 2003.
Inflexible net asset value (NAV) fund share pricing, that does not factor in the investment losses of 
trading illiquid assets, can generate a first-mover advantage for an open-end mutual fund and exacerbate 
the  incentive  for  investors  to  run.  Benchmarking  and  relative  performance  mechanisms,  which  are 
common tools to address the principal-agent problem in the investment management industry, may 
lead to a focus on short-term returns and thus reduce the investment horizon of the manager. Incentive 
structures may increase risk-taking and short-termism by asset managers. 
16 
10
In times of stress the behaviour of investors can depress the prices of 
assets  by  pushing  them  well  below  their  fundamental  values.  If  investors 
fear that the liquidation value of their shares will decline as other investors 
liquidate their positions, they will have an incentive to redeem their shares. 
When they invest through funds, their joint behaviour could produce massive 
redemptions, putting pressure on funds. Funds will be forced to liquidate, 
with adverse effects on asset prices and market liquidity.17 
Trades  by  large  investors  are  more  likely  to  turn  into  fire  sales, 
magnifying the impact of temporary shocks on market prices and leading 
to  severe  liquidity  stress  and  extreme  volatility.  As  asset  prices  decline, 
other  intermediaries  holding  those  assets  (including  banks)  face  losses, 
collateral becomes less valuable and borrowers are affected, with negative 
consequences for the real economy.
Interconnectedness  is  another  source  of  externalities  from  a  systemic 
risk perspective. Externalities related to interconnectedness can arise because 
intermediaries are linked through bilateral balance sheet exposures or on the 
derivatives market, or because they are jointly exposed to common shocks. 
Ownership  links  between  intermediaries  might  require  the  provision  of 
liquidity support in case of fund distress, either because of existing guarantees 
or  committed  credit  lines,  but  also  with  a  view  to  avoiding  reputational 
damage. For very large financial institutions the web of interconnectedness 
is highly complex and opaque.18 Interconnectedness mitigates the impact of 
small shocks but can amplify large ones. 
In asset management, a commonality of exposures can arise because the 
assets in which funds can invest are a finite set. Each fund holds a diversified 
portfolio  but  the  portfolios  of  rationally-managed  funds  of  a  certain  kind 
are  not  likely  to  be  particularly  diverse,  as  most  if  not  all  funds  will  use 
basically the same insights from finance theory and therefore follow similar 
investment strategies. If everybody in a market owns more or less the same 
portfolio and reacts in more or less the same way to disturbances, shocks can 
be amplified and spread more easily across markets and asset classes. 
17  Leveraged funds that rely on borrowing or derivatives may also be exposed to run-like behaviour if 
18 
they cannot roll-over funding or positions when they are under stress. 
J.  Abad,  M.  D’Errico,  N.  Killeen,  V.  Luz,  T.  Peltonen,  R.  Portes,  T.  Urbano,  “Mapping  the 
interconnectedness  between  EU  banks  and  shadow  banking  entities,”  ESRB  Working  Paper  Series  
No 40, March 2017.
11
The real significance of these risk is the subject of an ongoing debate. 
There are many reasons to believe that they are not negligible, at the very 
least. Not only is the asset management industry very large, but it is also 
increasingly concentrated. According to one source the market share of the 
top twenty firms is more than 40 percent.19 In the United States, the top 10 
managers owned about 5 per cent of the United States stock market in 1980; 
in  2016  they  owned  about  23  per  cent.20  The  commonality  of  exposures 
is  substantial;  evidence  suggests  that  during  stress  episodes  bonds  with 
concentrated mutual fund ownership tend to experience larger price drops.21 
Some other structural changes may further exacerbate the potential for 
externalities. First, the diffusion of funds with passive investment strategies, 
for  example  ETFs,  could  create  distortions  in  the  pricing  of  individual 
securities  by  applying  mechanical  investment  rules,  and  thereby  amplify 
trading  patterns.22  Second,  automated  trading  may  lead  to  less  diversified 
behaviour in response to shocks, increasing the procyclicality of prices and 
liquidity.23
Applications  of  new  technologies,  such  as  high-frequency  trading, 
algorithmic trading and robo-advisors, may improve market efficiency and 
reduce intermediation costs during normal times, but have the potential for 
making the behaviour of intermediaries (or, indeed, even individual investors 
in the case of robo-advice) more responsive to market news. More analytical 
work surely needs to be done, but available studies suggest that mutual fund 
investments affect price dynamics in less liquid markets, certain share pricing 
19  Data  from  “The  world’s  largest  500  asset  managers”,  Thinking  Ahead  Institute  and  Pensions  & 
20 
Investments joint research, based on 2017 figures for assets under management.
I. Ben-David, F. Franzoni, R. Moussawi, and J. Sedunov, “The Granular Nature of Large Institutional 
Investors”, NBER Working Paper No. 22247, May 2016.
21  See  Manconi  A.,  Massa  M.  and  Yasuda  A.,  “The  role  of  institutional  investors  in  propagating  the 
crisis of 2007–2008”, Journal of Financial Economics 104. More recently, I. Ben-David, F. Franzoni, 
R. Moussawi and J. Sedunov, show that ownership by large institutions predicts higher volatility and 
greater noise in stock prices (“The Granular Nature of Large Institutional Investors”, CEPR Discussion 
Paper 13427, 2019). The International Monetary Fund Global Financial Stability Report, April 2015, 
reviews available evidence.
22  See  V.  Sushko  and  G.Turner,  “The  implications  of  passive  investing  for  securities  markets,”  
BIS  Quarterly  Review,  March  2018,  for  a  discussion  of  the  issue.  The  evidence  is  ambiguous,  see 
for  example  “The  Shift  from  Active  to  Passive  Investing:  Potential  Risks  to  Financial  Stability?,” 
K.  Anadu,  M.  Kruttli,  P.  McCabe,  E.  Osambela,  and  C.H.  Shin,  Federal  Reserve  Board,  FEDS 
WP  2018-060;  also  I.  Ben-David,  F.  Franzoni,  and  R.  Moussawi,  “Do  ETFs  Increase  Volatility?”,  
NBER Working Paper No. 20071, April 2014.
IOSCO Research Report on Financial Technologies (Fintech), February 2017.
23 
12
rules create first-mover advantage incentives, and the behaviour of portfolio 
managers displays significant herding tendencies.24
Countries with a small asset management industry and less developed 
financial markets are not immune to these risks. On the contrary, and maybe 
rather paradoxically, they could be even more subject to volatile capital flows 
as global players adjust their investment strategies, leading to surges in bond 
yields and sharp depreciation of the domestic currency.25 There is evidence 
that international investors engage in more herding and momentum trading 
in emerging markets than in developed countries.26 Large firms borrow from 
international markets, often in foreign currency, which exposes them to the 
refinancing and exchange rate risks from the reversal of capital flows.
Policy approaches to risks in non-bank finance
The  externalities  I  have  just  described  require  a  macroprudential 
approach. One of the lessons from the global financial crisis is that aggregate 
–  i.e.  systemic  –  risk  can  build  up  largely  unchecked  if  authorities  lack  a 
broad  perspective,  and  that  the  consequences  of  a  crisis  originating  in 
financial markets may extend far beyond the fortunes of individual investors. 
The authorities in charge of financial regulation and supervision need to be 
able to monitor the potential sources of risks, to anticipate the build-up of 
systemic  risk,  and  to  deploy  instruments  to  prevent  it  from  materialising 
when possible; or, failing that, to mitigate their fallout. 
As  I  already  mentioned,  traditionally  the  focus  of  the  regulation  and 
supervision of the asset management industry has been the conduct of these 
intermediaries, and its purpose has been to ensure integrity and transparency, 
24  See the International Monetary Fund, Global Financial Stability Report, April 2015. While most of the 
earlier literature focused on equity trading, the different features of other types of assets can result in 
different herd behavior. Analyses of herding in the U.S. corporate bonds among bond fund managers 
find that corporate bond herding is substantially higher than the stock market herding (e.g. Cai, F., Han, 
S. and Li, D., “Institutional Herding in the Corporate Bond Market,” Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System International Finance Discussion Papers No. 1071, December 2012).
25  E S. Prasad, K. Rogoff, S. Wei, and M. A. Kose, “Effects of Financial Globalization on Developing 
Countries: Some Empirical Evidence,” IMF Occasional paper 220, 2003.
26  A  number  of  studies  focus  on  emerging  markets,  investigating  the  behavior  of  mutual  funds,  for  a 
survey see G. Gelos, “International Mutual Funds, Capital Flow Volatility, and Contagion – A Survey,”  
IMF WP/11/92, 2011; the evidence in the literature suggests that funds tend to avoid opaque markets and 
assets, and this behavior becomes more pronounced during volatile times, with portfolio rebalancing 
mechanisms  contributing  to  explain  contagion  patterns.  Also  C.  Jotiikasthira,  C.  Lundlbadand  
T. Ramadorai, “Asset Fire Sales and Purchases and the International Transmission of Funding Shocks,”, 
Journal of Finance 67(6). 
13
given the limited relevance of the risk of managers’ insolvency. More recently, 
the focus on liquidity management has increased, but still mainly from the 
perspective of individual funds. These issues should continue to receive all 
the attention they deserve; but there seems to be a case that they need to be 
accompanied by a macroprudential approach. The authorities should assess 
how shocks originating in one part of the financial system can be transmitted 
to the others components, both directly and through their impact on markets. 
This is a very challenging objective, requiring data and complex analytical 
frameworks. One tool that could be useful is macroprudential stress testing. 
The work on stress testing tools for non-banks is still in its infancy.27
An additional challenge is the identification and design of appropriate 
policy  instruments.  Tools  aimed  at  protecting  the  stability  of  individual 
asset  managers  are  available  in  many  jurisdictions,  for  example  liquidity 
requirements, rules restricting the amount of illiquid assets that can be held 
by  open-end  funds,  redemption  suspension  and  redemption  gates.  Their 
effectiveness for macroprudential purposes should be evaluated. Standards 
aimed  at  preventing  the  excessive  accumulation  of  risk  ex  ante,  such  as 
minimum  maturity-matching  rules,  are  more  effective  in  this  sense  than 
those  meant  to  manage  a  fund’s  crisis  ex-post,  such  as  gates,  which  may 
even have counterproductive signalling effects. The former set of standards 
should in my view include mandatory rules to ensure that funds investing in 
illiquid assets beyond a certain share of their portfolios may not operate as 
open-ended funds.
Finally, the adoption of a macroprudential approach to the risks arising 
from  asset  management  could  require  the  adjustment  of  the  institutional 
framework  for  financial  supervision.  In  many  countries,  the  authorities  in 
charge of the regulation and supervision of these entities have no financial-
stability  mandate.  Should  their  mandate  be  expanded  to  include  financial 
stability?  Given  the  cross-sectoral  nature  of  financial  stability  risks,  if 
several authorities are in charge of financial stability, how can the exchange 
of  information  and  the  coordination  of  policies  be  ensured?  Incentives  to 
redesign  institutions  are  usually  stronger  in  the  wake  of  a  crisis  but  tend 
27  See the work by Y. Baranova, J. Coen, P. Lowe, J. Noss and L.Silvestri, “Simulating stress across the 
financial system: the resilience of corporate bond markets and the role of investment funds,” the Bank 
of England Financial Stability Paper No. 42 (July 2017),. Also S. Calimani, G. Hałaj, S. Zochowski, 
“Simulating fire-sales in a banking and shadow banking system,” ESRB Working Paper Series 46, 2017.
14
to  wane  during  good  times.  Consideration  of  these  issues  should  not  be 
procrastinated until the next crisis.
Central banks play a key role in macroprudential policy because their 
mandate  includes  in  one  way  or  another  a  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability perspective. They also have access to timely information as a result 
of  monetary  policy  implementation.  Finally,  they  have  the  unique  ability 
to  provide  liquidity  through  banks.  This  proved  crucial  during  the  global 
financial crisis.28 In designing the institutional framework for macroprudential 
policy, authorities should consider if the scope of the lender-of-last resort 
function should be expanded to include institutions other than banks. Under 
what circumstances, and how, should central bank intervene if the liquidity 
stress of a non-bank financial intermediary appears likely to cause contagion 
and disrupt markets?
International cooperation is necessary to avoid regulatory arbitrage. The 
FSB is the forum that is best suited to coordinating the any efforts to analyse 
financial  stability  risks  stemming  from  non-bank  finance,  and  to  devise 
common approaches and regulatory standards. With its annual monitoring 
exercise the FSB provides the policymaking community with a framework 
for analysing risks, and a very useful source of data on non-bank finance; 
the coverage in terms of jurisdictions and the degree of harmonisation of the 
data have much improved in recent years. 
The FSB issued policy recommendations in 2017 to address structural 
vulnerabilities  in  asset  management  activities,  mandating  the  IOSCO,  the 
relevant standard setter body, to operationalise them. This work has led to 
the development of policy tools for asset managers in the area of liquidity 
risk management, and of leverage measures for investment funds to facilitate 
monitoring for financial stability purposes and to enable comparisons across 
funds at the global level.29 The FSB has also made some progress in studying 
the impact of large investors’ strategies on market liquidity. In a recent pilot 
simulation exercise, the FSB employed a modelling approach to assess the 
consequences  of  market  stresses  and  examined  the  resilience  of  liquidity 
across a range of corporate bond markets.30 
28  The central bank provided liquidity to mutual funds in the United States, to selected broker-dealers and 
29 
central clearing counterparties in the UK. Similar arrangements were made by the Bank of Japan. 
IOSCO,  “Recommendations  for  Liquidity  Risk  Management  for  Collective  Investment  Schemes,” 
February 2018.
30  The approach was an adaptation of a model of the Bank of England.
15
This line of action deserves to be brought further forward. There have 
been from time to time episodes of hesitations and reversal, such abandoning 
the  idea  of  identifying  globally  systemic  non-bank  intermediaries  (in  my 
view  an  ill-advised  move),  some  timidity  in  prescribing  ex-ante  liquidity 
rules, and now perhaps a sense that all that needed to be done has been done. 
The risks, however, are too new, too complex and too little understood for 
any complacency. Continued evaluation of the effectiveness of the available 
tools in a macro perspective, and increased coverage, as well as improved 
analytics,  of  systemic  resilience  testing,  should  in  my  view  be  actively 
pursued.
FinTech, regulation and systemic risk 
FinTech,  broadly  defined,  includes  very  diverse  technology-enabled 
financial  innovations  encompassing  the  provision  of  a  whole  range  of 
financial services, such as payments, insurance, lending and crowdfunding, 
trading and investment services.31 FinTech is changing the landscape in which 
intermediaries and policymakers are operating, as new business models are 
developed  by  exclusively  Fintech  firms  or  by  incumbents  responding  to 
competition. 
FinTech activities can generate institution-specific risks, financial and 
operational, and systemic risks. The financial risks are not in principle different 
from those borne by other intermediaries, and depend on the business model 
adopted  by  the  service  provider.  For  example,  some  platforms  providing 
FinTech-enabled  credit  directly  match  borrowers  with  lenders,  acting  as 
agents. If investments and loans are matched by maturity, and investors are 
unable to liquidate their investments before the loan matures, the platform 
bears no liquidity risk. Only a small proportion of platforms currently engage 
in  leverage,  as  they  use  their  own  balance-sheet  to  fund  loans.32  These 
platforms are exposed to credit risk, like others that offer return guarantees, 
and could be subject to liquidity risk if investors can liquidate on short notice 
their positions.
31  The IOSCO maps eight groups of innovations, considering also those in planning, data and analytics, 
and  security.  A  mapping  can  be  found  in  IOSCO,  “Research  Report  on  Financial  Technologies 
(Fintech), 2017.
32  See the FSB-CGFS “Report on Fintech credit,” May 2017.
16
Regulators  and  supervisors  have  to  focus  their  lenses  better  in  order 
to  see  more  clearly  the  potential  risks  arising  from  each  kind  of  Fintech 
activity  and  business  model.  There  is  one  general  principle  that  should 
inspire the way authorities tackle FinTech from a microprudential point of 
view: to the extent that FinTech activities involve the same risks that justify 
supervision of other activities, they should be regulated and supervised in 
much the same way. Following this principle also ensures a level-playing 
field between different institutions (i.e., banks and non-banks) performing 
the same activities. The current regulatory framework may or may not be 
adequate  to  ensure  that  this  principle  is  followed;  in  many  jurisdictions 
regulation of non-bank agents that engage in bank-like activities is lighter 
than that of banks, and many non-financial entities, large and small, appear 
determined  to  enter  the  financial-services  field.  Authorities  should  be 
prepared to evaluate on an ongoing basis the regulatory perimeter and the 
effectiveness of existing prudential rules. 
Operational risk, while not unique to FinTech activities, is especially 
relevant  for  them,  irrespective  of  whether  they  are  performed  by  separate 
service providers or by banks or other, supervised, traditional intermediaries. 
Cyber risk is not a new phenomenon, but the diffusion of FinTech activities 
could increase the vulnerability of the financial system due to greater use of 
digital technologies, which raises the number of potential entry points for 
cyber-attacks. 
Another  source  of  operational  risk  is  the  reliance  of  banks  and  other 
intermediaries  on  services  provided  by  third  parties.  FinTech  activities, 
including  those  performed  by  traditional  intermediaries,  often  involve 
outsourcing one or more functions or processes that are integrated into the 
value  chain;  these  third  parties  could  be  outside  the  financial  system,  or 
within the financial system, but subject to lighter regulation and supervision. 
Reliance on third parties exposes FinTech activities to the risk of disruptions; 
furthermore, if these third parties manage confidential data, the legal risks 
may be substantial. FinTech innovations need to be carefully monitored to 
avoid that opportunities open up for illegal activities that could pose a threat 
to financial integrity.
These  risks  have  potential  implications  for  financial  stability  to  the 
extent  that  their  materialisation  can  trigger  distress  in  an  entire  sector,  or 
propagate significant stress to other sectors of the financial system and the 
economy.  Developments  in  FinTech  could  also  become  important  from  a 
17
macroprudential perspective if they have the potential to amplify shocks or 
create new channels of contagion as a result of externalities.
I  already  mentioned  ways  in  which  technology  may  enhance  the 
amplification  risk  implicit  in  market  intermediation.  FinTech  can  also 
increase  the  risks  of  contagion  arising  from  interconnectedness  through 
several other channels. First, FinTech entities are connected with banks and 
other financial entities through partnerships or other joint ventures. Digital 
platforms in some cases intervene at some stage of the value chain of a given 
financial service. For example, they act as an interface between institutional 
investors  and  borrowers  or  provide  screening  services  for  banks.  While 
specialisation of intermediaries in the different stages of credit intermediation 
may increase cost efficiency, it could also exacerbate agency problems. At 
this stage, reputation risk and a collapse in trust in one or more large FinTech 
entities might conceivably be a major source of contagion. 
Second, digital technologies exhibit very significant economies of scale, 
which may drive consolidation in the financial industry and in financial market 
infrastructures, increasing concentration and leading to the emergence of a 
few systemically important players; similarly, third-party service providers 
may become fewer and larger, which increases the potential for exposure to 
common shocks. 
While policies for microeconomic and financial risks from FinTech 
are  currently  defined  by  individual  jurisdictions,  there  is  significant 
scope  for  coordination33.  Regulatory  and  supervisory  authorities  have 
the difficult job of protecting the safety and soundness of the financial 
system  without  curbing  innovation.  They  may  be  tempted  to  impose 
unduly  restrictive  rules  in  response  to  the  challenge  they  face,  arising 
from  the  complexity  and  dynamism  of  technology.  Or  they  could  be 
tempted to lower standards to encourage innovation and attract business, 
leading to the exploitation of regulatory arbitrage by firms. In European 
jurisdictions  the  volume  of  investment  in  FinTech  companies  appears 
to be negatively correlated with the stringency of financial regulation.34 
While the optimal point in this trade-off may be difficult to find, it needs 
33  Realistically, one has to recognise that national security concerns may in certain cases dictate limits to 
cross-jurisdiction cooperation in this field.
34  Barba Navaretti, G., G. Calzolari and A.F. Pozzolo, “FinTech and Banks. Friends or Foes?”, European 
Economy 2017 (2). 
18
to  be  found;  international  cooperation  is  key  to  avoiding  an  excessive 
divergence across jurisdictions.
From  a  macro-financial  perspective  risks  appear  to  be  limited  at  this 
stage, but they could increase rapidly if the authorities lag too much behind 
the  market  in  understanding  technological  and  business  developments. 
International  cooperation  in  monitoring  FinTech  trends  would  be  highly 
beneficial; assessing the material nature of the risks arising from FinTech 
is  a  difficult  task  because  of  the  lack  of  data  and  experience.35  The  FSB 
is  monitoring  developments  of  FinTech  in  its  annual  review  of  non-bank 
finance, and has just released a report on decentralised technologies.36 
  Collaboration  with  the  industry  can  be  very  useful.  In  April  the 
European  Commission  and  European  Supervisory  Authorities  launched 
a  new  platform,  the  European  Forum  for  Innovation  Facilitators  (EFIF).37 
Through this network, participating authorities can share experiences from 
their  engagement  with  firms  through  innovation  facilitators.  The  Bank  of 
Italy will contribute its experience with its innovation hub.38
Given the cross-cutting nature of FinTech, international coordination on 
policies is already involving many institutions and standard setting bodies, 
each according to its mandate.39 The FSB has identified two issues that deserve 
the authorities’ attention from a financial stability perspective, and should 
be a priority for international cooperation: managing operational risks from 
third party service providers, and mitigating cyber risks. Many third party 
service  providers  are  outside  the  regulatory  perimeter,  and  the  authorities 
should  carefully  evaluate  whether  the  existing  oversight  frameworks  are 
35  FSB, “Financial Stability Implications from FinTech, Supervisory and Regulatory Issues that Merit 
Authorities’ Attention,” 27 June 2017.
36  FSB, “FinTech and market structure in financial services: Market developments and potential financial 
stability implications,” 14 February 2019.
37  The European Commission has developed a FinTech Action plan, as outlined in a document released in 
2018 (see “FinTech Action plan: For a more competitive and innovative European financial sector”).
39 
38  FinTech Channel, accessible through the website, is a direct interface through active start-ups and firms 
that would like to offer technological solutions to banks and financial intermediaries, or the latter if 
they are directly involved in the development of innovative solutions in the area of financial services, 
can contact the Bank of Italy.
Initiatives  have  been  launched  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements (BIS), the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), the Committee on Payments 
and Market Infrastructure (CPMI), the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), 
the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS), the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). 
The IMF and World Bank have developed the Bali Fintech agenda in 2018, to guide its work and the 
dialogue with member countries.
19
appropriate. Cross-border coordination and collaboration may also involve 
authorities in charge of IT security, especially in the regard to cyber risk. 
Finally,  technology  may  also  offer  significant  opportunities  for 
authorities  to  improve  their  ability  to  protect  financial  stability.  Many 
central banks and supervisory agencies are experimenting in this area.40 
At  the  Bank  of  Italy  we  are  exploring  the  use  of  new  technologies  in 
supervisory activities: specifically, we are testing ways in which artificial 
intelligence  can  help  in  forecasting  economic  and  financial  variables, 
understanding  changes  in  investors’  sentiment,  and  improving  the 
effectiveness of anti-money-laundering activities.41
Conclusions 
A more diversified financial system, with banks and non-bank financial 
institutions  complementing  each  other,  can  improve  resource  allocation 
and  promote  growth.  Effective  regulation  and  supervision  have  to  ensure 
that non-bank financial institutions reinforce the financial system, and this 
requires understanding and managing the attending risks. 
Certain  types  of  non-bank  finance  could  exacerbate  the  tendency  
of the financial system to behave procyclically, and increase the degree of 
interconnectedness between intermediaries and markets. Authorities should 
look  at  a  possible  macroprudential  approach,  and  consider  adjusting  the 
policy framework accordingly, however challenging this may seem. 
Although FinTech has not raised issues from a systemic risk perspective 
so  far,  the  authorities  need  to  be  vigilant  and  constantly  update  their 
knowledge of how these activities are evolving, to harness the opportunities 
for innovation while keeping risks in check. 
40  Some of the initiatives by early users are described in a survey-based analysis by D. Broeders and  
J. Prenio, “Innovative technology in financial supervision (suptech) – the experience of early users,” 
Financial Stability Institute, FSI Insights on policy implementation, No 9 July 2018.
41  Examples are M. Accornero and M. Moscatelli, “Listening to the buzz: social media sentiment and 
retail depositors' trust,” Bank of Italy Working Paper No. 1165, 2018; M. Loberto, A. Luciani and 
M.  Pangallo,  “The  potential  of  big  housing  data:  an  application  to  the  Italian  real-estate  market,” 
Bank of Italy Working Paper No. 1171, 2018; C. Angelico, J. Marcucci, M. Miccoli and F. Quarta, 
“Can  We  Measure  Inflation  Expectations  Using  Twitter?”,  Bank  of  Italy  mimeo,  2019;  L.  Arciero  
G. Bruno, G, Marchetti, J. Marcucci, “Anomaly Detection in RTGS Systems: Performance Comparisons 
Between Shallow and Deep Neural Networks”, Bank of Italy, mimeo, 2019; G. Bruno, J. Marcucci,  
A. Mattiocco, M. Scarnó and D. Sforzini, “The Sentiment Hidden in Italian Texts Through the Lens of 
a New Dictionary”, Bank of Italy, mimeo, 2019.
20
Coordination  and  cooperation  among  central  banks  and  market  and 
supervisory authorities is of the utmost importance, not only to avoid negative 
spillovers across jurisdictions, but also because the exchange of knowledge 
and best practices yields concrete benefits when navigating such a rapidly 
changing world. 
I thank you very much for your attention. The Banca d’Italia is delighted 
to host this event, and I wish everyone a very fruitful discussion.
21
Designed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
