Bundesbank, Frankfurt – 26 September 2019
Speech in the presence of Jens Weidmann
by François Villeroy de Galhau
Governor of the Banque de France
« Household Expectations »
1
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a great pleasure for me to open - with my colleague Jens Weidmann - this
joint  Bundesbank
- Banque  de  France  conference  on  households’
expectations.  I  would  like  to  thank  warmly  the  Bundesbank: 
this  French-
German  cooperation  testifies  that  our  two  institutions  can  promote  and 
contribute to good research on a very topical policy issue. Over the past year, 
the  decline  of  market  inflation  expectations  has  been  pronounced  while 
households’ expectations have been increasing quite steadily. This divergence 
is a challenge for our assessment on inflation expectations. All the interesting
papers presented in the next couple of days will illustrate how much we can 
learn on inflation expectations when observing them outside financial markets. 
I.
Inflation expectations: a key issue for monetary policy
I.1. Policy relevance for Central Banks
Stable inflation expectations at a level close to our target are - of course - key 
for  our  monetary  policy:  they  provide  a  strong  nominal  anchor  helping us  to 
stabilize  inflation  when  facing  large  demand  or  supply  shocks.  Since  the 
1990s,  management  of 
through  central  bank
communication  has  become  a  standard  tool  for monetary  policy. A lot  of 
evidence  suggests that  this  policy  has  contributed  to  anchor  inflation 
expectations  and  to  reduce  their  volatility,  while facing strong  inflationary  or
deflationary shocks. The Great Financial Crisis is a good example: at that time, 
solid and well-anchored inflation expectations in the euro area contributed to 
counteract the strong deflationary forces affecting our economies. 
inflation  expectations 
However, since then, market-based measures of inflation expectations in the 
euro  area  have  been  decreasing and  this  decline  has  been  even  more 
pronounced since the beginning of 2019. This fall in market expectations has 
raised some questions among central bank watchers on potential risks of de-
anchoring of inflation expectations and more generally on our ability to deliver 
our mandate of price stability. 
I.2. The need for better information on households expectations
Let  me  stress  that  market-based  inflation  expectations are  not  the  only
available measures to assess future risks of inflation. Professional forecasters 
or consensus forecast provide a significantly higher figure than the 5Y/5Y ILS, 
at around 1,7% rather than 1,2% to 1,3%, although all of them point out to a 
decrease  of
inflation  expectations  over  time  (Figure  1). Market-based 
measures have also some technical limitations: first, related to the liquidity of 
2
financial  markets,  and  second  because  they  are  affected  by  the  evolution  of
the  risk  premium  over  time.  Moreover,  while  financial  market  expectations 
provide information on future financing conditions, the evolution of prices and 
wages depends more deeply and directly on what household and firms expect 
regarding future  growth  and  inflation.  Consequently,  existing  surveys  among 
firms  and  households  can  provide  very  useful  and  valuable  information  on 
expectations. 
Better monitoring the general public's inflation expectations is not an easy task 
since inflation expectations of firms or consumers are not directly observable. 
For the moment, reliable data on consumers or firms’ inflation expectations are 
quite  scarce  in  the  euro  area  whereas  in  other  jurisdictions  expectation 
surveys  have  been  developed  quite  extensively – famous  and  recent 
examples include the New York Fed Survey, the Tankan survey in Japan or 
the  different  surveys  developed  by  the  Bank  of  England.  In this  respect,  the 
new Bundesbank household survey contributes to fill the gap and it is also an 
excellent example of the recent efforts made by central banks to collect new
and better information on expectations of economic agents.
II.
Communication of central banks should also target households
For the moment, our most reliable information on the general public’s inflation 
expectations in the euro area comes from the consumer survey conducted by 
the European Commission. When comparing the different sources of inflation 
expectations with consumer survey expectations, we can see that they deliver 
a  very  different  message  on  the  level  of  inflation  expectations,  compared  to
financial  markets.  European  households  perceive  an  inflation  rate  close  to 
10% whereas their inflation expectations are closer to 5%.
One  implication  of  such  a  result  is  that  we  need  to  improve  a  lot  our 
communication to a more general audience. Another conclusion we can draw 
is that, if households are not well aware of the level of inflation, they perceive
quite  well the  overall  evolution of  inflation  over time (Figure 2). As  already 
pointed  out  by  Benoît  Coeuré1,  while  households  are  not  professional 
forecasters,  their  inflation  expectations  usually  correlate  very  well  with  the 
ones  anticipated  by  professional  forecasters  for  the  same  forecast  horizon 
(one  year)  (Figure 3). However,  we  can  see  over  the  recent  period, a
divergence between consumer expectations and financial markets indicators. 
1 B. Coeuré (2019). Inflation expectations and the conduct of monetary policy, Speech at an event organised by 
the SAFE Policy center, 11 july 2019
3
Since it could strongly affect the future path of inflation, such a pattern raises 
several important questions: will this divergence persist over time or is it very 
temporary?  What  are  the  sources  of  the  divergence  in  inflation  expectations 
between financial markets and households?
III.
Firms’  inflation  expectations  are  also  of  primary  interest  for 
Central Banks
While this conference is mostly about households’ expectations, I would like to 
stress  that  monitoring  firms’  inflation  expectation  is  also  of  primary  interest 
from a monetary policy perspective. 
Compared to households, information on inflation expectations within firms is 
even  scarcer.  This  scarcity  of  information  is  in  sharp  contrast with  the 
relevance of such information for the conduct of monetary policy: at the end, 
firms  are  the  price  setters  in  the  economy  and  also  take  part  in the  wage 
setting process. Besides, there is evidence that their expectations affect their 
economic  decisions  like employment  or  investment.  One  of  the  most 
comprehensive  evidence  has  been  produced  for  New  Zealand’s firms, 
showing  that  inflation  expectations  among  business  leaders  are  not  so 
different  from  household  expectations.  In  Europe,  Banca  d’Italia  has  also 
developed a very rich and informative firms’ expectations survey since 1999. 
The Bundesbank has also conducted a  very interesting survey asking trade-
unions  and  employers  what  was  the  relevant  inflation  underlying  the  last 
collective  wage  agreement.  Comparative  information  on  such  issues  across 
the  Euro  area  would  be  very  useful.  I  am  convinced  that  more  analysis on 
firms’ expectations  would  produce  very  valuable  and  relevant  information  for 
our monetary policy.
Conclusion
inflation  expectations.  This 
Let me now conclude by saying that we need to better measure consumer and 
firm 
information  prevents  our 
communication  policies  from  being fully  efficient.  One  important  question for 
monetary  policy is  what  kind  of communication  tools  can  be  used  to  better 
communicate with the general public and influence their inflation expectations.
lack  of 
This  conference  is  a  unique  opportunity  to  benefit  from  the  analyses  of  the 
most  distinguished  experts  on  the  various  exciting  issues  that  are  related  to 
household  expectations.  I  wish  you  very  fruitful  discussions.  Thank  you  for 
your attention.
4
Figure 1. Long term inflation expectations for the Euro area 
Source: BIS report “Recent developments in the global economy” (August 
2019)
 5
Figure 2. Households perceive quite well the overall evolution of inflation 
Source: B. Coeuré (2019). Inflation expectations and the conduct of monetary policy, Speech at an 
event organised by the SAFE Policy center, 11 july 2019
6
Figure 3. Recent divergence between the evolution of household inflation 
expectations and market based-measures
Sources: ECB, European Commission
7
