Sabine Lautenschläger: Risks to banks - from inside and out
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank, at the 14th Asia-
Pacific High-level meeting on Banking Supervision, Sydney, 13 February 2019.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 It is a pleasure to be here today! And not only because it allows me to escape the cold German
winter, but also because this meeting allows us to share views from opposite ends of the world –
views from Asia and Australia and views from Europe.
The crisis has shown how important it is to do just that. How important it is to be aware of what’s
going on elsewhere, of how closely markets and market participants are interconnected. After all,
a crisis that breaks out on one side of the globe can quickly spread to the other.
So, being aware is one thing. But the crisis forced us to go further; it forced us to join forces – not
only in overcoming problems as they arose, but also in revamping the regulatory and supervisory
framework afterwards. This happened at the global level – Basel III – and at the regional level.
In Europe, policymakers went further than anywhere else. At the height of the crisis, they decided
to set up a banking union. The first step was to take banking supervision from the national to the
European  level.  So,  in  2014,  the  ECB  became  responsible  for  supervising  banks  in  the  euro
area.
Has this worked out? I still remember that, back in 2014, I heard quite a few critical voices. Not
everyone believed that European banking supervision would actually work. Four years later, this
has  changed.  European  banking  supervision  has  been  set  up,  it  is  running  smoothly,  and  it
contributes to making banks safer and sounder.
But it was quite some job, I can tell you. I remember the early days, when we were just a handful
of people sitting in a half-deserted building in Frankfurt.
I remember how we began to hire staff – around 1,000 – for the ECB, and how we began to bring
together the supervisors in national authorities, supporting them in adopting the new European
supervisory approach.
I remember the comprehensive assessment we carried out on the banks that we would later
supervise. We were like a start-up; we still are, in fact. We are constantly innovating, learning
and growing together as a European team of supervisors.
And this European aspect is crucial. As European supervisors, we can take a higher vantage
point;  we  can  see  and  act  across  borders. As  a  national  supervisor  at  the  Federal  Financial
Supervisory Authority  and  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  I  supervised  20  large  banks  –  all  from
Germany. In the SSM, we supervise around 120 large banks from across the euro area. You can
imagine the greater depth of insight that we gain.
We benchmark all these banks against their peers; by comparing them we can more easily spot
new trends, new risks and new vulnerabilities. We can clearly distinguish the nodes and links of
the European banking sector. And see what works and what doesn’t – both on the banking and
the supervision side.
Let me give you just one example. It’s no secret that European banks have a profitability problem.
In  analysing  this  problem,  we  benefited  a  great  deal  from  our  cross-country  perspective.  We
could identify a number of banks that constantly outperform their peers, and we could assess the
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
factors  behind  their  success.  This  would  not  have  been  possible  if  we  had  looked  only  at  a
national sample of banks.
But now that I have lavishly praised the concept of European banking supervision, let’s turn to the
banks and the risks they face.
Risks from the outside – the economy, geopolitics and technology
And there are plenty of risks. Plenty of risks that interact in complicated ways. So, for brevity’s
sake, I won’t address all the risks that exist but will focus on just a few. I will start with one of the
issues  that  has,  unfortunately,  become  a  hallmark  of  the  euro  area  banking  sector:  non-
performing loans, or NPLs.
In early 2015, significant institutions in the euro area held almost €1 trillion worth of bad loans on
their  balance  sheets  and  the  aggregate  NPL  ratio  stood  at  7.5%  on  average.  This  average,
however, masks big differences: NPL ratios ranged from around 1.5% in Luxembourg to more
than 45% in Greece.
The banks therefore had a heavy burden to carry. After all, NPLs require special care and so tie
up management resources. They also pose a higher risk of losses, require provisions, tie up
capital and affect lending. Their effect on lending is what makes NPLs a problem that reaches
beyond the banks.
The euro area economy mostly relies on banks as a source of credit – much more so than many
other economies. This is particularly true for small and medium-sized enterprises, which form
the backbone of the economy. In the EU, SMEs account for more than 50% of value added and
more  than  60%  of  employment.  Altogether,  99%  of  all  enterprises  are  small  and  medium-
sized.   The  three  most  important  sources  of  financing  for  SMEs  are  bank  loans,  leasing  and
credit lines.  So they do rely heavily on banks.
1
2
This makes them somewhat vulnerable. In crises, banks tend to charge higher premiums when
lending  to  SMEs. And,  as  an  ECB  study  shows,  this  premium  is  in  turn  partly  driven  by  the
amount of NPLs on a bank’s balance sheet.  The more NPLs a bank holds, the less it lends to
the economy.
3
So, it was clear from the start that NPLs were not just a problem for banks and their supervisors.
Other national and European authorities had to act as well.
As for us supervisors, dealing with NPLs is a core task! We benefited from our European point of
view, from being free of national traditions. We drew, for instance, on the experience of countries
such as Ireland which had already successfully dealt with NPLs.
And  we  were  able  to  compare  and  draw  lessons  from  the  different  legal  and  judicial
environments  in  19  countries.  Building  on  all  these  insights,  we  developed  a  harmonised
European supervisory approach for tackling NPLs. This was not easy, though, as we met with
considerable pushback.
But we nevertheless moved ahead. After first taking stock, we pursued a two-pronged approach
from 2015 onwards: first, directly addressing legacy NPLs; second, preventing new NPLs from
piling up.
On this basis, we devised a harmonised approach that rests on three pillars.
The first pillar is qualitative guidance to banks on how to develop and implement strategies to
reduce NPLs. These strategies should contain targets for reducing NPLs at the portfolio level
over  a  three-year  horizon.  But  our  guidance  simply  outlines  best  practices  in  devising  the
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
strategies and lists tools for implementing them. As no two banks are alike, each bank needs to
pursue an individual strategy and meet individual reduction targets. It goes without saying that we
diligently monitor their progress.
The  second  pillar  is  a  quantitative  addendum  to  this  guidance,  in  which  we  specify  our
supervisory expectations for the provisioning of new NPLs. These expectations depend on the
extent  to  which  NPLs  are  secured.  For  fully  unsecured  exposures  and  unsecured  parts  of
partially secured exposures, we expect banks to achieve 100% coverage within two years after a
loan has been classified as non-performing. For secured NPLs, the limit is seven years.
The  third  pillar  is  a  framework  to  address  the  stock  of  NPLs.  Within  this  framework,  we
formulate, for each bank, our expectations regarding the provisioning of legacy NPLs, bearing in
mind the general expectations on provisions that I just outlined.
Our assessment of each bank’s implementation of our qualitative and quantitative guidance is
part of our bank-specific Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process, or SREP for short.
At the same time, an action plan to tackle NPLs was developed at the political level. This plan set
out the need for action in three areas: first, banking supervision; second, insolvency and debt
recovery frameworks; and third, secondary markets for distressed debt.
And since 2015, we have made real progress in bringing down the level of NPLs. The volume of
NPLs has declined by almost €400 billion since that year. The average NPL ratio now stands at
just  over  4%,  around  €600  billion  in  absolute  terms.  So  things  are  improving  significantly,  but
there is still some way to go.
NPLs are among the biggest challenges facing banks in the euro area; it is essential that banks
complete the clean-up of their balance sheets as long as the sun is shining.
But banks and supervisors cannot focus solely on the past, on legacy assets. We must also look
to the future and watch out for the risks that are still beyond the horizon or just appearing on the
horizon.
While I have just praised the banking union as a major step towards a united Europe, one country
is about to take a step in the opposite direction. Brexit is about to happen – or so it seems. The
official date for the United Kingdom to leave the European Union is 29 March 2019. As of today,
however, it is still unclear how this will happen – if it happens at all. The worst scenario would be
a  Brexit  without  any  agreement  between  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  EU  on  their  future
relationship.
Despite  all  the  uncertainty,  one  thing  is  clear:  Brexit  will  change  the  shape  of  the  European
banking  sector.  In  the  first  place,  the  large  number  of  banks  that  are  located  in  the  United
Kingdom  and  do  business  in  the  EU  will  have  to  find  new  ways  of  accessing  the  European
market after Brexit.
And this is relevant for us supervisors, of course. Over the past two years, we have clearly set
out what we expect from banks relocating to the euro area. We have published information on
our  website;  we  have  talked  about  the  issue  in  interviews  and  speeches;  and  we  have  had
intense discussions directly with the banks. We have urged and pushed them to prepare for all
potential outcomes of the political process. At present, most banks relocating to the euro area
have made reasonable progress in preparing their move.
But it’s not just banks located in the United Kingdom that will be hit by Brexit. Euro area banks
rely, for instance, very much on central counterparties, or CCPs, in the United Kingdom to clear
derivatives. With Brexit, they might lose access to these services, and this might disrupt their
business and the markets, and in turn threaten financial stability. The European Commission has
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
acknowledged the problem and plans to take temporary measures to preserve access. While
this is certainly good news, it is merely a stopgap. There is no time to relax; there is just a little
more time to prepare.
Now, Brexit at least offers an opportunity to think about CCPs and concentration risk in more
general  terms.  The  market  for  clearing  is  highly  concentrated.  While  I  do  see  the  benefits  in
terms of efficiency, I also see the risks. And this is something we definitely need to discuss.
I have now focused on two challenges that are more or less European: NPLs and Brexit. There
are, of course, many more challenges, and these affect banks not only in Europe but worldwide.
There  are  geopolitical  uncertainties,  for  instance.  It  seems  that  nationalism  and,  thus,
protectionism, is on the rise. In the long run this will hurt the economy and everyone will be worse
off, including those who appear to benefit from protectionist measures at first glance; the current
trade tensions are a case in point.
Then  there  are  financial  market  risks.  Interest  rates  are  low  and  liquidity  is  still  abundant  and
cheap, but these conditions will not last forever; there is the risk of a snapback in markets.
At  the  same  time,  technological  progress  might  change  the  business  of  banking  and  the
structure of the sector. This could be an opportunity; but it may also be a risk if banks fail to
adapt.
Risks from the inside – governance, culture and ethics
Ladies and gentlemen, banks have to deal with many risks these days. And while it seems that
the risks have grown, it should be clear that risks are an inherent part of a bank’s business. In
fact, what distinguishes a good bank from a bad bank is how it deals with risk.
And in this regard, the enemy all too often comes from within. After all, banks are managed by
people.  And  people  make  mistakes  from  time  to  time;  they  are  often  biased  when  taking
decisions under uncertainty and some people have skewed ethics. The result can be bad risk
management  or  even  outright  misconduct.  Neither  is  acceptable  and  each  can  damage  the
reputation of a bank, drive away its customers and diminish its capital. Each can bring down a
bank and harm others.
For policymakers, issues of misconduct can bring additional challenges. Money laundering is a
good  example.  Recent  cases  have  shown  that  it  often  reaches  across  borders  and  requires
different authorities to act. In Europe, national authorities are in charge of anti-money laundering,
AML for short. The ECB has no AML mandate, but as European banking supervisors we also
have to take relevant risks into account. We do so, for instance, when we assess acquisitions of
qualifying holdings, or when we assess whether banks’ managers are fit for their jobs.
Prompted  by  the  recent  scandals,  European  policymakers  have  now  taken  several  initiatives,
one  of  their  aims  being  to  strengthen  the  cooperation  between  national  AML  authorities  and
European banking supervisors.
For  instance,  new  European  legislation  provides  that  the  ECB  and  national  AML  authorities
exchange  relevant  information.  To  better  integrate  findings  from  national  AML  authorities  in
prudential  supervision,  ECB  Banking  Supervision  is  setting  up  an  AML  coordination  function
which  will  have  three  main  roles:  to  handle  interactions  with  national  AML  authorities,  raise
supervisors’ awareness about money laundering risks in banks, and be a centre of expertise on
prudential AML topics.
But  AML  is  just  one  example.  More  generally,  good  governance,  with  the  right  checks  and
balances in place, can keep such problems from emerging. Governance has been neglected by
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
regulators and supervisors for far too long. I see it as a crucial topic for the years to come.
For  European  banking  supervision,  governance  is  a  key  issue  –  and  has  been  from  the  very
beginning. The quality of a bank’s governance is one of the four pillars of our SREP. How could
we judge a bank to be safe and sound without assessing its governance framework?
As part of our SREP, we also assess the banks’ risk appetite frameworks, their RAFs. We look
at whether banks are fully integrating the policies, processes, controls, systems and procedures
set out in their RAF into their decision-making processes and their risk management. We also
assess whether their RAF is aligned with their business plans, strategies, capital planning and
remuneration schemes. Easier said than done, as I’m sure you know.
We do not look at banks in isolation. As I just mentioned, benchmarking is a key supervisory tool.
We  carry  out  horizontal  analyses  on  a  host  of  issues,  including  governance,  which  was  the
4
subject of a thematic review we published in 2016.
However, all of this is still work in progress – for supervisors and for banks. That banks are not
yet where they should be becomes clear when we look at the recent scandals in the headlines:
money laundering, tax evasion, manipulation of rates and prices – you are no doubt familiar with
these  cases.  They  are  not  confined  to  a  single  region,  nor  to  a  single  bank.  While  good
governance can take banks a long way in behaving responsibly, we have to dig deeper.
Ultimately, ethical behaviour is either helped or hindered by a bank’s culture. So we do not want
to see a culture that tolerates misconduct or even encourages it. But it is not in a supervisor’s
power to shape a bank’s culture. Ultimately, the onus is on the banks and their stakeholders to
bring about a cultural shift.
The first step is to understand that staying in business for the long term is more important than
ramping up profits in the short term. In that sense, a good reputation is worth more than a dodgy
deal – no matter how much profit that deal promises.
Shareholders, too, should focus more on the sustainability of a bank’s business model, and thus
their investment, and less on receiving as high a dividend as possible in the short run.
This understanding is only the first step. The culture of a bank is shaped both ways, top-down
and  bottom-up.  The  management  of  a  bank  plays  an  important  role  in  setting  the  tone  and
defining expected behaviour. But this is not enough. When it comes to culture, action speaks
louder than words. Staff will take the behaviour of management as a cue of what is acceptable
and what not. Managers have to lead not only by words but by example.
Incentives are another important point. Staff will know which behaviour earns them a bonus or
gets them promoted. That’s why European banking supervisors assess remuneration schemes,
including the extent to which integrity matters in promotions. More generally, integrity is one of the
five criteria we apply when conducting fit and proper assessments of potential bank managers.
And this is key. Culture tends to be self-perpetuating, because people with certain values tend to
hire people who hold the same values. Breaking this cycle is difficult, but necessary. But simply
hiring  people  with  different  values  and  perspectives  will  not  suffice.  They  then  must  be
encouraged to speak up – to call foul when necessary. Here, we supervisors can help again. The
ECB  has  set  up  a  breach-reporting  mechanism  through  which  whistle-blowers  can  share
information with us. Last year, we received more than 120 reports, an increase of about 40%
from 2017.
So, there are things that can be done, but we should not expect miracles. Culture is a sticky thing
that tends to change very slowly. I am sure it will keep us busy for some time to come.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
This is it; this is how the banking world looks from a European point of view. Banks have become
more resilient over the past years, but they still face a number of risks and challenges. Some of
these risks and challenges are indeed European, but some are global in scope. And a number of
risks are universal in the sense that they emerge from within a bank: weak governance, bad risk
management, unethical behaviour. So plenty of work lies ahead for banks and supervisors.
But for now, I am looking forward to listening to you, and to discussing our thoughts and ideas.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
European Commission (2018), Annual Report on European SMEs 2017/2018, November.
European Commission (2018), Survey on the access to finance of enterprises (SAFE), November.
Holton, S., McCann, F. (2017), “Sources of the small firm financing premium: evidence from euro area banks”,
Working Paper Series, No 2092, ECB, August.
The report is available on the ECB’s banking supervision website.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
