Stephen  S  Poloz:  Toward  2021:  the  power  -  and  limitations  -  of
policy
Remarks  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Chamber  of
Commerce of Metropolitan Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, 21 February 2019.
Introduction
 As the country’s central bank, our responsibilities are spelled out in the Bank of Canada Act. Its
preamble says that our job is to “promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada”—a lofty
assignment.
Few  mention  the  phrase  that  comes  right  before  that:  “so  far  as  may  be  possible  within  the
scope of monetary action.” Even in 1935, the drafters of our legislation recognized that monetary
policy cannot do everything. There are limits to its power. I will talk about three of these limitations
today.
Our understanding of these limits has evolved with experience. Forty years ago, it was widely
believed that monetary policy had very limited power. Today, especially after the global financial
crisis, people seem to have a pretty high level of confidence in the power of monetary policy.
Every five years, the Bank undertakes a wide-ranging research and public consultation process
to recommend to the government how we should carry out our responsibilities. We will make our
next recommendation in 2021. So now is a good time to take stock of our understanding of the
power—and limitations—of monetary policy. That is what I aim to do today.
The power of inflation targeting
For more than 25 years, the Bank has focused its monetary policy directly on keeping inflation
low.  For  someone  who  remembers  well  the  inflation  of  the  1970s,  this  focus  makes  perfect
sense. But fewer and fewer people remember how difficult those times were. Inflation was not
only  high—much  higher  than  today—it  also  jumped  around  from  year  to  year.  For  both
households and businesses, making financial plans was a very risky exercise.
The transition from an inflation-prone world was not an easy one. Central banks needed to break
inflation psychology by raising interest rates dramatically during 1979–81. In 1981, when I arrived
at the Bank, the average posted rate for a five-year mortgage in Canada peaked at over 20 per
cent.  Can  you  imagine  paying  20  per  cent  for  a  five-year  fixed-rate  mortgage?  Today,  most
mortgages of the same terms have an interest rate under 4 per cent.
To prevent future outbreaks of inflation, in 1991, the Bank of Canada became one of the first
central  banks  to  adopt  the  policy  framework  known  as  inflation  targeting.  Many  other  major
central banks soon followed.
To put things very simply, the Bank influences inflation by lowering or raising interest rates to
heat  up  or  cool  down  the  economy.  The  idea  is  to  adjust  rates  to  balance  total  demand  and
supply, thereby stabilizing inflation. Low interest rates stimulate demand by encouraging people
and businesses to borrow, spend and invest. High interest rates do the opposite.
In  practice,  inflation  targeting  is  much  more  complex  and  difficult  than  this.  Many  forces  that
affect  demand  and  supply  in  the  economy  lie  beyond  our  control.  What  is  more,  our  policy
actions  take  time  to  have  their  full  impact—up  to  two  years.  This  means  that  we  are  always
working with forecasts of where the economy and inflation will be in two years, and attempting to
influence those things in the future.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
A crucial feature of this framework is that we have just one policy instrument: our influence over
interest rates. This represents the first major limitation on the power of monetary policy. With
only one instrument, we can aim at only one objective. If inflation is our objective, we cannot use
interest rates to target other things, such as the exchange rate or the unemployment rate, at the
same time. Of course, that is not the same as saying that interest rates do not temporarily affect
other things, such as economic growth and employment, as we go about targeting inflation. But
ultimately, inflation is the sole target of the policy.
In  the  late  1980s,  when  inflation  targeting  first  came  under  active  consideration,  many  were
skeptical that it could work at all. As it turns out, it has worked very well. Inflation expectations
have become firmly anchored on our 2 per cent target. A symptom of our success is the fact that
many people do not appreciate how problematic high and variable inflation and interest rates can
be. This is a gift to the next generation, if you will. My children will never pay anything like the kind
of interest rates I have paid in my lifetime.
It  is  not  just  that  inflation  and  interest  rates  have  been  lower  and  more  stable.  With  inflation
expectations  well  anchored,  monetary  policy  is  more  effective.  The  economy  adjusts  more
quickly to shocks than in the past. Firms and households can make longer-range plans. Wage
negotiations are much simpler. Economic cycles are less severe. Unemployment is lower on
average and less variable. These observations are based on global experience from the early
1990s to the mid-2000s, a 15-year tranquil period called the Great Moderation.
All that success has led many to conclude that keeping inflation low, stable and predictable is the
best contribution monetary policy can make to the economy. It sounds less ambitious than the
preamble to the Bank of Canada Act, but the results have been very powerful.
Nevertheless,  the  widespread  belief  that  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable  would  keep  the
economy out of trouble proved to be misplaced. The global financial crisis laid bare the second
important  limitation  of  monetary  policy:  low  inflation  can  still  lead  to  a  buildup  of  dangerous
imbalances  in  the  economy.  In  effect,  prolonged  economic  and  financial  stability  can  lead  to
excessive  risk-taking  and  rising  leverage.  Regulatory  complacency  also  played  an  important
contributing role.
Imbalances can make the economy fragile. When a shock hits the economy, its effect can be
amplified  by  these  imbalances,  and  the  central  bank  may  have  difficulty  achieving  its  inflation
target for some time. In other words, low and stable inflation may be necessary for sustainable
economic growth, but it is not sufficient on its own. More on this later.
The perils of low for long
Policy-makers, both monetary and fiscal, have worked extremely hard for more than a decade to
nurse their economies back to health.
By 2014, we appeared to be within a year of returning “home”—by which I mean the point where
the economy is running at full capacity, with supply and demand in balance and inflation at target.
When the economy is truly home, it can grow sustainably without policy stimulus.
Unfortunately, the economy hit a major setback late in 2014, when oil prices collapsed. The Bank
lowered its key policy interest rate twice in 2015, to a very stimulative level of 0.5 per cent, to help
the economy work through the shock of lower oil prices. The government also introduced new
fiscal  stimulus.  Over  the  next  two  to  three  years,  the  economy  gradually  made  its  way  back
home, absorbing excess capacity and seeing inflation return to target. In this context, the Bank
began withdrawing its extraordinary stimulus, raising interest rates by a total of 1.25 percentage
points, to 1.75 per cent. But with that rate still lower than inflation, it is clear that monetary policy
continues to deliver stimulus to the economy today.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Indeed,  monetary  policy  has  been  stimulating  the  economy  for  much  longer  than  anyone
expected when the crisis began back in 2008. And we have seen the natural results of leaving
interest rates very low for a long time. For one thing, this has been hard for people, such as
retirees, who rely on interest from their savings for their income. Further, people have taken on a
lot of debt, mostly in the form of mortgages and home equity lines of credit. By 2017, the ratio of
household debt to disposable income had hit a record—with the average household owing more
than  $1.70  for  every  dollar  of  disposable  income.  If  we  remove  households  that  do  not  have
mortgages, the ratio becomes much higher—close to $3 for every dollar of disposable income.
And house prices were rising extremely quickly in some of Canada’s biggest cities.
This brings us back to the second major limitation on the power of monetary policy I mentioned
above.  When  low  interest  rates  persist,  debt  can  reach  levels  that  become  risky  for  the
borrowers and for the entire economy. When households carry a lot of debt, they become less
able  to  manage  through  a  temporary  period  of  unemployment.  The  effect  of  shocks  can  be
magnified when they interact with elevated debt. This can cause the economy to underperform
for extended periods.
Let me illustrate by describing what might have happened had we not started to raise interest
rates  over  the  past  couple  of  years  as  the  economy  approached  home.  If  we  had  kept  our
interest rate at 0.5 per cent from mid-2015 until now, our models tell us that we would have seen
stronger economic growth—no surprise there. By now, the level of GDP would be about 2 per
cent higher than it is today. That sounds good, but inflation would also be higher—it would be
close to the top of our 1–3 per cent target range, and very likely would be heading even higher.
Faced with that prospect, we would need to raise interest rates forcefully to guide inflation back
to its target over the next year or two.
Forceful increases in interest rates would pose problems for households carrying a lot of debt, of
course. Indeed, if we had left rates down at 0.5 per cent, that debt load would be even greater by
now,  over  $60  billion  higher,  or  about  $2,000  in  additional  debt  for  every  Canadian. And  it  is
certain that house prices would be even higher today—our models suggest by around 5 per cent
nationally.
This scenario shows how monetary policy has the power to affect not just growth and inflation in
the broader economy, but also financial vulnerabilities. In other words, in pursuing our inflation
target, we may create side effects that make the economy vulnerable to new shocks. This is
what happened during the Great Moderation, and it is what has happened during the recovery
from  the  global  financial  crisis.  Of  course,  the  fact  that  we  have  only  one  policy  instrument
means that we cannot independently try to manage those side effects without putting our inflation
target in jeopardy.
The implication is that policy-makers need additional instruments to address these side effects.
To this end, Canada has developed a number of what we call “macroprudential policies.” These
measures include new rules for mortgage borrowing, the so-called B-20 guideline, for example,
which was implemented by the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions. The aim of
these measures has been to reduce the economy’s vulnerability by ensuring borrowers will be
able to manage their debt, even when interest rates rise. Let me stress that the goal of these
measures  has  always  been  to  improve  the  quality  of  new  household  debt,  not  to  slow  down
housing markets. That said, we have also seen various provincial and municipal governments
put rules in place that are aimed specifically at containing house price growth.
To  help  guide  the  use  of  macroprudential  tools,  we  need  a  way  to  measure  the  economic
importance of financial vulnerabilities as they rise and fall. This would allow us to account for
these side effects of monetary policy.
Recently, the Bank has started using a framework that estimates the economic growth that is at
risk from financial vulnerabilities. When we forecast economic growth, there is always a range of
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
possible outcomes around that projected path. Rising financial vulnerabilities make it more likely
that an economic shock will cause the economy to follow a much weaker growth path, as the
shock interacts with high levels of debt, for example. The gap between our most likely scenario
and the possible adverse scenario where financial stability risks are realized is called “growth at
risk.” We can estimate how much economic growth is at risk with our models.
Let  us  go  back  to  the  hypothetical  scenario  where  we  simulated  keeping  our  policy  rate
unchanged  at  0.5  per  cent  from  2015  until  now. As  I  said  before,  economic  output  would  be
higher, but inflation would be approaching
3 per cent by now and likely continuing to climb. Household debt and house prices would also be
higher, which would mean the economy would be more vulnerable to a new economic shock.
The downside risk from these vulnerabilities to economic growth—and therefore to inflation as
well—would be rising throughout the scenario.
Fortunately, we did not follow this scenario. Both macroprudential and fiscal policies were also
put in place, and this produced better outcomes.
It is important to understand the role that expansionary fiscal policy played. Our models show
that if fiscal policy had remained unchanged following the collapse in oil prices in late 2014, the
Bank would have had to set interest rates as much as 50 basis points lower during the 2015–18
period to get the economy back home. Instead of approaching full capacity in mid-2017, it would
have  taken  until  the  end  of  2018  for  the  economy  to  get  home  with  inflation  on  target.  This
demonstrates that, at low interest rates and high debt levels, monetary policy has less power
than fiscal policy in stimulating the economy.
Meanwhile, that lower track for interest rates would have led to even higher household debt and
house prices. Our growth-at-risk framework shows that this would have meant an even greater
risk that a new economic shock would cause the economy to fall into a low-growth scenario with
inflation below target.
The  bottom  line  is  that  the  mix  of  monetary,  fiscal  and  macroprudential  policies  matters.  In
certain circumstances, relying less on low interest rates to bring the economy home can mean a
more resilient economy.
Knowledge limitations
Even  though  it  can  be  hard  to  imagine  counterfactual  scenarios,  these  model  simulations
demonstrate some of the trade-offs that policy-makers face. They also highlight the third major
limitation of monetary policy—how uncertainty limits the ability of the policy-maker.
Complex economic models are indispensable tools for economists, particularly those who work
at central banks. However, these tools are all based on historical averages and embrace several
simplifying assumptions that may not hold in reality. Every relationship in the Bank’s models is
meant only to approximate how part of the economy will behave, on average, over time.
The importance of this uncertainty is magnified by the fact that our policy operates in the future.
Actions we take today will have their ultimate effects only in the next couple of years. In hockey,
we must pass the puck not at the feet of our teammate, but to where he or she will be when the
puck  arrives.  The  sense  of  motion  in  the  economy  adds  to  the  uncertainties  we  face  as
modellers and forecasters.
The reality is that conducting monetary policy requires a lot of judgment. Rather than the finely
tuned mechanical process many people imagine, policy is much more akin to an exercise in risk
management. As we said at the Bank’s most recent interest rate announcement, we judge that
we will need to move our policy rate up into a neutral range over time, to a point where it is not
stimulating  or  constraining  economic  growth.  However,  the  path  back  to  that  neutral  range  is
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
highly  uncertain.  We  will  watch  the  data  as  they  come  in,  and  use  judgment  to  deal  with  the
uncertainties and manage the associated risks.
One important uncertainty that we are dealing with today is the impact of higher interest rates on
highly indebted Canadians. Rising interest rates will mean these people will have to spend more
of their income servicing debt, leaving less for other goods and services. Clearly, given these
elevated levels of debt, raising rates will have more of an impact on the overall economy than in
the past. This is one reason why we have been gradual in our approach to raising interest rates.
Housing  markets  are  adjusting  not  only  to  higher  interest  rates,  but  also  to  new  mortgage
guidelines  and  rules  aimed  directly  at  cooling  certain  housing  markets.  Given  the  unique
situation, we are monitoring the impacts carefully. Housing activity has been a little weaker than
we  expected  recently.  Mostly  it  is  housing  resales  that  have  been  soft,  suggesting  there  may
have been more froth in certain housing markets than previously thought. Housing markets that
were not experiencing bidding wars appear to be adjusting in line with our expectations. However,
more data will help us better understand the full situation in Canada’s housing market.
A second area of intense interest is the outlook for business investment, which has been less
robust than our models indicated for the past couple of years, mainly due to uncertainty about the
future  of  the  North  American  Free  Trade  Agreement.  Although  uncertainty  remains  around
ratification of the new Canada-United States-Mexico Agreement, we expect investment spending
to  regain  momentum  in  2019,  especially  in  light  of  the  government’s  new  accelerated  capital
depreciation  rules.  However,  we  must  acknowledge  that  the  future  of  the  global  trade
environment is highly uncertain right now. An escalation of the US-led trade war would, of course,
be a negative for the outlook, but a resolution would be a source of new lift for the global and
Canadian economies.
Given  these  uncertainties,  we  have  kept  interest  rates  unchanged  at  1.75  per  cent  since  last
October. We will remain decidedly data-dependent as the domestic and international situations
evolve.
Conclusion
It is time for me to conclude.
We have learned over time just how powerful monetary policy can be. Canada has more than a
quarter century of experience with inflation targeting. And this experience has taught us that using
monetary policy to bring about low, stable and predictable inflation is the best way for the Bank to
meet its responsibilities.
Of course, there is more than one way to keep inflation low and stable. Between now and 2021,
when we next renew our inflation-control agreement with the government, we will be doing in-
depth research and wide-ranging consultations on alternative policy frameworks.
Meanwhile,  we  must  never  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  there  are  limitations  on  the  power  of
monetary policy. We have only one instrument at our disposal. History proves that even a highly
successful  monetary  policy  can  generate  harmful  side-effects.  And  uncertainty  intrudes
everywhere 
future  refinement,  of
macroprudential policies shows considerable promise in addressing some of these limitations.
The rest may just be a matter of hard work and ingenuity.
in  monetary  policy  practice.  The  development,  and 
As  we  head  toward  2021,  we  will  keep  working  hard  on  deepening  our  understanding  of  the
power—and the limitations—of monetary policy. We are gaining important experience in seeing
how various types of policies interact. I know we have some of the sharpest economic minds in
the world, both inside and outside the Bank, working on this issue. And we will have lots more to
say about it ahead of the next renewal.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
I would like to thank Jing Yang for her help in preparing this speech.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
