 J u n e   6 ,   2 0 1 9 
Bank  of 
Japan 
How Finance and ICT Combine:  
a Historical View on the Future 
Keynote Speech at the Institute of International Finance (IIF)  
Spring Membership Meeting 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
I. 
Introduction 
Good afternoon. It is a great pleasure to welcome you all. Let me thank Chairman Weber, 
President Adams and the IIF Team for organizing this conference. 
 Looking back, the first IIF G20 conference was convened in London in early March 2009, 
when the global financial system remained under severe stress. One topic discussed at the 
conference  was  the  role  of  the  international  financial  institutions,  including  the  Asian 
Development Bank I was leading at that time, in mobilizing liquidity for emerging market 
and developing countries. A month later, when the G20 leaders met in London and agreed to 
strengthen financial regulation to rebuild trust, they also agreed to increase very substantially 
the  resources  and  enhance  the  tools  available  through  these  institutions  to  support  the 
continued flow of capital to these countries. 
 That  agreement  was  proved  to  be  vital  in  fighting  the  crisis.  With  the  assistance  of  the 
institutions, emerging market and developing countries were largely successful in avoiding 
the contagion of the crisis and their strong growth supported world growth. Following the 
tradition  of  the  first  and  of  subsequent  conferences,  I  hope  that  this  conference  will  also 
provide additional impetus for cooperation in order to pursue our G20 Agenda. 
 Reflecting the upcoming G20 Agenda, tomorrow's morning sessions will focus on the future 
of  finance and the role of financial regulation and supervision against the backdrop of the 
rapid evolution in information and communications technology (ICT). Today, I would like to 
share  my  thoughts  on  this  topic.  Throughout  history,  finance  and  ICT  have  interacted  and 
evolved closely together. Also throughout history, people have found ways to overcome the 
resultant  challenges  and  have  realized  the  opportunities.  I  believe  we  are  at  that  point  of 
challenge and opportunity now. Let me start by looking back at some key historical episodes 
because I think they are telling. 
 II.  Historical Episodes of the Interaction between Finance and ICT 
Finance enables money to travel from one person's pocket to another's across time and space. 
It  reallocates  resource,  diversifies  risk,  and  provides  means  for  settlement.  Throughout 
history, people have developed financial technologies to make use of the state of the art ICTs 
 1 
available  at  that  time,  in  pursuit  of  defying  the  gravity  that  constrains  the  dynamic  and 
cooperative use of available resources. 
 The  earliest  writing  system  known  as  cuneiform  script  was  invented  by  the  Sumerians  of 
Mesopotamia about 5,000 years ago and can be seen as our first example of the interaction 
between the evolution in finance and ICT. 
 Scholars  believe  that  the  genesis  of  cuneiform  writing  is  to  be  found  in  accounting. 1 
Three-dimensional  tokens  whose  shapes  --  cones  and  spheres  --  represented  a  specific 
amount of goods were used for trade. The tokens then developed into two-dimensional clay 
tablets with pictographs. 
 As the size of cities grew and society became more complicated, the clay tablets experienced 
a  significant  innovation.  They  incorporated  an  abstract  number  system,  which  allowed 
significant abstraction of data that could be communicated using the same size of tablets. It is 
probable  that  writing  was  further  developed  by  the  emerging  need  for  debt  contracts. 
Evolution in finance and ICT closely interacted in Sumerian cities. 
 Our  next  example,  the  invention  of  the  printing  press  in  the  15th  century  by  Johannes 
Gutenberg, had a long-lasting effect in promoting the interaction between the evolution in 
finance  and  ICT  on  a  global  scale.  One  major  impact  of  the  new  printing  process  was  to 
diffuse knowledge in finance. For example, in Venice in 1494, mathematician Luca Pacioli, a 
friend  of  Leonardo  da  Vinci,  published  a  book  which  included  short  yet  comprehensive 
instruction  on  the  principle  of  double-entry  bookkeeping.  From  Venice,  then  the  world's 
printing  center,  Pacioli's  instruction,  its  commentaries,  and  applied  examples disseminated 
one of the most fundamental principles in finance throughout Europe and the world. 
 And what about other major impacts of the new printing process on economic growth? Did 
the  diffusion  of  the  printing  press  have  significant  impact  on  aggregate  productivity?  In 
general,  measuring  the  impact  of  ICT  on  aggregate  productivity  is  a  challenging  task  for 
                                                        
1 For details, see Denise Schmandt-Besserat, How Writing Came About (Austin: University of Texas 
Press, 1996). 
 2 
economists  and  policymakers  as  Robert  Solow  wrote  of  a  later  time,  "you  can  see  the 
computer  age  everywhere  but  in  the  productivity  statistics."2 But  recently,  LSE  economist 
Jeremiah  Dittmar  has  provided  evidence  showing  how  the  printing  press  did  indeed 
contribute to productivity in certain cities.3 He has shown that cities where printing presses 
were established in the 15th century experienced an accelerated economic growth. And it was 
in the Netherlands that cities adopted the printing press faster than in most other countries and 
these Dutch cities went on to accumulate great wealth. 
 This  wealth  was  a  necessary  underpinning  for  exploration  to  Asia.  But  exploration  also 
required wider access to capital. By the mid-17th century, the city of Amsterdam had risen to 
be the center of international finance and trade, the cradle of modern financial architecture. In 
Amsterdam were the first public company with limited liabilities, the first stock exchange, 
and one of the ancestors of the modern central bank. 
 And  one  more  key  interaction  between  the  ICT  and  finance:  the  printing  press  assisted 
newspapers to become an important route of transmission for the timely distribution of the 
information  necessary  for  active  trading  of  shares  and  many  commodities.4 This,  in  turn, 
further widened access to capital. 
 These innovations were embodied in the rise of the Dutch East-India Company. Starting in 
1602,  the  Company's  share  was  traded  freely  on  the  city's  first  stock  exchange  and  later, 
limited  liability  was  admitted  for  major  shareholders.  Combining  ample  capital  with 
advanced maritime technologies, the Company expanded its business throughout Asia. 
                                                         
2 Robert  M.  Solow,  "We'd  Better  Watch  Out," New  York  Times  Book  Review July  12  (1987).  For 
Japan's study, see Takuji Fueki and Takuji Kawamoto, "Does Information Technology Raise Japan's 
Productivity?," Japan and the World Economy vol. 21, no. 4 (2009): 325-336; and for the U.S.'s study, 
see Robert J. Gordon, The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the 
Civil War (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2016). 
3 Jeremiah E. Dittmar, "Information Technology and Economic Change: The Impact of the Printing 
Press," Quarterly Journal of Economics vol. 126, no. 3 (2011): 1133-1172. 
4 For details, see Peter Burke, A Social History of Knowledge: From Gutenberg to Diderot (Polity, 
2000). 
 3 
There is another story. The Company was particularly important for Japan because it was the 
only  Western  organization  allowed  to  operate  under  the  Tokugawa  Shogunate's  national 
seclusion policy. The Company's sole trading post was confined in a fan-shaped, man-made 
island called "Dejima" in the bay of Nagasaki. 
 The island, which was only the size of two football pitches, functioned as a solitary yet robust 
information hub to maintain the flow of ideas between Japan and the West for more than 200 
years.  People  in  Japan  studied  imported  books  and  digested  technologies  from  the  West. 
Employees of the Company wrote books on what they learned in Japan. Harnessing the very 
latest ICT -- the printing press, the newspapers -- people in the Dutch cities of the Golden Age 
were able to find the opportunities of financial innovations. 
 III.  Market Failures and the Role of Financial Regulation and Supervision 
Financial innovations also held dangers. Now, let me turn to the risk of financial innovations. 
Historically, the wider access to capital through markets also became important sources of 
economic  volatility.  In  1776,  Adam  Smith  warned  that  company  managers  exempt  from 
being liable for company losses were the managers of "other people's money". He believed 
that  these  managers  could  not  apply  the  "anxious  vigilance"  that  partners  with  unlimited 
liabilities would apply. He concluded that, "negligence and profusion, therefore, must always 
prevail".  His  warning  was  proven  to  be  significant.  Today,  the  principal-agent  problem  he 
raised  stands  as  one of  the  key  market  failures  that  justify  public  interventions  for  private 
companies. 
 Problems  of  limited  liability  are  especially  significant  for  financials  since  asymmetric 
information is more likely to exacerbate the magnitude of the problems. For example, under 
limited  liability,  investment  managers  would  benefit  from  bubble  blowing,  but  not 
necessarily  suffer  a  symmetrical  loss  when  it  bursts.  Some  economists  show  that  a 
combination of limited liability and asymmetric information among market participants can 
incentivize the investment managers to blow the bubble.5 Although the evolution in ICT has 
                                                        
5 For  example,  see  Franklin  Allen  and  Gary  Gorton,  "Churning  Bubbles," Review  of  Economic 
Studies vol.  60,  no.  4  (1993):  813-836;  and  Franklin  Allen  and  Douglas  Gale,  "Bubbles  and 
Crises," Economic Journal vol. 110, no. 460 (2000): 236-255. 
 4 
contributed  to  developments  in  modern  financial  risk  management  technologies,  such 
developments, even combined with enhanced disclosure, have not eradicated the problems. 
 Next  year  2020  will  mark  the  three-hundredth  year  of  the  bursts  of  the  first 
internationally-correlated financial  bubbles.  In  1720,  the  burst  of  the  South Sea  Bubble  in 
London,  the  bubble  which  inspired  Adam  Smith,  was  accompanied  by  a  similar  crash  in 
Paris,  known  as  the  Mississippi  Bubble.  In  the  aftermath,  people  lost  their  trust  in  capital 
markets and the creation and trading of joint stock companies were sharply curtailed for a 
century. Stagnation of capital markets left large investment projects predominantly financed 
by a small group of rich people.6 
 Financial  bubbles  tend  to  associate  with  financial  crises  when  accompanied  by  excessive 
credit  creation.  Economists  who  look  into  long-term  cross-country  data  find  that  credit 
growth is indeed a powerful predictor of financial crises.7 Financial crisis entails significant 
negative externalities to the economy. Our experience of Japan's crisis in the late 1990s and of 
the last global financial crisis  in the late 2000s  reminds us that the most important role of 
financial regulation and supervision is to address market failures in order to prevent financial 
crises. 
 The G20 financial reforms launched in 2009 to address the fault lines revealed by that crisis 
are  nearly  complete.  The  reason  for  seeking  global  cooperation  through  international 
negotiation  is  to  realize  the  mutual  benefits  in  addressing  the  risk  of  globalized  financial 
activities. 
 Throughout  the  process  of  international  negotiation,  different  cultures  as  well  as  different 
social and economic systems make contact with each other. I was involved in a number of 
negotiations  and  saw  these  differences  surface  in  a  myriad  ways.  Negotiators  tend  to  feel 
                                                        
6  For  details,  see  William  N.  Goetzmann, Money  Changes  Everything:  How  Finance  Made 
Civilization Possible (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2016). 
7 Moritz  Schularick  and  Alan  M.  Taylor,  "Credit  Booms  Gone  Bust:  Monetary  Policy,  Leverage 
Cycles,  and  Financial  Crises,  1870-2008," American  Economic  Review vol.  102,  no.  2  (2012): 
1029-1061. 
 5 
uneasy  when  the  differences  require  alternative  ways  of  thinking,  which  is  an  important 
aspect  of  international  cooperation.  In  order  to  establish  the  common  rules  which  are 
mutually  beneficial  to  all  relevant  parties  in  the  global  markets,  it  is  helpful  to  view  the 
differences as dynamic and relative in nature and to accept the differences. 
 Now that the regulatory reform agenda is nearly complete, we must turn our focus onto the 
full, timely, and consistent implementation of the agreed reform in order to achieve the goal 
of  maintaining  global  financial  stability.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  to  evaluate  the 
effects of the agreed G20 reforms to assess whether reforms are operating as intended. And 
essentially we must identify and address possible sources of market fragmentation that may 
be harmful to global financial stability. 
 IV.  Concluding Remarks 
Let me finally add a few words on how I view the future of finance and the role of financial 
regulation and supervision against the backdrop of the current rapid evolution in ICT. Even 
though the Sumerian clay tablets of 5,000 years ago have today been substituted by tablet PCs 
and  smartphones,  the  central  role  of  finance  to  enable  money  to  travel  from  one  person's 
pocket to another's across time and space remains unchanged. 
 That  said,  the  amount  of  information  that  can  be  communicated  using  tablet  PCs  and 
smartphones today is incomparably greater than using clay tablets. Our current evolution in 
ICT  is  paving  the  way  for  ever-growing  digitalized  information  to  be  swiftly  collected, 
processed and communicated at ever-decreasing cost across space. The new ICTs have the 
potential to provide not only economies of scale but also economies of scope and hence give 
market power to those who successfully apply those technologies. As we learned from Dutch 
history,  the  future  shape  of  the  financial  industry  will  be  significantly  influenced  by  the 
contemporary evolution in ICT, although it may be difficult to predict today what the future 
shape of the industry will be. This afternoon, we talked about how banks could harness the 
power  of  technology  to  drive  sustainable  growth.  Tomorrow,  we  will  talk  about  how  the 
financial sector will need to continue evolving to serve a transforming society. We will also 
talk  about  the  implications  of  the  evolution  on  the  role  of  financial  regulation  and 
supervision. 
 6 
On  the  opportunities  side,  the  evolution  will  open  up  immense  possibilities  for  many 
individuals  and  firms  to  carry  out  a  wide  range  of  financial  transactions  across  time  and 
space.  For  example,  it  has  strong  potential  to  promote  financial  inclusion.  A  World  Bank 
report finds that 69 percent of adults had an account at a bank or mobile money provider in 
2017, up from just 51 percent in 2011. It also reports that globally 1.7 billion adults remain 
unbanked, yet two-thirds of them own a mobile phone that could help them access financial 
services.8 A joint report from the Center of Financial Inclusion at Accion and the IIF shows 
that the market for inclusive insurance is also vast and potentially profitable, based on the 
confluence of rising income in emerging markets and ICT that is bringing down the cost of 
distributing insurance and measuring risks.9 
 On  the  challenges  side,  the  degree  of  market  failures  could  be  magnified  by  our  current 
evolution  in  ICT.  We  hear  concerned  voices  that  the  current  evolution  could  lead  to 
concentration of data and resources in a small number of economic agents. The economies of 
scale and scope derived from the new ICTs could encourage greater reliance of core banking 
services on globally concentrated third-parties. This, in turn, could seriously complicate the 
existing  principal-agent  problem  and  magnify  market  failures.  Although  the  key  role  of 
financial  regulation  and  supervision  remains  unchanged,  we  should  leverage  innovative 
technology in financial supervision. And we should continue to monitor and assess the impact 
of evolving market structures and of the evolution in ICT on the nature of the market failures 
that need to be addressed by financial regulation and supervision. 
 Let me wrap up. I see our current evolution in ICT as having strong potential to magnify both 
the  opportunities  and  the  risks  of  finance.  We  face  a  difficult  yet  rewarding  challenge  to 
control and limit the downside while encouraging the upside of the evolution. History tells us 
that we can find ways to overcome the challenges and realize the opportunities. Is this time 
any different? I believe not. Since the global financial crisis, our framework of international 
                                                        
8 Asli Demirgüç-Kunt et al., "The Global Findex Database 2017: Measuring Financial Inclusion and 
the Fintech Revolution," World Bank Group (2018). 
9 Susy Cheston et al., "Inclusive Insurance: Closing the Protection Gap for Emerging Customers," A 
Joint  Report  from  the  Center  for  Financial  Inclusion  at  Accion  and  the  Institute  of  International 
Finance (2018). 
 7 
cooperation  among  authorities  and  market  participants  has  significantly  strengthened. 
Through our critical discussions and cooperation, I believe together we shall overcome the 
new challenges and unleash our potential opportunities. 
 Thank you. 
 8 
