Yandraduth  Googoolye:  The  need  to  adapt  regulatory  and
supervisory  structures  to  changing  technologies  and  business
models
Speech by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the 15th Meeting of
the FSB Regional Consultative Group for Sub-Saharan Africa, Port Louis, 2 May 2019.
 Honourable Governors,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Good  afternoon  and  welcome  to  this  fifteenth  meeting  of  our  Regional  Consultative  Group.  It
gives me great pleasure to share my thoughts with this august forum whose work serves as
inputs for the FSB Plenary.
We must all take pride that the democratic deficit at the level of the participation of developing
economies in international discussions has been gradually addressed. The establishment of the
different Regional Consultative Groups in 2011 was a step in the right direction. It has enabled
our voice to be heard.
The  global  financial  system  has  undergone  positive  transformation  in  the  past  decades.
Improvements in technology, product innovation, market integration, fierce competition, as well
as policy and regulatory reforms have resulted in a dynamic and sophisticated financial industry.
The pace of development and innovation in the financial industry even surpassed the authorities’
ability to adequately regulate and establish suitable oversight mechanisms.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  need  not  reiterate  the  importance  of  a  stable  financial  system  as  a
prerequisite  for  sustainable  and  inclusive  economic  development.  We  are  all  aware  of  the
causes  of  the  run-up  to  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  consequences.  We  have  seen
percentage points to economic growth and employment rate being knocked off. Many countries
relied on taxpayers’ money to bailout distressed financial institutions. Returns to savers are now
relatively lower and borrower’s access to credit has become more complex.
Standard-setters and regulators need to ensure that the financial industry continues to deliver on
its  essential  services,  whilst  doing  their  best  to  correctly  regulate  and  oversee  the  financial
system.  Regulating  a  financial  industry  has  nothing  in  common  with  how  other  industries  are
regulated. Failures in the financial industry have devastating consequences on the real economy.
Adequate  understanding  of  the  financial  sector  as  well  as  identifying  risks  and  vulnerabilities
should therefore be of prime concern to regulators and supervisors.
Financial stability is today one of the most widely discussed themes in economic literature. The
relevance  of  analyses  on  financial  stability  stemmed  from  the  late  90s  international  financial
crises. It was reinforced by the financial and economic crisis that unfolded in August 2007. These
economic tremors accentuated the need for constant up-to-date and exact snapshots of a given
country’s financial sector.
We should aim not only at promoting efficiency, but also transparency around operations in the
financial  system  and  about  participants.  In  our  region,  the  availability  of  information  on  the
financial services industry needs to be further broadened, and financial literacy further enhanced.
A comprehensive, timely and globally comparative collection and dissemination of information is
critical. This will undoubtedly benefit all stakeholders, ranging from industry and markets players
to the public at large.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Another element that requires our attention is the proliferation of new investment products. These
products  are  often  fairly  complex.  We  must  remain  vigilant  over  the  operations  of  non-bank
institutions that, in some form, take part in financial intermediation using complex products. This
sector  may  include  brokerage  firms,  investment  funds,  insurers  and  other  forms  of  entities.
Investment  opportunities  have  also  expanded  far  beyond  national  borders.  While  this  allows
individuals  to  invest  in  a  broad  range  of  assets  and  currencies,  it  also  opens  the  doors  to
mistakes which can be costly both at the micro and the macro level.
Ladies and gentlemen, knowledge of the financial system constitutes not an option but a must!
Indeed, when evaluating the stability of the financial industry, we need to have the resources and
information needed to assess the degree to which it is capable of resisting shocks, both external
and internal. We need to be confident that we have the tools to identify and mitigate the risks that
can potentially trigger financial instability.
At its last meeting, the FSB identified four main priorities for 2019. These are:
How to address new and emerging vulnerabilities in the financial system;
How to finalise and operationalise post-crisis reforms;
How to evaluate the effects of the reforms; and
How to reinforce outreach to stakeholders.
All of these are of concern to the economies of our region. This meeting comes at an opportune
time as we shall be able to discuss these topics and take stock of the latest developments on the
global front.
Speaking of development, allow me, ladies and gentlemen, to share with you some of the work
that the Government of Mauritius has been doing to shape the future of our country’s financial
industry. A financial sector blueprint was prepared in 2018. It has identified three strategic pillars
as key drivers of the growth of the Mauritian IFC:
First, cross-border investment;
Second, cross-border corporate banking and private banking; and
Third, wealth management.
All of these fall either directly or indirectly under the work programme of the FSB. We will indeed
be  called  upon  to  ensure  that  Mauritius  adequately  mitigates  risks  and  that  it  remains  a  well-
regulated and properly supervised jurisdiction.
As  a  small  country  with  a  population  of  nearly  1.3  million,  the  limited  size  of  the  Mauritian
domestic market constrains opportunities for banks in the domestic segment. This is what has
paved the way for diversification of banks’ operations by offering cross-border banking services.
As at date, cross-border banking assets of our banks account for 60 per cent of total banking
sector assets.
However, cross-border banking entails risks which are not present in domestic banking. These
include differences in legal frameworks and political risks. In that regard, the Bank of Mauritius is
coming up with a Guideline on Cross Border Lending Risk Management. This guideline will set
out a minimum set of standards to which banks wishing to enter into cross-border lending will
need to adhere. These requirements will vary depending on the structure of those banks and on
whether a banking group already has a presence in the foreign country where lending is being
effected.
The  identification  and  assessment  of  money  laundering  risks  remain  one  of  the  overarching
priorities  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius.  This  is  particularly  important  in  view  of  the  far-reaching
implications on the correspondent banking field and reputation of the jurisdiction. At the level of
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the Bank of Mauritius, we have a zero tolerance approach for breach of guidelines, particularly
those relating to anti-money laundering and financing of terrorism.
Mauritius  had  recently  undergone  a  Mutual  Evaluation  Exercise  under  the  auspices  of  the
ESAAMLG. Some areas warranting remedial action in the AML/CFT regulatory and supervisory
framework had been identified. The country has already taken the necessary corrective steps
and  addressed  many  of  the  shortcomings.    The  legal  framework  has  been  enhanced  with
relevant amendments to the Banking Act and Bank of Mauritius Act. 
We are also upgrading our supervisory and regulatory framework.  As from September 2018, the
Bank has a full-fledged unit for monitoring AML/CFT risks and conducting on-site examination in
institutions. We are also in the process of moving towards a risk-based supervisory approach. A
separate  module  is  being  developed  to  capture AML/CFT  risks.  The  Bank  has  also  signed  a
tripartite  memorandum  of  understanding  with  the  Financial  Services  Commission  and  the
Financial Intelligence Unit to enhance, among others, the effectiveness of the implementation of
AML/CFT measures.
Once the risk-based supervisory framework becomes fully operational, banks posing higher risks
to  the  system  will  be  subject  to  more  intensive  supervision.  We  have  also  introduced  a
framework for Domestic–Systemically Important Banks since July 2014. All banks which have
been identified as being systemically important are required to hold a capital surcharge in the
range of 1% to 2.5%.
Mauritius,  as  a  highly  open  economy,  has  a  few  large  corporates  that  dominate  economic
activity. These corporates require a close monitoring. A large exposure limit is in place to curtail
the exposure of any borrower or group of borrowers. The basis for computing the large exposure
limit  was  recently  enhanced  from  capital  base  to  Tier  1  capital.  Further,  in  our  framework  for
Domestic–Systemically Important Banks, exposure to large groups is a supplementary indicator.
These  large  groups  have  been  defined  as  having  an  exposure  of  at  least  Rs2  billion  to  the
banking sector.
Another  topic  that  warrants  attention  is  climate  change  and  the  reduction  of  global  carbon
emissions. The financial services industry has an important role to play in that area. I know that
some  central  banks  are  already  at  an  advanced  stage  in  their  work  and  that  much  work  has
already been done on that subject at the level of the FSB. In Sub-Saharan Africa, central banks
have not focused extensively on climate change. We are eager to know more about the work that
has been carried out by the FSB. Climate change related measures could also, perhaps, be on
the agenda for future meetings.
An  area  on  which  we  must  also  focus  is  that  of  the  application  of  technology  in  finance.  The
emergence of FinTech represents an opportunity for Africa. Advances in areas of finance-related
technology, such as blockchain, mobile payments and Artificial Intelligence are opening up new
possibilities  for  financial  service  firms.  This  is  an  area  where  regional  cooperation  will  be  of
paramount  importance.  The  setting  up  of  the  FinTech  Association  will  give  the  impetus  to
position Mauritius as a Regional Hub for that industry.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  our  common  ambition  is  to  transform  Africa  into  an  innovative  and
technologically-enabled continent. However, as regulators, we have an important role to play in
fostering innovation. It is our responsibility to ensure that banks operate safely and comply with
applicable  laws.  This  is  why  we  must  ensure  that  our  regulatory  and  supervisory  structures
remain effective by constantly adapting them to changing technologies and business models.
Since 2017, banks are allowed to have recourse to cloud-based services subject to the fulfilment
of certain conditions. Our approach is one of open-mindedness. We indeed welcome change by
banks. But this change is welcome so long as banks are able to demonstrate that risks are being
appropriately  and  adequately  managed.  Our  staff  will  make  a  presentation  on  cloud-based
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
services in this meeting. I look forward to some stimulating debates for our common benefit.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I am convinced that our agenda will stimulate exciting and constructive
discussions.  The  presence  of  our  partners  from  the  IMF,  World  Bank  and  the  FSB  can  only
enrich the debate.
Let  me  end  by  quoting  Timothy  Geithner,  the  75   US  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  who  served
under President Barack Obama. I quote: “Looking past the immediate crisis, a more resilient
system must be built on stronger and better designed shock absorbers, both in the major
institutions and in the infrastructure of the financial system”. Unquote. 
th
Ladies and gentlemen, this is for what we must ultimately aim.
Along these lines, I wish all of you a pleasant stay in Mauritius and fruitful deliberations over these
two days. I invite those of you who have some spare time to experience the beauty of our island.
Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
