 A keynote address by Daniel Mminele,  
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the S&P Dow Jones Indices South African Seminar  
Johannesburg 
12 February 2019 
    Understanding the core drivers of inflation in South Africa 
Introduction 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning, and thank you to S&P Dow Jones Indices for 
inviting me to deliver the keynote address at this conference, which brings together a 
broad spectrum of investment management and other financial market professionals 
to discuss, among others, key drivers of South Africa’s reinvention of itself to stimulate 
economic growth.  
 
The topic chosen for this address, ‘Understanding the core drivers of inflation in South 
Africa’, is of high relevance today – not just because of the key influence that price 
developments  have  on  the  economy  in  general,  and  on  corporate  investment 
decisions in particular, but also because of the growing debate, both at home and 
globally,  about  the  mandate  of  central  banks  and  what  exactly  they  should  be 
responsible for.  
 
Within the context of today’s theme, I thought it might be useful to first provide some 
insight into how inflation has ended up relatively high in South Africa, the challenges 
in bringing it lower, and how the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) sees the recent 
encouraging  developments,  and  its  outlook  for  consumer  prices  over  the  near  to 
medium term. I will conclude my address by highlighting the SARB’s policy response 
to this inflation outlook and the risks thereto. 
 Page 1 of 9 
 
A brief history of inflation challenges in South Africa 
 
In recent years, South African consumer price inflation has regularly exceeded the 
median levels for both the world and large emerging markets. But this was not always 
the  case.  In  the  three  decades  or  so  that  followed  the  Second  World War,  South 
African inflation was largely in line with that of its main trading partners. The decoupling 
occurred mostly from the 1980s onwards, when central banks – in the advanced world 
at first, though later also in emerging markets – took effective steps to root out high 
inflation. By contrast, the 1980s saw South Africa experience high and volatile inflation 
in an environment of growing supply constraints, disinvestment and sanctions, and a 
loosening of the fiscal stance by a government facing increasing pressure for political 
reform. 
 
The  advent  of  democracy  in  1994  saw  increased  focus  on  price  stability  as  a 
necessary  condition  for  growth  and  development,  which  is  why  the  drafters  of  the 
Constitution  enshrined,  in  the  country’s  fundamental  law,  the  SARB’s  mandate  of 
achieving and maintaining price stability in the interest of balanced and sustainable 
economic growth, and its independence. For the remainder of the 1990s, in contrast 
to the previous two decades, the SARB’s policy of positive real interest rates brought 
inflation sustainably within single-digit territory. In 2000, the introduction of inflation 
targeting helped to clarify the mandate of the SARB, providing a policy anchor and 
introducing greater transparency in policy decisions. 
 
This policy has brought clear results. Since inflation targeting began, annual consumer 
price inflation has averaged 5.7% (and 5.3% so far in the present decade), compared 
to 10% in the 1990s and as high as 15% in the 1980s. As the inflation-targeting regime 
has gradually grown in credibility, South African inflation has also become less volatile. 
The standard deviation of monthly year-on-year inflation readings has fallen to 0.9 
percentage points so far in this decade, from 3.1 percentage points in the 2000s. Yet, 
as I mentioned earlier, South African inflation is still relatively high by global standards: 
its 2018 average of 4.6% placed it around the 80th percentile of a sample of 58 large 
advanced and emerging economies. 
 
 Page 2 of 9 
that 
is  necessary 
in  economic  growth 
This brief recap of the recent history of inflation in South Africa reminds us of how the 
level and volatility of inflation can have a crucial impact on the decisions of both real 
economy and financial investors. The high and volatile inflation in the 1980s and early 
1990s, resulting in high-amplitude interest rate cycles, coincided with a large decline 
in  fixed  investment  as  a  share  of  gross  domestic  product  (GDP),  especially  in  the 
private sector. That decline only started reversing in the 2000s, after inflation targeting 
was adopted. Still, investment levels remain insufficient to trigger the kind of sustained 
acceleration 
to  meaningfully  reduce 
unemployment  and  poverty.  It  is  true  that  low  and  stable  interest  rates  provide  a 
conducive  opportunity  for  investment,  but  the  issue  lies  in  where  these  funds  are 
channelled.  
 
While other factors contributed to the low investment rates of earlier decades, it is not 
difficult  to  understand  why  high  and  volatile  inflation  can  cripple  capital  formation. 
Uncertainty about future nominal returns makes a business more reluctant to commit 
capital,  except  for  the  more  profitable  projects.  At  the  same  time,  high  inflation 
discourages domestic savings, thus increasing reliance on foreign investors who are 
more  likely  to  prove  risk-sensitive  and  demand  a  premium  because  of  inflation 
volatility. High uncertainty premiums can, in turn, result in misallocation of capital, with 
small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in particular struggling to access funding.  
 
Why has South Africa’s inflation struggled to decline? 
 
What are the drivers of this still relatively high rate of inflation? And why has it not 
declined more after so many years of sub-par growth?  
 
There are several factors, but the role of inflation expectations cannot be neglected. 
As  often  happens  in  countries  with  a  long  history  of  relatively  high  inflation,  these 
expectations are in part adaptive – that is, private economic agents are often sceptical 
about the authorities’ ability (and, possibly, willingness) to keep inflation low, because 
their experience indicates otherwise. The rand’s long-term depreciating trend, caused 
by positive inflation differentials with trading partners as well as a structural current 
account  imbalance,  has  fuelled  such  expectations:  it  has  directly  impacted  on  the 
prices of consumer goods, as a large fraction of them is either imported or subject to 
import parity pricing. 
 Page 3 of 9 
 
The relatively rigid wage- and price-setting process has also resulted in upward shocks 
to prices proving relatively persistent, for instance after a large-scale exchange rate 
depreciation. In South Africa, the coexistence (especially during recessions) of large-
scale job losses and high real salary increases bears witness to the fairly high degree 
of rigidity in wage demands. It has been argued that high wage gains are a key tool to 
redress past income inequalities; and also that there is a trade-off between inflation 
and employment gains. While there is no denying the large levels of inequality in South 
Africa, it is doubtful that high wage gains can do much to reduce income disparities 
when  they  get  absorbed  by  inflation  or  come  at  the  expense  of  large  job  losses. 
Equally, experience suggests that tolerance of higher inflation only has a short-term 
boost to employment at best, with negative consequences in the long run. 
 
Other  supply-side  rigidities  have  probably  also  contributed  to  the  persistence  of 
relatively  high  inflation  in  South  Africa.  High  mark-ups  in  several  segments  of  the 
South African economy, barriers to entry for small businesses, and the relatively slow 
response of domestic producers to depreciation in the exchange rate, all suggest limits 
to  competition  in  the  private  sector.  In  turn,  this  prompts  rigidity  in  upward  price 
adjustments.  At  the  same  time,  tariff  hikes  by  municipalities  and  state-owned 
enterprises (for example, electricity tariffs, which are receiving particular attention at 
the moment) have often exceeded the headline rate of inflation and have added to the 
upside cost pressures for private businesses. It also does not help that many of these 
increases affect the regular, high-frequency expenses of households, and therefore 
contribute to perceptions of high inflation among the general public. 
 
The recent encouraging signs in price trends 
 
This is not to say, however, that price-formation patterns in South Africa are completely 
static. In fact, the last two years or so have seen some encouraging developments. 
From 5.3% so far this decade, average headline inflation fell to 5.0% in the last two 
years and further to 4.6% in 2018, showing some gradual easing towards the midpoint 
of the 3-6% target range.  
 
Core  consumer  price  inflation  has  followed  similar  patterns.  After  remaining  stuck 
above 5% for four whole years to February 2017, it has now been in the 4.0-4.5% 
 Page 4 of 9 
range for more than a year. True, the 2016 rand recovery did favour the decline in both 
headline  and  core  inflation,  yet  the  trend  persisted  even  as  the  rand  experienced 
volatility  in  2017-18.  Indeed,  of  the  last  24  monthly  consumer  price  index  (CPI) 
releases,  14  came  out  below  the  consensus  expectation  of  economists  polled  by 
Bloomberg, versus only 3 that came out higher. 
 
Why did market economists – and indeed, the SARB’s own econometric models – fail 
to anticipate the extent of this inflation slowdown?  
 
Some  particular  factors  stand  out,  which  were  highlighted  in  the  last  issue  of  the 
SARB’s Monetary Policy Review.  
 
First, the decline in food inflation that began in early 2017, as crops recovered from a 
drought-induced  plunge  a  year  earlier,  lasted  longer  than  most  projections  had 
anticipated. Part of this positive surprise reflected a continued decline in global food 
commodity prices.  
 
Second, the impact of the 1 percentage point value-added tax (VAT) hike implemented 
in April 2018 proved lower than expected. Possibly, retailers and service providers 
trimmed their margins to avoid too negative an impact on sales volumes. 
 
Third, housing costs, incorporated into the CPI through actual and owners’ equivalent 
rents, slowed markedly in 2018. In many regions, rents had been slowing for several 
years  already,  amid  a  lacklustre  property  market  and  downbeat  building  activity. 
However, the national average was long distorted by an acceleration in the Western 
Cape, which only reversed in the past year, in line with other regional trends. 
 
However,  the  jury  is  still  out  on  several  of  the  potential  causes  of  this  latest 
disinflationary trends, and whether they will last.  
 
I will first mention the pass-through of foreign exchange movements to domestic goods 
prices. In several components of the CPI, it has been less pronounced of late than in 
earlier cycles. Yet economists are still assessing the full range of causes of this lower 
pass-through. It is conceivable that the long persistence of a negative output gap has 
made price-setters more sensitive to the weakness of demand than was the case in 
 Page 5 of 9 
the past. But will this pattern persist or will it fade once demand finally picks up again 
and  the  output  gap  starts  to  close?  More  observations  may  be  needed  before  we 
conclude that the pass-through is now structurally lower or simply ‘slower’ because of 
unusually weak demand conditions. 
 
Equally, the signs of a moderation in private-sector wage inflation over the past year 
or  so  are  not  yet  fully  understood.  Remuneration  per  worker  in  the  private  sector 
slowed to an average of 5.0% year on year in 2017 and the first half of 2018, compared 
with 6.7% in the previous five years. As a consequence, unit labour cost growth slowed 
to as low as 3.6% year on year in the second quarter of 2018 – the lowest reading 
since early 2007 and a far cry from the double-digit readings seen at the start of the 
decade.  Yet  it  is  hard  to  establish  whether  this  moderation  is  a  consequence  of 
prolonged  cyclical  demand  weakness,  whether  the  labour  market  has  become 
structurally more responsive to the business cycle, or whether wage-setters’ inflation 
expectations have inched permanently downwards. 
 
The  inflation  outlook  improved  since  the  November  2018  Monetary  Policy 
Committee meeting 
 
In light of these uncertainties, how does the SARB see the outlook for inflation over 
the next two to three years?  
 
Encouragingly,  at  the  time  of  our  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  meeting  last 
month, our econometric models indicated a significant improvement from the earlier 
projection exercise in November last year. The SARB now expects inflation to average 
4.8% in 2019 (down from 5.5% in the November projection) and 5.3% in 2020 (slightly 
below the previous forecast of 5.4%). Arguably, the lower assumptions for the dollar 
price of oil explain a large part of the lower inflation profile for 2019. The real effective 
exchange  rate  of  the  rand  has  also  recovered  somewhat,  while  world  agricultural 
prices are expected to provide more of a drag on domestic food inflation. 
 
Importantly, core inflation forecasts have been revised downwards too. Projections for 
2021, published for the first time in January, show both headline and core inflation 
falling  back  below  5%  in  this  end-part  of  the  forecast.  Furthermore,  the  SARB’s 
Quarterly  Projection  Model  (QPM)  shows  a  continued  convergence  of  inflation 
 Page 6 of 9 
expectations,  which  are  already  off  their  near-6%  ‘perch’  of  the  earlier  part  of  the 
decade, and seem to be steadily moving towards the midpoint of the target range. In 
addition,  the  gap  between  nominal  unit  labour  cost  growth  and  CPI  inflation  is 
expected to gradually fade over the forecasting period, reducing one lasting source of 
upside pressure on inflation. 
 
Risks to the inflation outlook that may still be skewed to the upside 
 
Still, when we met in January to assess the risks to this downwardly revised inflation 
outlook, the MPC found that, on balance, they were still skewed to the upside. This is 
not to say that further downside surprises may not occur, of course. After all, demand 
remains weak and credit creation is sluggish, and in many countries these would be 
sufficient conditions for inflation to fall further. Equally, many risks, both external and 
internal, could result in higher inflation should they materialise. 
 
Among the former, exchange rate volatility remains a key factor of uncertainty in light 
of  South  Africa’s  reliance  on  portfolio  flows  to  fund  what  is,  by  emerging  market 
standards, and its current level of growth, a relatively large current account deficit. The 
rand  has  been  quite  stable  over  the  past  few  months,  thanks  in  part  to  reduced 
expectations  of  interest  rate  hikes  in  the  United  States  (US)  and  the  subsequent 
moderate  retreat  of  the  US  dollar.  But  such  a  situation  can  change  if  market 
expectations  of  the  future  US  rate  path  need  to  be  revised  upwards  again  or, 
conversely, if the world economy slows faster than expected, triggering a new wave 
of investor aversion towards ‘riskier’ assets. The implications for capital flows towards 
emerging markets of global central banks’ balance sheets, some of which are currently 
contracting after nearly a decade of expansion, are also not clear yet. Equally, the oil 
price outlook remains uncertain amid persistent geopolitical tensions. 
 
On the domestic front, the MPC is cognisant of the upside risks to administered prices, 
especially electricity and water, in light of the challenges that utilities have faced for 
years to contain costs, and in light of the pressing maintenance needs if supply safety 
and quality are to be secured. The MPC also sees risks of a pickup in food prices in 
the outer years of the forecasting period. In addition, any unresolved domestic policy 
uncertainties  could trigger  exchange  rate  volatility  even  in  the  absence of external 
shocks. 
 Page 7 of 9 
 
The South African Reserve Bank’s reaction and policy mandate 
 
Following its decision to hike the policy rate by 25 basis points at the November 2018  
meeting, the MPC felt that the inflation backdrop and outlook had improved sufficiently 
enough to warrant keeping the policy rate unchanged at the January meeting. While 
the MPC still judged the policy stance as broadly accommodative, the endogenous 
rate path generated by the QPM now only entails one hike of 25 basis points in the 
policy rate, to 7.0% by the end of 2021. As previously indicated, this does not represent 
policy guidance nor commitment. The MPC will remain alert to any possible second-
round price effects of potential shocks and stands ready to act accordingly should data 
indicate a shift in the inflation outlook and the risks thereto in either direction. 
 
It  has  at  times  been  suggested  that  the  SARB  should  place  greater  emphasis  on 
growth and employment objectives, or even that its mandate should be modified to 
make such objectives clearer. These suggestions may miss the key channels through 
which  monetary  policy  best  serves  the  goal  of  long-term  economic  development. 
South Africa’s monetary policy framework is not one of rigid inflation targeting, but a 
flexible one, which takes full account of the outlook for real economic growth and how 
it is likely to affect inflation over the forecasting period. For instance, when demand is 
weak and exerts downward pressure on prices, the SARB has far more latitude to ‘see 
through’ external price shocks than in an environment of domestic ‘overheating’. 
 
However,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  trying  to  ‘kick-start’  economic  growth  and 
employment through a larger dose of monetary stimulus would probably have only a 
short-lived  impact  on  activity.  By  contrast,  its  implications  for  the  current  account, 
policy uncertainty and inflation expectations would most likely be negative. Over time, 
therefore, the consequence would probably be higher, rather than lower, interest rates.  
 
International and local experience does suggest that it is a stability-oriented monetary 
policy framework, focused on reducing price volatility and risk premiums on financial 
assets,  that  has  the  best  chances  of  delivering  lower  interest  rates  and  stronger 
economic growth, amid sustainable investment, over the longer term.  
 
 
 Page 8 of 9 
Conclusion 
 
Allow me to end my address by reiterating that in line with its constitutional mandate, 
the SARB will continue  to seek to ensure that the purchasing power of our currency 
is protected. Monetary policy cannot contribute directly to stronger economic growth 
and  employment  creation  in  the  long  run,  but  by  ensuring  a  stable  financial 
environment, monetary policy  fulfils an important precondition for the attainment of 
growth and development. Monetary policy in South Africa considers all factors driving 
inflation, including output growth and the external environment. Monetary policy has 
an important role to play, but it needs to be part of a carefully defined overall macro- 
economic policy mix. 
  
Thank you. 
 
 Page 9 of 9 
