Peter  Praet:  Providing  monetary  policy  stimulus  after 
normalisation of instruments
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the conference "The ECB and its watchers XX", Frankfurt am Main, 27 March 2019.
the
 1
The financial crisis and its aftermath ushered in the need for central banks across the world to
broaden the means by which they achieve their statutory mandates.  The ECB’s responses to
the first two phases of the crisis, namely the immediate aftermath of the collapse of Lehman
Brothers  and  the  euro  area  sovereign  debt  crisis,  were  largely  centred  on  conventional  tools
being  used  in  unconventional  ways.  The  key  ECB  interest  rates  remained  the  instrument  for
adjusting  the  monetary  policy  stance.   Meanwhile,  refinancing  operations  continued  to  be  the
vehicle  for  providing  reserves  to  the  banking  system,  but  by  adopting  fixed  rate  tender
procedures with full allotment, expanding the eligible collateral pool and offering additional longer-
term funding, we provided the banking system with the ample liquidity it was trying to secure in
an elastic manner. Unconventional tools – namely limited purchases of covered and sovereign
bonds  (Securities  Markets  Programme),  as  well  as  the  announcement  of  outright  monetary
transactions  (OMTs)  –  were  used  to  promote  and  safeguard  the  smooth  transmission  and
singleness of our monetary policy.
2
Things  changed  during  the  third  phase  of  the  crisis.  This  phase  was  characterised  by  a
deleveraging process that fed into a renewed macroeconomic downturn, producing a pernicious
cycle of contracting credit growth and weak demand dynamics that required a forceful monetary
policy response. Additional accommodation was initially provided by further reductions in the key
ECB interest rates – eventually to negative levels – and the introduction of forward guidance on
their expected path, while targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) were conducted
to support bank lending to the real economy. But with the deposit facility rate in negative territory
and  limited  scope  for  additional  rate  cuts,  purchases  of  private  and  public  sector  securities
became the tool for adjusting the level of monetary accommodation.
3
Following its announcement in January 2015, our expanded asset purchase programme (APP)
was  recalibrated  a  number  of  times  in  response  to  changes  in  the  inflation  outlook.  These
recalibrations consisted of changes in the monthly purchase volumes, expansions in the list of
eligible asset classes and extensions of the minimum horizon over which purchases would take
place.  The aim of the APP was to prevent acute and persistent disinflationary pressures from
destabilising medium-term inflation expectations and potentially spiralling into outright deflation.
That intention was hard-wired in the conditionality – or, in academic parlance, the “policy rule” –
that  governed  the  forward  guidance  on  the  evolution  of  the  APP  from  its  inception.  The
programme was to continue at a pre-set monthly pace of purchases until the Governing Council
saw inflation on a sustained adjustment path towards levels below, but close to, 2% over the
medium term.
We’ve come a very long way since the APP was launched. Last December, we took a first step
on  the  path  towards  “normalisation”  by  completing  the  rotation  of  instruments  from  a
configuration  relying  on  the  pace  and  horizon  of  monthly  bond  purchases  to  one  founded  on
forward  guidance  on  our  policy  interest  rates  as  the  principal  instrument  of  monetary  policy.
There is an important distinction to be made here between the normalisation of the hierarchy of
policy instruments and the normalisation of the monetary policy stance – that is, the degree of
monetary  stimulus  that  we  provide  to  the  economy.  The  normalisation  of  instruments  was
implemented  in  such  a  way  as  to  preserve  the  degree  of  accommodation  necessary  for
continued inflation convergence even after the end of net asset purchases.
Rotation back to the “normal” instrument of monetary policy
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
When  announcing  our APP  in  January  2015,  we  made  clear  that  we  intended  to  conduct  net
asset purchases until we saw inflation on a sustained adjustment path towards levels below, but
close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  While  further  accommodation  was  initially  provided  by
additional cuts in policy rates into negative territory, the APP became the tool for adjusting the
level of monetary accommodation. In March 2016 we adjusted our forward guidance on the key
ECB  interest  rates  to  imply  a  sequencing  between  the  interest  rate  policy  and  the  net  asset
purchases, thereby exploiting the complementarities between these two key components of our
monetary policy conduct. The APP enhanced the effectiveness of our forward guidance on policy
rates via the signalling channel, underscoring our commitment to keep rates low for as long as
necessary  to  achieve  the  stated  objective  of  our  policy.   In  addition,  the APP  gave  rise  to  a
portfolio rebalancing channel; this put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, thereby
complementing  the  impact  of  forward  guidance  on  short  to  medium-term  interest  rates.  The
5
 In conjunction with our
APP, as well as the TLTROs, also resulted in a liquidity creation effect.
negative  interest  rate  policy,  which  increased  the  opportunity  cost  of  holding  reserves,  the
abundance of liquidity in the system reinforced the compression of longer-term interest rates.
4
In assessing progress towards a sustained adjustment in inflation, the Governing Council was
guided by three criteria: convergence, confidence and resilience.  First, headline inflation needed
to be on a trajectory to converge to levels below, but close to, 2% by the end of a meaningful
medium-term horizon. Second, we needed to be confident that the upward adjustment in inflation
would be realised with a sufficiently high probability. Third, the convergence of inflation towards
our aim needed to be resilient to the ending of net asset purchases.
6
By June last year, substantial progress had been made on the inflation front in terms of our three
criteria. Inflation was projected to be on a gradual upward path, uncertainty around the inflation
outlook had narrowed sharply and the inflation trajectory was tested to be sufficiently robust to an
ending of net asset purchases. So the time had come to bring net asset purchases gradually to
an end. We therefore initiated a rotation away from net asset purchases and back to interest
rates  as  the  principal  instrument  of  monetary  policy  by  signalling  our  intention  to  end  net
purchases in December 2018, subject to incoming data, and by enhancing our forward guidance
on the key interest rates. We also expressed our intention to maintain our policy of reinvesting
maturing securities for an extended period of time after the end of our net asset purchases and in
any case for as long as necessary.
Our net asset purchases had borne fruit, and in December 2018 we assessed that they had set
inflation  on  a  sustained  adjustment  path  towards  our  aim,  but  that  continued  inflation
convergence  still  required  significant  monetary  policy  stimulus.  Our  successive  downward
adjustments  in  the  volume  of  monthly  purchases  had  supported  our  confidence  that  inflation
convergence  would  be  sustained  even  after  the  end  of  net  asset  purchases,  underlining  the
increasing role of the stock of acquired assets in determining the stance of our monetary policy.
In the process of rotating back to forward guidance on policy rates as our main instrument, it was
essential  to  preserve  the  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  required  for  continued  inflation
convergence. To prevent the risk that our instrument rotation would leave expectations about our
key  interest  rates  –  which  since  March  2016  were  expected  to  remain  unchanged  “for  an
extended  period  of  time,  and  well  past  the  horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases”  –  without  a
tangible  anchor,  we  enhanced  our  forward  guidance  on  interest  rates  when  announcing  our
anticipation that we would bring net purchases to an end. Specifically, we decided last June on a
new conditionality formula for our forward guidance that – by and large – mirrored the one we had
used for steering APP expectations. This conditionality consists of both date and state-contingent
legs. The smooth financial market reaction to the end of net asset purchases suggests that our
enhanced forward guidance had the intended effect.
Our reinvestment policy reinforces the effects of forward guidance on policy rates. Today, the
stock  of  securities  acquired  under  the  APP  has  reached  such  a  sizeable  level  that  our
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
reinvestment policy is sufficient to ensure the degree of continued duration extraction needed to
keep  a  lid  on  term  premia.   Keeping  the  stock  of  securities  constant  also  contributes  to
maintaining favourable liquidity conditions. Ample volumes of excess reserves ensure that the
overnight interest rate stays close to the floor of the interest rate corridor, which is provided by
the deposit facility rate. This, together with forward guidance on the expected evolution of our
policy  interest  rates,  reduces  rate  uncertainty  across  maturities  and  thus  adds  to  the
compression of term premia brought about by the duration extraction channel.
Preserving significant monetary stimulus
At the beginning of March this year the Governing Council was faced with a delicate call. On the
one  hand,  the  economic  expansion  was  clearly  losing  steam  and  the  sagging  economy
threatened  to  slow  the  pace  at  which  inflation  was  expected  to  climb  back  to  our  objective.
Indeed, for the first time in a number of projection rounds, the March staff projection exercise had
downgraded the inflation outlook uniformly throughout the horizon, including at the end point. On
the other hand, there was no doubt that underlying conditions had come a long way since the
start of our asset purchase programme, in terms of both the overall progress achieved and the
resilience  of  the  economy  to  negative  shocks.  The  weaker  economic  momentum  had  not
fundamentally  undermined  the  conditions  on  which  progress  towards  our  aim  ultimately
depends, but it was slowing the pace of inflation convergence.
In the light of the downward revisions to the macroeconomic outlook, additional measures were
needed  to  preserve  the  ample  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  supporting  inflation
convergence  towards  our  aim.  In  March  we  adjusted  our  forward  guidance  on  the  key  ECB
interest  rates,  our  main  instrument,  while  announcing  some  other  measures  to  preserve
favourable lending conditions and the smooth transmission of monetary policy.
Long-term  interest  rates  and,  indirectly,  financial  conditions  depend  on  market  participants’
expectations of the path that monetary policy interest rates are likely to follow. Today, this path is
constrained on the downside, as the overnight interest rate – which underpins the whole term
structure  of  risk-free  interest  rates  –  is  already  negative.  So,  under  current  conditions,  our
indications regarding the most likely evolution of the policy rates are a key instrument for setting
the monetary policy stance.
Our interest rate forward guidance consists of both date and state-contingent legs. The state-
contingent leg expresses the anchor of our policy-setting: keeping inflation stably on its sustained
path towards levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. It says that the policy
rates won’t be raised until we are sufficiently confident that inflation will reach levels below, but
close to, 2% over the medium term.
We further define our forward guidance with additional wording which we refer to as the date-
based leg. Through that wording the Governing Council relays to the market information about its
expectation of the earliest date at which, given the likeliest path for inflation, the state-contingent
part  might  dictate  a  first  rate  increase.  As  such,  it  is  not  a  stand-alone  proposition.  It  is  a
clarification about the rate path that we see as most consistent with the inflation outlook that we
face, and with our commitment to achieve our policy objective over the medium term. The date-
based  leg  of  our  forward  guidance  directly  affects  the  formation  of  market  expectations  by
clarifying the course of interest rate policy over a well-defined period of time. It influences the risk-
free curve by truncating the left tail of the distribution of market expectations for policy rates.
In the run-up to our March meeting, the state-contingent part of our forward guidance with its link
to  the  evolving  inflation  outlook  had  already  influenced  investor  expectations  a  great  deal. As
investors had been revising their outlook, the point at which they expected a first rate increase
had  also  been  extending  dynamically  into  the  future,  as  they  were  internalising  the  Governing
Council’s  commitment  –  expressed  in  the  state-contingent  part  of  forward  guidance  –  to  an
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
inflation-dependent  “policy  rule”.  The  term  structure  of  money  market  interest  rates  had  been
shifting lower and flattening as a result. So, a gap had formed between the market-implied date of
a rate lift-off and the Governing Council’s indications, under its time-bound component of forward
guidance, of the earliest date at which such a lift-off was likely to occur. Since June 2018 this
time-bound part of forward guidance had signalled that policy rates were very likely to remain at
present levels “at least through the summer of 2019”. In March we assessed the risks to price
stability  and  concluded  that  recalibrating  the  date-based  leg  of  our  forward  guidance  was
necessary  to  preserve  the  appropriate  degree  of  monetary  accommodation.  Therefore,  we
decided  to  communicate  that  we  now  expect  to  keep  our  policy  rates  unchanged  “at  least
through the end of 2019”.
Our  reinvestment  horizon  is  chained  to  our  forward  guidance  on  interest  rates,  as  the  full
reinvestment  horizon  is  defined  as  “an  extended  period  of  time  past  the  date  when  we  start
raising the key ECB interest rates, and in any case for as long as necessary…”. By extending the
earliest  date  for  a  rate  increase,  we  effectively  also  pushed  out  the  time  over  which
reinvestments  are  intended  to  continue.  This  will  not  only  help  to  maintain  favourable  liquidity
conditions but also reinforce the downward effect of our rate forward guidance on the risk-free
curve by supressing term premia.
We also decided to launch a new series of quarterly TLTROs to help preserve favourable bank
lending  conditions  and  support  the  smooth  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  Bank  funding
conditions – while still accommodative – could be affected by high refinancing needs resulting
from  maturing  bank  bonds  and  outstanding  TLTROs. According  to  ECB  staff  estimates,  after
taking into account excess liquidity holdings, banks in the euro area face combined refinancing
needs of around EUR 800 billion from June 2020 to May 2021, amounting to around 20% of the
currently outstanding stock of debt securities issued by banks in the euro area. This could give
rise to “congestion effects” as banks try to issue large volumes of bank bonds in a short period of
time to replace maturing sources of funding. A rise in funding costs could affect banks’ ability to
provide sufficient credit to the economy. Especially in the current environment, it is imperative to
preserve  the  favourable  bank  lending  conditions  that  have  been  instrumental  in  spurring  and
supporting  the  ongoing  economic  expansion  and  the  gradual  return  of  inflation  towards  our
objective.
The new series of TLTROs is intended to do just that. TLTROs are a flexible tool with a number
of parameters which can be calibrated to meet the needs of monetary policy at a given point in
time. Starting in September 2019, banks will be able to borrow funds with a two-year maturity on
a  quarterly  basis  until  March  2021.  These  operations  will  feature  built-in  incentives  for  credit
conditions to remain favourable and will help to preserve a smooth and efficient transmission of
our monetary policy to the real economy. Counterparties will be entitled to borrow up to 30% of
the stock of eligible loans as at 28 February 2019 at a rate indexed to the interest rate on the
main refinancing operations over the life of each operation, with further details on the precise
terms of the new operations to be communicated in due course.
Finally, we extended the fixed rate tender procedure with full allotment. This means that we will
continue to provide banks with a liquidity backstop against sufficient and adequate collateral.
These  measures  give  us  renewed  confidence  that  growth  will  return  to  its  potential  level,
supporting the continued convergence of inflation towards our aim.
Concluding remarks
Our monetary policy is bearing fruit, and we remain confident that the labour cost pressures that
have strengthened and broadened amid high levels of capacity utilisation and tightening labour
markets  will  continue  to  support  underlying  inflation  over  the  medium  term.  The  process  of
inflation convergence takes time. While the sluggishness of the transmission mechanism can in
part be attributed to the persistence of uncertainties related to geopolitical factors and the threat
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
of protectionism that still cloud the euro area economic outlook, persistent, patient and prudent
monetary policy creates the conditions for the fundamental economic relationships to prevail and
for inflation to converge to our aim in a sustainable manner.
In any case, we stand ready to adjust all of our instruments, as appropriate, to ensure sustained
inflation  convergence  towards  levels  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term. All  our
instruments remain available following the return to rate forward guidance as our main policy tool.
The  activation  of  any  existing  or  new  instruments  always  depends  on  our  assessment  of  the
risks to price stability and our judgement of the effectiveness of those instruments in ensuring the
convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% in the medium term. In March
we judged that recalibrating the date-based leg of our rate forward guidance, complemented with
the  announcement  of  a  new  series  of  TLTROs,  was  appropriate  to  respond  to  the  weaker
economic momentum and the related slowdown in the pace of inflation convergence to our aim.
Monetary policy acts in full independence, but not in isolation. The mildly expansionary euro area
fiscal stance and the operation of automatic stabilisers are also providing support to economic
activity.  Growth-friendly  public  finances  based  on  sustainable  fiscal  plans  and  a  sound
composition of taxes and expenditures are essential for macroeconomic stabilisation and lasting
economic prosperity. In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other
policy  areas  must  contribute  more  decisively  to  raising  the  longer-term  growth  potential  and
reducing vulnerabilities.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
I thank Danielle Kedan for her support in preparing this speech.
For further discussion on the phases of the crisis, see Praet, P. (2016), “The ECB and its role as lender of last
resort during the crisis”, speech at the Committee on Capital Markets Regulation conference on the lender of
last resort – an international perspective, Washington DC, 10 February 2016.
For further discussion of the implementation and effects of the APP, see Hammermann, F., K. Leonard, S.
Nardelli and J. von Landesberger (2019), “Taking stock of the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programme after
the end of net asset purchases”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 2, European Central Bank.
See Coenen, G., M. Ehrmann, G. Gaballo, P. Hoffmann, A. Nakov, S. Nardelli, E. Persson and G. Strasser
(2017),  “Communication  of  monetary  policy  in  unconventional  times”,  Working  Paper  Series,  No  2080,
European Central Bank.
See Praet, P. (2018), “Challenges to monetary policy normalisation”, speech at the SUERF conference entitled
“Sustainable Policy Responses: EU and US Perspectives”, New York, 20 September.
For further discussion, see Praet, P. (2018), “Maintaining price stability with unconventional monetary policy”,
speech given at the Council of the European Union, Brussels, 29 January
See Praet, P. (2017), “Maintaining price stability with unconventional monetary policy measures”, speech at the
MMF  Monetary  and  Financial  Policy  Conference,  London,  2  October  and  Praet,  P.  (2018),  “Assessment  of
quantitative  easing  and  challenges  of  policy  normalisation”,  speech  at  The  ECB  and  Its  Watchers  XIX
Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 14 March.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
