Yandraduth  Googoolye:  Cross-border  regulation  in  relation  to
digital assets
Speech  by  Mr  Yandraduth  Googoolye,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the ADC  Global
Blockchain Summit, Adelaide, 27 March 2019.
The Honourable Steven Marshall, Premier of South Australia
Major General the Honourable Michael Jeffery, Forum Patron
 Excellencies
Ladies and gentlemen
All protocol observed
1.    Introductory Remarks
It is a great pleasure for me to be in the midst of such an august gathering today.
First of all, I would like to thank Honourable Steven Marshall MP, Premier of South Australia for
the invitation to attend this Summit 2019 and share my thoughts, as a central bank governor and
regulator of the banking sector in Mauritius, on cross-border regulation of Digital Assets.
I would also like to thank Loretta Joseph, Fintech Adviser to the OECD, for having facilitated my
participation to this Summit.
2.    Fintech and Digital assets and central bank digital currencies
Fintech and digital assets are areas that the Bank of Mauritius has been following closely.  
The international community has also shown keen interest in this sector.
The Financial Stability Board (FSB), Financial Action Task Force (FATF), International Monetary
Fund  (IMF),  Bank  for  International  Settlement  (BIS)  and  fellow  foreign  international  standard
setters  and  regulators  have  shared  their  thought,  concerns  and  recommendations  regarding
fintech and digital assets.
We must obviously distinguish between digital assets and central bank digital currency.  While
the latter are usually created and issued by central bank and is legal tender, digital assets, on the
other hand, are not “legal tender, and are not backed by any government or public authority” as
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision clearly puts it.
The FATF recommends countries to consider virtual assets  as “property,” “proceeds,” “funds”,
“funds or other assets,” or other “corresponding value”.”
3.    The need to regulate Digital Assets
History has shown that regulatory gaps or vacuum have contributed to perpetuate fraud, led to
financial crisis and undermined confidence in the financial services sector, amongst others.
The  BIS,  in  its  September  2018  Quarterly  Review,  reported  that  news  pointing  to  the
establishment of legal frameworks tailored to cryptocurrencies and initial coin offerings coincide
with strong market gains.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
There  is  need,  therefore,  for  Digital  Assets  to  be  regulated.    Indeed,  regulation  brings  legal
certainty,  legitimacy,  trust  and  confidence  in  markets  and  will  undeniably  act  as  a  catalyst  in
promoting acceptance of digital assets. 
These regulations should, nonetheless, not be too intrusive, but rather, it must be optimal and
enabling so as to promote innovation in this technology-driven sector.
4.    International Standards and recommendation regarding Digital Assets
Prudential Norms
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has, on 13 March 2019, issued a Statement on
Crypto-Assets wherein the Basel Committee opines that “the continued growth of crypto-assets
trading platforms and new financial products related to crypto-assets has the potential to raise
financial stability concerns and increase risks faced by banks.”
The  Basel  Committee  has  accordingly  set  out  its  prudential  expectations  related  to  banks’
exposures to crypto-assets and related services.  The Basel Committee views that on account
of  their  high  degree  of  volatility,  crypto-assets present  a  number  of  risks  for  banks,  including
liquidity risk; credit risk; market risk; operational risk (including fraud and cyber risks); money
laundering and terrorist financing risk; and legal and reputation risks.
The  Committee  therefore  expects  that  if  a  bank  is  authorised  and  decides  to  acquire  crypto-
asset exposures or provide related services, it should at a minimum:
Firstly, perform due diligence prior to acquiring exposures to crypto-assets or providing
related services,
Secondly, have a clear and robust risk management framework that is appropriate for the
risks of its crypto-asset exposures and related services;
Thirdly, publicly disclose any material crypto-asset exposures or related services as part
of  its  regular  financial  disclosures  and  specify  the  accounting  treatment  for  such
exposures;
Fourthly, inform its supervisory authority of actual and planned crypto-asset exposure or
activity  in  a  timely  manner  and  provide  assurance  that  it  has  fully  assessed  the
permissibility  of  the  activity  and  the  risks  associated  with  the  intended  exposures  and
services, and how it has mitigated these risks.
As regulators, it is our responsibility to ensure that supervised institutions are operated safely and
soundly and comply with applicable laws.
Within  that  framework,  however,  we  also  have  a  strong  interest  in  permitting  beneficial
innovations to flourish, while ensuring that the risks are appropriately managed.
It is, therefore, of paramount importance to ensure that regulatory and supervisory structures are
constantly adapted to changing technologies and business models for them to remain effective. 
At the level of the Bank of Mauritius, our approach has been characterized by open minds and
open door policy. We welcome change in banks so long as they are able to demonstrate that the
risks are being appropriately and adequately managed.   
Moreover, as all prudent central banks, the Bank of Mauritius will also pay special attention to the
recommendations of the Basel Committee and require banks operating in Mauritius to ensure
strict compliance thereto. 
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Addressing the concerns regarding Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing risks
Concerns have been expressed to the effect that digital assets offer some form of anonymity to
its  holders  if  not  properly  regulated  and  controlled  and  may  be  subject  to  heightened  money
laundering and terrorism financing (ML/TF) risks.
In  an  era  where  ML/TF  risks  are  assuming  increasing  significance  and  may  even  result  in
international  sanctions  and  loss  of  correspondent  banking  facilities,  regulators  need  to  be
extremely vigilant.
International Standard Setting Bodies have also identified the potential ML/TF risks that could rise
from digital assets and they have been prompt in providing necessary guidance. As far back as
2015, the FATF identified certain key risks associated with Crypto Assets, including ML/TF, cross
border  nature  of  operating  systems  and  non-face  to  face  client  relationships  which  facilitates
anonymity. 
In October 2018, the FATF, recognising the need to adequately mitigate the money laundering
and terrorism financing (ML/TF) risks associated with virtual asset activities, adopted, changes to
the FATF Recommendations to clarify how the Recommendations apply in the case of financial
activities involving virtual assets.
The FATF recommended countries to ensure that virtual asset service providers are regulated
for  AML/CFT  purposes,  and  licensed  or  registered  and  subject  to  effective  systems  for
monitoring  and  ensuring  compliance  with  the  relevant  measures  called  for  in  the  FATF
Recommendations. 
More  recently,  in  February  2019,  the  FATF  announced  that  it  is  setting  out  more  detailed
implementation requirements for effective regulation and supervision/monitoring of virtual asset
services providers which are expected to be adopted at the June 2019 Plenary of the FATF. 
As  the  FATF  Recommendations  are  globally  accepted  standards,  it  is  very  likely  that,  when
establishing the regulatory framework for digital assets, countries will adhere to these standards.
5.    The experience of Mauritius in regulating Digital Assets – Development of regulatory
frameworks in line with international standards
Allow me to share the experience of Mauritius in regulating Digital Assets.
Last year, the Government of Mauritius took the initiative of setting up a Regulatory Committee on
FinTech  and  Innovation-Driven  Financial  Services  chaired  by  Lord  Desai  and  comprising
amongst others Loretta Joseph, Rajesh Ramloll S.C., Deputy Solicitor General at the Attorney
General’s  Office,  Mauritius,  the  Chief  Executive  of  the  Financial  Services  Commission,  other
eminent experts from in fintech regulation, blockchain as well as artificial intelligence industry and
myself.  The Regulatory Committee was tasked to advise on the development of a regulatory
framework for fintech in Mauritius.
The  Regulatory  Committee  identified  priority  areas  in  the  fintech  space  to  be  considered  for
regulation in Mauritius and recommended the approach to be adopted in regulating this emerging
sector of activities.
Further  to  the  report  of  the  Regulatory  Committee,  the  Financial  Services  Commission,
Mauritius, which is the integrated regulator for the non-bank financial services sector and global
business in Mauritius, was identified as the most appropriate authority in Mauritius to promote the
regulatory framework for digital assets in Mauritius. 
In  September  2018,  the  Financial  Services  Commission  issued  Guidance  Note  on  the
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
recognition  of  digital  assets  as  an  asset-class  for  investment  by  sophisticated  and  expert
investors.
Subsequently, on 05 November 2018, the Financial Services Commission issued a Consultation
Paper seeking feedback from stakeholders and the public on the proposed regulatory framework
for the Custodian Services (Digital Asset) Licence, which allows its holder to provide custody
services for Digital Assets.
The Consultation Paper has now been translated in a set of Rules which became effective as
from 01 March 2019, thereby positioning the Mauritius IFC as the first jurisdiction globally to offer
a regulated landscape for the custody of Digital Assets. 
The Financial Services Commission has ensured that the distinct regulatory frameworks are in
line  with  international  standards  set  by  institutions  like  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-
operation and Development and the FATF.
Mauritius has participated fully in discussions at the level of the OECD on the governance and
regulation of Digital Financial Assets and the regulatory framework for this activity segment has
been  developed 
the  FATF
Recommendations have been fully considered in the regulatory approach taken by Mauritius to
regulate the custody of digital assets as a business activity.
international  consultations  and 
reference 
these 
to 
in 
As  technology  is  a  constantly  evolving  affair,  we  need  to  be  at  the  forefront  of  the  latest
development.  This  requires  specialized  skillsets  which  might  not  be  available  in  all  regulatory
bodies, thereby heightening the need for continued upskilling and capacity building. 
6.    Cross-border regulation
With  the  globalisation  of  financial  services,  collaboration  has  always  been  a  requirement  for
financial services regulators across the globe. The need for cross border cooperation between
financial services regulators is becoming even more crucial in relation to fintech.
Adherence  to  a  common  set  of  standards  will  foster  standardization  of  the  regulation  across
countries and facilitate cross-border regulation of digital assets.
Obviously, cross border regulation implies cooperation and collaboration between regulators.
It is common practice for financial services regulators to sign Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU)  with  their  counterparts  for  cooperation  and  exchange  of  information  in  the  field  of
conventional financial services.
These MoU may now have to be extended to collaboration in Fintech and financial innovation.
It may be foreseen that such collaboration will improve the cross-border regulation of fintech and
digital assets through:
a.        Harmonised/Equivalent  fintech  regulatory  frameworks  across  jurisdictions
which  is  an  effective  tool  against  regulatory  arbitrage  and  will  enable  licensed
fintech business to have access to other markets;
b.        Bridging  the  expertise  gap  between  jurisdictions  for  efficient  framework
development; and
c.     Capacity building and knowledge sharing in the field of fintech supervision for
financial services regulators.
Concluding remarks
 4 / 5
1
BIS central bankers' speeches
The launch, in January 2019, of the Global Financial Innovation Network  aims at acting as a
network  of  regulators  to  promote  information  and  knowledge  sharing  on  emerging  innovation
trends  as  well  as  promoting joint  policy  work  and  regulatory  trials  by  enhancing  collaboration
between regulators on key policy questions with the view to support the work of standard setting
bodies, amongst others.
1
All  of  us  in  this  room  who  have  a  keen  interest  in  promoting  financial  innovation  should
collaborate  and  support  this  initiative  in  the  hope  that  a  standardized  and  agreed  sets  of
principles  and  practices  for  fintech  and  digital  assets  may  unfold  soon  for  the  benefit  of  the
market participants and regulators alike.
Summits,  similar  to  this  one,  acts  as  incubators  for  sharing  our  thoughts  and  vision  for  this
innovative  sector.    I  am  confident  that  this  Summit  will  foster  cooperation  and  collaboration
between regulators, investors and international organisations.  I wish us all success in this area. 
1
 GFIN has been established by an international group of financial regulators and related organizations is an
indication of the willingness of the global community to promote financial innovation in an efficient and orderly
manner
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
