Dimitar Radev: Accession to the euro area - a catalyst for social and
economic prosperity
Summary of a statement by Mr Dimitar Radev, Governor of the Bulgarian National Bank, at the
Annual Government Meets the Business conference, Sofia, 29 January 2019.
 During the Annual Government Meets the Business conference dedicated to Bulgaria’s path to
the eurozone, the Bulgarian National Bank’s Governor, Mr. Dimitar Radev, outlined the activities
of the central bank in this process and the anticipated effects for the economy and the business
from the national currency’s entry into the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM II) and the adoption
of the euro in Bulgaria.
Provisionally, the work will be conducted in two stages: a short- and long-term. The short-term
stage is linked to the preparation for simultaneous accession to the Banking Union and lev’s entry
into ERM II. The second stage is Bulgaria joining the euro area.
Mr. Radev underlined that the BNB is currently focused on the first stage, the outcomes of which
will determine the next steps to follow. In terms of content, the first stage consists in joining the
Single Supervisory Mechanism and the Single Resolution Mechanism.
As regards the Single Supervisory Mechanism, the BNB is concentrated on three work blocks.
The first one is creating the necessary regulatory framework. Overall, work in this direction was
completed with the adoption of the necessary package of legislative amendments by the National
Assembly at the end of last year. The second block relates to synchronising the BNB supervisory
practices with those of the ECB. This includes an enormous amount of activities, among which
supervisory regulations, statistics, and IT systems. The BNB’s efforts in this area are a logical
development of the banking sector reforms launched in 2015. The third work block is linked to
organising  and  conducting  the  asset  quality  review  and  the  stress  test,  which  is  a  widely
discussed topic. The preparatory phase in this respect has been completed. The banks that will
be  covered  by  the  review  and  stress  test  have  been  designated,  as  well  as  the  auditors,
methodologies and macroeconomic scenarios used for the stress test purposes. The results are
expected to be announced in July, Mr. Radev said.
Work on the Single Resolution Mechanism has been organised in very much the same way. An
essential element in the first work block in this area – amendments to the legal framework – is
the  preparation  of  a  Draft  Law  amending  and  supplementing  the  Law  on  the  Recovery  and
Resolution of Credit Institutions and Investment Firms. The part involving the BNB was finalised
at  the  end  of  last  year  and  is  due  for  submission  to  the  National  Assembly  with  legal
amendments likely to get adopted by the end of this quarter. The BNB Governor also outlined the
second  work  block  in  this  direction,  on  which  the  BNB  is  currently  working,  i.e.,  the  overall
framework  of  determining  the  amount  of  funds  to  be  contributed  by  banks  to  the  Single
Resolution Fund and the amount and way of transferring funds from the Bank Resolution Fund in
Bulgaria, which was set up in 2015, to the Single Resolution Fund. The third work block covers
the  overall  activity  of  planning  and  conducting  resolution  activities,  including  the  distribution  of
responsibilities and tasks between the Single Resolution Board and the BNB after our country
joins the Banking Union.
With  regard  to  the  expected  effects  on  the  economy  and  the  business,  the  BNB  Governor
highlighted that it was positive to reaffirm Bulgaria’s strategic course, and that the process is
already being filled with content and specific timeframe. The whole process stands as a positive
counterbalance against the more general uncertainty from the global and European economic
environment.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Among the more direct positive effects from this first stage on the path to the euro area is the
anticipated  improvement  of  the  country’s  credit  rating,  as  announced  by  the  credit  agencies,
should the process run successfully in the short-term. That would improve the funding conditions
in the country.
At the same time, the effects of joining ERM II will not be tangible in regard to the macroeconomic
policy and neither will our monetary regime change. The BNB Governor made it clear that the
only  exit  from  the  current  regime  would  be  the  replacement  of  the  lev  with  the  euro  at  the
currently fixed exchange rate.
The whole process of accession – first to the Banking Union and ERM II, and next to the euro
area – could not substitute for the good macroeconomic practices and business projects, Mr.
Radev  said.  A  country  refusing  to  comply  with  this  is  sure  to  suffer  serious  economic  and
financial difficulties whether inside or outside the euro area.
The two proven pillars of good macroeconomic policy in Bulgaria are the fiscal stability and the
monetary regime stability. Should these conditions, together with the continuous improvement of
institutions,  be  present,  the  preparatory  process  and  subsequently  the  accession  to  the  euro
area would be a catalyst for the social and economic prosperity of our country.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
