  Národná banka Slovenska 
Communication Section 
 
 CLOSING REMARKS 
by Mr Ľudovít Ódor, Deputy Governor of Národná banka Slovenska 
 at the conference 
 10 YEARS OF THE €URO IN SLOVAKIA 
International Conference to Mark the 10th Anniversary  
of the Introduction of the Euro in Slovakia  
 Bratislava, 11 January 2019  
  Ladies and gentlemen,  
Let  me  begin  by  thanking  all  the  conference  speakers  and  participants  for  frank  and  lively 
discussions. Usually at such anniversaries everybody says everything is fine and the future is 
bright,  but  these  discussions  were  really  balanced,  and  I  liked  that.  We  talked  about 
opportunities, but also about some possible problems in the future. I will try to summarise the 
main messages from my point of view.  
The  first  issue  is  the  euro  itself.  When  talking  about  the  euro,  we  heard  that  it’s  not  just  an 
economic concept, but also a political project. Some called themselves proud members of the 
euro area. So, it’s not just about economic numbers. If we look back at the things said before 
the creation of the euro, they included some very pessimistic projections. For example, Milton 
Friedman gave it ten years at the most. Other voices, however, were very optimistic about the 
common  currency.  They  expected  a  huge  increase  in  trade  and  an  endogenous  convergence 
effect. They said that while the euro area may not be the best or an optimal currency union, 
once countries joined it, they would endogenously converge towards each other. Today, after 
twenty years, we see something in between these opposite views.  
Turning to the euro adoption strategy, it was made clear in the presentations that the strategy in 
Slovakia was very ambitious. When the central bank and Finance Ministry began talks on this 
issue in 2003, we were light years away from fulfilling all the Maastricht criteria. In the end, 
the  decision  to  seek  euro  adoption  was  a  good  one  and  the  timing  of  the  adoption  was  also 
excellent.  Of  course,  we  were  lucky  to  some  extent,  but  that’s  part  of  life.  As  regards  the 
strategy, it was noted today how Slovakia benefited from the euro even before adopting it. Euro 
preparations  acted  as  a  catalyst  for  structural  reforms  and  public  finance  consolidation 
Národná banka Slovenska, Imricha Karvaša 1, 813 25 Bratislava, Slovak Republic 
www.nbs.sk 
 strategies, and they also changed how Slovakia was perceived within the European Union. As 
was noted today, the road to fulfilling the criteria was a little bit bumpy. Slovakia had previously 
been on a floating exchange rate, so the major issues included the sustainability of the inflation 
criterion  and  the  exchange  rate  pass-through  to  prices.  But  the  discussions  were  frank  and 
turned out successful.  
In terms of the technical issues and the technical changeover, the euro adoption was much less 
bumpy.  
I’m glad that although we took some its profits, the banking industry is very happy with the 
euro adoption. The same goes for the citizens and firms, and no major political party is explicitly 
against it, either. The euro adoption in Slovakia is praised mainly for supporting exchange rate 
stability, ease of travel, and business. That is pleasing, because it has not been the case in each 
country that adopted the euro. Several participants stressed that Slovakia could be a role model 
for  countries  joining  the  euro  in  the  future.  It  was  good  to  hear  this  from  distinguished 
international economists, and even better to hear it from a Czech economist.  
Now  the  question  is  how  we  should  look  at  the  euro  per  se.  The  euro  is  not  a  guarantee  of 
prosperity, not something that automatically makes you richer once you adopt it. The common 
currency is not a blank cheque. It’s very important to bear in mind that there are good examples 
and bad examples. It is not set in stone whether you will prosper or struggle after entering the 
euro area. Other policies are extremely important. When a country joins the euro area, it gives 
up the exchange rate as a demand stabilisation tool, so it should prepare other policies to fight 
against  asymmetric  shocks,  including  macroprudential,  fiscal,  labour  market  and  other 
structural policies.  
Today we saw a very lively discussion about the future of the common currency. I really liked 
the point that we should not see the euro as a blame game between European institutions and 
Member States. Everybody should understand that it’s kind a of a shared responsibility. We 
should try hard to figure out how to reform our governance framework in order to incentivise 
European institutions, as well as the Member States themselves, to see the euro as a common 
concern.  
We talked a little bit  about  the potential next  recession and crisis. We heard how the policy 
space  is  more  limited  now  than  before  the  previous  crisis.  On  the  other  hand,  some  more 
optimistic points were made: for example, the banking sector is in much better shape now than 
before the last recession.  
What we didn’t discuss, but in my view is crucial to the euro area’s shock-absorbing capacity, 
are private risk-sharing channels. Here the discussion about the capital markets union is very 
important.  
Towards the end, some speakers stressed that when we have problems, we sometimes discuss 
and see things from a limited perspective, and that it is very important not to lose sight of the 
broader picture. The  euro area is  not  just a  collection of member states,  but  a big  economic 
player in the world. We should therefore also try to respond to the shocks coming from global 
issues, such as trade wars or major productivity trends.  
Národná banka Slovenska, Imricha Karvaša 1, 813 25 Bratislava, Slovak Republic 
www.nbs.sk 
 Today we heard a lot of interesting ideas in many areas. I opened my presentation earlier today 
by mentioning my son who is now ten years old. But I also have an older daughter, and I know 
that the next ten years are usually much more difficult than the first ten. When I look at the 
twenty-year history of the euro, the same also applies; nevertheless, I don’t think the trend is 
uniform, so I hope that Slovakia will continue being a successful euro area member over the 
next ten years. Thank you for your attention and your contributions. 
Národná banka Slovenska, Imricha Karvaša 1, 813 25 Bratislava, Slovak Republic 
www.nbs.sk 
 