    Investing in Ethnicity & Race 
 
Speech given by 
Mark Carney, Governor Bank of England 
 Investing in Ethnicity & Race Conference 2019, Bank of England 
28 March 2019 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
1 
    Introduction  
 It’s a pleasure for the Bank of England to host this workshop on Investing in Ethnicity & Race. 
 To pursue its mission, Bank of England must reflect the diversity of the people it serves.  
 That hasn’t always been the case.  Historically, central banks were run by the City for the City. The Bank’s 
first female Court member, Frances Heaton, was appointed only in 1993, while our first Black, Asian and 
Minority Ethnic (BAME) member, Lord Morris, followed five years later.  I’m the 120th in a very long line of 
male, white Governors of the Bank. 
 Over the last five years the Bank has implemented a concerted strategy to increase diversity and foster 
inclusion.  These initiatives have had a material impact on all aspects of diversity at the Bank.  We are now 
reinforcing them to further improve the retention and progression of BAME colleagues in particular, and to 
deepen progress on inclusion more generally. 
 The Bank values diversity for at least three reasons. 
 First, it is the right thing to do: a public institution should reflect the public it serves. 
 Second, diversity helps to build the trust we need to fulfil our remits. 
 The decisions that the Bank takes impact every UK citizen, but not everyone wants to be steeped in fan 
charts and stress testing.  
 The conventional central banker approach is to build trust through a track record. In recent decades this has 
been supplemented by greater transparency.  But trust is also grounded in familiarity.  People trust 
individuals, places and things that they know.   
 Better reflecting the diversity of the people we serve can reduce misperceptions that we are experts making 
esoteric decisions in an ivory tower for the benefit of others.  Broader outreach to all strata of society across 
the country can reinforce these benefits. 
 Diversity can make our communication more effective. Homogenous organisations are more likely to fall 
afoul of the ‘curse of knowledge’, where people assume that their audience has the same information and 
base level of understanding as themselves. By drawing on alternative perspectives, we can craft our 
messages so that they resonate with more people. 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
2 
 
2 
   Third, greater diversity leads to better decision making.  
 Homogenous groups are vulnerable to over-optimism, bias and groupthink.  They easily become rigid. 
In contrast, diverse teams can adapt better to change.  Such resilience is particularly important in a world 
where information is super abundant and certainty is absent, and it is especially relevant in finance where 
most decisions are taken under uncertainty. 
 But diversity alone is insufficient.  For its benefits to be realised fully, diverse teams must be supported by 
the right frameworks. Research on central bank committee design shows that diverse decision‐making 
bodies benefit from: 
  Having a clearly defined policy objective; 
  Having relatively small policy committees, with external members; 
  Publishing policy decisions, and; 
  Allowing for external scrutiny. 
How the Bank of England is becoming more diverse 
 Five years ago we made Diverse and Talented one of four pillars of our strategic plan.  Our aim was not just 
to increase diversity; but also to choose inclusion. 
 Inclusion unlocks the true value of an organisation’s diversity. Only through inclusion can people realise their 
full potential. That’s why the Bank is focussing on building a culture that values diverse ideas, encourages 
open debate, and empowers people at all levels to take initiative. 
 Our strategy has three elements: 
   Inclusive recruitment, 
Inclusive culture, and 
Inclusive communications. 
First, inclusive recruitment 
We are fishing from a larger pond.  In recent years our graduates have come from 40 different universities, a 
six-fold increase in the past decade.  Of our 2019 intake, due to join us in September, 46% of graduates are 
female and 39% are declared BAME students.  This compares to a BAME share of 20% five years ago.  
 To support diverse recruitment at all levels our managers are now required to undertake unconscious bias 
training.  We use anonymous CVs for internal and external recruitment and strive for balanced shortlists and 
interview panels.  
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
3 
 
3 
   In 2016 we setup a formalised talent management process for all employees, to ensure everyone has equal 
access to opportunities to discuss their careers.  
 To enable us to continue to hire graduates from a broader set of disciplines and train them as economists 
and technical specialists we have introduced our Central Banking Qualification, in which new hires can earn 
Masters Degrees in Central Banking.  And now around half of our graduates study economics, with the 
remainder plucked from the sciences, business and the humanities. 
 To help develop the next generation, we are working with schools and universities to encourage a more 
diverse set of students to study economics and finance. We provide free classroom materials through our 
econoME initiative, and by the end of 2018 one quarter of all state secondary schools had registered for the 
programme, reaching an audience of 90,000 students. Over the past year we have made more than 300 
school visits, of which 75 were by the Bank's committee members, including myself. 
 Second, fostering an inclusive culture 
 As we attract a more diverse workforce, we’re taking a number of initiatives to enable and encourage 
participation.  
 Traditionally central banks have been notoriously hierarchical and deferential.  To break down these barriers, 
we have changed how we make decisions to ensure that everyone participating has the same information at 
the same time, and can put forth their views.  We have an ‘author in the room’ policy so that expert staff can 
always explain their papers in person and challenge conventional wisdom.   
 Our core values (which include being Inclusive and Collaborative) are embedded in everything that we do, 
including feeding directly into the performance management and remuneration of all colleagues.  
 We are proud to have a number of thriving and influential employee network groups including Women in the 
Bank, LGBT+ and Allies, Bank of England Ethnic Minority (BEEM), Mental Health, Disability, Carers, 
Parents, and three Faith Networks. The Employee Network Groups help Bank colleagues bring their whole 
selves to work. I will talk more in a moment about the important work our BEEM network does to support 
BAME colleagues. 
 Third, inclusive communications 
 Inclusion also means engaging with all our stakeholders, internal and external, and being aware of the many 
ways in which the economic situation affects different people.  Active engagement with a range of expert and 
non-expert stakeholders across the UK has always been important, but it is taking on new prominence in the 
information age. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
4 
 
4 
    Our agents and Bank officials meet thousands of business contacts across the UK each year to take the 
temperature of the UK economy. 
 Our new Open Forum and Future Forum events do this on a large scale by bringing together thousands of 
people from the community to discuss the economy, the financial system and the Bank’s role in promoting 
the good of the people of the United Kingdom.  We listen to the views and concerns of local business 
leaders, technology developers, representatives from the voluntary and education sectors, unions and the 
wider public and explore how the Bank can maintain stability and reduce uncertainty.  
 Inclusive communications also requires more tailored content.  Our visual summaries of our Inflation and the 
Financial Stability Reports, explain how developments in the global economy and financial system affect the 
outlook for inflation and financial stability without the need for dense text.  Deploying social media, including 
Facebook and YouTube, can make our messages available directly to a broader audience.  New digital 
products, such as KnowledgeBank, use accessible language and engaging visuals to help us tell a story 
about what the Bank does.   
 Our strategy is working, with major progress over the past five years. 
 For example, female representation in senior roles at the Bank has increased from 17% in 2013 to 31% 
today, and is on track for our target of 35% by the end of 2020.1  
 BAME representation below senior management is 19%, up from 13% in 2013.  
 In 2018 we were one of the first organisations to conduct a special Cognitive Diversity Survey.  Our results 
indicate colleagues are generally positive about inclusiveness at the Bank on every metric measured.  
 In 2018 we were one of the first organisations to conduct a special Cognitive Diversity Survey to gain a better 
understanding of how our colleagues feel about working at the Bank. The survey measured seven inclusivity 
metrics including interpersonal interactions, flexible working, communication with leaders as well as 
recruitment and promotion, and results are cut across twelve different aspects of diversity. Our results 
indicate colleagues are generally positive about inclusiveness at the Bank on every metric measured by the 
survey.  
 And 80% of colleagues in our annual employee survey reported they think the Bank takes diversity seriously, 
7 percentage points higher than the UK average. And 87% of Bank colleagues say they are treated with 
respect as an individual, 6 percentage points higher than the UK average. 
 
                                                      
1 See also my letter to Nicky Morgan, Chair of the Treasury Select Committee, on 4 July 2018. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
5 
 
5 
   Let me now turn specifically to ethnic diversity at the Bank. 
 Investing in ethnicity2 
 Our diversity and inclusion strategy has had a positive impact on BAME diversity at the Bank of England.  
Since we implemented name-blind recruitment processes in March 2018 around one quarter of all 
recruitment offers (internal and external) have been to declared BAME candidates. But there is scope for 
further improvement.  
 The turnover rate of declared BAME colleagues is higher than that for the Bank as a whole – 9.2% compared 
with 7.5% as of January 2019.  While BAME representation at senior levels has increased from 2% to 5% 
since 2013, we still have some way to go to meet our ambitious target of 13% by 2022.    
 The Bank’s experience is consistent with that of other organisations as documented by “The Middle” (a 
thorough, evidence-based research report on progressing BAME Talent in the Workplace commissioned by 
the Black British Business Awards).3  This study concluded that across organisations the challenges were 
greatest in retaining and promoting ethnic minority professionals from middle management to senior 
executive roles.  We’re pleased that the changes the Bank is already making are consistent with the report’s 
recommendations. 
 To maintain momentum, the Bank recently created a BAME Diversity Taskforce, chaired by Deputy Governor 
Sir Dave Ramsden and attended by members of both Court and our BEEM network. This Taskforce is now 
focusing on: 
 First, supporting the progression of BAME colleagues to leadership roles by rolling out inclusive 
leadership training for all colleagues and having all senior management including the Bank’s Governors 
participate in our Sponsorship programmes and mentoring schemes.  
 Second, supporting our ethnic minorities network (BEEM), which has achieved much since its 
foundation in 2012. This includes implementing reciprocal mentoring of 150 of our BAME colleagues each 
year.  BEEM has also set up, with HR, the Bank's African/ African-Caribbean scholarship programme. 
Launched in 2015, we have awarded 10 scholarships and 8 bursaries to talented students studying a range 
of subjects from Chemical Engineering to Politics and International Relations.  
                                                       
2 See also my letter to Nicky Morgan, Chair of the Treasury Select Committee, on 19 March 2019. 
3 See ‘Progressing Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic (BAME) talent in the workplace through collaborative action’, “The Middle” Report, 
available online at: https://www.thebbbawards.com/middle-research/  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
6 
 
6 
   We have recently decided to provide a seat at the table for our BEEM network at senior committees 
whenever diversity issues are discussed. And we have launched ‘Let’s Talk About Race’ workshops to help 
senior leaders become more comfortable talking about these issues.  
 Third, we are ensuring greater accountability for BAME progression throughout the organisation.  
 The Bank has published a huge amount of diversity data externally and internally since we first set diversity 
targets five years ago. We published our BAME pay gap for the first time in our 2018 Annual Report. We are 
currently reviewing the metrics we report to make sure they identify hotspots in terms of BAME recruitment, 
progression or retention.  
 All managers’ participation in the inclusion agenda is assessed as part of annual performance reviews, and 
Executive Directors have specific diversity performance objectives. 
 Finally, I am very pleased to announce today that the Bank is signing the Race at Work charter.  This Charter 
commits organisations to five initiatives to improve ethnic diversity in the workplace.  The Bank now has all 
five in place.4 
 Conclusion  
 Choosing inclusion means listening and learning from others.  That’s why it is so valuable to have forums like 
today.  
 We are fortunate to have with us this morning representatives of so many organisations who have 
championed diversity and inclusion for many years.  
 We look forward to learning from all of you so that we can build a more diverse and inclusive Bank of 
England to serve better all the people of the United Kingdom.  
                                                      
4 See https://race.bitc.org.uk/issues/racecharter.  The commitments ask signatories to 1) Appoint an Executive Sponsor for race; 2) 
Capture ethnicity data and publicise progress; 3) Commit at Board level to zero tolerance of harassment and bullying; 4) Make clear that 
supporting equality in the workplace is the responsibility of all leaders and managers; and 5) Take action that supports ethnic minority 
career progression. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
7 
 
7 
 