Mugur  Isărescu:  Romania  -  post-crisis  performance  and  current
challenges
Speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the AmCham CEO
Forum, Bucharest, 31 May 2019.
Accompanying slides of the speech.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 I am honoured to address, this morning, such a distinguished audience. I have gladly accepted
your kind invitation, for AmCham Romania has become, during the last 25 years, an important
voice of the business community, speaking on behalf of many US-based, international and local
companies that are doing business in Romania, and promoting its members’ best practices.
1. GROWTH, CONVERGENCE AND SUSTAINABILITY
I  am  aware  that,  when  talking  to  business  community  representatives,  more  than  to  other
categories of public, the topic of economic growth, with all its determinants, trends, uncertainties
and  tensions,  is  of  great  interest.  Indeed,  Romania’s  post-crisis  performance  has  been
impressive: average annual growth rate of 4.6 percent in the last five years. Romania’s economy
is constantly growing, yet some tensions surround the macroeconomic equilibria.
The advance seen in recent years was primarily driven by consumption that benefited from a
loose  fiscal  and  income  policy,  coupled  with  a  tight  labour  market  profile,  which  additionally
spurred wage growth. The pass-through of consumption to output was nevertheless limited by
the weak competitiveness position of some local industries on the domestic market, so that high
consumption rates were accompanied by strong imports. Thus, in spite of high export growth
rates, net external demand has not made a positive contribution to the GDP advance since 2013.
Instead, this caused a significant current account deficit widening.
Therefore,  in  order  to  preserve  the  GDP  growth  trend,  economic  policies  should  focus  on  its
sustainability.  In  the  quest  for  supporting  potential  growth  and  increasing  the  resilience  of  the
economy,  there  is  no  substitute  for  a  coherent  mix  of  macroeconomic  policies  and  structural
reforms.
A durable economic growth is extremely important also from the perspective of euro adoption, as
it would lead to progress in convergence, which will put us on the right track for achieving the
goal of joining the Eurozone. In order to stay on course, economic growth and convergence must
advance in line with economic fundamentals. Otherwise, the gains, as spectacular as they might
be,  could  be  jeopardised  by  abrupt  setbacks. At  the  end  of  the  day,  forcing  convergence  or
postponing convergence is equally harmful.
I had the honour to be one of the vice-presidents of the National Committee for Substantiation of
the National Euro Changeover Plan, founded last year, which prepared a set of documents that
emphasise the need for a substantial degree of convergence before entering the euro area. In
fact, it is the Maastricht Treaty that explicitly stipulates the need for “a high degree of sustainable
convergence”. Yet, this requirement seems to have been overlooked sometimes.
Let me point out that by convergence I refer to all four types of convergence that must be taken
into  account:  nominal,  real,  institutional  and  structural.  Nominal  convergence  is  easily
quantifiable, as the specific criteria are clearly defined in the Maastricht Treaty. But we also have
to ensure the compatibility of our institutions with those in the euro area and this is the essence
of  institutional  convergence,  a  process  where  the  central  bank  and  its  independence  are
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
particularly  important.  While  structural  convergence  focuses  on  adapting  the  structure  of  our
economy to that of the euro area, real convergence, measured by GDP per capita (at PPS) as a
percentage of euro area/EU average, is the best proxy for the development level of a nation.
Romania has certainly come a long way in terms of economic convergence, a process whose
inception  is  tied  to  the  prospects  of  EU  membership,  witnessing  a  significant  increase  in  per
capita GDP as a share of the euro area average (based on PPS), from 31.3 percent in 2005 to
60.4  percent  in  2018.  Peer  countries  recorded  a  similar  trend:  Bulgaria  went  from  about  33
percent to 47 percent, while Czechia, Hungary and Poland, which started from a more advanced
level, added 11 to 23 percentage points to the same indicator during 2005–2018. However, this
process is still far from completion in these non-euro New Member States.
Talking about real convergence, practical experience has showed us that the Eurozone is not a
“convergence  club”,  as  its  members  did  not  necessarily  improve  their  real  convergence  after
joining it. The euro area is not a cosy place for economies with lagging competitiveness or rigid
markets. In this context, a high enough level of real convergence (in addition to the compliance
with the nominal convergence criteria) is needed when joining the euro area, to limit the costs
associated with losing monetary policy independence.
A high enough level does not mean that we are so ambitious as to aim for a convergence level of
90% of the Eurozone average or a level equal to that of Germany (as is the case with certain
approaches put forward in Hungary or Poland). However, we need to achieve a real convergence
level of at least 70–75 percent of the Eurozone average. Otherwise we would be insufficiently
developed  and,  therefore,  vulnerable  to  asymmetric  shocks  and  unable  to  synchronise  our
business cycle with that of other euro area economies. However, we must take care that the
level of convergence increases in a sustainable manner. We should be able to preserve the pace
of this process, and once steps forward have been made, we may not stop or go backwards.
Past achievements in nominal and real convergence, while significant, do not guarantee future
success. To this end, allow me to bring up an old, but reliable principle. The Latin saying festina
lente  is  perfectly  suitable  in  this  case:  hurrying  in  a  slow  manner,  if  I  can  say  so,  on  the
convergence path means achieving a sustainable pace in the medium and long term. In other
words, we need to be a marathoner, and not a sprinter.
Our commitment to join the euro area is indisputable, yet this process has to be managed in a
very careful manner.
2. FINDING THE RIGHT BALANCE BETWEEN CONSUMPTION AND INVESTMENT
During recent years, the contribution of investment to growth was smaller than it should have
been,  with  consumption  spending  being  the  main  driver  of  GDP  dynamics.  Welfare  has
increased  markedly,  but  the  concern  for  rendering  these  welfare  gains  sustainable  should
prompt a switch to policies aimed at fostering investment, thus boosting the productive potential
of the economy.
A short-term focus on economic policies and paying no heed to accumulating macroeconomic
disequilibria ought to be avoided, as they eventually lead to suboptimal outcomes. The adequate
approach is to ensure a rebalancing between consumption and investment, not by discouraging
consumption, but by stimulating investment.
This  is  also  a  way  to  reduce  development  gaps  between  Romania’s  regions.  Indeed,  the  EU
accession acted as a catalyst for real convergence at country level, yet development imbalances
in  Romania  did  not  decrease  significantly.  Romania  currently  has  regions  that  are  similar  in
terms  of  living  standards  and  development  levels  to  Western  economies,  while  some  other
areas are considerably lagging behind: in 2017, the wealthiest region in Romania was almost
four  times  richer  than  the  poorest  one  (based  on  regional  per  capita  GDP).  Therefore,  even
though  the  EU  membership  has  acted  as  a  catalyst  for  country-level  real  convergence,  the
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
development gaps across the regions of Romania have actually increased. Such a status quo is
not beneficial, for instance, in the context of euro adoption, as it favours asymmetric shocks and
uneven effects of public policies.
These imbalances can be mitigated, first and foremost, through investment in infrastructure. For
instance,  the  construction  of  highways  is  essential  for  connecting  Romania’s  regions,
encouraging regional trade and investment, with favourable effects on regional development and
cohesion inside the country.
3. LOOKING FOR A WAY OUT OF A LABOUR MARKET DILEMMA
Another  area  that  deserves  particular  attention  is  the  labour  market,  at  a  time  when  the
Romanian  one  is  facing  considerable  challenges. As  a  catching-up  open  economy,  within  a
European Union based on the free movement of capital and labour, our country was bound to
find itself in a dilemma sooner or later. More precisely, there are contradictory arguments with
regard  to  the  adequate  path  of  the  wage  level  in  the  Romanian  economy.  On  the  one  hand,
wages should be governed by productivity dynamics, so as not to erode the competitive position.
On the other hand, they cannot be considerably below those in other economies, as this would
simply  result  in  a  labour  force  drain,  with  dramatic  consequences  if  not  addressed  quickly.
Specifically, we are facing an emigration problem today, as more than three million Romanians
(a significant percentage of the population) have left their homeland for other EU Member States.
Therefore, to limit emigration, wages should increase. As noted above, the only way to do that
without hindering competitiveness is to boost productivity.
Foreign direct investment has helped total factor productivity in recent years, yet if wages reach
too high levels, attracting investment may become a problem. We therefore need to ensure that
wage levels are compatible with attracting investors, but at the same time acknowledging that, at
least in certain areas, wages need to go up at present, in order to mitigate the labour force drain
that affects the private and public sectors alike. However, pay rises in the private sector should
not be triggered only by an increase in public sector wages. While raising the minimum wage
has  been  necessary,  we  should  be  very  careful  not  to  hurt  employers,  as  they  represent  an
important engine of the economy.
The  key  is,  in  my  opinion,  to  increase  wages  at  an  adequate,  sustainable  pace,  in  order  for
Romanians to ultimately benefit from an improved living climate reflected in a higher purchasing
power, but also from preserved macroeconomic equilibria, as well as higher-quality public goods
–  especially  highways  connecting  different  regions  of  Romania,  but  also  our  country  with  the
West. After all, wages are not the only side of the emigration story.
4. KEEPING THE EXTERNAL DEFICIT IN CHECK
The  wage  matter  is  also  closely  linked  to  the  topical  issue  of  ensuring  a  balanced  external
position. To the extent to which the upward path of wage costs is too steep, it gets very difficult to
preserve competitiveness, not only on external markets, but also on the domestic market. If the
Romanian companies are unable to gain market shares in the tough competition with rivals on
both  aforementioned  markets,  the  gap  between  imports  and  exports  widens,  causing  the
deepening of the trade deficit and hence of the current account deficit; the latter is already at a
level that raises concerns, also in terms of its financing by flows deemed stable (such as FDI
and European funds), which have no longer fully covered it.
Romania’s  sizeable  external  imbalance  is  singular  in  the  region  in  terms  of  size  and  trend.  It
owes to the faster growth of domestic absorption than that of domestic output, as well as to non-
price competitiveness issues of the Romanian economy manifest in certain production sectors.
Relevant  from  this  perspective  is  the  unfavourable  comparison  with  Czechia,  Poland  and
Hungary, three countries where, the same as in Romania, monetary policy is managed under the
inflation targeting strategy and there is a floating exchange rate in place.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Speaking of the exchange rate, I cannot help mentioning that the hasty adoption of Government
Emergency  Ordinance  No.  114  at  the  end  of  last  year  contributed,  through  the  uncertainty
created on the market, among others, to an episode of moderate depreciation of the domestic
currency in January 2019. Thus, the relative stability of the exchange rate of the leu, which we
have all got used to, was a bit affected. Obviously, a certain flexibility margin in its evolution is
natural, but allow me to point out that it is not the exchange rate that should act as a correction
tool for the external imbalance, which can be rather mitigated by way of structural reforms and
fiscal adjustment.
In this context, it is also worth underlining that it is important to avoid a significant appreciation of
the leu, which might be induced by a too high interest rate differential versus peer countries. In
Czechia,  Poland  and  Hungary,  the  monetary  policy  rate  is  substantially  lower  than  that  of  the
NBR, which the Board meeting of May 2019 kept at 2.5 percent, along with tightening control over
money  market  liquidity. A  widening  of  the  interest  rate  spread  vis-à-vis  these  countries  might
attract volatile capital inflows, conducive to an excessive strengthening of the domestic currency.
Let me also point out that, in all three countries mentioned above, policy rates stand below the
inflation rate, the same as in Romania. And precisely because – as the business community
knows too well – we are not cut off from what is going on around us, the NBR’s monetary policy
stance should be assessed in a regional context as well.
To sum up, it is essential to keep macroeconomic imbalances in check and promote structural
reforms  so  that  the  Romanian  economy  does  not  witness  major  vulnerabilities  in  a  global
environment marked by so many uncertainties. It is by no means an easy task to make forecasts
in such an environment, but one thing is sure: it takes a lot of economic policy wisdom to sail
safely  in  waters  that  are  not  exactly  tranquil. As  one  of  the  most  outstanding  US  presidents,
Abraham Lincoln, once said, “The best way to predict your future is to create it”.
Thank you for your attention!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
