 Central Bank of Barbados 
Tom Adams Financial Centre, Spry Street, Bridgetown 
P.O. Box 1016 
Telephone: (246) 436-6870: Fax. (246) 436-7836 
E-Mail Address: info@centralbank.org.bb  
Website: www.centralbank.org.bb 
 
Cleviston Haynes, Governor, Central Bank of Barbados 
Remarks by 
Opening of the New Branch of Consolidated Finance 
at the 
One Welches, St. Thomas 
Thursday, January 31, 2019 
I am delighted to celebrate with you, the launch of this new corporate branch in the growing 
Welches business district. Firstly, I would like to extend congratulations to the Head of the 
branch,  Mr.  Darrell  Wilson,  an  experienced  financial  services  professional,  and  his  staff,  as 
they  set  out  on  this  exciting  journey,  anxiously  looking  forward  to  seizing  the  available 
opportunities and overcoming the inevitable challenges that lie ahead. I have no doubt that 
the  depth  of  experience  and  understanding  of  the  Barbadian  financial  landscape  that  you 
bring will augur well for the success of this new branch, as you seek to expand Consolidated 
Finance’s foothold in the corporate and commercial lending market.   
Consolidated Finance is now a household name with a long history in Barbados, having been 
established as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the McEnearney Alston (Barbados) Group. The 
company  has  built  an  excellent  reputation,  expanding  its  range  of  financial  products  and 
services  ranging  from  vehicle  leasing  arrangements  to  offering  fixed  deposits,  real  estate 
financing, merchant banking and foreign exchange trading.  
As regulator, the Bank has been able to monitor your growth and we are satisfied with your 
commitment  to  enhance  your  systems  for  risk  management  to  ensure  compliance  with 
regulatory standards. 
We welcome your decision to expand your footprint in the domestic financial market at this 
time.  It  demonstrates  confidence  in  your  ability  to  manage  an  expanded  portfolio.  Equally 
important,  it  shows  confidence  in  the  future  prospects  for  the  Barbados  economy  and 
embodies  your  commitment  to  helping  the  Barbados  economy  to  recover  and  strengthen 
over the medium term.  
 1 | P a g e  
As  I  reported  only  yesterday,  the  economic  indicators  for  the  Barbadian  economy  are 
displaying encouraging signs.  But the prospects for durable growth over the medium term 
require  a  strong  recovery  in  investment,  both  foreign  and  domestic.  I  believe  that  the 
domestic  financial  sector  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  this  area,  as  it  seeks  to  allocate 
over time, the substantial resources it has mobilized from our citizens.   
In recent years, credit demand has been weak and the banking sector has been marked by 
excess  liquidity.  We  all  know  that  in  the  past  year,  financial  institutions  have  had  to  cope 
with the implementation of a new accounting standard and with the  debt restructuring of 
Barbados  domestic  government  securities.  However,  the  sector  has  proven  resilient  with 
capital remaining above statutory requirements. 
Your foray into corporate lending provides an opportunity for you to diversify your business.  
At  the  same time,  it  presents  a  challenge,  as  you  compete  with  brands  well  established  in 
this  area,  with  larger  capital  bases  and  access  to  mature  risk  management  systems.  Your 
goal  must  be  to  create  a  niche  area  for  products  and  quality  of  service  in  the  financial 
services market that will differentiate you from your competitors. Your challenge will be to 
attract  small  and  medium  size  credits,  to  provide  financing  and  where  possible,  advice  to 
enable these entities to grow and flourish. 
Your expansion occurs at a time when the Barbadian financial industry is gradually evolving, 
with an increasing push to offer new types of financial products and services.  Technology is 
driving  developments  with  increasing  emphasis  on  on-line  banking  and  digital  payment 
solutions.  I  believe  that  these  developments  will  enhance  efficiency  and  productivity  and 
therefore benefit the economy.  Already we can see a future in which traditional instruments 
such as cheques and cash will play second fiddle to technological transfers of money within 
the  public  and  private  sectors.  These  technological  innovations  will  impact  individuals, 
corporates, financial institutions and government, and I encourage you to align your systems 
to cope with the emerging trends. 
The adoption of new technologies is a positive development for a small economy like ours 
with  highly  concentrated  markets.  It  creates  the  potential  for  increased  competition,  an 
expansion of the range of products and services available to the public and an improvement 
in  the  public’s  access  to  affordable  financial  services.  The  Central  Bank  is  therefore 
committed to  fostering  a  regulatory  environment  that  will  enable existing or  new  firms  to 
expand and improve the quality and range of financial products and services.  
In  closing,  let  me  reiterate  that  the  opening  of  this  branch  provides  an  opportunity  to 
implement new approaches and offer financial solutions that can add vigor to the existing 
credit  market.  On  behalf  of  the  Central  Bank,  I  offer  sincerest  congratulations  to  ANSA 
 2 | P a g e  
Financial  Holdings  (Barbados)  Ltd  and  the  management  and  staff  of  Consolidated  Finance 
Company Limited for the demonstration of the commitment and faith in the resilience of the 
Barbados economy.  
Best wishes for the future.  
Thank you. 
 3 | P a g e  
