Mugur Isărescu: Introductory speech - CEPS Ideas Lab: Europe's
Choice conference
Introductory speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the
Centre for European Policy Studies (CEPS) Ideas Lab - Europe's Choice conference, Brussels,
21 February 2019.
 Chairman Almunia,
First Vice President Timmermans,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a great privilege for me to attend the annual meetings of Centre for European Policy Studies,
at a momentous time for the Union. Surely, the elections for the European Parliament are on my
mind as well, but not exclusively. As the topic of this year’s meeting amply suggests, we, as EU
citizens, need to make the right choices so that the future of the Union continues the project that
has always fostered peace and economic reconstruction after the Second World War. It is the
same project that has helped Central Eastern European countries “return to Europe” after the fall
of the Berlin Wall.
Centre  for  European  Policy  Studies  is  a  great  scene  for  discussing  the  huge  challenges  our
Union is facing at the moment. It brings together high officials from EU institutions and national
governments, academics and representatives of the civil society and business circles. I speak
not only on behalf of the central bank of Romania, but also as a representative of a country that
holds the rotating presidency of the EU Council. I trust that we will be able to fulfill our mandate
and advance projects of substance for the Union.
Let me focus in the minutes I have at my disposal on several economic issues.
Our debate is so more important for it takes place at a time of some economic slowdown all over
Europe and of an erosion of multilateralism, of spreading trade conflicts. The prospect of a hard
Brexit is very annoying for all of us and I still very much hope that such a denouement would be
avoided. Likewise, it is high time to strike a deal on the Multiannual Financial Framework so that
the  great  challenges  the  Union  is  facing  (protection  of  borders,  cyber  fare,  climate  change,
conflicts in near and more remote neighborhoods, etc.) find proper conciliation with the need to
preserve the cohesion of the Union and avoid further fragmentation.
I also trust that EU leaders will find the right balance to address key institutional and policy related
weaknesses  of  the  Euro  area.  I  mention  this,  for  Romania,  like  other  Non-member  States,  is
bound by EU accession treaties to join the single currency area eventually. And hopefully, this will
happen in the not too distant future. In this regard I wish to mention that two major documents on
Romania’s path to the Euro area (an analytical report and a Plan of action) have been recently
completed and have been subjected to the scrutiny and approval of the political parties and the
Parliament. I was one of the vice-chairs of the National Commission which guided the completion
of the two documents.
I should say that we are not oblivious to what it takes for accession to be a success. No matter
how much one wishes to put accession on a fast lane, success hinges on having achieved a
critical mass of real and structural convergence with the Euro area. The lessons of the Euro area
crisis  remind  us  starkly  this  reality.  The  more  robust  the  Euro  area  turns,  as  a  result  of
institutional and policy reforms, the better for us.
When  it  comes  to  reforms  of  the  Euro  area,  I  would  highlight  the  respect  for  rules  and  their
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
enforcement, on one hand, and the introduction of risk-sharing schemes on the other. Among the
latter I range a collective deposit insurance scheme (EDIS) which, together with a much stronger
Resolution Fund (SRF) would complete the Banking Union, and the introduction of instruments
that  can  help  member  states  deal  with  asymmetric  shocks. A  euro  area  budget  does  make
sense in this respect.
Let me make a few remarks on the macroeconomic scene in Europe.
The economic recovery of recent years has been heavily dependent on non-standard operations
of the main central banks and very low interest rates.
There are still large public and private debts, which are especially burdensome in the Euro area –
and which complicate the mission of policy normalization, of unwinding special operations of the
ECB.  Fortunately,  some  countries  in  our  region  (including  Romania)  enjoy  a  much  better
situation in this respect.
The very low inflation is prompting some to argue that policy normalization may have to wait still,
but  perverse  effects  need  not  be  underplayed.  But  it  is  likely  that  policy  normalization  –
understood  as  a  return  to  positive  real  policy  rates,  will  be  quite  a  time  consuming  process,
particularly in Europe.
Major risks persist, or even grow, in the global economy; they are due to interconnectedness and
synchronicity of business cycles, the search for yield that has stimulated big bubbles again, a
propensity to resort to protectionism measures (which adds to fragmentation tendencies), the
accumulation of systemic risks in non-banking markets.
When it comes to monetary policy let me mention a few challenges.
The models central banks use have baffled in quite a few instances; we still do not have clear
answers  as  to  why  inflation  is  persistently  so  low  in  most  of  the  Union,  in  spite  of  economic
recovery.
Financial stability concerns are increasingly on our radars.
There are other puzzles, like the flattening of the Philips Curve and I would range here the fall of
financial intermediation in some Non-member Sates –in Romania and Hungary in particular. This
seems to be a clear case of credit-less recovery, but that may also be the outcome of financial
integration – for international companies prefer to source credit on external markets (where these
may be cheaper).
The global financial cycle poses a major challenge. This is also due to the operations of major
central banks, to their unconventional policies; policy reversals can cause major pains, especially
where there is much external indebtedness, public and/or private.
As Hélène Rey says, the trilemma (free capital flows, exchange rate stability and autonomous
monetary policy) may have turned into a dilemma; and that the power of monetary policy rests
with  the  ability  to  control  capital  flows  –  which  is  a  huge  tall  order.  The  resort  increasingly  to
macro-prudential tools shows that, de facto, some kind of capital controls revival is under way,
for the sake of both monetary policy effectiveness and financial stability reasons.
I would argue that exchange rate flexibility has been quite helpful for undertaking macroeconomic
adjustment,  in  Romania,  too.  Under-development  creates  additional  challenges  for  monetary
policy since catching up is accompanied by higher inflation (the Balassa Samuelson effect). This
may not be a problem right now in view of the overall context, but it will likely turn out to bother us
in the not too distant future.
Migration of human capital (which is a very intense in some of our countries, including Romania)
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
also puts a lot of pressure on wages and fuels inflation.
Let me turn now to a few regulatory issues. It is widely accepted among professionals, among
us,  central  bankers,  that  the  European  banking  sector  has  cleaned  up  much  of  its  balance-
sheets, that it is better capitalized. Likewise, the reforms of the regulation and supervision of the
financial industry has taken us in the right direction, and much has been accomplished to make
our banks safer. But still much needs to be done to feel the right degree of comfort.
Some final words I would direct towards the threat of protectionism. An enormous risk for the
global  economy  is  the  temptation  to  shed  the  commitment  to  multilateralism  and  embark  on
protectionism. Beggar thy neighbor policies are quite perilous, as history amply shows. It is true
that trade needs to be both free and fair, that commitments made within the framework of the
World Trade Organization and other fora need to be observed. Unless we defend open markets,
we invite big commercial conflicts and a proliferation of lose-lose situations.
Allow me to conclude my short address by pointing out that as a Romanian official I am confident
that important steps have been already taken to ensure a more close cooperation in order to
solve the afore mentioned issues.
As you know, Romania holds at the moment the Presidency of the Council of European Union
and good work has already been done by our team in Bucharest and Brussels. They held 15
working parties in the Council, negotiated in 18 trilogues with the European Parliament, attended
over 30 technical meetings, among bilateral meetings, informal consultations with the Parliament
and the Commission. They have concluded the work and agreed on two files (Risk Reduction
measures  –  the  Banking  package  and  Pan-European  Pension  Product).  There  has  been  a
political agreement with the Parliament on two other files (Cross Border Distribution of Funds
and  European  Market  Infrastructure  Regulation  (EMIR)  Refit).  And  I  understand  they  have
reached a general approach on the European system of financial supervision (ESFS) file, at the
Council level.
I am sure we will keep up the good work and efforts on every side will have a positive outcome.
The future might be uncertain, but we can surely try to better prepare for it.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
