 Remarks by 
Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile,  
Governor, Bank of Uganda 
   UBA Annual Bankers’ Conference   
   Kampala Serena Hotel 
 Tuesday, July 16, 2019 
   The Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, Dr. Ruhakana Rugunda,  
Mr. Patrick Mweheire, Chairman - Uganda Bankers 
Association (UBA)  
Mr. Wilbrod Humphreys Owor, Executive Director  
Members of the Executive Committee of the UBA 
Members of Uganda Bankers Association 
Invited guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 
I would like to thank the UBA for inviting me to address 
this third edition of the Annual Bankers Conference on the 
theme - “De-risking Financing & Investment in Agriculture to 
promote decent youth employment and inclusive growth”. 
 
It is commendable that the UBA has focused attention on 
the potential role that finance can play in leveraging the 
agriculture sector to diffuse the demographic bomb that 
threatens to explode in our midst if Uganda does not 
create decent jobs for the youths. 
 
The value added by agriculture, forestry, and fishing as a 
percentage of gross domestic product (GDP) declined 
from 49 percent in 1991, to 28 percent in 2000, to 26 
percent in 2010, and down to approximately 24 percent in 
20181.  
                                                 
1 World Bank Data 
 Page 2 of 8 
 Over the same period, employment in agriculture as a 
percentage of total employment declined from 74 percent 
in 1991, to 70 percent in 2000, remained at 70 percent in 
2010, and rose to approximately 71 percent in 20182.  
While the contribution of agriculture to national economic 
growth has halved between 1991 and today, the share of 
the population that is employed in this sector has hardly 
moved. Moreover, 68 percent of the population is engaged 
in subsistence farming.  
 
The United Nations forecasts that Uganda’s population 
will rise to 102 million by 2050, and then to 203 million by 
2100. Uganda will become one of the most densely 
populated countries in the world by the middle of this 
century, when its population will be more than two and a 
half times the current level.  
 
It is quite unlikely that the formal sector will employ a 
significant share of the population. Moreover, some 
surveys including one conducted by the Aga Khan 
University in 2016 indicated that a tiny proportion of the 
youths aspire to employment in the agriculture sector.  
 
                                                 
2 ILO estimates 
 Page 3 of 8 
 And this brings me to the finance sector. A previous 
edition of the World Bank’s Economic Update on Uganda 
argued that the high cost and limited access to credit was 
a binding constraint on Uganda’s economy. This implies 
that if only banks and other financial institutions could 
lower their lending rates and expand the volume of their 
lending, substantial numbers of businesses in the economy 
would be able to borrow money for investment in order to 
boost their output while servicing their debt and 
increasing their incomes.  
 
While I remain uncomfortable with the high lending rates 
and believe that they should be reduced sustainably over 
time, I dare say that access to credit is not the ultimate 
binding constraint on economic growth.  
 
We must think holistically about the challenges holding 
back the power of finance to transform our economy. 
Proper diagnostics must reveal the problems that 
constrain agricultural finance before we devise durable 
solutions. We must examine the borrowing capacities of 
the businesses in our real sector.  
 
On one hand, financial institutions are challenged to 
rethink their views of bankable projects so as to design 
 Page 4 of 8 
 solutions for potential borrowers at their level. On the 
other hand, formal sector creditworthy businesses, which 
have been the main clients of commercial banks, comprise 
a small share of the economy. Informal business and 
micro-enterprises abound and their capacity to utilize 
credit effectively is constrained, including by inadequate 
business and technical skills, the high costs of inputs, and 
unpredictable market conditions.  
 
Fortunately, some financial institutions have started 
tackling these problems through business incubation 
programs. Moreover, through automation and adoption of 
new technologies for delivering financial services, it is 
possible for banks to reduce their operating costs, and 
pass on the savings to borrowers through reduced lending 
rates. I am also optimistic that banks will exploit the 
potential of bancassurance to exploit synergies with 
insurance to design products for the riskier borrowers.  
Indeed, I am anxious to learn from the speakers about 
UBA’s plans to de-risk financing and investment in 
agriculture.  
 
I must applaud the UBA for embracing the role that can be 
played by the financial sector in transforming our people 
into a non-agrarian workforce and urban-dwelling 
 Page 5 of 8 
 populace. But I must add that it will take a comprehensive 
approach by all sectors to bring about this transformation.  
 
Indeed, the fruits of higher labour productivity in non-
agriculture sectors, and higher living standards in urban 
areas enjoin the government to develop the manufacturing 
and service sectors in order to absorb the youths who are 
migrating from rural areas. Research conducted by the 
International Growth Centre has shown that it is possible for 
Uganda to industrialise through prioritization of high 
productivity services or non-traditional “industries 
without smokestacks” such as agro-processing, ICT, 
transport and tourism, which can absorb the youths 
seeking jobs.  
 
Government must focus on boosting export-oriented 
manufacturing and growth of the tradable services. This 
will help to meet the rapidly growing urban demand for 
food thereby linking urban and rural growth by creating 
market for rural production, and even reducing the import 
bill.  
 
Such demand-driven agricultural development would 
foster innovation and advancement in production, 
processing, and packaging, across all the stages of the 
 Page 6 of 8 
 chain in catering to the demands of urban consumers of 
processed products including packaged foods. 
  
Government needs to join hands with finance and all 
sectors by facilitating urban-rural linkages, to embed local 
firms within the supply chains of international retailers, 
such as the international supermarkets in our cities and 
towns, and promote export readiness of local firms if we 
are to be the bread basket of the region.  
 
Potential areas of further investment for government and 
the financial sector include roads, cold storage, transport, 
support for farmer organisations, agricultural extension, 
and out grower schemes. It is also necessary to address 
information asymmetries, for example, by matchmaking 
international firms and local suppliers.  
 
Only through boosting agricultural development through 
inclusive rural-urban links will we effectively harness the 
agriculture sector as a dominant source of employment.  
 
I applaud the UBA for rising to this challenge and call 
upon Government to join the bankers in the 
modernization of agriculture for job-creation and inclusive 
economic growth.  
 Page 7 of 8 
  
On our part, the Bank of Uganda will continue to work 
with Government and commercial banks in promoting 
affordable agricultural finance through the Agricultural 
Credit Facility, which we encourage all eligible borrowers 
to take advantage of. 
 
I thank you all for listening to me.  
 Page 8 of 8 
