Maria  Almasara  Cyd  N  Tuano-Amador:  In  Memory  of  Governor
Nesting
Words  by  Ms  Maria Almasara  Cyd  N  Tuano-Amador,  Officer-in-Charge  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng
Pilipinas (BSP, the central bank of the Philippines), during the Flag Raising Ceremony, Manila, 26
February 2019.
My Dear Colleagues:
 News of the Governor’s passing away on Saturday has left us deeply saddened. We wanted to
reach  out  to  his  family  and  to  pay  our  respects.  We  wanted  to  be  able  to  say  our  personal
goodbyes to him. We also wanted some comfort as members of the BSP community that he
had ably guided and led since July two years ago. 
I am also sure that your own relatives and friends have offered you words of sympathy and your
hearts are bursting with the desire to share these sentiments with Team BSP. This is because
the BSP is not only a place where you work. This is because the BSP is part of your family, and
because Governor Nesting was the head of our work family. 
We will all be able to do so on Thursday afternoon, when our Governor makes his last visit to his
beloved BSP. The schedule of visits has been posted in the iKnow, but Thursday is our very own
day as a community to gather around our Governor and salute him.
As we remember Governor Nesting today, let us not ask how he died; instead let us ask how he
lived.
Let me borrow some words from Summer Sandercox. The poem goes like this:
Not what did he gain, but what did he give?
These are the units to measure the worth
Of a man as a man, regardless of birth.
Not, what was his church, nor what was his creed?
But had he befriended those really in need?
Was he ever ready, with word of good cheer,
To bring back a smile, to banish a tear?
Not what did the sketch in the newspaper say,
But how many were sorry when he passed away.
Very thoughtful words indeed.
So how do we remember his life?
Governor Nesting was a man in constant motion. He had big plans for the BSP to make us future
ready. He had a reform agenda that covered the full breadth of the BSP’s responsibilities: price
stability,  financial  stability,  a  safe,  reliable  and  inclusive  payments  system  and  advocacies
including financial inclusion, economic and financial learning, and consumer protection.
His plate was always full of responsibilities and his time was gold.  But he was never too busy to
share his time with his family, his friends, his staff at the Office of the Governor, and of course 
his One Team BSP.
Governor Nesting was a man who took great comfort from his faith and his beloved family. He
was  a  loyal  and  dependable  friend  who  carefully  tended  the  friendships  that  he  had  formed
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
through the years. Many of us have been blessed with his gift of friendship. We take comfort from
it. We are richer because of it.
He  was  a  witty  man  and  an  intellectual  with  a  wonderful  ability  to  articulate  his  ideas  and
thoughts…not in fancy words or technical jargon. He was able to break down difficult concepts
into plain and easy-to-understand language so the messaging is clear and concise. The mark of
a truly wise man.
Invariably, the testimonials that we have been receiving from people sharing about their times
with him speak of a humble man. A wise man has said: if you are good, you don’t have to shout.
Governor Nesting was good…and he never had to shout. Humility is a rare trait these days and
we are blessed that we had a leader who exemplified this virtue.
On a lighter note, I was told that Governor Nesting was happiest during quiet family moments
when  he  could  relax  with  his  beloved  dogs  by  his  side.  He  also  loved  Mr.  Bean  movies  who
doesn’t? Not many of you may know this but Gov. Nesting had a playful side…some would say a
very sharp sense of humor and he can laugh as loud—sometimes even louder—than any one of
us!
Governor Nesting was man who was full of optimism.  He was optimistic that he can bring out
the best in each one of us, and he challenged us to do better in whatever task we have been
assigned to do. He was optimistic that he can bring the BSP to greater heights as a globally
recognized  central  bank,  building  on  the  foundations  that  had  earlier  been  laid  by  his
predecessors. He was optimistic that his Continuity Plus Plus agenda will promote institutional
stability while serving as a rallying point for future-ready Filipino central bankers. His optimism is
brave.  His  optimism  is  brave  and  strong  because  it  rests  not  on  wishful  hopes  but  on  the
conviction that the BSP’s reform agenda is realizable because the organization he led is strong,
it is resilient, it is agile and it is capable. 
We applaud the legacy of Governor Nesting in prudently formulating and implementing monetary
policy  to  safeguard  price  stability.  We  applaud  him  for  leading  the  financial  industry  through
prudent  and  forward-looking  reforms  and  for  being  a  vanguard  in  the  digitalization  of  the
payments  system  in  the  country.  We  bask  in  these  achievements  because  he  had  always—
always—generously said that it is One Team BSP that has made these possible.
Colleagues, as we move forward—with the seasoned and thoughtful guidance of the members
of  the  Monetary  Board  and  the  dedication  and  expertise  of  the  BSP  management  team,  our
beloved  institution  will  continue  to  build  on  the  headway  that  had  been  made  by  Governor
Nesting. We are in for exciting—and challenging—times as the amendments to the BSP Charter
—which were signed into law just this month—have granted the BSP with greater flexibility in the
discharge of its mandated responsibilities.
Governor, you will be greatly missed. But your legacy lives on in every one of us.
Thank you Governor for sharing your life with us.  Godspeed Gov. Nesting!
Let us now offer a moment of silence as we honor the memory... the years of public service ...of
servant leadership…and the vision of our Governor, Governor Nestor A. Espenilla, Jr.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
