Burkhard Balz: Closing remarks - "Strengthening the National Bank
of Belarus"
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Burkhard  Balz,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the EU Twinning Project "Strengthening the National Bank of Belarus", Minsk, 10
July 2019.
 1 Introduction
Mr Kalechits,
Mr Samecki, Ms Kuniyoshi, Ms Wiktorin,
your excellencies,
distinguished guests,
ladies and gentleman,
First of all, I would like to thank you for the warm welcome and your kind introductory remarks.
I’m delighted to be here in Minsk today to celebrate with you all the successful conclusion of the
EU twinning project with the National Bank of the Republic of Belarus, Narodowy Bank Polski,
Lietuvos bankas and the Deutsche Bundesbank.
Just  a  few  days  ago,  our  countries  were  still  engaged  in  sporting  rivalry  as  part  of  the  2nd
European  Games  here  in  Minsk.  The  city  was  abuzz  with  more  than  4,000  athletes  from  50
nations, and when I look around me, there are still lingering reminders of this event. What we are
celebrating today, though, has attracted slightly less public attention, even though it is certainly no
less significant. It is something that our central banks – representing our four countries – have
achieved together: the first EU twinning project for Belarus and the first EU twinning project for
the National Bank of the Republic of Belarus.
It’s  something  that  all  the  stakeholders  can  be  proud  of.  And  that’s  why  I’d  like  to  take  this
opportunity to thank everyone involved for all their dedication and hard work.
2 The role and task of central banks
Ladies and gentlemen,
On  14  May,  the  European  Union  marked  the  10th  anniversary  of  the  Eastern  Partnership  in
Brussels together with the six Eastern Partnership countries, including Belarus.
Jean-Claude Juncker, President of the European Commission, used this high-level conference to
emphasise  that  the  Eastern  Partnership  is  fundamentally  a  future-oriented  partnership  for  the
citizens and with the citizens. He said: “Together we are working towards stronger economies,
stronger governance, stronger connectivity and stronger societies.”
While  our  EU  twinning  project  is  just  one  building  block  in  this  broadly  based  cooperation
process,  no  one  should  overlook  the  fact  that  central  banks  in  particular  are  important
government institutions. After all, they ensure that monetary systems continue functioning both at
a national and an international level.
Economic systems based on the division of labour need stable money to run smoothly. You see,
only stable money serves the general public and enterprises in equal measure as a medium of
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
exchange, unit of account and store of value.
As you will no doubt be aware, modern central banks use their monetary policy to keep the value
of money stable. And yet there is more to monetary policy than just setting policy rates or banks’
refinancing volumes.
Indeed, monetary policy also involves constantly reminding economic, societal and government
actors  not  to  undermine  the  value  of  money,  for  example  through  excessive  demands  and
cooptation.
Central  banks  have  to  perform  their  tasks  in  a  political  and  economic  environment  all  of  their
own. There is no blueprint for this. Monetary policy isn’t something that can be sketched out on
the  drawing  board.  Incidentally,  the  same  can  be  said  for  other  central  bank  tasks,  such  as
banking supervision, financial stability policy and providing the economy with cash and cashless
payment facilities.
This makes it all the more important for central banks to regularly exchange best practices. The
EU twinning projects are an ideal platform for doing so.
That’s why the Bundesbank lost no time to take part in EU twinning projects. We carried out our
first twinning project with Czech National Bank in 2004. Altogether, we have now taken part in 13
EU-funded projects – EU twinning projects and large scale ESCB projects – with central banks in
11 countries.
At  the  Bundesbank,  we  contribute  quite  specific  insights  we  have  gained  from  our  own
transformation processes, including German reunification and European monetary union.
Needless  to  say,  what  we  have  experienced  is  confined  to  our  own  particular  political  and
economic context. So it is all the more gratifying to have also benefited from the experiences of
Narodowy Bank Polski and Lietuvos bankas here in Belarus.
3 EU twinning project for the National Bank of Belarus
Ladies and gentlemen,
Our  EU  twinning  project  with  the  National  Bank  of  Belarus  is  a  good  example  of  sharing
experiences and learning from each other: just look at the preparation, execution, and today’s
successful conclusion.
During the preparatory stage, a series of meetings were held between our central banks at the
working level.
The correspondence between you, Mr Samecki, and my predecessor at the Bundesbank as well
as  the  Bank  of  Lithuania  Chairman,  Mr  Vasiliauskas,  and  our  president,  Dr  Weidmann,
culminated in the formation of our consortium. From the very beginning, our colleagues here in
Minsk looked on with great interest as the project took shape.
During  the  implementation  phase,  the  Polish  colleagues  took  on  the  project  components
Payment Systems and Risk Management, the Lithuanians handled the Banking Supervision and
Financial Risk Management components, and the Bundesbank colleagues were responsible for
the Financial Consumer Protection and Communication Policy components.
Our counterparts at the National Bank of Belarus brought a strong work ethic and commendable
commitment to the table right from the outset. We were all united by an all-round determination to
make the project a success and by the “corporate spirit” that central bankers around the world
feel they belong to.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
At  today’s  concluding  celebration,  everyone  involved  in  this  joint  project  can  look  back  on  the
months of hard work and in-depth treatment of the subject matter, on the many discussions of
different professional and personal perspectives, and on the host of good personal contacts, and
perhaps even friendships, that have grown from it.
4 Closing words of gratitude
Ladies and gentlemen,
Having  said  all  that,  allow  me  to  close  with  a  few  words  of  thanks  to  the  people  behind  the
project.
Thank you Mr Kalechits for embarking on this “European adventure” and for being open to the
idea of EU twinning not just from the beginning but over the entire timeline as a project manager.
I’d  also  like  to  thank  Mr  Samecki  and  Ms  Kuniyoshi  for  your  interest  in  forming  a  consortium
between your institutions and the Deutsche Bundesbank and for the large-scale staff support you
gave to the project.
My  thanks  also  go  to  Ms  Wiktorin  for  bringing  EU  twinning  to  Belarus  and  for  your  constant
positive presence at the side of the participating central banks as they jumped in at the deep end.
And finally, thank you to all of you who have made your own personal contribution to the success
of the project and whose names I wouldn´t be able to mention now without running out of time:
the  managers  of  the  components,  the  visiting  experts  and  all  those  who  took  on  the  vital
administrative work.
The great Jean Monnet once said of Europe: “We are not allying states, we are bringing together
people”.  In this spirit, I hope that the EU twinning project with the National Bank of Belarus will
not be the last one.
1
1
Thank you for your attention.
1
“Nous ne coalisons pas des États, nous unissons les hommes.” Speech in Washington on 30 April 1952.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
