John  C  Williams:  The  research-policy  nexus  -  ZLB,  JMCB  and
FOMC
Remarks by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Conference celebrating the 50th Anniversary of the “Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 31 May 2019.
As prepared for delivery
 John Maynard Keynes quipped, “Practical men, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from
any intellectual influences, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist.” I wonder whether
Keynes would see this as a feature rather than a bug in light of his enduring influence on the
profession more than 70 years after his death.
The theme of my talk today is that during my quarter century as a researcher and policymaker at
the Fed, we have not been overly beholden to defunct economists. Quite the contrary. A quick
scan  of  FOMC  memos,  briefings,  and  meeting  minutes  provides  ample  evidence  that  a  wide
range of economic research—new and old, conventional and outside the box—regularly enters
into our debates and influences our decisions. This represents a rich two-way dialogue between
researchers and policymakers, with both sides probing for new answers to old questions.
I  could  list  a  long  catalog  of  examples  of  the  synergistic  relationship  between  research  and
policymaking at central banks. Instead, I will focus my comments today on one specific topic: the
zero lower bound on interest rates, or ZLB for short. This topic has obvious importance to central
bank practice past, present, and future. In addition, the Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
(JMCB), the 50th anniversary of which we are recognizing today, played a very important role in
shaping how we think about the ZLB. Today I’d like to highlight how this work has influenced my
own thinking, as a researcher and policymaker.
Before I proceed any further, I should give the usual disclaimer that everything I say today reflects
my own views and not necessarily those of the FOMC or anyone else in the Federal Reserve
System.
The Zero Lower Bound Emerges
Although the ZLB was not a new idea by any means, three circumstances—two empirical, one
theoretical—came together to reignite interest in this topic by researchers and policymakers in
1
the 1990s.
The first was the achievement of low inflation in the United States, which, all else equal, implied
lower  interest  rates.  The  second  was  Japan’s  lengthening  period  of  deflation  and  near-zero
interest rates.  The third was renewed curiosity about the theory of monetary policy as decision
rules for interest rates, following the publication of John Taylor’s “Discretion versus Policy Rules
3
in Practice.”
2
Although  that  paper  did  not  mention  the  ZLB,  it  fundamentally  transformed  how  many
economists, including one impressionable Stanford grad student, thought about monetary policy.
Indeed, the very logic of the Taylor rule—that interest rates systematically move up and down
with  changes  in  economic  conditions—forced  macroeconomists  to  come  to  terms  with  the
presence of the ZLB. Put simply, if you run macroeconomic model simulations with a Taylor rule,
you will eventually encounter the ZLB and face the decision of what, if anything, to do about it.
This  tension  is  evident  in  research  papers  on  monetary  policy  rules  from  this  era,  in  which
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
authors either sidestepped the ZLB or ignored it altogether. In fact, I’ll plead guilty as charged
when  it  comes  to  my  own  research  during  this  period. At  the  same  time,  a  small  cadre  of
researchers at the Fed and in academia started to take the ZLB head-on and explore its effects
4
in macro models.
Research on the ZLB quickly made its way to policymakers. The ZLB was analyzed in a note to
5
the FOMC in the summer of 1998 and discussed at the subsequent FOMC meeting in July.
That discussion led to interest at the Fed in having a research conference to provide a broad set
of views and perspectives on the ZLB.
This  convergence  in  interest  between  researchers  and  policymakers  resulted  in  a  Federal
Reserve  conference  on  “Monetary  Policy  in  a  Low-Inflation  Environment”  held  in  Woodstock,
Vermont,  in  October  1999.  The  conference  proceedings  were  subsequently  published  in  a
special issue of the Journal of Money, Credit and Banking in November 2000. The goal of the
conference was to bring together academic and Fed researchers and policymakers to study the
6
implications of low inflation and the ZLB from a variety of perspectives.
Looking back, what stands out the most from this conference was the richness and diversity of
thought brought to a topic that had lain mostly dormant for many decades. There were papers on
the  historical  experience  with  very  low  inflation  and  interest  rates,  and  on  financial  market
functioning in such an environment. The conference concluded with an international policymaker
panel.
Three of the conference papers were directly related to conducting monetary policy in relation to
the  ZLB.  Specifically,  Ben  McCallum’s  paper  examined  the  use  of  the  exchange  rate  as  an
additional instrument for monetary policy in the context of a model where a “portfolio balance”
channel  allowed  for  deviations  from  uncovered  interest  parity.   In  my  paper  with  Dave
Reifschneider,  we  explored  the  effects  of  the  ZLB  on  the  macro  economy  and  evaluated
alternative  monetary  policy  strategies,  including  versions  of  average-inflation  and  price-level
targeting.  To his credit, Marvin Goodfriend went outside the box and considered three avenues
to overcome the ZLB: charging negative interest rates on reserves and cash; conducting large-
scale  purchases  of  long-term  securities  to  reduce  the  external  finance  premium;  and  outright
9
monetary transfers to the public.
7
8
What is striking rereading these papers today is how all authors took for granted that the ZLB
was a real problem that needed addressing, and how they approached it in novel and different
ways. This despite the fact that the economy was in the midst of a productivity-driven boom, the
longest  expansion  on  record,  and  the  prevailing  federal  funds  rate  was  5.25  percent.  These
papers  and  the  ensuing  discussions  and  debates  planted  seeds  that  would  germinate  in
research and policymaking. Central banks across the globe ultimately used variations of nearly
all of the tools discussed at the conference. Indeed, the topics of interest rate policies, targeting
asset  prices,  asset  purchases,  and  negative  interest  rates  are  among  the  most  prominent
discussions in monetary economics today.
Importantly,  this  research  made  its  way  straight  to  policymakers  within  a  few  years—a  quick
turnaround by central bank standards! In January 2002, Marvin, Dave, and I reprised our roles
from the conference in briefings to the FOMC.
 And in June 2003, Vince Reinhart briefed the
FOMC  on  alternative  monetary  policy  approaches—including  asset  purchases  and  forward
guidance—to mitigate the effects of the ZLB.
 This was followed by a flurry of further research
by academics and central bank economists that delved deeper into these topics.
Putting Research into Practice
10
11
12
This research had important practical lessons for policymakers in the United States and abroad
following  the  global  financial  crisis.  One  lesson  was  that  short-term  rates  should  be  cut
 2 / 4
13
BIS central bankers' speeches
aggressively when deflation or a severe downturn threatens.
 That is, do not “keep your powder
dry.” A second lesson is that short-term rates should be kept “lower for longer” as the economy
recovers.
 A third is that large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) can complement conventional
policy actions by making financial conditions more favorable for growth even when short rates
are constrained by the ZLB.
14
15
13
16
Armed with these insights, policymakers were prepared and able to act quickly and decisively
when the financial crisis hit. A great deal was learned about the ZLB and unconventional policy
tools  along  the  way.
  Indeed,  another  conference  organized  by  the  Boston  Fed  was  held  in
October  2010  to  assess  lessons  learned,  and  the  proceedings  of  that  conference  were
published in a special issue of the JMCB in February 2012. For me, the most interesting aspect
of that conference was that participants took the ZLB as a defining feature of the landscape: what
was once viewed as primarily theoretical had become grounded in practice and experience.
The ZLB in 2019
This brings me to today. The Federal Reserve has embarked on a review of its monetary policy
strategic framework. As was the case 20 years ago, the question is how to best achieve our
monetary policy goals in the context of low inflation and the ZLB. Indeed, the policy questions we
are grappling with today are exactly the ones laid out in Woodstock. The one fresh wrinkle is that
with estimates of the neutral real interest rate much lower than those that prevailed 20 years ago,
the ZLB is likely to be an even more powerful force than was imagined in 1999.
17
In  approaching  this  question  today,  we  should  take  lessons  from  the  conference  held  in
Woodstock 20 years ago: Bring together leading researchers and policymakers, draw out the
best  and  most  creative  thinking,  and  take  a  long-run  view  of  how  we  can  navigate  the
environment before us. I am happy to say that this process is already in train, with the Fed’s
framework review incorporating perspectives from a wide range of stakeholders, culminating in
an academic conference next week in Chicago. 
Conclusion
In  closing,  I  want  to  add  a  personal  thanks  to  Ken  West  for  all  he  has  done  to  promote
outstanding research that is both innovative and relevant to the real-world problems that central
banks face. And my best wishes for the JMCB, which I hope may continue its illustrious record
for the next 50 years. As a researcher and policymaker, the one thing I am certain about is that
fostering an open and active dialogue between researchers and policymakers is the best way for
us to succeed in our work.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
For references to the early literature, see James Clouse, Dale Henderson, Athanasios Orphanides, David H.
Small, and P. A. Tinsley,  Monetary Policy When the Nominal Short-Term Interest Rate Is Zero, The B.E. Journal
of Macroeconomics, De Gruyter, Volume 3, Issue 1, pp. 1-65, September 2003.
Paul Krugman, It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, The Brookings Institution, Volume 29, Issue 2, pp. 137-206, 1998.
John  B.  Taylor, Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, Volume 39, pp. 195–214, 1993.
For an early example, see Jeffery C. Fuhrer and Brian F. Madigan, Monetary Policy When Interest Rates Are
Bounded at Zero, The Review of Economics and Statistics, Volume 79, Issue 4, pp. 573-85, November 1997; for
further references see Reifschneider and Williams (2000), and Clouse et al., 2003.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FOMC transcript, June 30-July 1, 1998.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
Jeffrey C. Fuhrer and Mark S. Sniderman, Conference Summary, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Volume
32, Number 4, Part 2, pp. 845-69, November 2000.
Bennett T. McCallum, Theoretical Analysis Regarding a Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates, Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking, Volume 32, Issue 4, pp. 870-904, November 2000.
David Reifschneider and John C. Williams, Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era, Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, Volume 32, Issue 4, pp. 936-66, November 2000.
Marvin Goodfriend, Overcoming the Zero Bound on Interest Rate Policy, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
Volume 32, No. 4, Part 2, pp. 1007-35, November 2000.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FOMC transcript and presentation materials, January 29-30,
2002.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FOMC transcript and presentation materials, June 24-25,
2003.
See, for example, Lars E. O. Svensson, The Zero Bound in an Open Economy: A Foolproof Way of Escaping
from a Liquidity Trap,  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  Volume  19,  Issue  S1,  pp.  277-312,  February  2001;
Günter Coenen, Athanasios Orphanides, and Volker Wieland; , Price Stability and Monetary Policy Effectiveness
When Nominal Interest Rates Are Bounded at Zero, Advances in Macroeconomics, Volume 4, Issue 1, 2004;
Ben S. Bernanke and Vincent R. Reinhart. 2004. Conducting Monetary Policy at Very Low Short-Term Interest
Rates, American Economic Review, Volume 94, No. 2, pp. 85-90, May 2004; Klaus Adam and Roberto M. Billi,
Optimal Monetary Policy under Commitment with a Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates, Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, Volume 38, No. 7, pp. 1877-1905, October 2006.
Reifschneider and Williams 2000; Board of Governors 2002.
Gauti B. Eggertsson and Michael Woodford, The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Volume 34, No. 1, pp. 139-211, 2003; Reifschneider and Williams 2000.
Ben S. Bernanke, Vincent R. Reinhart, and Brian P. Sack, Monetary Policy Alternatives at the Zero Bound: An
Empirical Assessment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, The Brookings Institution, Volume 35, No. 2, pp.
1–100, 2004.
John  C.  Williams, Lessons  from  the  Financial  Crisis  for  Unconventional  Monetary  Policy,  Presentation  at
National Bureau of Economic Research Conference, Cambridge, Mass., October 18, 2013; John C. Williams,
Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Putting Theory into Practice,  The  Hutchins  Center  on  Fiscal  and
Monetary Policy, The Brookings Institution, January 16, 2014.
Thomas Laubach and John C. Williams, Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux, Business Economics,
Volume 51, No. 2, pp. 57-67, April 2016.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
