Shaktikanta  Das:  Reflections  on  current  policy  issues  facing  the
Indian economy
Speech  by  Mr  Shaktikanta  Das,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Investors'
Roundtable, 9th Vibrant Gujarat Global Summit 2019, Gandhinagar, 18 January 2019.
 I am very happy to participate in the 9th edition of Vibrant Gujarat Global Summit. It is indeed a
pleasure to be here and share my thoughts on various contours of the Indian economy. I thank
the  organisers  of  this  event,  namely  the  Government  of  Gujarat,  National  Investment  and
Infrastructure Fund and the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Government of
India for inviting me to this Roundtable.
2. As this august audience would know, India in recent years has emerged as one of the most
vibrant economies in the world. Not only has India survived many global shocks successfully in
recent years, it also tops the list of fastest growing emerging market economies (EMEs) in the
world. According to the IMF’s database, India’s contribution to world growth has risen from 7.6
per cent during 2000–2008 to 14.5 per cent in 2018. Multilateral agencies are further optimistic on
this as far as the medium-term outlook is concerned. Most importantly, India’s growth story is
backed  by  strong  domestic  fundamentals.  For  instance,  (i)  inflation  has  eased,  (ii)  central
government remains committed to the fiscal targets, and (iii) the current account deficit (CAD) is
far less than its peak level during the stress period (i.e., taper talk period of mid-2013).
3.  Indian  economy  has  witnessed  an  accelerated  pace  of  domestic  reforms  in  recent  years.
These reforms include, inter alia, the flexible inflation-targeting monetary policy framework, the
Insolvency  and  Bankruptcy  Code  (IBC),  the  Goods  and  Services  Tax  (GST)  and  steps  for
enhancing foreign investments by liberalising the FDI regime and undertaking efforts to provide a
conducive business climate.
Let me dwell a bit more on some of these aspects.
Inflation
4. First, let me talk about inflation. Maintaining price stability in the economy is a basic mandate
for a central bank. Delivering low inflation by the central bank induces greater confidence among
both domestic and global investors. India has witnessed significant disinflation since 2012–13 –
with headline CPI inflation moderating from an annual average of 10.0 per cent in 2012–13 to 3.6
per  cent  in  2017–18  and  3.7  per  cent  in  2018–19  so  far  (April-December). As  per  the  latest
reading, headline inflation stood at a low of 2.2 per cent in December 2018. The disinflation was
marked by the commitment of the Reserve Bank to bring down inflation in a sequential manner –
to 8 per cent by January 2015, 6 per cent by January 2016 and 5 per cent by Q4 of 2016–17 –
which was called the glide path for inflation. This, in turn, paved way for the formal adoption of
flexible  inflation  targeting  (FIT)  through  a  legislative  amendment  to  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India
(RBI) Act under which price stability has been mandated as the primary objective of monetary
policy,  while  keeping  in  mind  the  objective  of  growth.  Price  has  been  defined  in  terms  of  a
numerical CPI inflation target set by the government at 4 per cent with a tolerance band of ± 2 per
cent. With the formal setting up of a Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), there has been a shift to
a  committee-based  approach  for  determining  the  monetary  policy.  This  has  enhanced
transparency and accountability of the decision making process.
5. Since the adoption of flexible inflation targeting in India, inflation has been reasonably range
bound within the target band. I must add here that easing of global crude oil prices also augured
well for our inflation outcomes.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Financial Sector
Let  me  elaborate  on  some  of  the  major  policy  developments  in  domestic  financial  sector  in
recent years.
Banking sector
6. We all know that Indian banking sector had emerged largely unscathed in the aftermath of the
global  financial  crisis.  However,  headwinds  from  international  and  domestic  economic
developments posed challenges to the banking sector in recent years. Indian banking system is
on the cusp of a transformation, aided by recent policy measures to reduce vulnerabilities and
improve  its  financial  health.  Several  initiatives  are  underway  to  strengthen  the  regulatory  and
accounting frameworks aimed at increasing the resilience of the institutions. The Reserve Bank’s
initiatives in the recent period are aimed at ensuring better and timely recognition of stressed
assets,  sufficient  provisioning  and  an  efficient  resolution  process.  Recent  supervisory  data
suggests that these efforts are bearing some results and incipient signs of improvement in asset
quality of banks are emerging. After reaching a peak of 11.5 per cent in March 2018, the gross
non-performing  asset  ratio  improved  to  10.8  per  cent  in  September  2018. As  per  the  current
1
assessment of the Reserve Bank, the ratio may further improve to 10.3 per cent by March 2019 .
7. The new resolution framework with the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) as its lynchpin
and RBI’s regulatory framework as its facilitator, is a game changer. It endeavours to create an
environment  in  which  maximum  value  can  be  realised  from  troubled  assets,  bolstered  by  the
early  identification  of  incipient  stress.  The  shift  of  power  in  favour  of  creditors  in  the  IBC
framework will facilitate speedier and impartial resolution process and help in improving the credit
repayment culture. The framework has been providing a market-driven, time-bound process for
insolvency resolution of a corporate debtor, thereby helping financial institutions to clean up their
balance  sheets.  Most  importantly,  it  is  aiding  a  paradigm  shift  in  the  extant  credit  culture  and
discipline.
8.  The  progress  of  IBC  framework  so  far  has  been  encouraging  and  has  resulted  in  better
recovery as compared to the earlier mechanisms. Data available till January 3, 2019 suggest that
the  resolution  processes  have  been  approved  in  66  cases,  involving  around  ₹800  billion  as
resolution value to creditors. The gradually building resilience of the banking sector is evidenced
by  the  fact  that  banks  have  improved  their  profitability  ratios  and  capital  positions.  Other
soundness indicators such as the tier I leverage ratio at 6.7 per cent and the liquidity coverage
ratio at 134.8 per cent as at end-September 2018 remain well above the minimum regulatory
requirements. Provision coverage ratio also increased to 52.4 per cent at end-September 2018
from 48.3 per cent at end-March 2018. Bank credit is recovering from the risk aversion of recent
years. Bank intermediation in the flow of resources to the commercial sector is regaining lost
ground.
9.  The  growing  size  and  complexity  of  the  Indian  financial  system  warrants  strengthening  of
corporate  governance  systems  in  banks.  Incidence  of  financial  frauds  in  recent  times  further
underscores  the  significance  of  sound  corporate  governance  standards  in  banks.  The
Government, the Bank Board Bureau and the Reserve Bank are currently engaged in developing
an  objective  framework  for  performance  evaluation  and  this  should  redefine  the  contours  of
corporate  governance  in  the  public  sector  banks  (PSBs)  with  a  focus  on  transparency,
accountability and skills.
10.  On  the  consumer  protection  front,  improvements  in  grievance  redressal,  introduction  of
innovative products for digital payments, and measures to improve cyber security in banking are
all  expected  to  expand  financial  inclusion  and  provide  financial  services  efficiently  and  cost-
effectively. The Reserve Bank is cognisant of the fact that deepening of digital payment systems
will facilitate greater access to institutional finance by the informal sector, furthering the cause of
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial inclusion. We have very recently constituted a High Level Committee on Deepening of
Digital Payments with Shri Nandan Nilekani as Chairman to suggest measures for increasing
digitisation of payments and enhance financial inclusion through digitisation.
11.  The  regulatory  approach  of  RBI  has  been  and  will  be  aimed  at  ensuring  that  the  banking
system withstands the transitory difficult phase and keeps playing a positive intermediation role in
supplementing the financial needs of our growing economy.
Non-banking financial sector
12. Non-banking financial sector is another segment that plays an important role in the Indian
financial system, given its unique position in providing complementarity as well as competition to
banks. This sector, with a size of around 15 per cent of combined balance sheet of scheduled
commercial banks (SCBs), has been growing robustly in recent years, providing an alternative
source  of  funds  to  the  commercial  sector.  However,  the  sector  has  faced  challenging  times
recently.
13. The debt default of a systemically important NBFC highlighted the vulnerability and need for
strengthening regulatory vigil on the sector in general and on asset liability management (ALM)
framework in particular. The Reserve Bank intends to strengthen the ALM framework for NBFCs
and harmonise it across different categories of NBFCs with the objective of enabling the NBFCs
to play a vital role in our economy. In order to allow additional access to funding for the NBFC
sector in the wake of the recent crisis, the Reserve Bank has relaxed the norms for NBFCs to
securitise  their  loan  books.  In  addition,  banks  have  been  allowed  to  provide  partial  credit
enhancement  to  bonds  issued  by  the  systemically  important  non-deposit  taking  non-banking
financial companies and Housing Finance Companies. This measure will enhance credit rating
of bonds and enable the companies to access funds from the bond market on improved terms.
We are keen to foster a well regulated, well-functioning and vibrant NBFC sector.
External Sector
14. India’s external sector has remained resilient in recent period despite terms of trade losses
due to the firming up of international crude prices and uncertain global demand conditions. The
current account deficit since FY 2013–14 (i.e., period after the taper talk) has been below 2 per
cent of GDP, though it rose to 2.7 per cent in the first half of the financial year 2018–19 reflecting
elevated crude oil prices. Modest current account deficit in recent years was accompanied by
robust  flows  of  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI).  Strong  FDI  inflows  and  build-up  of  foreign
exchange  reserve  buffers  have  helped  India  meet  its  external  financing  requirements  despite
domestic capital market facing sizeable outflows of foreign portfolio investment.
15. As a few advanced economies are on the path of monetary policy normalisation, there has
been  global  portfolio  rebalancing  away  from  EMEs,  including  India.  Another  factor  that  has
repercussions  for  India’s  external  sector  is  the  recent  developments  around  Brexit.  There  are
consequential policy challenges for India which enjoys strong trade and investment relations with
UK  and  the  EU.  We  will  carefully  weigh  the  challenges  and  opportunities  that  lie  ahead  and
undertake appropriate policy responses.
16. As  regards  policy  environment  relating  to  the  external  sector,  sectoral  norms  for  Foreign
Direct  Investment  have  been  eased  gradually  and  now  100  per  cent  FDI  is  permitted  in  all
sectors, barring a few prohibited sectors. In recent years, the focus has been to simplify the FDI
policy  regime  by  abolishing  the  Foreign  Investment  Promotion  Board,  rationalising  various
procedures, introducing e-biz portal as a single window for obtaining clearances from the central
government and using information technology as enabler to make governance more effective.
Two days ago, we have also substantially rationalised and liberalised the regulations governing
the External Commercial Borrowings by the Indian entities to improve ease of doing business.
The  full  impact  of  all  these  reforms  and  a  stable  domestic  macroeconomic  environment  will
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
fructify in coming years. In fact, gross FDI inflows in India were at a record high of US$ 61 billion
in 2017–18.
17. Further, external debt to GDP ratio has fallen from 22.4 per cent at end-March 2013 to 20.8
per  cent  at  end-September  2018.  Other  external  indicators,  viz.,  import  cover  and  short-term
debt to reserves ratio are also better, relative to the taper talk period of mid-2013 when the Indian
rupee had come under severe pressure).
 
Challenges and Outlook
18. India is widely believed to remain world’s fastest-growing major economy in the medium to
long term. The growth projections of several global agencies rank India at the top among the G-
20 economies. In the medium term, annual growth is projected at around 7.5 per cent by the IMF
and the World Bank. It is likely that growth will be more sustainable now, propelled by investment
and  private  consumption.  The  latest  estimates  of  national  accounts  suggest  that  investment
activity has accelerated by 12.2 per cent during 2018–19 as compared to 7.6 per cent in 2017–
18.  Investment  activity  is  expected  to  strengthen  further  as  the  benefits  of  recent  structural
reforms begin to materialise.
19. Going forward, the foremost priority is to preserve domestic macroeconomic and financial
stability,  especially  in  a  global  environment  that  is  clouded  by  high  uncertainty.  Not  only
downward  risks  to  global  growth,  trade  and  investment  have  risen,  the  spill  over  effects  on
emerging markets due to increase in global interest rates could also be profound. We, therefore,
need to brace ourselves for any sudden bout of global financial market turbulence that domestic
economy  and  financial  markets  may  face  in  the  period  ahead.  In  such  a  milieu,  domestic
macroeconomic  policy  framework  needs  to  be  supported  by  sound  financial  supervision  and
regulation.
20. Let me highlight the key policy challenges that the Indian economy confronts at the present
juncture.
(a) Inflation
Although headline inflation has moderated significantly in recent years, as discussed earlier,
its  major  components  –  inflation  in  food,  fuel,  and  inflation  excluding  food  and  fuel  –  are
exhibiting wide divergences this year. While food inflation has turned negative since October
2018  and  fuel  inflation  has  been  highly  volatile,  inflation  excluding  food  and  fuel  remains
sticky at close to 6 per cent. Such wide divergences and large volatilities in inflation across
major groups pose challenges for inflation assessment. Balancing the objectives of inflation
and growth under a flexible inflation targeting framework would warrant careful analysis of
every new data.
(b) Financial Sector
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
There  is  need  for  continued  vigil  on  the  asset  quality  of  banks  as  well  as  resolution  of
stressed  assets  with  a  focus  on  implementation  of  the  new  resolution  framework.  It  will
remain critical to ensure that further slippages are contained.
While technology provides opportunities for growth and innovation in the banking sphere, it
also involves newer challenges and risks. Cyber risk is a major challenge. Formulation of
comprehensive cyber risk and resilience policies and diligent implementation is critical.
Another area where policy action is required is corporate governance in banks with a focus
on transparency and accountability.
(c) External sector
While positive policy settings and continued macroeconomic stability helped contain India’s
external  vulnerabilities,  a  close  monitoring  of  external  sector  is  required,  given  the  sharp
movements in global crude oil prices and global financial market volatility. These are the two
global shocks that have implications for our CAD and financial flows.
Another challenge that Indian companies may face pertains to developments around Brexit.
Indian companies and policy makers need to suitably weigh all opportunities and challenges,
and accordingly re-strategise to respond appropriately.
21. Let me conclude by saying that at the RBI, we are committed to play our role as the monetary
authority for maintaining mandated price stability objective while keeping in mind the objective of
growth; and as the regulator and supervisor of the banking sector and payment systems. We will
take  necessary  steps  to  maintain  financial  stability  and  to  facilitate  enabling  conditions  for
sustainable and robust growth.
22. In October 2018, when I had absolutely no clue that I would be landing up in the Reserve
Bank in December 2018, I had tweeted, “Central Banks across countries have a very critical role
at the current juncture. The challenge is to try and read the situation and take decisive steps in
pursuit of their multiple responsibilities.” As Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, it would be
my endeavour to act according to these principles.
Thank you.
1
Financial Stability Report, December 2018.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
