BALANCING FINTECH OPPORTUNITIES AND RISKS: IMPLEMENTING 
THE BALI FINTECH AGENDA 
 Welcome Remarks 
 by  
 Moses D Pelaelo 
Governor 
 June 24, 2019  
  It is with great pleasure and honour to warmly welcome you all to this 
small  but  vibrant city  of  Gaborone;  the  capital  of  Botswana,  ranked 
the 48th largest country in the world (approximately the size of France, 
Kenya, Madagascar or Texas) but with a population of just over 2.3 
million people – Our Pride, Your Destination.  Allow me to extend a 
special  welcome  to  the  delegates,  moderators  and  other  resource 
persons to this important and timely two-day high-level conference on 
Balancing  Fintech  Opportunities  and  Risks:  Implementing  the  Bali 
Fintech Agenda. 
 While encouraging you to work very hard over the next one and half 
days,  those  from  outside  Botswana  please  do  not  forget  that,  once 
back home, you will be invariably asked about the City of Gaborone’s 
landscape  of  shopping  malls  and  other  social  amenities.  I  have  no 
doubt that it will be an incomplete story and a big disappointment if 
all you can say is that the Conference was successful. 
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  wish  to  start,  first,  by 
acknowledging  the  presence  of  the  Honourable  Minister  of  Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Mr  Kenneth  Matambo,  who  has  kindly 
agreed  to  perform  the  official  opening  of  this  Conference.    In  many 
respects,  Honourable  Minister  Matambo  leads  the  infusion  and 
integration  of  modern  technology  in  the  provision  of  financial  and 
government  services.    He  has  also  lived  through  and  witnessed  the 
evolution from brick and mortar as well as paper to virtual and digital 
channels,  both  as  a  professional  in  various  positions  in  the  Public 
Service of this country and as a consumer of services.  It is, therefore, 
fitting that he will perform the official opening of this Conference and 
give insights and inspiration on prospects for Fintech and its potential 
impact on the development agenda of our region.    
 Second, we are also pleased to have amongst us the First  Alternate 
Executive Director for Africa Group I Constituency at the International 
Monetary Fund, Ms Ita Mannathoko who, incidentally, is a Botswana 
citizen; Deputy Director, Monetary and Capital Markets Department at 
the IMF, Mr Aditya Narain; Division Chief in the African Department 
of  the  IMF  who  is  also  the  Mission  Chief  for  Botswana,  Mr  Papa 
N’Diaye, together with all the  staff of the Fund and the World Bank 
Group here present.  Let me say to you, individually and collectively, 
that  your participation in this Conference is highly  appreciated.    We 
look forward to your wise counsel, guidance and infusion of expertise 
during the Conference. 
 Third, I wish to welcome and appreciate the efforts of those that will 
moderate and  lead  the  discussions  during  the  Conference.    I  expect 
that  their  preparatory  work,  effective  leadership  of  sessions,  and 
animated dialogue on the relevant issues will stimulate and contribute 
 2 
to beneficial sharing of expertise and perspectives on both the benefits 
and challenges of harnessing Fintech. 
 To  all  delegates,  local  and  from  outside  Botswana,  I  have  no  doubt 
that the diversity in this room will surely enrich and add to the value 
and  benefit  of  the  Conference  in  terms  of  both  inputs  into  the 
deliberations and implementable takeaways for policy and regulation, 
as well as ideas for innovation, with respect to business development 
and service provision. 
 Indeed,  the  idea  of  the  Conference  is  to  propagate  and  entrench, 
globally, the broad themes of the Bali Fintech Agenda, which you will 
get  to  hear about  over  the  next  one  and  half  days.  For  this  reason, 
similar conferences, led by the International Monetary Fund, are being 
held  in  other  regions.  The  cross-participation  by  policymakers, 
regulators  and  private  sector  practitioners  in  these  conferences  also 
enriches networking and the sharing of ideas; thus a common view, 
globally,  about  the  prospects  for  Fintech  and,  where  there  are 
potential  systemic  and  global  challenges,  inculcate  forward-looking 
preparations  for  both 
localised  and  coordinated,  cross-border 
mitigation approaches.   
 In this regard, I wish to note that, as a practical approach, the SADC 
region has established a Fintech regional monitoring group comprising 
representatives from the respective central banks. This is intended to 
build institutional knowledge of Fintech developments on an ongoing 
basis  and,  therefore,  continually  provide  the  SADC  Committee  of 
Central Bank Governors with a comprehensive picture of existing and 
emerging  technologies,  the  application  and  market  penetration  of 
 3 
these technologies, as well as the attendant risks.  We, therefore, look 
forward to hearing your thoughts on the broad range of areas that are 
relevant for balancing Fintech opportunities and risks.  
 I acknowledge and fully appreciate, in this respect, that the effort by 
the International Monetary Fund to lead the integration of Fintech into 
the  global  development  and  policy  agenda  provides  for  a  useful, 
knowledgeable and accessible partner to support the domestication of 
this agenda.  Having said that, I take it you will agree with me that, 
while policy and regulation can guide and safeguard, at the end of the 
day, the more impactful and beneficial aspect of Fintech should be on 
private business activity and associated adoption by customers, such 
that there are clear benefits in terms of productivity social and welfare 
enhancement. Even then, conferences, such as this one, are valuable 
for  policy  makers  to  reflect  on  prospective  opportunities  and 
vulnerabilities and to deliberate on responsive growth strategies.  
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, for this purpose, there 
is no better qualified person than the distinguished Minister of Finance 
and  Economic  Development,  Honourable  Matambo  to  break  the 
ground  for  this  Conference  and  lead  us  in  navigating  the  linkages 
between  Fintech  evolution,  economic  growth  dynamics  and  benefit 
risk equation. 
 Please  joining  me  in  welcoming,  most  warmly,  Honourable  Minister 
Kenneth Matambo to officially open the Conference.  
 Thank you for your kind attention.  Minister Matambo Sir!    
 4 
