  News conference on new banknotes 
  Berne, 3 September 2019 
Thomas Jordan 
Introductory remarks by Thomas Jordan 
 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I too welcome you warmly to this presentation of the new 100-franc note. The issuance of this 
final note brings the ninth banknote series – an important and complex project – to a close. 
Over the next few minutes I’d like to look back at some of our experiences, review the results 
and, finally, make a few observations about the future of cash. 
Work on the new banknote series began over 14 years ago. On 2 February 2005, the SNB 
published a press release announcing that it was preparing a new series inspired by the 
overarching theme ‘Switzerland open to the world’. In November 2005, the results of the 
design competition were presented to the public, and at the beginning of 2007, the SNB 
tasked Manuela Pfrunder with carrying out the graphic design work. 
This decision marked the beginning of a 10-year adventure. The development of the new 
banknotes was shaped by stringent quality standards on both the design and production fronts. 
Throughout the process, dialogue and exchange were required between all the involved 
parties to ensure that these standards were met. Thanks to this team effort, the ninth series – 
culminating in the last denomination, the 100-franc note – is now complete. 
An ambitious start … 
In 2005, we started with the ambition of creating a banknote series that was highly innovative 
across the board: 
- We wanted to achieve significant technological advances in terms of both materials and 
printing. 
- At the same time, we wanted to break new ground in the designs. We wished to move away 
from individual personalities or achievements and depict an overarching theme instead. 
  Page 1/4 
  Berne, 3 September 2019 
Thomas Jordan 
News conference on new banknotes 
 - And finally, we wanted to reduce the size of the notes. This would make them fit more 
easily into people’s wallets, as well as rendering them more suitable for machine processing. 
- We did not, however, make any changes to the denominations and consciously retained the 
tried-and-trusted colour palette. 
… and the associated challenges 
This set of requirements pushed the limits of what was technologically possible. We at the 
SNB and our partners had to jointly overcome a succession of challenges. 
The most important difference between the eighth and ninth banknote series is in the materials 
used. Thanks to the new substrate Durasafe, we were able to integrate new and complex 
security features – such as the transparent Swiss cross which turns into the flag when held up 
to the light – into the substrate itself, thereby making the new series even more secure. You 
can see what I mean on the image. The new substrate makes the notes more robust, and we 
expect them to have a longer life cycle; this, in turn, will have a positive effect on overall 
costs. 
Mass production of the notes, involving a new substrate, complex printing procedures and 
innovative security features, initially posed a few unexpected problems. This led to delays. 
The SNB had originally planned to issue the first denomination in autumn 2010, but it became 
clear that additional development work would be needed before the green light could be given 
for mass production. The issue date had to be postponed twice on account of these 
refinements. 
The decision to deploy a new substrate was a bold one – and turned out to be the right course 
of action, as it allowed us to incorporate unique security features. However, we were 
dependent on one supplier for the production of the Durasafe substrate, and this had 
consequences around two years ago. When the Durasafe manufacturer Landqart found itself 
facing a liquidity shortage in 2017, the SNB decided to take over the company in conjunction 
with Orell Füssli in order to safeguard banknote production using this unique substrate. 
Another key element of the new banknote series is the design. The core design elements on 
the notes were to be memorable and feel contemporary even years later. We wanted motifs 
that would not only be clear and vivid but would also have emotional appeal. 
Here too, we had to overcome some obstacles. Our goal was to portray a theme in a coherent 
and consistent overall context. However, as work progressed it became evident that it was 
going to be difficult to depict the thrust of the original overarching theme ‘Switzerland open 
to the world’ satisfactorily in a banknote series. This ran counter to our plan of designing 
banknotes that had a clear internal logic and were immediately recognisable as a series. 
The production delay bought us some time to consider the overarching theme of the new 
series, the selected illustrations and the messaging of the various motifs on the notes in greater 
depth. The result was a decision to change the overarching theme to ‘The many facets of 
  Page 2/4 
  Berne, 3 September 2019 
Thomas Jordan 
News conference on new banknotes 
 Switzerland’. Taking this as our inspiration allowed us to portray our country with all its 
facets very effectively and gave us more latitude for the design. 
In line with this thematic development, each denomination depicts a typically Swiss 
characteristic, which is then illustrated graphically using a key motif. The key motif appears 
in various forms in all the illustrations and security features on a given denomination, and ties 
the different sections of the note together. You can see from this image that the key motif of 
the 100-franc note is water. 
While the key motif ensures coherence within a given denomination, core design elements 
which appear in all denominations – a hand, a globe, a location and the security features – 
create continuity across all the notes and lend the series a sense of overall cohesion.  
The design thus sets new standards when it comes to combining security, functionality and 
aesthetics. 
Issuance successfully concluded 
Thanks to the close cooperation of all those involved, we were able to clear the numerous 
hurdles we encountered. We would like to take this opportunity to thank all of our partners 
sincerely for their contribution. Special thanks go to Manuela Pfrunder and her team for their 
designs. Their work has been consistently impressive – from the earliest drafts right through 
to the issuance of the final denomination. I would also like to thank our suppliers: Orell 
Füssli, Landqart, Sicpa and Kurz. Furthermore, allow me to thank our cash distribution 
partners, the banks and Swiss Post for their valuable cooperation and support in enabling a 
smooth issuance process. And finally, let me thank the many SNB staff who have managed 
this project so diligently over the years and have seen it through to a successful conclusion. 
In issuing modern and secure banknotes, the SNB is fulfilling its statutory task of ensuring the 
supply and distribution of cash in Switzerland. We are therefore pleased that we have 
evidently been able to meet the expectations of the banknote users – the Swiss population: 
- The new designs have been almost universally well received and have also been lauded by 
banknote experts internationally. 
- The new notes are technologically state-of-the-art and are also easy to handle, robust and 
distinctive. 
- All the logistical processes, including the modification of ATMS to accommodate the new 
notes, also ran largely smoothly. 
The substantial media and public interest and the feedback on social media have also been 
gratifying. When it comes to rapidly informing the public about the security features and the 
design of the new banknotes, the media naturally play a pivotal role. Ladies and gentlemen, 
on behalf of the SNB, thank you for all the work you do. 
We broke new ground with respect to informing the public as well, introducing ‘Swiss 
Banknotes’ – an augmented reality app with which users can explore the new series. We are 
  Page 3/4 
  Berne, 3 September 2019 
Thomas Jordan 
News conference on new banknotes 
 convinced that this innovation has helped to make the design and security features of the 
banknotes more accessible, especially to younger generations. 
So what happens to the eighth-series notes now? 
The old banknotes remain legal tender until further notice and can thus continue to be used for 
making payments. The SNB plans to announce the recall date for the eighth-series notes in the 
course of 2020. From the recall date onwards, the old notes lose their status as legal tender 
and can then only be exchanged at the SNB or one of our agencies. 
The future of cash in the digital age 
I would like to finish by looking to the future. 
The digital transformation taking place in our economy is also affecting developments in the 
payments arena. As part of its statutory mandate, the SNB must not only ensure the supply 
and distribution of cash but also facilitate and secure the operation of cashless payment 
systems. A well-functioning payment system is critical for our economy. 
Technological progress is also changing customers’ expectations and needs in terms of 
cashless payments – for instance as regards speed and user-friendliness. 
In this area too, the SNB is a participant in innovation. Specifically, we are ensuring that 
Swiss Interbank Clearing (SIC) – our country’s powerful infrastructure for transacting 
cashless payments in Swiss francs – continues to work quickly and efficiently and thus 
remains as attractive as possible. 
Promoting and ensuring both the supply of cash and the smooth functioning of cashless 
payments is no contradiction. The various payment methods satisfy the differing needs of our 
population. Our latest survey on payment methods, published in May 2018, showed that the 
public’s use of – and affinity for – cash remains high. It also confirmed that the Swiss 
population like to be given the choice between paying cashless or paying with notes and 
coins. Banknote circulation in our country has increased steadily in recent years. Cash is used 
and valued for a variety of reasons, and not just out of habit or reluctance to adopt new 
technology. Cash can be used everywhere and is less dependent on technical infrastructure. 
Cashless payments are likely to become more important over time. I am nevertheless 
convinced that the future of cash, and thus of our new banknote series, is bright. 
Today, our full attention is focused on the new 100-franc note and the rest of the new 
banknote family, which is now complete. 
Thank you all very much for your interest. 
  Page 4/4 
 