Shaktikanta Das: Emerging challenges to financial stability
Inaugural address by Mr Shaktikanta Das, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the FIBAC
2019, the Annual Global Banking Conference organised by the Indian Banks’ Association (IBA)
and the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), Mumbai, 19 August
2019.
 It is indeed a matter of great pleasure for me to be here today amidst the business and financial
sector leaders. My compliments go to the partners, namely, the Indian Banks’ Association, FICCI
and  the  Boston  Consulting  Group  for  spearheading  this  event.  What  really  gives  me  the
additional motivation to address you is the earnestness with which you have themed this year’s
conference, showing your appreciation of the need to prepare ourselves for a new paradigm in
banking.  The  happenings  of  the  past,  especially  the  not  so  remote  ones,  have  generated  an
attitude  towards  the  financial  sector  that  ranges  from  an  existential  angst  to  a  more  positive
outlook that hinges on the opportunities beckoning at us. I would like to believe that solutions to a
better future lie in unlearning from the practices which led to that angst and in relearning to befit
ourselves in the changing financial landscape. Prudent governance and emerging trends in the
digital space have the potential to reshape the way we perceive finance. Against these broad
underpinnings, let me present my thoughts highlighting emerging challenges to financial stability.
This would be the theme of my address to this august gathering.
2. A consensus on the definition of the term financial stability remains elusive even today. Broadly
speaking, the core principles governing financial stability can be thought of in terms of a financial
system’s  ability  to  facilitate  efficient  allocation  of  economic  resources;  its  effectiveness  in
assessing,  pricing,  and  managing  financial  risks;  and  in  maintaining  its  capability  to  perform
these key functions even when affected by external shocks. In other words, as one IMF research
paper  of  2004  puts  it, a  financial  system  is  in  a  range  of  stability  whenever  it  is  capable  of
facilitating  the  performance  of  an  economy,  and  of  dissipating  financial  imbalances  that  arise
1
endogenously or as a result of significant adverse and unanticipated events .
The Global Context
3. The global approach to financial stability changed significantly after the financial crisis of 2008
which made it abundantly clear that financial strength of every financial institution does not add
up to systemic stability. The policy makers realised that micro-prudential regulations have to be
complemented with systemic risk measures; otherwise systemic stability could be at risk.
4. Ten years after the crisis, the major financial sector reforms, called for by the G20 and co-
ordinated by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and Financial Stability Board (FSB), are
now  mostly  in  place.  Large  banks  are  better  capitalised,  less  leveraged  and  more  liquid.  The
banking system is, therefore, more resilient to economic shocks. Implementation of Too-Big-To-
Fail (TBTF) reforms is advancing, including via the establishment of effective resolution regimes
for  banks.  Over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives  markets  have  been  made  simpler  and  more
transparent. The use of central clearing has increased, and collateralisation is more widespread.
Those aspects of non-bank financial intermediation that contributed to the financial crisis have
declined.  However,  the  implementation  of  reforms  is  not  yet  complete  and  remains  uneven,
especially  in  the  non-banking  space.  It  goes  without  saying  that  while  dealing  with  all  these
issues, country specific situations have to be factored in.
5. Recent developments in the global economy should be seen in this perspective. A weaker
than expected growth with signs of slowdown in major economies, as projected by multilateral
institutions like the International Monetary Fund (IMF), is one of the key risks to global financial
stability  at  this  juncture.  Looming  trade-tensions,  geo-political  risks,  and  related  uncertainties
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
continue to exert pressure on the investment outlook. The latest Global Financial Stability Report
(GFSR) by the IMF warns that because of these developments, vulnerabilities in the sovereign,
corporate,  and  non-bank  financial  sectors  are  elevated  by  historical  standards  in  several
systemically  important  countries  and  regions.  Under  these  circumstances,  central  banks  and
other regulators are required to follow the cardinal principle – the regulator never sleeps. Cutting
the hyperbole out, what it means is that the regulators and other authorities need to be constantly
vigilant and proactively take whatever steps that are necessary.
6. The current state of the global banking sector also presents a story of uncertainty. While bank
capitalisation  has  increased  significantly  in  the  post-crisis  period  primarily  due  to  Basel  III
reforms, bank profitability has been lacklustre. Both macroeconomic and bank-specific factors
have contributed to this phenomenon. Importantly, banks are also facing increasing competition
from  non-traditional  players,  such  as  FinTech  and  BigTechs,  which  are  taking  advantage  of
digital innovation. These developments have implications for financial stability in Emerging Market
Economies (EMEs) like India. It is indeed imperative that banks capitalise on these technological
advances and the associated business models. Regulators on their part also need to provide
enabling frameworks for these endeavours by banks as well as the non-traditional players.
The Indian Scenario
7. The pursuit of financial stability has always been a policy priority in India. The twin concerns of
monetary and financial stability constitute the core objectives of the Reserve Bank. Similar to the
global case, India also responded to the crisis by introducing changes in the existing institutional
architecture to further the cause of financial stability. Recognising the various channels that could
lead to systemic instability and the fact that different segments of financial systems are regulated
by  different  regulators,  the  institutional  mechanisms  of  the  Financial  Stability  Development
Council (FSDC), under the Chairmanship of the Finance Minister, and the FSDC sub-committee,
under  the  chairmanship  of  Governor,  Reserve  Bank,  have  been  fully  functional.  The  biannual
Financial Stability Report (FSR), a report of FSDC sub-committee, analyses the current state of
financial  system,  the  extent  of  interconnectedness  among  its  various  segments  and  possible
sources of vulnerabilities that could impact domestic financial stability.
8.  The  headwinds  to  financial  stability  could  emanate  from  various  sectors  of  the  economy,
namely, (i) the credit market; (ii) financial markets; (iii) external sector; and (iv) payment system.
It may emanate from some other sources as well. But today, I will focus on these four aspects.
Headwinds from Banking Sector
9. In India, the credit market is dominated by the banking sector which plays a key role in financial
intermediation in the economy. Soundness of the banking system may have a bearing on the
financial stability through various channels – excessive credit growth; maturity mismatches and
liquidity issues; high proportion of non-performing loans; and overleveraging, among others. Even
if  individual  institutions  are  robust,  the  overall  behaviour  of  the  financial  sector  can  pose  a
systemic risk. Hence, monitoring the health of the banking sector is crucial for financial stability.
10. In recent years, as a result of efforts by both the Reserve Bank and the Government, the
overhang  of  stressed  assets  in  the  banking  system  has  declined.  Going  forward,  the  macro-
stress  tests  for  credit  risk  conducted  by  the  Reserve  Bank  indicate  that  under  the  baseline
scenario, the GNPA ratio may decline further by March 2020 . Other indicators like the provision
coverage ratio (PCR), capital adequacy and return on assets have also improved. I have earlier
stressed  that  the  real  test  of  performance,  efficiency,  internal  stability  and  governance
improvement  in  public  sector  banks  (PSBs)  would  be  their  ability  to  access  capital  markets
rather than looking at the Government as a recapitaliser of first and last resort.
2
11. Despite certain teething problems, the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) is proving to be
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
a  game  changer.  New  norms  for  resolution  of  stressed  assets  framed  in  June  2019  by  the
Reserve  Bank  provide  incentives  for  early  resolution,  with  discretion  to  lenders  on  resolution
processes. The objective is to ring-fence future build-ups of NPA stress and protect the banking
sector. The recent amendments to the IBC should also be able to facilitate faster resolution of
stressed assets.
12. As we have seen in the recent past, the build-up of risks among regulated entities due to
interconnectedness,  exposure  concentrations,  non-transparent  market  practices,  governance
deficiencies, and their contagion effects have repercussions for financial stability. In this regard,
the Reserve Bank is keeping a close watch on the interconnectedness of banks and non-banks.
The Working Group on Core Investment Companies (CICs) has already started its deliberations
and  based  on  its  recommendations,  the  Reserve  Bank  proposes  to  carry  out  necessary
changes  in  the  regulatory  architecture  for  CICs.  We  are  also  in  the  process  of  building  a
specialised regulatory and supervisory cadre for regulation and supervision of banks and non-
banks.
13.  Another  important  issue  in  this  context  is  the  immediate  need  to  strengthen  corporate
governance  structure  in  banks,  which  I  have  elaborated  earlier  as  well.  This  would  include
efficient  functioning  of  their  boards  and  board  sub-committees,  especially  audit  and  risk
management committees; robust system for monitoring of performance of MDs/CEOs; and, an
effective performance evaluation system to improve the financial and operating parameters of
banks.  We  have  already  sent  our  suggestions  to  the  Government  for  governance  reforms  in
PSBs. Overall, it is important that risk management systems, compliance functions, and internal
control mechanisms are strengthened and made more dynamic.
Non-Banking Sector
14. Coming to the NBFC sector, we all know that this sector complements the banking sector
and aspires to act as the bridge to provide last mile connectivity. Further, niche NBFCs fulfil the
unmet and exclusive credit needs of infrastructure, factoring, leasing and other such activities.
Non-traditional and digital players are now entering this space to deliver financial services by way
of  innovative  methods  involving  digital  platform.  There  is  a  web  of  inter-linkages  of  the  NBFC
sector with the banking sector, capital market and other financial sector entities. The Reserve
Bank keeps a close watch on these inter-linkages to ensure financial stability. With a view to
strengthen the sector, maintain stability and avoid regulatory arbitrage, the Reserve Bank and the
Government have been proactively taking necessary regulatory and supervisory steps. It is our
endeavour  to  have  an  optimal  level  of  regulation  and  supervision  so  that  the  NBFC  sector  is
financially  resilient  and  robust.  We  will  not  hesitate  to  take  whatever  steps  are  required  to
maintain financial stability in the short, medium and the long-term.
15.  Our  objective  is  to  harmonise  the  liquidity  norms  between  banks  and  NBFCs,  taking  into
account their unique business models. We are also looking at governance and risk management
structures in NBFCs. Recently in May 2019, NBFCs with a size of more than ₹5,000 crores have
been  advised  to  appoint  a  functionally  independent  Chief  Risk  Officer  (CRO)  with  clearly
specified role and responsibilities. This is expected to bring in professional risk management to
the working of large NBFCs.
16. The move to bring Housing Finance Companies (HFCs) under the regulatory ambit of the
Reserve  Bank  is  significant,  given  their  asset-liability  profiles.  Including  HFCs,  the  size  of  the
NBFC sector constitutes about 25 per cent of combined balance sheet of scheduled commercial
banks. The Reserve Bank will take necessary measures to deal with these challenges.
Headwinds from Financial Markets
17. Apart  from  banks  and  non-banks,  headwinds  to  financial  stability  can  also  originate  from
financial markets. The increasing frequency and severity of currency and debt crises globally and
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
their ability to cause output loss calls for careful regulation and surveillance of financial markets.
Globalization of finance, by amplifying the risk of contagion, and thereby constraining the policy
space for effective regulation, has added to the difficulty of this task. As a regulator of various
market  segments  such  as  money  markets,  G-sec,  forex  and  interest  rate  derivatives,  the
Reserve Bank has followed calibrated, sequenced and careful approach to develop and integrate
these markets. The broad objective has been to keep pace with the requirements of fast-growing
Indian economy, while being vigilant of potential risks to financial stability. This is done through
freeing up market forces by moving away from prescriptive to principle-based regulation, whose
core  features  are  simplification  of  processes,  encouraging  product  innovation,  removing
regulatory differentiation across participant categories and ensuring protection for retail market
participants.
18. Let me give one example. Recently, we have permitted the creation of an electronic platform
on which one can buy or sell foreign currency at market rates. This platform is accessible over
the internet and the customers can get the best market price without having to approach any
individual bank/broker. This is how FinTech can be used to inject greater efficiency to financial
markets.
19. As financial markets are opening up, stability concerns are addressed through capital flow
control  measures  (e.g.,  the  overall  cap  on  foreign  investment  in  the  debt  market)  or  macro-
prudential measures (e.g., cap on total external borrowing as a percentage of GDP).
20. Adoption of global best practices to improve market integrity is another important aspect of
regulation.  In  the  last  couple  of  years,  the  Legal  Entity  Identifier  (LEI)  system  has  been
implemented in a phased manner in all financial markets, including derivative markets regulated
by the Reserve Bank, as well as for bank loans. We believe transparency of financial markets will
greatly improve once the LEI system is used widely. The recent regulations to control market
abuse, upgrade the benchmark setting process are all consistent with global standards.
21.  A  key  feature  of  regulation  of  derivative  markets  has  been  the  differential  treatment  of
professional and non-expert clients. Moreover, differential access to derivative markets is being
gradually  removed. Anyone  –  resident  or  non-resident  –  can  now  access  these  markets  for
hedging on similar terms. In fact, alignment of incentives for non-residents to gradually move to
the domestic market is an important regulatory aim. As you would be aware, the Task Force on
Offshore Rupee Markets with Mrs. Usha Thorat, former Deputy Governor as chairperson, has
made important recommendations that are likely to improve participation of non-residents in the
onshore  market.  Our  aim  is  to  make  the  onshore  market  more  accessible  and  attract  higher
transaction volumes.
External Headwinds and Domestic Financial Stability
22. With increased trade and financial linkages with rest of the world, India has become more
susceptible to the vagaries of heightened global economic uncertainties. While trade channels
take some time to show a tangible impact of global shocks, it is the financial and confidence
channels that quickly transmit the global shocks as was evident in the case of India during the
taper tantrum period in mid-2013. In fact with negative and low interest rates in major economies,
net  private  capital  flows  to  EMEs  in  the  form  of  direct  and  portfolio  investments  have  nearly
doubled in the post-crisis period. However, with high monetary policy uncertainties in advanced
economies, these flows have proved to be fluid and therefore posed considerable risk to EMEs.
Just a year back, EMEs like India faced financial market turbulence due to a faster-than-expected
tightening in monetary policies in advanced economies. Many EMEs including India witnessed
portfolio capital outflows, exerting downward pressure on domestic currencies.
23.  In  recent  years,  India’s  external  sector  has  benefited  from  a  sustainable  level  of  current
account deficit, largely financed by robust foreign direct investment inflows and flexible exchange
rate policy. Improvement in other vulnerability indicators during 2018–19 such as fall in external
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
debt to GDP ratio (from 20.1 per cent at end-March 2018 to 19.7 per cent at end-March 2019)
and debt service ratio (from 7.5 per cent at end-March 2018 to 6.4 per cent at end-March 2019)
also  augur  well  for  mitigating  the  spill  over  of  external  headwinds  on  the  domestic  financial
markets. Notwithstanding strong macroeconomic parameters, constantly changing dynamics of
external headwinds warrant policy preparedness in order to minimise spill overs of global shocks
and preserve financial stability. As a supplementary safeguard, the Reserve Bank has signed a
bilateral currency swap agreement with the Bank of Japan for US$ 75 billion with the objective of
bringing greater stability in foreign exchange and capital markets in the country.
Payment System and Financial Stability
24. A number of innovations have taken place in retail payments which have reshaped payment
processes and changed the retail payments landscape. India’s payment systems are considered
to be efficient, safe and secure. While acknowledging this and without trying to be complacent,
the  Reserve  Bank  has  made  an  attempt  to  benchmark  domestic  payment  systems  and
practices  with  those  prevalent  in  prominent  countries  worldwide.  The  assessment  of  various
indicators  including  regulation  and  oversight  suggests  that  India  has  a  strong  and  robust
regulatory structure.
25.  However,  new  entrants  into  the  financial  services  space,  including  FinTech  and  BigTech
firms are altering the universe of financial service providers. A range of new lending platforms,
including  P2P  and  marketplace  lenders,  have  appeared  in  jurisdictions  around  the  world.
Highlighting  some  of  the  related  challenges  and  opportunities,  the  recent  Annual  Economic
Report of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) states that such firms can collect large
amount  of  data  at  nearly  zero  costs,  which  can  be  used  to  better  assess  the  riskiness  of
borrowers  and  could  reduce  the  need  for  collateral  to  assure  repayment.  These  new  players
have also made inroads in the provision of payment services, remittance services and cross-
border payments. Moreover, they have the potential to grow very quickly and become large and
systemically  important  financial  institutions,  raising  concerns  over  financial  stability  and
consumer protection.
26. Faced with such profound changes, the policy makers’ dilemma is more than walking the
middle  path  between  innovation  and  regulation.  The  public  policy  approach  here  needs  to  be
more  comprehensive  and  holistic,  taking  into  account  issues  such  as  financial  regulation,
competition policy and data privacy regulation. Coordination among various authorities – such as
financial regulators, competition authorities and data protection supervisors – becomes critical at
this juncture.
27. The Reserve Bank’s Vision-2021 for Payment and Settlement Systems in India visualises
empowering every Indian with access to a bouquet of e-payment options that is safe, secure,
convenient, quick and affordable. The Committee on Deepening of Digital Payments under the
chairmanship of Shri Nandan Nilekani has suggested to increase the volume of digital payments
by  10  times  in  the  next  three  years  which  can  be  facilitated  by  initiatives  such  as  removing
transaction charges on digital payments, simplifying KYC processes, and reducing KYC costs
for  banks.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  taking  necessary  action  based  on  the  committee’s
recommendations.
Concluding Observations
28. At the end, I would like to highlight the significance of consumer protection which is not only
important from the point of view of access but also from a broader context of stakeholders’ trust.
The trust of the consumers that the services are fairly priced, the trust of the investors that the
stakeholders are acting in their best collective interest, the trust of the regulators that the audited
financial statements do represent a fair and reasonable assessment of the activities of a firm –
all  have  intangible  but  substantial  contribution  to  national  savings  and  financial  stability.  Post
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Lehman developments in the US financial markets are a prime and sobering example of what
happens when investor trust evaporates. In fact, consumer protection should be seen as a key
pivot around which all regulatory and supervisory initiatives are required to evolve.
29.  Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  much  progress  has  been  made  in  maintaining  a  stable
financial system. However, as we have seen, the financial landscape is continuously changing,
and new challenges are emerging. The Reserve Bank is continuously harnessing the regulatory
and supervisory framework to better adapt to the evolving scenario. The IBA, its members and
other stakeholders should, therefore, be active partners in ensuring that such a process evolves
successfully.
1
2
Garry, J. S. (2004). Defining financial stability. IMF Working Paper, 2004: WP/04/187.
Financial Stability Report, June 2019, Reserve Bank of India.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
