Yves Mersch: Interview in Hospodarske noviny
Interview with Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in
Hospodarske noviny, conducted by Ms Kristina Votrubova on 11 January 2019.
 There are rumours about the ECB´s plans to raise interest rates, however there are also
voices that it is not a good idea, as the situation is changing. What is the ECB´s position?
The ECB’s position is that we will continue with our policy of monetary accommodation for as
long as necessary. We are confident that what we have done is helping us to get inflation in line
with our objective at levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
So no date has been established for raising the interest rates.
We  never  announce  in  advance  how,  when  or  by  how  much  we  intend  to  use  different
instruments.  That  is  not  how  central  banks  work.  We  give  broad  forward  guidance  on  the
direction  of  our  monetary  policy.  But  we  always  look  at  incoming  information  and  evaluate
whether it is in line with how we expected the economy to behave. What is currently happening to
the  economy  is  still  broadly  in  line  with  our  baseline  scenario.  We  had  already  anticipated  a
slowdown  in  growth  when  we  announced  these  baselines.  Now  that  the  slowdown  is
materialising, we do not have to take it into account for a second time in our policy response.
Fundamentals have not changed but political uncertainty has increased.
Slovakia would need interest rates to rise as household debt is increasing alarmingly.
What is the ECB’s view of the situation in Slovakia?
First,  we  conduct  monetary  policy  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  rather  than  for  individual
countries.  Second,  if  we  raised  interest  rates  to  curb  household  debt,  the  effect  would  also
impact the corporate sector and investment. That is why there are macroprudential instruments
at the disposal of national authorities. And I have seen that the competent authorities in Slovakia,
including the national central bank, have taken action to tackle the dynamic rise of household
debt. I think once you have put such instruments into action, you would like to see also what the
effect  of  these  instruments  is.  Do  they  work  as  is  expected? And,  as  I  have  been  told,  there
seems to be a positive reaction.
In the majority of European countries, the economic cycle has already reached its peak
and the euro area economy is slowing down. How does the ECB view the situation and
what are you going to do about it?
As  I  said,  we  take  the  expected  path  of  the  economy  into  account  in  our  policy  decisions.
However, a slowdown does not mean that we will slide into a recession. What is happening right
now is what we expected to happen.
So are you reconsidering plans to end quantitative easing?
At each meeting of the Governing Council we assess whether the economy is in line with our
expected  baseline  scenario.  If  we  identify  a  deviation,  we  analyse  the  reasons  for  it  and  the
impact it is likely to have on inflation. Let me remind you that our sole objective is to maintain
price stability.
The  German  economy,  which  is  the  largest  economy  in  the  euro  area,  has
underperformed expectations. What does this mean for the euro area as a whole?
The  slowdown  in  the  third  quarter  was  mainly  caused  by  the  automotive  industry,  which  was
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
affected by the diesel scandal and related aspects. But a slowdown in one quarter in one country
is not sufficient to prompt a monetary policy response at the euro area level. We would have to
see whether a slightly deeper slowdown in one quarter might not be followed by a slightly better
performance in the following quarter. Once the relevant data are available, we will assess the
trend and the future path of the euro area economy. We will then judge whether it is still in line
with our inflation expectations, as price stability is the only needle in our compass.
How will Brexit affect the euro area economy?
The  UK  economy  has  been  deeply  integrated  into  the  European  one  in  very  diverse  sectors.
Inevitably,  Brexit  will  have  some  consequences.  However,  it  is  unclear  which  players  will  be
relative  winners  or  losers,  as  the  consequences  will  not  be  evenly  distributed.  Obviously,  we
would have preferred not to have Brexit, because we are not eager to see unnecessary shocks
to the economy. For me, the main concern is uncertainty, which has a negative impact on all
sectors of the economy and on all countries.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
