Luis de Guindos: Euro at 20 years - the road ahead
Address by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the European
Parliamentary Week, Brussels, 19 February 2019.
 I  would  first  like  to  thank  the  European  Parliament  and  the  Parliament  of  Romania  for  this
opportunity to reflect together on the first 20 years of the euro and discuss the road ahead.
The  euro’s  first  two  decades  saw  the  outbreak  of  the  great  financial  crisis,  which  caused  a
permanent loss in output in all major economic regions around the globe, and of the sovereign
debt crisis in the euro area, which posed an existential threat to the single currency.
Steady advances in convergence and financial integration in the euro area had been made before
these crises. However, as a result of the incompleteness of Economic and Monetary Union the
impact of these shocks reversed some of the progress made towards integration, just when they
were most needed.
Thanks to a collective effort by European citizens and their leaders, the existential threat to the
euro  has  been  overcome.  Several  euro  area  countries  have  gone  through  a  substantial
adjustment phase, macroeconomic imbalances have been unwound, and price competitiveness
has  improved.  We  have  seen  an  impressive  correction  in  current  account  deficits  and  fiscal
deficits have declined.
Also thanks to the support of the ECB’s monetary policy measures, the euro area has been on a
broad-based recovery path, which has been reflected in improved labour market conditions and
job creation. Monetary Union is now more resilient to shocks thanks to the economic expansion,
a reduction in imbalances, as well as the significant institutional reforms that have been adopted
in  the  post-crisis  period.  Nevertheless,  there  is  more  work  to  be  done:  the  journey  ahead  to
complete the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) is challenging.
This  forum  allows  me  to  discuss  the  important  role  played  by  parliaments  on  that  journey.
Parliaments  already  have  a  significant  role  to  play  in  the  governance  of  the  euro  area. And  I
believe that we can further build on their contribution to improve the functioning of Economic and
Monetary Union.
Rather than focusing on what we need for a better functioning of EMU, I will stress today why and
how  parliamentary  involvement  can  enhance  the  legitimacy  of  economic  decisions  at  national
and European level and make them more consistent with participation in a single currency.
Answering EU citizens’ legitimacy concerns
Our  Union  is  founded  on  the  value  of  democracy.  And,  following  the  tradition  of  liberal
democracies, it is based on principles, rules and institutions that protect freedoms, rights and the
rule of law to avoid abuse of powers.
On the one hand, legitimacy in such a system requires that all European citizens, our demos,
have a choice and a voice. On the other, it is grounded in fundamental rules that form the basis
of our social contract. Nevertheless, ensuring legitimacy is not a one-off activity; it requires an
ongoing effort by institutions.
Let me look at the example of the ECB, of which I have the honour to be Vice-President.
The  ECB’s  democratic  mandate  is  laid  down  in  the  EU  Treaties,  which  were  ratified  in  all
Member States according to their constitutional requirements.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Within this mandate, and to fulfil the euro-area wide objectives assigned to the ECB, the ECB
has discretion to use its instruments as necessary. And its independence is protected, precisely
to  ensure  that  the  legitimacy  of  its  decisions  is  not  undermined  by  accusations  of  political
interference for short-term electoral gains.
As  a  necessary  counterpart  to  that  independence,  the  ECB  is  accountable  to  the  European
Parliament, which represents the people of the EU. This is complemented by judicial review of
the ECB’s decisions by the Court of Justice of the EU and the audit of the operational efficiency
of the management of the ECB by the European Court of Auditors.
All these elements allow us to show that we are acting in accordance with our mandate and not
arbitrarily.
We take our accountability to the European Parliament very seriously. Over the years, we have
developed a strong and comprehensive accountability framework, which goes beyond the Treaty
requirements. We can affirm that the European Parliament has been very diligent in its regular
and in-depth scrutiny. As one should expect, the intensity of this scrutiny was stepped up during
1
the crisis.
The role of parliaments in fostering a better functioning EMU
The  ECB’s  experience  shows  how  a  well-functioning  EMU  requires  strong  institutions,  strong
rules  and  strong  accountability.  They  are  complementary  and  mutually  reinforcing  in  pursuing
input and output legitimacy, i.e. ensuring that institutions function smoothly and perform well.
Any discussion on what should be done requires us to look at how we can ensure democratic
legitimacy  and  accountability.  This  is  particularly  true  for  decisions  on  economic  and  fiscal
matters, which are highly political; though enshrined in national democracies, they are subject to
common European rules.
In  these  matters,  both  national  parliaments  and  the  European  Parliament  already  bear  an
important  responsibility.  National  parliaments  adopt  the  national  government  budget  and
structural reforms.
At the same time, the European Parliament, as co-legislator, has a key role in the design of an
effective and efficient EU governance framework. It needs to consider the cross-border spillovers
from national policies, as well as the impact of European policies at national level.
The European Parliamentary Week can play a very useful role here as it allows us to learn from
each other’s experiences. In fact, there has been no lack of successful reforms in different policy
fields across EU countries.
Let me take a concrete example.
In the area of financial services, the completion of the banking union is essential for improving the
functioning of EMU. Looking back at what we have achieved since the crisis, the result is quite
impressive.
European banking supervision, which marked its fifth anniversary last year, has brought a more
uniform  approach  to  how  banks  are  supervised.  We  have  also  created  a  new  EU  resolution
framework, which ensures that banks can fail in an orderly manner and that the cost of bank
failures is shifted away from governments and onto the financial sector.
Thanks to these achievements, the banking union is helping to make European banks safer and
sounder and more able to support the European economy. We have made good progress, but
we are not done yet.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
On  the  one  hand,  we  need  to  complete  the  banking  union  by  operationalising  the  common
backstop to the Single Resolution Fund and advancing political discussions on banking union’s
missing third pillar: a European deposit insurance scheme.
To  complete  the  banking  union  reform  agenda  substantial  risk  reduction  has  already  been
achieved and the process is ongoing and should continue. But further progress also depends on
having a more harmonised regulatory framework.
This entails, among other things, undertaking a serious effort to harmonise options and national
discretions (ONDs), some of which lie in the hands of national legislators, limiting opportunities
for regulatory arbitrage, and ensuring a level playing field at European level.
This can only be achieved through European legislation and common institutions, which bring
national competent authorities closer together.
Conclusions
In conclusion, allow me to use a metaphor. National and European parliaments should be like
two runners in a relay race. They are both essential in passing on the baton of legitimacy: in other
words,  they  should  cooperate  as  one  team  to  ensure  the  legitimacy  of  the  greater  sharing  of
sovereignty that underpins EMU.
In running this relay race, we need to discuss the optimal allocation of responsibilities between
the national and European level. But for this not to happen through the back door, we need to
open it up to public debate. The yearly European Parliamentary Week offers a perfect forum in
which to bring it forward.
Thank you very much and I look forward to today’s debate.
1
See “The evolution of the ECB’s accountability practices during the crisis”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 5, ECB,
2018.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
