John C Williams: LIBOR - the clock is ticking
Remarks by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the 2019 US Treasury Market Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, New York City, 23 September 2019.
As prepared for delivery
 Good morning everyone and welcome to the New York Fed. It’s a pleasure to be speaking at the
fifth annual U.S. Treasury Market Conference.
This conference is particularly valuable because it brings together market participants and five
public sector bodies—the New York Fed, the Board of Governors, the Treasury, the SEC, and
the CFTC—to discuss the U.S. Treasury market.
The Treasury market is arguably the most important market in the world, and today is a unique
opportunity to discuss some of the big topics in front of us.  Increasing transparency, preparing
for future risks, and taking advantage of innovation in this market are vital areas of discussion.
This  morning,  I’ll  begin  with  some  observations  on  recent  volatility  in  money  markets  and  the
Fed’s approach to support stability in this critical part of the financial system as we carry out the
FOMC’s monetary policy decisions.
I’ll then pivot to a different but related topic: the transition away from LIBOR. I think I can get away
with it because this conference’s five sponsoring agencies, which first came together following
the “flash rally” in 2014, also all play a vital role in facilitating the industry’s move to more robust
reference  rates.  Crucially,  they  are  ex  officio  members  of  the  Alternative  Reference  Rates
Committee (ARRC), the private sector group convened to guide the transition away from LIBOR.
And  of  course  the  Secured  Overnight  Financing  Rate  (SOFR),  the  ARRC’s  selected
replacement for U.S. dollar LIBOR, reflects transactions that finance U.S. Treasury securities.
Before I go any further, I need to give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today
are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or
others in the Federal Reserve System.
Market Conditions
I’ll  start  with  recent  developments  in  money  markets.  Conditions  in  funding  markets  became
highly volatile early last week, with secured lending rates moving higher on Monday and rising
sharply on Tuesday. We had expected a number of factors—including quarterly corporate tax
payments and the settlement of Treasury auctions—to put upward pressure on funding rates.
However,  the  size  of  the  reaction  in  repo  rates,  the  spillover  to  unsecured  markets  such  as
federal  funds,  and  the  emergence  of  strains  in  market  functioning  were  outside  of  recent
experience. For example, in April and June of this year, sizable payment flows led to relatively
muted movements in secured lending rates and small movements in unsecured rates.
As had been done ahead of prior dates with anticipated significant funding pressures, on Friday,
September  13,  the  Markets  team  at  the  New  York  Fed,  and  others  in  the  Federal  Reserve
System  put  in  place  a  plan  for  increased  monitoring  of  money  markets.  This  included  more
frequent reporting on transactions, data, and information from market participants on Monday.    
Although  conditions  remained  calm  on  that  Friday,  the  simultaneous  increase  and  widening
dispersion in repo rates and, importantly, federal funds rates on Monday indicated that markets
were not effectively distributing liquidity across the system.  The New York Fed’s Markets team
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
built  a  timeline  and  implementation  plan  in  case  the  Open  Market  Desk  at  the  New  York  Fed
(Desk)  would  need  to  operate  on  Tuesday.  Early  Tuesday  morning,  it  became  clear  that  this
situation had persisted and had the potential to become more acute.
In response to these developments, and in keeping with the FOMC’s standing directive to the
Desk to conduct open market operations as necessary to keep the federal funds rate within the
target  range,  on  Tuesday  morning  the  Desk  announced  and  conducted  a  repo  operation.
Although such operations were common before the financial crisis, this was the first non-test
repo operation in many years. This was followed by repo operations each day since.
These actions had the desired effect of reducing strains in markets, narrowing the dispersion of
rates,  and  lowering  secured  and  unsecured  rates  to  more  normal  levels  relative  to  other
benchmarks. 
The experience of the past week drew attention to the possibility of the development of strains in
funding markets around the upcoming end of the quarter.  This past Friday we announced a plan
of  continued  daily  overnight  repo  operations  through  October  10,  accompanied  by  three  two-
week term repo operations that span the month end.  The goal of these actions is the same as
for recent open market operations: foster conditions in money markets to keep the federal funds
rate within the target range.
1
This episode reminds us all of the importance of having well- functioning markets and the vital
role that the Federal Reserve plays in supplying liquidity to the system when markets are under
stress. We were prepared for such an event, acted quickly and appropriately, and our actions
were  successful.  Friday’s  announcement  on  open  market  operations  to  address  potential
quarter-end funding pressures on interest rates followed this same approach: quickly diagnose
the problem, develop the right action plan, and execute that plan.
At the same time, it is equally important that we examine these recent market dynamics and their
implications for the liquidity needs in relation to the overall amount of reserves held at the Federal
Reserve. We will continue to monitor and analyze developments closely. As Federal Reserve
Chair Powell stated in his most recent press conference, the FOMC will assess the implications
for the appropriate level of reserves and time to resume organic growth of the Federal Reserve’s
balance  sheet  consistent  with  the  successful  execution  of  the  FOMC’s  ample  reserves
2
framework.
That’s enough on recent events for now. I’ll turn to another very important issue, reference rate
reform.
LIBOR Won’t Last Forever
Some say only two things in life are guaranteed: death and taxes. But I say there are actually
three: death, taxes, and the end of LIBOR.
Everyone in the financial services industry needs to be aware that the date when the existence of
LIBOR can no longer be guaranteed is fast approaching.
I titled remarks I gave on this subject earlier in the year “901 Days” to remind everyone just how
little  time  both  the  public  sector  and  market  participants  have  to  prepare  for  a  world  without
3
LIBOR.
We  are  now  831  days  away  from  that  world,  and  while  some  institutions  are  making  good
progress, others are sticking their metaphorical heads in the sand, hoping the issue will go away.
Even more concerning are those wearing rose-tinted glasses, getting nostalgic about LIBOR and
hoping for an extension to the deadline or a reincarnation of the rate. I cannot emphasize enough
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
that the clock is ticking and everyone needs to get their firms ready for January 1, 2022.
A look at the numbers, and recent history, reveals the need for urgency. There are $200 trillion of
financial  contracts  referencing  U.S.  dollar  LIBOR.   But  the  volume  of  actual  transactions  that
term LIBOR is based on is very small. When individual banks make LIBOR submissions they are
largely based on judgment, not real transactions. This makes the rate vulnerable to manipulation,
and banks are increasingly reluctant to provide submissions, adding yet further risk around using
the rate.
4
5
The  U.K.  Financial  Conduct  Authority  (FCA)  has  reached  an  agreement  with  banks  to  keep
submitting  rates  until  the  end  of  2021,  but  beyond  that  date  the  existence  of  LIBOR  is  not
guaranteed.   The FCA has made it clear that it expects at least some banks to leave the LIBOR
panels soon after 2021, making LIBOR even less representative than it is now, and that it would
6
need to judge whether LIBOR was still representative at that stage.
Headway Is Being Made
While the clock is inevitably ticking, progress is being made.  
7
In 2017, the ARRC selected SOFR as its preferred alternative to U.S. dollar LIBOR.
Since April 2018, the New York Fed has produced SOFR every business day. It’s based on an
important underlying market with much higher volumes than LIBOR, and is compliant with the
Principles  for  Financial  Benchmarks  set  forth  by  the  International  Organization  of  Securities
8
Commissions (IOSCO).
The International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) has led really important work on the
development  of  contingencies  for  some  derivatives  products  for  the  scenario  where  LIBOR
9
ceases to exist.
A key question is what will happen if the FCA finds LIBOR to no longer be representative. Two
large central counterparties have already indicated that they would expect to move the LIBOR
trades  they  clear  to  SOFR  if  this  occurred.  The  Financial  Stability  Board’s  Official  Sector
Steering  Group  (OSSG)  has  indicated  its  support  for  ISDA  to  include  such  a  trigger  to  avoid
fragmentation between cleared and uncleared derivatives.
10
Derivatives contracts account for 95 percent of the exposure to U.S. dollar LIBOR, so universal
changes to these contracts would be a significant leap forward. If the market signs up to the
ISDA  protocol  when  it’s  published,  it  will  be  a  considerable  milestone  and  will  go  a  long  way
toward reducing risks to firms, markets, and the financial system.   
In  addition,  the ARRC  has  released  four  sets  of  recommended  fallback  language  for  different
types of cash products and has published potential paths forward for adjustable-rate mortgages
(ARMs).
 While mortgages are a small part of the overall exposure, it’s vitally important that
consumers understand what the changes being made mean in real terms.
11
12
Last  week,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  the  FDIC,  the  OCC,  and  other  agencies  released  a
proposal on adjusting margin requirements for covered swap entities that, among other things,
are meant to remove unintended hurdles to signing the ISDA protocol and moving away from
  The Financial Accounting Standards Board has similarly released an exposure draft
LIBOR.
with proposals to smooth the transition from an accounting perspective.
  Finally, earlier this
year, the SEC staff issued a statement highlighting risks and disclosures for market participants
to evaluate proactively as they transition away from LIBOR.
The Challenges Ahead
13
14
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Progress has been made, but there’s still much to do.
SOFR is sometimes criticized for the lack of a term rate, but my message is don’t wait for a term
rate to get your house in order. Don’t use that as an excuse to halt the vital work of understanding
where your exposure to LIBOR lies and how to prepare your business. The OSSG has produced
a document explaining how market participants can use overnight risk-free rates, as opposed to
waiting for term rates.
 In addition, the New York Fed is preparing average SOFR rates and a
SOFR index, with the goal of publishing them daily by the middle of next year.    
15
Contracts that reference U.S. dollar LIBOR continue to be written, which only serves to increase
the  level  of  systemic  risk.  In  rare  cases  where  for  some  reason  LIBOR  must  be  referenced,
robust fallback language that accounts for a future without LIBOR needs to be included. I also
strongly  encourage  market  participants  to  address  legacy  LIBOR-linked  contracts.  There’s  no
one-size-fits-all  approach  for  closing  out  or  converting  existing  LIBOR  positions  so  market
participants need to get ahead of this issue.
We know this is difficult and complex work. At the New York Fed, we’re working to identify where
we have potential exposure to LIBOR and other non-IOSCO-compliant reference rates. We have
teams examining monetary policy operations, foreign reserve management activities, and trading
agreements with counterparties.
We want to hear your voice so we can incorporate your feedback and facilitate the development
of the tools you need to ensure an orderly transition.  Engage with the official sector about how
LIBOR affects your firm and your challenges in this transition. And note that just last week, the
ARRC  published  a  checklist  designed  to  support  market  participants  with  the  adoption  of
SOFR.
16
Implementation will be complex: financial contracts need to be scrutinized, operations need to be
evaluated, and technology needs to be updated. The work involves numerous jurisdictions and
multiple  asset  classes,  and  will  require  changes  from  how  business  is  conducted  to  how
systems are built. These things take time, and time is running out.
Conclusion
The LIBOR transition is a serious issue the industry needs to address. Both the official sector
and market participants have made enormous progress, but we need to see much broader and
consistent preparation for the transition.
If your firm is one of those hoping the problem will go away, or feeling nostalgic and counting on
an extension to the deadline, take this message back: The clock is ticking, LIBOR’s days are
numbered, and we all need to play our part in preparing the industry for January 1, 2022.
Thank you, and I hope you enjoy today’s conference.
 1
2
3
4
5
6
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Statement Regarding Repurchase Operations, September 20, 2019
For  recent  statements  regarding  the  FOMC’s  longer-run  monetary  policy  implementation  framework  and
balance sheet normalization, see FOMC Communications Related to Policy Normalization.
John C. Williams, 901 Days, Remarks at the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, New York,
July 15, 2019.
Alternative Reference Rates Committee, Second Report, March 2018.
Financial Conduct Authority, FCA Statement on LIBOR Panels, November 24, 2017.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Andrew  Bailey, LIBOR: Preparing for the End. Speech at Securities Industry and Financial Market Association
LIBOR Transition Briefing, July 15, 2019.
Alternative  Reference  Rate  Committee, The ARRC  Selects  a  Broad  Repo  Rate  as  its  Preferred Alternative
Reference Rate, June 22, 2017.
International Organization of Securities Commissions, Principles for Financial Benchmarks, Final Report, July
2013.
International  Swaps  and  Derivatives  Association, Interbank  Offered  Rate  (IBOR)  Fallbacks  for  2006  ISDA
Definitions, May 16, 2019.
See the letter from the OSSG to the ISDA dated March 12, 2019.
See Alternative Reference Rate Committee, Fallback Contract Language.
See Margin and Capital Requirements for Covered Swap Entities.
See FASB Proposes Guidance to Assist in Transition Away from Interbank Offered Rates to New Reference
Rates, Financial Accounting Standards Board news release, September 5, 2019.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Staff Statement on LIBOR Transition, July 12, 2019.
Financial Stability Board, Overnight Risk-Free Rates: A User’s Guide, June 4, 2019.
Alternative  Reference  Rates  Committee, Practical  Implementation  Checklist  for  SOFR Adoption,  September
2019.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
