Sharon Donnery: Risks and opportunities from climate change
Address  by  Ms  Sharon  Donnery,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the
Department of Finance and Sustainable Nation Ireland Conference, Dublin, 16 May 2019.
Introduction
1
Good evening, I am delighted to speak to you today .
 Last week, the Central Bank of Ireland held an event with former President Mary Robinson. She
gave an inspiring speech . In her remarks, she asked three things of us all:
2
First, to take climate change personally.
Second, to get angry and get active.
3
Third, to imagine the world we need to get to in a hurry .
Individually,  it  can  often  seem  our  actions  have  only  a  limited  effect.  Think  of  recycling  for
example. Can an individual or household really make a difference by taking recycling seriously?
Well, reassuringly, the answer is yes.
Recycling efforts in the UK for example have reduced annual carbon emissions by between 10
and 15 million tonnes . This is equivalent to 10% of transport related emissions. Or taking 3.5
millions cars off the road.
4
Individually the evidence shows that if we take things personally, we can all make a difference.
This includes central banks themselves, which I will come back to later.
It  really  has  been  wonderful  to  meet  so  many  people  at  today’s  conference  who  indeed  take
climate change personally and take that individual responsibility seriously. So personally in fact –
that  many  of  you  have  made  a  profession  of  it. And  I  think  the  Department  of  Finance  and
Sustainable Nation Ireland need to be commended on today’s initiative, and their activity on this
important issue.
Speaking  to  us  last  week,  former  President  Robinson  also  asked  something  specifically  of
central banks. To be more explicit in our warnings about the risks posed by climate change.
In my remarks today I will try and take up this challenge. I will also address specific areas where I
believe central banks can truly make a difference and indeed take a leading role.
Gillian Tett wrote an article in the Financial Times last month stating that “activists do not always
turn up wearing tie-dye and throwing stones. Sometimes they wear boring grey suits and use dull
central bank blogs as their weapon of choice” . I think that is true.
5
Given  the  potential  far-reaching  consequences  of  climate  change  –  not  least  economic  and
financial – central banks are rightfully taking a greater interest. The Central Bank of Ireland is after
all here to ensure that the financial system operates in the best interests of consumers and the
wider economy.
If global savings are to truly be channelled into advancing sustainability goals, central banks can
play a role. We can help design the appropriate framework for disclosure and investments as a
public good, for example.
A  functioning  financial  system  is  necessary  to  act  as  a  catalyst  for  change.  In  this  context,
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
externalities and risks need to be correctly priced. Climate change needs to be factored into:
How we think about supervising banks and insurers;
How the investment fund industry operates; and
How interlinkages across the financial sector might amplify climate risks.
I will address some of these issues in my remarks today.
The risks to the financial system
As I mentioned earlier, in addition to taking climate change personally, we have been told to get
angry and get active. Now central banks should probably not get angry. But we can certainly get
active . Particularly when we see risks building in the financial system.
6
Climate risks are unusual for a number of reasons . First, the effects are broad-based in nature.
They affect all types of economic actors, sectors of the economy and regions.
7
Second, there is a very high degree of certainty that these risks will crystallise at some point in
the future. But, at the same time, the precise horizon, nature and indeed scale of these risks is
highly uncertain because of potential ‘tipping-points’ for example.
Third,  the  time  households,  companies  or  governments  for  example  have  to  plan  to  manage
8
these climate-related risks is probably longer than their typical planning cycle .
Finally, climate related risks affect everyone – governments, companies and households, across
countries and continents. Mitigating these risks requires co-ordination between everyone. And not
just  at  a  single  point  in  time.  But  sustained,  concerted,  and  effective  coordination  over  many
years to come.
Physical risks
While climate change is highly unusual as a source of risk to the financial system, recent efforts
mean that there is a growing consensus over the channels through which climate change can
affect the financial sector . Broadly, there are two categories of risks.
9
First, ‘physical risks’ and second so-called ‘transition risks’. When we think about physical risks –
you don’t have to flick through too many channels to see news reports of heatwaves, landslides,
floods or storms. The economic cost and financial losses from more frequent and more severe
extreme climate change-related weather events are already evident. Longer-term structural shifts
in  our  environment  such  as  rising  sea  levels,  growing  weather  variability,  or  changes  in
precipitation are all leading to physical risks. Natural disasters are occurring nearly five times as
10
often today as they were in the 1970s . 
The cost of these events has been stark. Globally, between 1970 and 2012, over 1.9 million lives
have  been  lost  and  economic  damages  of  2.4  trillion  USD  suffered .  Storms  and  floods
accounted for nearly 80 per cent of the total number of disasters, caused over 50 per cent of
12
deaths, and 84 per cent of economic losses .
11
The most direct link from physical risks to the financial system is through the insurance sector.
Insurance companies cover losses when these physical risks materialise. For example, 2017
recorded the highest insured losses ever for natural disasters, at 138 billion USD . This risk of
distress in the insurance sector will be bigger if insurance companies are unable to appropriately
price and manage climate-related risks.
13
This  is  complicated  by  the  extent  that  models  rely  on  historical  data  to  assess  the  risk  of
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
catastrophe. With climate change, the past is unlikely to be a good guide to the future.
14
The dynamics of climate change also present a major challenge to modelling future impacts .
Distress  of  insurers  could  in  turn  affect  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  This  could  occur
through the interconnections with other parts of the financial system – like banks for example. Or
it could occur through the impact of behaviour on asset prices.
But there is another manifestation of climate-related physical risks – a collective withdrawal of
insurers from covering risks that they consider uninsurable.
15
The  International  Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  (IAIS)  shows  that  the  insurance
‘protection  gap’  for  weather  related  losses  is  already  significant,  with  roughly  70  per  cent  of
losses uninsured in 2017 . This raises risks of its own. If households and businesses cannot
insure  themselves  against  some  of  the  physical  risks,  they  will  bear  all  the  costs  of  climate-
related shocks. This reduces resilience. Households and businesses may not be able to access
finance in the first place, if investors judge that the risks stemming from climate-related events
are too high. And it means that – when climate related shocks hit – the economic impact will be
larger, due to underinsurance.
Take the simple example of property. Households and businesses often use property as security
for borrowing. If climate-related events hit – and households and businesses are underinsured –
this  will  directly  affect  their  net  worth.  This  will  in  turn  reduce  their  ability  to  borrow  and  fund
investment and spending. It will affect the value of property. And it will affect the quality of the loan
portfolios of banks.
What does all this mean for Ireland?
Take insurance first. Our insurance sector is very international. For example, 80 per cent firms
operating  here  conducted  underwriting  business  in  the  European  Economic  Area  (EEA)
(excluding Ireland) in 2018. A substantial number of firms also operate further afield, outside the
EEA. The value of premiums underwritten outside of Ireland was significant, accounting for 73
per  cent  of  the  total  value  of  underwriting  in  2018.  The  Irish  insurance  sector  is  exposed  to
shocks from across the globe.
And what of banks?
Irish banks are heavily exposed to property. As are households and businesses. Property-related
lending, for example, accounted for 68 per cent of the loan portfolios of Irish resident banks in the
third quarter of 2018 , while the asset holdings of Irish households are also heavily focused on
property  –  accounting  for  almost  70  per  cent  of  household  net  worth .  So  adverse  weather
events that affect property can affect several aspects of the economy and financial system.
Transition risks
16
17
In addition to getting active, what of the third request? Imagining the world we want to get to is
easy.
A  greener  world  with  less  plastic  and  ultimately  –  a  low  carbon  economy  without  the
devastating impact of climate change.
However, the journey to this world is not risk free. The risks I am referring to here are termed
‘transition risks’. Transition risks refer to:
The impact of the adjustment towards a low-carbon economy; and
The uncertainties related to the timing and speed of the adjustment.
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
With regard to timing, the sooner we start on this journey the better. The longer we wait, the
greater the adjustment that will be required to meet our goals. The speed of this adjustment must
also be managed.
As  an  economist,  implementing  a  carbon  tax  seems  like  a  sensible  way  to  price  in  the
externalities  associated  with  high-carbon 
the
implementation of such a tax must consider the capacity of the economy to switch to low-carbon
products  to  be  as  effective  as  possible.  Adjusting  to  a  lower-carbon  economy  will  involve
changes in policy to encourage shifts in consumption and investment. This will have implications
for both economic activity and asset prices.
technologies  and  products.  However, 
The  expectations  of  economic  agents  regarding  the  timing  of  transition  will  also  play  a  role,
affecting,  for  example,  the  relative  pricing  of  high-  and  low-carbon  assets.  Through  those
channels, the adjustment will affect the financial system. Overall, it is unclear if the market is
placing enough weight on the potential for these costs and pricing them correctly.
I believe two things are abundantly clear:
1.  The costs of inaction will be much greater than the cost of action;
2.  The path of adjustment matters.
A  timely,  orderly,  predictable,  scenario  would  allow  sufficient  time  to  adjust.  A  disorderly  or
sudden transition would clearly be costly and disruptive.
Opportunities for the financial sector
To  summarise  so  far,  we  can  all  take  climate  change  personally  and  central  banks  are  now
getting active in thinking about how to address the risks on the journey to a better world that we
can  all  imagine.  Given  the  role  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  in  ensuring  a  resilient  financial
system, it is not surprising that I have focused quite a bit on risks from climate change. But that
should  not  distract  from  the  fact  that  these  trends  also  bring  significant  opportunities  for  the
financial sector.
require 
technological 
Ensuring  success  will 
the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) estimate that the world will need to spend
around  900  billion  USD  annually  until  2050  on  energy-related  mitigation  investments  if  global
warming  is  to  be  limited  to  1.5  degrees .  For  Ireland,  last  year’s  research  from  Sustainable
Nation  Ireland  estimated  that  making  the  transition  to  a  sustainable,  low-carbon  economy  by
19
2030 will require €50 billion .
innovation  and 
investment. 
Indeed, 
18
This investment will cover a range of activities:
Developing  disruptive  innovations,  including  some  that  we  may  not  already  have  thought
about.
Expanding  new  types  of  infrastructures,  including  for  clean  sources  of  energy,  not  least
given the potential increased cost efficiency of these.
Adapting  existing  infrastructures,  such  as  retrofitting  existing  homes  and  offices  to  make
them more energy efficient.
The key point is that this investment will need to be financed. And, while there is a role for public
investment, a significant part of the adjustment will fall to the private sector. This is where the
opportunity for finance lies. To meet this challenge, the financial sector will need to innovate –
just like the rest of the economy. The financial sector has a long history of innovating to meet the
needs  of  its  clients:  from  the ATM  to  the  digital  wallet.  Innovations  we’ve  seen  around  green
finance are just one dimension of how the financial sector is responding to this challenge.
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Since  the  first  green  bond  issued  by  the  World  Bank  in  2008,  the  green  bond  market  has
continued to gather pace. In 2018, issuance stood at around 170 billion USD, almost four times
higher  than  in  2015.  Last  year  also  saw  inaugural  sovereign  green  bond  issues  from  five
countries, including Ireland . But green finance will need to be bigger than that – it will need to
be mainstream . There is clearly demand.
20
21
What can central banks and policy makers do to facilitate the growth of sustainable finance?
Broadly speaking, we can contribute to creating an environment where climate related financial
risks  can  be  more  efficiently  assessed  and  considered.  This  will  facilitate  the  channelling  of
savings into the investment needed to make the climate transition a reality. There are some key
areas where we can make a difference.
First,  we  need  clarity  over  what  constitutes  a  sustainable  investment.  We  need  a  common
understanding  of  what  disclosures  actually  mean  and  definitions  of  sustainable  financial
products. The European Commission has taken steps towards this goal with its action plan for
sustainable finance. This addresses the development of regulations for a common taxonomy,
investor disclosures and low-carbon benchmarks. As part of the European System of Financial
Supervision,  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  has  contributed  to  this  work  on  sustainable  finance
through the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) and the European Insurance and
Occupational  Pensions  Authority  (EIOPA).  Both  authorities  provided  technical  advice  to  the
European  Commission  earlier  this  month  on  the  integration  of  sustainability  risks  and
factors
22,23
.
Second, transparency is required to allow investors to make informed decisions. The work of the
Financial  Stability  Board’s  Task  Force  on  Climate-Related  Financial  Disclosures  (TCFD)  has
24
resulted in recommendations for voluntary disclosure of material climate-related financial risks .
The  financial  system  must  take  advantage  of  these  developments  and  adjust  the  services
provided to clients accordingly.
Taking it personally and getting active – the role of the Central Bank of Ireland
To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  briefly  discuss  how  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  is  taking  climate
change personally and getting active. We have an explicit mandate in domestic and European
legislation to contribute to financial stability in Ireland and at euro area and EU levels. We also
provide independent economic advice. We plan to incorporate considerations related to climate
change in our macroeconomic and financial stability assessments moving forward. For example,
25
climate-related stresses can be incorporated into sector or market-wide stress tests .
In addition, in our role as regulator and supervisor of the financial system, we will continue to
participate in the design of such regulatory rules and supervisory frameworks at European and
global  levels.  We  will  also  continue  to  collaborate  and  coordinate  with  the  international
community  of  central  banks  and  financial  regulatory  authorities  in  implementing  our  climate
change work programme.
Our work is wide-ranging. From revisions to the regulation of financial markets, investment firms
and the asset management industry, to the assessment of climate-related prudential risks facing
the banking and insurance sectors. We also must consider the implications for financial products
such  as  mortgages,  insurance  policies  and  investment  funds,  given  our  consumer  protection
26
role .
In managing our investment portfolio, environmental, social and governance (ESG) criteria are
taken into account. In particular, the equities component of our investment portfolio is managed in
line with ESG criteria: compliance with the UN-supported Principles for Responsible Investment
(PRI)  was  a  condition  in  allocating  the  mandate  for  this  portfolio.  In  relation  to  the  bond
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
component  of  our  investment  portfolio,  an  ESG  policy  for  this  asset  class  is  currently  in
preparation. Already, the Central Bank holds eleven green bonds (€271 million) in our investment
portfolio. As part of the public sector purchase programme component of the European Central
Bank’s monetary policy measures, we also hold six green bonds (€258 million).
In terms of our own carbon footprint, the construction of our new headquarters on North Wall
Quay provided an opportunity to design a building that was energy efficient, had low operating
costs with a healthy and ambient indoor environment for our staff. It is the first office building of
its size in Ireland to achieve a BREEAM rating of ‘Outstanding’ and a Building Energy Rating of
27
A2 .
Central banks will continue to engage with other policy makers to address this issue.
One forum that is particularly important for us is the Network for Greening the Financial System
(NGFS). A new coalition of central banks and supervisors has come together under the auspices
of the NGFS to ensure that the financial system is resilient to climate related risks. The Central
Bank  of  Ireland  is  a  member  of  this  group,  and  we  will  do  our  part  to  better  understand  and
address the link between climate-related risks and the financial system and to put in place the
right  policies  and  protections  to  guard  against  these  risks  and  to  foster  a  greener  financial
system.
The  challenge  that  we  all  face  from  climate  change  is  immense.  In  line  with  our  mandate  to
assess all risks to  financial  stability  and  to  provide  independent  economic  advice,  the  Central
Bank of Ireland necessarily takes a long view. Given the uncertainty I discussed around climate-
related risks, this long-term view is essential. Central banks must always be cognisant of the
longer-term costs associated with action, or inaction. We all must play a part in meeting this
challenge.
The  mission  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  is  to  serve  the  public  interest  by  safeguarding
monetary and financial stability and by working to ensure that the financial system operates in the
best  interests  of  consumers  and  the  wider  economy.  So,  we  are  taking  it  personally,  we  are
28
getting active and we are imagining both the world we need to get to and how we get there .
Thank you.
——————————————————————————-
1
 I would like to thank Yvonne McCarthy, Vasileios Madouros, Paul Reddan, and Mícheál O’Keeffe
for their assistance in preparing my remarks. 
2
 Central Bank of Ireland: LinkedIn (10 May 2019). 
3
  Robinson,  Mary: Climate  Justice:  Hope,  Resilience,  and  the  Fight  for  a  Sustainable  Future,
Bloomsbury Publishing (2018).
4
 The Economist: Case Study: The truth about recycling, Technology Quarterly (2007).
5
 Tett, Gillian: Central banks are finally taking up the climate change challenge, Financial Times
(25 April 2019).
6
  Lane,  Philip  R.: Climate  Change  and  the  Irish  Financial  System.  Central  Bank  of  Ireland
Economic Letter, Vol. 2019, No.1 (2019).
7
 Network for Greening the Financial System. A call for action: Climate change as a source of
financial risk (2019). 
8
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
8
  Carney,  Mark: Breaking  the  tragedy  of  the  horizon  –  climate  change  and  financial
stability, Lloyds London (29 September 2015).
9
 Network for Greening the Financial System. A call for action: Climate change as a source of
financial risk (2019). 
Also European Systemic Risk Board: Too late, too sudden: Transition to a low-carbon economy
and systemic risk. Report of the Advisory Scientific Committee (2016).
Also  Lane,  Philip  R.: Climate  Change  and  the  Irish  Financial  System.  Central  Bank  of  Ireland
Economic Letter, Vol. 2019, No.1 (2019).
10
Climate Extremes 1970–2012 (2015). 
11
 World Meteorological Organization: Atlas of Mortality and Economic Losses from Weather and
 Ibid.
12
 Ibid.
 International Association of Insurance Supervisors: Issues paper on climate change risks to
  For  example,  uncertainties,  non-linearities  and  potential  cliff  effects  could  prove  difficult  to
 International Association of Insurance Supervisors: Issues paper on climate change risks to
13
the insurance sector (2018). 
14
model. 
15
the insurance sector (2018). 
16
Carney, Mark: A New Horizon, European Commission Conference (21 March 2019).
Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change: Special  Report:  Global  Warming  of
  Sustainable  Nation  Ireland: Private  Sector  Financing  for  Sustainable  Infrastructure,  Meeting
 Central Bank of Ireland: Systemic Risk Pack (March 2019).
17
 Central Bank of Ireland: Quarterly Financial Accounts.
18
 
1.5°C (January 2019). 
19
Ireland’s 2030 Decarbonisation Objectives (2018).
20 
21
 Ibid.
22
(3 May 2019).
23
2019).
24
the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (2017). 
25
financial risk (2019).
26
Conference 2019 (16 May 2019).
27
 ESMA: ESMA submits technical advice on Sustainable Finance to the European Commission
 EIOPA: EIOPA submits advice on Sustainable Finance to the European Commission (3 May
  Task  Force  on  Climate-Related  Financial  Disclosures: Final Report:  Recommendations of
 Network for Greening the Financial System: A call for action: Climate change as a source of
 Cross, Gerry: Accountability and sustainability: key themes in financial regulation. ICSA Ireland
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
27
 The Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method (BREEAM) is an
international  independent  benchmark  to  measure  and  verify  the  sustainability  credentials  of  a
building.  The  Bank  operates  an  energy  management  system  at  each  of  its  sites,  to  the  ISO
50001 international energy performance standard.
The results are already evident: a 20 percent reduction in energy consumption at our currency
centre  since  March  2017.  This  is  equivalent  to  over  1.4  million  kilowatt  hours,  402  tonnes  of
carbon dioxide or a saving in excess of e97,000. In 2018, we reduced electricity consumption at
the North Wall Quay building by twenty five percent compared with 2017, equivalent to almost
one  million  kilowatt  hours,  520  tonnes  of  carbon  dioxide  or  an  annual  saving  in  excess  of
e119,000 . (Since the NWQ building was commissioned in 2017, it would not be considered a
baseline for “normal” operations. The CO2 conversion factors are different for gas and electricity,
hence the varying results from the different ratios of resource use at the two sites.)
28
Bloomsbury Publishing (2018).
  Robinson,  Mary: Climate Justice: Hope, Resilience, and the Fight for a Sustainable Future,
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
