 Public Lecture by Lesetja Kganyago, 
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
At the University of South Africa, Pretoria 
24 July 2019 
Delivering on our mandate: 
   Monetary policy, inflation, and balanced and sustainable growth 
 
 
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
 
Today, I would like to talk about the South African Reserve Bank’s (SARB) 
mandate: what it is, how we interpret it, and where we are in our national 
conversation about the SARB.  
 
Although central banking has a global reputation for being boring, in South 
Africa it has been getting a lot of attention. Much of this is welcome: it is 
largely a useful opportunity for improving public understanding of what the 
SARB  does,  while  we  at  the  SARB  also  learn  and  benefit  from  our 
interactions with people all over South Africa.  
 
However,  some  parts  of  the  discussion  are  problematic  because  they 
distract us from more pressing priorities. As Mr Tito Mboweni, the Finance 
Minister, has pointed out: this ‘obsession’, to use his phrase, is getting in 
the way of a more fundamental discussion about economic growth, job 
 Page 1 of 14 
creation and dealing with inequality.1 This economy used to grow at 3% or 
4% a year, but now it grows at about 1%.  
 
As  we  in  the SARB  have tried to  communicate:  the  growth  problem  in 
South Africa is mainly structural in nature, beyond the reach of monetary 
policy alone. Perhaps part of the problem is that whenever we get a new 
gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  statistic,  the  news  bulletins  and  the 
newspaper  articles  end  up  talking  about  what  it  means  for  the  next 
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meeting.  
 
Given this pattern, you might well assume that interest rates have large 
growth consequences. But we need some perspective. If we reduce rates 
by 25 basis points, and there are no other reforms in the economy, our 
modelling tells us that growth will be about 0.1 percentage points higher, 
one year later. That’s all.  
 
Remember that when we cut rates, borrowers have more spending power 
but lenders have less. Exporters may do better from a weaker rand, but 
firms that use imports do worse. Investment may pick up, but that depends 
on long-term rates, not just the repurchase rate (repo rate) – in addition to 
many non-monetary factors.  
 
So the growth effects of a rate cut are small. And if we as a country obsess 
about the SARB and monetary policy as the only answer to our growth 
problems, we will fail to discuss the difficult but vital reforms that might 
actually rescue us from our growth malaise.  
 
                                                           
1 Lindeque, M. 10 June 2019. Eyewitness News (EWN). Retrieved from EWN: 
https://ewn.co.za/2019/06/05/what-is-this-obsession-with-the-reserve-bank-mboweni-sets-record-
straight-again. 
 Page 2 of 14 
Failing  to  get  that  conversation  about  growth  going  has  further 
repercussions,  because  it  feeds  the  notion  that  the  SARB’s  private 
shareholding matters to the policy framework we have and the decisions 
made on policy. And again, this shareholding debate is more damaging to 
our economy than it should be. It sends a signal to investors, both here 
and abroad, that our macroeconomic framework is at risk, making the cost 
of  debt  higher  than  otherwise  and  undermining  confidence. Who  loses 
from all this? One of the biggest hits is to indebted households and the 
beneficiaries  of  public  spending,  who  pay  the  price  for  skyrocketing 
interest costs on our public debt as the resources to spend are squeezed.  
 
These very serious problems aside, the fact that South Africans want to 
engage with the SARB and its mandate is welcome, and we applaud it. Of 
course, not everyone agrees with us 100% of the time. A certain amount 
of disagreement is normal, in central banking, as in so many other things. 
Indeed, not only is public engagement and discussion of monetary policy 
appropriate. When it is based on evidence, it is something we encourage.  
 
In the old days, central bankers did everything in secret, and any public 
statements were deliberately complicated. Nowadays, we try to be open 
and transparent. We have learned that monetary policy works better with 
communication.  An  economy  is  populated  with  people.  If  these  people 
understand  what  the  central  bank  is  trying  to  do,  they  adjust  their 
behaviour, which in turn helps the central bank to achieve its policy goals. 
Furthermore, we appreciate that having independence creates a duty to 
be  transparent  and  accountable;  we  are  not,  and  do  not  want  to  be, 
exempt from democratic principles.2  
                                                           
2 Kganyago, L. 2019. ‘Principled agents: reflections on central bank independence.’ 19th annual 
Stavros Niarchos Foundation lecture. Washington D.C.: Peterson Institute for International 
 Page 3 of 14 
 
This talk is a contribution to the discussion on our mandate. 
 
So let us talk about the SARB’s mandate.  
 
The Constitution, in section 224, instructs the SARB to protect the value 
of the currency in the interest of balanced and sustainable growth. This 
mandate  reflects  an  understanding  that  protecting  the  value  of  the 
currency is a critical foundation for achieving lasting growth.  
 
Clearly, the mothers and fathers of our Constitution did not want us to let 
inflation  run.  We  might  have  got  more  growth  but  it  would  have  been 
unsustainable.  As  many  countries  have  discovered,  after  a  temporary 
boom, we would end up in stagflation, with weak growth and high inflation.  
 
The  framers  of  our  Constitution  also  cared  about  macroeconomic 
imbalances, which might, for example, result from a debt boom, or if we 
spend well in excess of what we produce, with imports running too far 
ahead of exports.  
 
The Constitution tells us what to do, but it is not explicit about how we do 
it. We had to figure out a monetary policy framework for ourselves. In fact, 
it  took  us  a  few  years  to  arrive  at  the  approach  we  use  now:  the 
Constitution was passed in 1996, but we only started inflation targeting in 
2000  –  after  a  false  start  using  the  so-called  ‘eclectic  approach’  that 
included a failed attempt to control the exchange rate.  
 Economics. Retrieved from the SARB: 
http://www.resbank.co.za/Lists/Speeches/Attachments/550/Principled%20agents%20Reflections%20
on%20central%20bank%20independence.pdf. For a scholarly treatment: Tucker, P. 2018. Unelected 
power: the quest for legitimacy in central banking and the regulatory state. Princeton University Press. 
 Page 4 of 14 
 
The inflation target, agreed between the SARB and National Treasury, 
was  initially  set  at  3-6%  before  being  shifted  to  3-5%.  The  emerging 
market crisis of 2001 led to the reinstatement of the 3--6% target, and it 
has remained since then. More importantly, the target created a clearer 
framework for decision making and enhanced public understanding of the 
SARB’s monetary policy objectives.  
 
But this choice of target also left important questions open. In particular, 
because  the  3-6%  we  ended  up  using  is  a  wide  range,  it  created 
uncertainty  about  the  SARB’s  true  objective.  I  recall  that  a  consultant 
helped us with some educational materials, including for our website, who 
wrote that with a 3-6% target the SARB would cut rates when inflation was 
under  3%  and  hike  rates  when  it  was  over  6%.  That  was  a  logical 
interpretation,  but  it  was  completely  wrong.  The  fact  is  that  during  the 
inflation-targeting era, the SARB has not seen targeted inflation below 3%. 
We have nonetheless cut rates on many occasions. In fact, these rate cuts 
have typically happened with inflation over 5%, already in the top end of 
the target range. Various analysts and academics have spent a lot of time 
trying to estimate the SARB’s de facto target, and they have tended to 
conclude it has been close to 6%.3  
 
Four years ago, we took a critical look at our monetary policy and reflected 
on  our  shortcomings.  We  realised  we  had  let  underlying  inflation,  and 
inflation expectations, drift to the very top of our target range. This wasn’t 
a problem of supply shocks or demand shocks; it was a problem of the 
 3 Examples include: Klein, N. July 2012. ‘Estimating the implicit inflation target of the South African 
Reserve Bank’. International Monetary Fund (IMF) Working Paper 12/177 and Miyajima, K. and 
Yetman, J. 2018. ‘Inflation expectations anchoring across different types of agents: the case of South 
Africa’. IMF Working Paper 18/177. 
 Page 5 of 14 
trend inflation rate. The analysts and academics were right: we had ended 
up with a 6% target. This meant we had a high inflation rate relative to 
other countries. We found that about three-quarters of other countries had 
lower inflation. In addition, with ‘normal’ inflation already near 6%, every 
new adverse price shock would push us outside of the target range. This 
would force us to act, rather than be flexible, or would cost us credibility, 
ensuring  a  higher  inflation  rate.  To  make  matters  worse:  because 
everyone was used to inflation around 6%, indexation had set in – prices 
and wages across the economy were locked in to grow at this pace.  
 
This  left  us  in  a  trap:  nominal  interest  rates  had  to  be  high  because 
inflation expectations were anchored at around 6% but high interest rates 
meant there was always pressure to cut. Meanwhile, the indexation bias 
meant that inflation never fell much, and so in turn interest rates stayed 
structurally high.  
 
The paradox is that we have often been accused of being hawkish and 
keeping interest rates too high, when in reality we have often tolerated as 
much inflation as we can, ignoring the bottom half of our target range. This 
is the main reason why our interest rates haven’t fallen further. We tend 
to spend a lot of time comparing ourselves to low inflation and low interest 
rate economies, when we really are not in that particular picture frame.4  
 
Given this analysis, we decided to make some changes. We could better 
achieve permanently lower interest rates if we were clearer about where 
exactly we want inflation to be, within our range.  
 
 4 See also Mnyanda, L. 22 July 2019. ‘Reserve Bank should clarify inflation target’. Business Day. 
 Page 6 of 14 
The simplest and most honest option would be to emphasise the middle 
of our target range, 4.5%, as our goal. By analogy, we began to think of 
the 3-6% target range as the lines on a road. When you’re driving down 
the road, you try to steer between the lines. You don’t drive along the 
yellow line or the centre line, unless you’re a bad driver. Of course, you 
can’t keep the car dead-centre in the middle of the road all the time, but 
every time you start to drift towards the lines, you correct, aiming back for 
the  middle  of  the  lane.  For  monetary  policy,  the  4.5%  midpoint  is  the 
middle of the lane in this metaphorical road, and 3-6% are the lines.  
When we decided on this adjustment, we were aware that using interest 
rates to  move  inflation  expectations  from  the  top  of  the target to  4.5% 
could be costly. For this reason, we started with some communication, 
expressing our preference for inflation expectations moving towards 4.5% 
over time. We also began more detailed work on ‘sacrifice ratios’, which 
is the term economists use for how much growth it costs to lower inflation. 
These exercises generated a range of estimates, but, broadly speaking, 
they suggested we would have to do a series of rate increases, lifting the 
repo rate to 8% or higher, to get inflation to 4.5% – assuming everything 
else in the economy was normal. The estimated output sacrifice ratio was 
in the range of 1-1.5% of GDP.  
 
However,  while  we  were  studying  this  problem,  a  fortunate  thing 
happened.  Inflation  began  to  slow,  falling  to  around  the  middle  of  the 
target  range  by  the  middle  of  2017.  This  occurred  mainly  because  of 
positive  supply  shocks.  In  particular,  food  price  inflation  declined  to 
unusually  low  levels,  around  3%,  compared  with  a  long-term  average 
nearer 7%. The exchange rate also stabilised: after depreciating every 
year  from  2011  to  2016,  it  began  trending  sideways,  which  helped  to 
moderate  inflation  for  imported  goods.  We  also  like  to  think  our 
communication made a difference. People were seeing inflation around 
 Page 7 of 14 
4.5%, and they were hearing the SARB say that’s where we planned to 
keep it, so they used that information in setting prices and wages. All of 
this happened without us having to adopt a tight policy stance – we started 
with the repo rate at 7%, and we never had to go above that. Put simply, 
we got a good opportunity to get inflation lower, and we used it. 
 
Did  we  do  the  right  thing?  Again,  I  appreciate  that  informed  people 
disagree,  and 
these  are  good-faith  disagreements.  People  who 
understand economics and genuinely want what is best for South Africa, 
take different views. But let me make two points about our decision. 
 
First, what we are doing is completely consistent with our target and our 
mandate. Some people tell a story that in February 2010 there was a letter 
from  the  Minister  of  Finance  changing  the  SARB’s target  and  how  the 
SARB is now ignoring that letter.5 It is strange for me to be told what that 
letter  was  about,  because  at  the  time  I was  Director-General  in  the 
Treasury, under Minister Pravin Gordhan, so I should know the content of 
that  letter.  It  did  not  establish  a  new  target  close  to  6%.  Rather,  it 
reaffirmed the 3-6% target range, and it reaffirmed the SARB’s practice of 
pursuing this target in a flexible way.  
 
Flexibility means the SARB should avoid excessive volatility in growth and 
interest rates. In other words: if an inflation shock moves inflation outside 
of the target range temporarily, the SARB doesn’t have to hike interest 
rates to return inflation to target immediately. The SARB just needs to do 
enough to get inflation to return to target over time. The Minister’s letter 
specifically recognised that inflation expectations need to be anchored, 
 5 Gordhan, P. 16 February 2010. National Treasury. Retrieved from National Treasury: 
http://www.treasury.gov.za/comm_media/press/2010/2010021701.pdf. 
 Page 8 of 14 
and  that  well-anchored  inflation  expectations  under  credible  monetary 
policy are good for growth.  
 
The approach we are taking now, emphasising the 4.5% midpoint, is our 
best attempt at implementing the 3-6% target framework optimally. As I 
have noted earlier, the SARB and National Treasury had originally agreed 
to lower the target range to 3-5%. With hindsight, by postponing it to some 
unannounced  future  date,  we  made  a  mistake.  We  should  have 
announced we would get to 3-5% more slowly, instead of reverting to 3-
6%.  
 
If we reformed the target now, in consultation with National Treasury, we 
would  likely  go  to either  3%  or  4%, with  a  tolerance  band  of  maybe  1 
percentage point on either side. This is where most of our peer emerging 
markets  are  already,  or  where  they  are  heading.  For  instance,  this  is 
where  inflation  targets  are  for  Brazil,  Chile,  China,  Colombia,  India, 
Indonesia,  Mexico,  Russia  and  various  other  peer  countries.6  But  we 
never reformed our target, so we are still using 3-6% and we are making 
policy target that range as best we can. 
 
The second question I would like to tackle is whether emphasising 4.5% 
is an optimal monetary policy for South Africa? My view is that this is a 
key macroeconomic accomplishment. We have positioned South Africa to 
have permanently lower inflation. This is valuable progress.  
 
Critics will say we could have cut rates to get higher growth. But, as I have 
noted earlier, South Africa’s growth problem is caused mainly by structural 
 6 Unlike the other countries mentioned, China’s monetary policy approach is not always classified as 
pure inflation targeting. Nonetheless, the authorities have specified an inflation target of around 3%.   
 Page 9 of 14 
factors, like a constrained electricity system as well as policy uncertainty. 
Given these constraints, a monetary policy that tolerated higher inflation 
for the sake of more demand would have yielded, at most, relatively small 
and temporary benefits, at the price of long-term costs.  
 
As an exercise, we have modelled what would happen if the MPC started 
aiming for a 6% target again. If we cut rates by about 100 basis points, 
growth would be half a percentage point higher, at its peak, and about a 
third  of  a  percentage  point  higher  the  year  after  that.  That  isn’t  much 
growth,  and  certainly  not  a  game-changing  growth  recovery.  The 
exchange rate would depreciate, the output gap would close, and inflation 
expectations would start shifting higher. Core inflation would hit 6% after 
about  two  years.  By  around  this  point,  growth  would  slow  once  again; 
there would be no permanent increase in output. Interest rates, however, 
would be permanently higher, given the implicit 6% target.  Higher inflation 
begets higher interest rates.  If the country needs long-lasting low interest 
rates, then we must have lower inflation. 
 
This last point is something you should bear in mind whenever you hear 
someone arguing for a higher inflation target. Many of you are students, 
so it matters for you as much as for anyone else. A higher inflation target 
would mean higher interest rates. Over the short term, one or two years, 
tolerating  more  inflation  can  allow  a  looser  stance.  But  this  effect  is 
temporary. If we decide to tolerate more inflation now, by the time you 
graduate and go to work, you are going to face higher interest rates. Your 
student  loan  repayments  will  be  higher.  A  car  payment  will  be  more 
difficult. A mortgage will be costlier. All this will have real implications for 
your incomes.  
 
 Page 10 of 14 
This  does  not  mean  the  SARB  should  avoid  all  rate  cuts.  Rather,  we 
should avoid cutting if the price of doing so is permanently higher inflation. 
We can cut rates if we feel confident we can keep inflation under control 
over time.  
 
Our modelling framework balances growth and inflation over the medium 
term using a Taylor rule. If the model sees growth underperforming the 
economy’s potential, the rule suggests a looser policy stance. If inflation 
is simultaneously higher than the target, it compromises, aiming both to 
hit  the  inflation  target  and  to  move  growth  back  to  potential  over  the 
forecast  period,  of  two  to  three  years.  Given  this  process,  the  MPC 
decided  to  reduce  rates  at  its  July  meeting,  because  growth  is 
underperforming and inflation appears to be under control. So this is one 
responsible way to do rate cuts.  
 
You may wonder why we say ‘growth’ instead of ‘employment’. Of course, 
the two are linked. Better growth generally means more jobs. But we don’t 
refer  to  employment  because  of  technical  issues  with  our  employment 
data, making them difficult to interpret. For example, despite the negative 
GDP  growth  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  year,  the  Quarterly  Employment 
Survey told us that the economy had created an extra 49 000 jobs. That 
was probably not a signal the economy was picking up. Unfortunately, the 
data throw up these kinds of puzzles all the time, making it hard to rely on 
them  as  guides  for  monetary  policy.  At  a  more  fundamental  level,  it 
doesn’t  make  much  difference  if  we  use  growth  or  employment  in  our 
Taylor rule, a point made by academics assessing our policy decisions. 
 Page 11 of 14 
They find that the SARB cares about jobs as well as growth, and does not 
behave as if it cared about inflation and nothing else.7 
 
We can also measure our policy stance with reference to something called 
a  ‘neutral  real  interest  rate’,  which  in recent  years  has  increased.  This 
makes it more difficult to cut rates without inducing inflation. A part of the 
rise in our neutral rate has come from higher global rates, which affect us 
because we have to borrow from foreigners to finance our current account 
deficit. A larger part of the rise comes from an increasing risk premium. 
The risk premium is the price that lenders demand for putting their money 
here in South Africa instead of somewhere else they perceive as safer. 
Our risk premium has increased by about three-quarters of a percentage 
point over the past five years. If risk subsides again, perhaps because we 
borrow less or invest more to grow faster, we will have more monetary 
space and might cut rates responsibly.  
 
Ladies and gentlemen, to conclude, let me make a point frankly. We don’t 
have balanced and sustainable growth in South Africa. With annual GDP 
growth rates under 1%, we barely have any growth. Indeed, adjusting for 
the  increase  in  our  population,  we  have  been  getting  poorer  for  half  a 
decade. We also don’t have balance or sustainability. Government’s debt-
to-GDP ratio is moving steadily higher, and with bailouts for state-owned 
enterprises, there are real risks we will soon have one of the highest debt 
levels amongst our emerging market peers. Because we have borrowed 
so much from abroad, we pay a rapidly rising amount of interest to non-
South African creditors, and this is contributing to a large current account 
deficit – again, one of the biggest in our peer group.  
 7 Bold, S. and Harris, L. April 2018. ‘Identifying monetary policy rules in South Africa with inflation 
expectations and unemployment’. SA-TIED Working Paper 7. Available at: http://sa-
tied.wider.unu.edu/sites/default/files/pdf/WP-7-2018-Bold.pdf. 
 Page 12 of 14 
 
There are real limits on what monetary policy can do to help. By anchoring 
inflation expectations at lower levels, we lower long-term interest rates, 
supporting investment and helping government to finance a growing debt 
burden.  By  maintaining  a  credible  monetary  policy  and  a  short-term 
interest  rate  that  compensates  investors  for  risk,  we  help  to  maintain 
capital flows into South Africa. Our repo rate setting is accommodative 
relative to our estimate of neutral, and it is low compared with historical 
averages. Rate cuts, like the one we’ve just decided on, provide some 
help on the margin, but inflation shows few signs yet of further moderation.  
 
There is a healthy debate about where exactly we need to go with the repo 
rate. But we see no monetary policy stance that would single-handedly 
transform South Africa’s prospects. And as our economic circumstances 
get more difficult, I worry that more people will choose to avoid making 
hard choices and pretend they do not need to be made, as if the SARB 
could just cut rates enough and all will be well.  
 
The facts are, central bankers care about growth and employment, and 
the  SARB  is  no  exception.  But  we  do  not  face  a  permanent  trade-off 
between  inflation  and  growth.  There are  short-term  trade-offs  involving 
growth, but after a while, inflation and interest rates are the things that 
permanently increase.   
 
The  SARB  can  deliver  low  and  stable  inflation.  But  balanced  and 
sustainable growth also requires contributions from many other parts of 
government  and  society.  As  a  country,  we  need  to  maintain  prudent 
macroeconomic policies and we have to make further progress on a range 
of structural issues. Ultimately, prosperity cannot be created by an MPC 
 Page 13 of 14 
setting interest rates. We are but one part of the orchestra; we are not 
soloists. We are doing our best but we can’t put on a show alone. 
 
Thank you.  
 
 Page 14 of 14 
