  18.09.2019 
 Monetary policy and bank profitability in an environment of uncertainty 
10th Conference on the Spanish Banking Sector, organised by the IVIE and the 
University of Valencia 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
 
I should like to thank the Valencian Economic Research Institute for the invitation to speak 
at  this  conference  on  the  Spanish  banking  sector,  which  this  year  marks  its  tenth 
anniversary.  I  am  honoured  and  delighted  to  participate  in  this  event  and  share  some 
reflections  with  you  regarding  the  current  profitability  of  Spanish  banks  and  the  main 
challenges that will shape their future. As you know, this is a subject that is attracting a lot 
of attention in Europe, both on the part of analysts and supervisors and the industry itself, 
owing to the concern about banks’ low profitability. 
 
Before I address this issue, allow me to start by describing the economic situation in the 
euro area and, in particular, the decisions taken by the Governing Council of the European 
Central Bank (ECB) last week. This is very relevant for the financial system, insofar as it is 
the context in which its activity will be carried out over the next few years. 
 
1.  The economic situation in the euro area and the monetary policy response 
 The international economic context has undoubtedly become more unfavourable over the 
past  year,  with  a  slowdown  in  growth  and,  in  particular,  in  trade.  The  latest  information 
shows that global activity slowed across the board in the second quarter and the highest 
frequency  indicators  point  to  persistence  of  this  weakness  over  the  coming  months. 
Meanwhile, the decline in world trade appears to have steepened, against a background of 
heightened  uncertainty  regarding  the  trade  policies  of  the  United  States  and  China  and 
intensification  of  geopolitical  risks.  Although  the  decline  in  activity  has  been  particularly 
strong in manufacturing, the slowdown in recent months in the global services output PMI, 
which remains in expansionary territory, is indicative of an increase in the risk of a greater 
slowdown in global activity. 
 
Given its degree of openness and the existence of certain idiosyncratic factors, the  euro 
area economy has been one of the most affected by these international trade developments. 
Specifically, there was a significant slowdown in the euro area from the beginning of 2018, 
mainly  due  to the  sharp moderation in its  exports.  As  a  result,  in  2018, GDP grew  at  an 
average rate of 1.8%, 0.7 percentage points less than in 2017, while year-on-year growth 
fell to around 1% in late 2018 and early 2019.  
 
The latest information shows that euro area GDP growth in the second quarter, adversely 
affected by export weakness and sluggish investment, was only 0.2% quarter-on-quarter, 
down from 0.4% in the first quarter. By contrast, private consumption continued to grow, 
driven by the relative strength of the labour market. On the supply side, industrial activity 
contracted in this period, while services continued to behave more favourably. By country, 
the decline in activity in the German economy and the stagnation in Italy were notable.  
 
Furthermore, the available indicators suggest that the weakness of economic activity in the 
euro area persisted in the third quarter of the year. Thus, the indicators relating to trade and 
industrial  activity  (industrial  production,  export  orders,  manufacturing  confidence  and 
industrial production expectations) continued to deteriorate. Also, certain survey indicators 
of  activity  and  employment  in  services  showed  a downturn,  which may indicate  that the 
weakness is beginning to spread to these activities. The slowdown in employment, along 
 3/13 
 with the gradual decline in consumer confidence in the third quarter, points to more modest 
growth in private consumption, which until now has been the main driver of growth. 
 
In this context, the ECB published its macroeconomic  projections for the euro area as a 
whole  last  week.  Projected  GDP  growth  was  revised  downwards,  especially  for  2020. 
Specifically, growth is now projected to be 1.1% in 2019 and 1.2% in 2020, in both cases 
lower  rates  than  were  projected  in  June.  In  the  medium  term,  a  recovery  in  activity  is 
expected,  underpinned  by  favourable  financial  conditions  and  the  slightly  expansionary 
fiscal policy stance, assuming that the political and trade uncertainty gradually dissipates.  
 
Notwithstanding  this  downward  revision  to  the  macroeconomic  projections,  the  ECB’s 
Governing  Council  stressed  that  there  remain  important  downside  risks  to  the  central 
scenario, arising mainly from the possibility of a no-deal Brexit and a possible escalation of 
trade tensions.  
 
Inflation in the euro area remains at low levels. In the third quarter, inflation developments 
were marked by the downward dynamic of energy prices and the persistence of moderate 
rates in services and industrial goods. The annual rate of change in the harmonised index 
of consumer prices (HICP) held steady at 1% in August, for the second month running, while 
underlying inflation, which excludes energy and food prices, stood at 0.9%. In fact, since 
2013,  inflation  in  the  euro  area  has  stood  on  average  at  0.9%,  practically  half  the  level 
observed during the first 10 years of EMU, of 2.1%. 
 
In  parallel,  the  indicators  of  long-term  inflation  expectations,  based  on  financial  market 
information, have fallen sharply since the end of last year and stand at very low levels, which 
broadly  coincides  with  the  signals  obtained  from  surveys.  These  indicators  are  regularly 
used  to  monitor  the  degree  to  which  inflation  expectations  are  anchored  to  the  ECB’s 
medium-term inflation target (below, but close to, 2%). Although most of the reduction in 
inflation expectations, according to market indicators, seems to stem from the fall in the 
inflation risk premium, the level of this premium is in negative territory, which would indicate 
that agents are hedging the risk of very low or even negative inflation rates. 
 
This  absence  of  inflationary  pressures  and  the  weakness  of  demand,  along  with 
expectations  of  falling  oil  prices  and  a  deteriorating  global  environment,  led  to  a  further 
downward revision to the Eurosystem inflation projections. Inflation was projected to stand 
at 1.2% in 2019 and, following a notable downward revision of 0.4 percentage points, 1% 
in 2020. In 2021, inflation is expected to stand at 1.5%, clearly below the monetary policy 
target. 
 
These  developments  have  been  accompanied  by  a  reduction  in  long-term  yields  on 
sovereign debt markets, which have reached historic lows in most euro area countries and 
in the United States, as a consequence of the weakness of the macroeconomic environment 
and market expectations of the central bank response to this scenario of reduced economic 
momentum.  
 
In short, the macroeconomic context is characterised in the euro area, first, by a downward 
revision to growth forecasts, which were already relatively weak, which remain subject to 
downside  risks,  owing  to  the  persistence  of  trade  tensions  and  other  geopolitical 
4/13 
  uncertainties,  such  as  those  relating  to  the  final  outcome  of  Brexit,  and  which  in  some 
countries of the area even point to a risk of imminent recession; and second, by medium-
term inflation projections that have also been revised downwards and are well below the 
levels that could be considered compatible with the ECB’s price stability mandate.  
 
The measures adopted by the Governing Council of the ECB at last week’s meeting should 
be  understood  against  this  background.  In  particular,  and  in  keeping  with  previous 
communications, the Governing Council acted – with a package of expansionary measures 
– in response to inflation rates, both realised and projected for the coming years, which have 
remained  persistently  below  the  ECB’s  aim,  in  line  with  its  commitment  to  symmetry  in 
relation to this aim. In this context, symmetry means that the ECB undertakes to act with 
the same determination whether inflation is persistently above or below 2%.1  
 
In particular, the Governing Council of the ECB took the decision to decrease the interest 
rate on the deposit facility by 10 basis points to -0.50% and reinforced its forward guidance 
on interest rates by indicating that they will remain at their present or lower levels until it is 
seen that the inflation outlook robustly converges to a level sufficiently close to, but below, 
2%. Such convergence should also be consistently reflected in the observed behaviour of 
underlying inflation. 
 
The ECB also agreed to restart net purchases under its asset purchase programme (APP) 
at a monthly pace of €20 billion as from 1 November and without a defined time limit. In 
order to preserve favourable bank lending conditions, the modalities of the new series of 
quarterly  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTRO  III)  were  also  changed, 
eliminating the 10 bp spread established on the interest rates applied to them and extending 
their  maturity  from  two  to  three  years.  Finally,  in  order  to  support  the  bank-based 
transmission  of  monetary  policy,  a  two-tier  system  for  reserve  remuneration  was 
announced, such that part of banks’ holdings of excess liquidity will be exempt from the 
negative deposit facility rate. 
 
These decisions aim to counter the worsening growth and inflation outlook by means of a 
package  of  measures  that  complement  one  another,  easing  financial  conditions  by  a 
different route. Thus, the cut in the interest rate on the deposit facility will have a moderating 
effect on yields at the short end of the different yield curves, which extends to the interest 
rate term structure as a whole, thus reducing the cost of borrowing for households and for 
firms.  
 
This effect is reinforced by the changes introduced in the forward guidance on interest rates, 
which closely links the potential normalisation of interest rates to a robust convergence of 
the  inflation  outlook  to  a  level  “sufficiently  close  to,  but  below,  2%”.  Moreover,  such 
convergence should have been reflected, as mentioned earlier, in actual inflation dynamics.  
 
This forward guidance on interest rates and the resumption of net asset purchases seek to 
have  an  impact  on  the  medium  and  longer-dated  segments  of  the  yield  curve,  mainly 
through interest rate expectations in the case of forward guidance, and term and risk premia 
in the case of asset purchases. The resumption of net purchases, without a defined time 
                                                                                              
1See  the  Governor  of  the  Banco  de  España’s  closing  address  of  the  La  Granda  Courses  on  31  August  2019,  “The 
European economic policy response to a scenario of lower growth and inflation”. 
 5/13 
 limit,  also  has  an  important  signalling  effect  with  respect  to  the  Governing  Council’s 
commitment to meet its inflation aim, which is particularly relevant in the current context of 
inflation expectations at risk of becoming de-anchored.  
 
In addition, the period of time over which the net asset purchases and the reinvestment of 
existing  assets  will  continue  is  anchored  to  the  normalisation  of  interest  rates,  thus 
enhancing  the  consistency  and  complementarity  of  the  different  measures  and  their 
dynamic  adjustment  to  inflation.  In  a  setting  of  heightened  uncertainty,  this  automatic 
adjustment  of  the  expectations  about  the  future  path  of  monetary  policy  in  the  face  of 
potential changes in the macroeconomic environment is particularly desirable. 
 
Lastly, the improved conditions of the new TLTRO-III programme seek to further ease the 
conditions of bank lending to the real economy.  
 
Economic research, including that produced by the Banco de España in recent years, shows 
that  these  measures  have  been  effective  in  the  recent  past,  in  terms  of  easing  financial 
conditions and encouraging lending. Bearing this in mind, the new package of measures 
will boost economic activity in the euro area against a background of high uncertainty and 
will help to bring about the convergence of inflation to levels in line with the ECB's mandate. 
 
As regards negative interest rates, although there is no conclusive evidence to date that 
they have adversely affected the supply of bank credit, we cannot rule out that maintaining 
rates  at  very  low  levels  for  an  additional,  potentially  extended,  period  of  time,  could 
ultimately have some negative consequences for the bank-based transmission of monetary 
policy. In this regard, the mitigating measures adopted by the ECB, consisting of a tiered 
system  for  remunerating  excess  liquidity  holdings,  are  intended  to  soften  the  negative 
impact on bank profitability of the new reduction in reserve remuneration, and thus ensure 
the expansionary effect on activity and inflation of any additional cuts to interest rates in the 
current setting.  
 
2.  Banking sector profitability 
 
This is the economic environment that banks, economic agents and, in particular, financial 
institutions  will  face  in  coming  years.  If  I  may,  I  will  now  move  on  to  analyse  the 
developments in Spanish banking sector profitability and the determinants thereof.  
 
Profitability is one of the main variables that characterise the financial position of banks and 
it provides the first line of defence against adverse shocks. Indeed, the volume of a bank’s 
profits determines the return its owners can earn on the capital invested. This, duly adjusted 
for the risks assumed, will affect the bank’s valuation. Moreover, profit levels determine the 
margin these agents have available to address shocks. Indeed, low profitability reduces the 
possibility of generating capital internally through retained earnings. Note that the capital of 
banks acts as a buffer that allows potential losses to be absorbed in adverse scenarios, so 
that these intermediaries can continue to offer financial services to households and firms, 
thus contributing to smoothing – rather than amplifying – negative shocks to the economy. 
 
Also, a high level of capital entails a stronger link between the personal wealth of the owners 
and the economic performance of the banks, thus contributing to mitigate the risk profile 
6/13 
  that the latter are prepared to assume and, therefore, the likelihood that they will overreach 
themselves and will subsequently require traumatic correction measures. All of this explains 
the concern of banking regulators that banks should hold sufficient capital. 
 
The last financial crisis showed that banks’ capital levels were clearly insufficient to address 
the  economic  and  financial  shocks  that  arose.  In  response  to  the  crisis,  international 
financial  regulators  tightened  capital  requirements,  setting  higher  minimum  levels  and 
requiring capital of higher quality, as well as introducing requirements for minimum liquidity 
levels.  
 
As  a  result,  the  main  international  banking  systems  have  gradually  raised  their  solvency 
ratios  in  recent  years.  The  Spanish  banking  system  has  gradually  adapted  to  the  new 
regulations  and  its  capital  ratios  are  currently  in  excess  of  regulatory  requirements. 
However, in the case of ratios calculated in terms of risk-weighted assets, such as the CET1 
ratio, average levels are comparatively low and have risen by less than in the main European 
banking systems. By contrast, in terms of the leverage ratio, that is, when banks’ assets are 
not risk-weighted, the relative position of the Spanish banking system is more favourable, 
standing  somewhat  above  the  European  average  and  above  that  of  the  main  European 
banking systems.  
 
Spanish bank profitability since the start of the crisis 
 
The profitability of the Spanish banking system contracted sharply during the last economic 
crisis  and  more  severely  than  in  other  jurisdictions:  in  2012  return  on  equity  reached  a 
negative  level  of  -21%  and  return  on  assets  a  negative  level  of  -1.2%,  according  to  the 
consolidated  statement  information  which  reflect  not  only  business  in  Spain  but  also 
international exposures. The main determinant of this performance was the increase in loan 
losses  associated  with  the  significant  increase  in  non-performing  loans,  in  particular  in 
construction and the real estate sector to which banks were over-exposed.  
 
Despite the drop in aggregate profit levels in the first half of this year, in recent years the 
profitability of the Spanish banking system has tended to recover, essentially underpinned 
by  the  decline  in  impairment  losses  which  reflects  the  improvement  in  the  quality  of  the 
credit  portfolio.  The  reduction  in  non-productive  assets  –  non-performing  loans  and 
foreclosed assets – has played a fundamental part. Specifically, the ratio of non-performing 
loans to the resident private sector in Spain has fallen from 14% in December 2013 to 5.3% 
in June 2019, and the volume of foreclosed assets has decreased from almost €78 billion in 
December 2013 to €40 billion in June 2019. This has been achieved by sales of large non-
performing  and  foreclosed  asset  portfolios,  partly  as  a  consequence  of  regulatory  and 
supervisory pressure.   
 
These  latest  developments  have  occurred  in  a  favourable  macro-financial  setting 
characterised by growing economic activity, falling unemployment and lower interest rates. 
This has boosted borrowers’ ability to repay their loans, driven up asset values and has also 
been compatible with substantial deleveraging in the non-financial private sector and with 
a major consolidation process in the banking sector.  
 
 7/13 
 Spanish banking system earnings are highly cyclical, essentially on account of business in 
Spain. Banks that are more exposed to business abroad were comparatively less hard hit 
by the crisis, as they were able to offset the losses on their Spanish business with earnings 
from  their  activities  in  other  economies  that  were  less  adversely  affected  by  cyclical 
patterns. Naturally, these international exposures also entail other risks. For example, banks 
with exposure to the United Kingdom could be affected by the possible negative impact of 
Brexit  and  the  effects  it may  have on the UK  economy.  In  addition,  the  problems  facing 
certain emerging market economies, such as Turkey or Argentina, may affect banks that 
have exposure to those countries. However, despite these risks, international diversification 
of the banking business offers important advantages overall and especially, as was apparent 
in the last crisis, when it is focused on retail banking and is organised on a decentralised 
basis. 
 
Despite the recent recovery observed in Spanish banking system profitability, the present 
levels are below the pre-crisis levels and below the cost of capital estimates available. This 
situation  is  not  exclusive  to  Spain,  but  is  in  fact  quite  widespread  within  the  euro  area. 
Indeed, the average profitability of Spanish banks is currently somewhat higher than that of 
the main European banking systems and the euro area average. 
 
The breakdown of the return on assets shows that the main reason why Spanish banks’ 
profit levels are higher than the euro area average is that their net interest income is higher. 
This reflects the larger relative share of Spanish banking business in less mature markets, 
such  as  the  Latin  American  economies,  where  margins  are  higher.  Conversely,  Spanish 
banks have higher impairment related expenses and provisions than their euro area peers. 
 
Average  return  on  equity  among  Spanish  banks  is  also  higher  than  for  banks  of  other 
European countries such as Switzerland or the United Kingdom or for Japanese banks. But 
it is lower than average return on equity observed in other more profitable banking systems, 
such as the United States, Sweden, Norway, Canada and Australia.  
 
In any event, there is a high level of dispersion in profitability between banks, both in Spain 
and in the rest of Europe. This shows that profitability problems do not affect the sector 
evenly,  given  the  range  of  banking  business  models,  both  between  countries  and  within 
each jurisdiction, and also the combination of multiple explanatory factors. 
 
To  facilitate  a  better  understanding  of  the  factors  underpinning  the  Spanish  banking 
system’s low profitability levels compared with the pre-crisis levels, I will now concentrate 
on business in Spain. This is because changes in profitability in the consolidated statements 
are influenced by the growing share of international exposure observed in recent years and 
this makes it more difficult to interpret earnings as they are affected by significant changes 
in  composition.  Also,  there  are  only  a  small  number  of  banks  that  have  significant 
international exposure, which means that changes drawing on consolidated statements may 
not be very representative of the majority of the banking sector.  
 
The profitability data drawing on individual statements of business in Spain are also highly 
cyclical,  even  more  so  than  those  drawing  on  consolidated  statements.  This  reflects  the 
greater  severity of  the  crisis  in  Spain  compared  with  the  situation  in  other  economies  to 
8/13 
  which Spanish banks held exposures. There are also signs of a marked recovery in recent 
years, despite which, in 2018 both ROE and ROA were still below their pre-crisis levels. 
 
The breakdown of the return on assets shows that the main determinant of the current low 
level of profitability of business in Spain compared with the pre-crisis period is a narrowing 
of  net  interest  income  in  terms  of  assets,  or  net  interest  margin.  This  narrowing  was 
concentrated in the period 2009 to 2013, when the margin fell from 1.4% to 0.9%; since 
then this indicator has steadied at around 1% of total assets.  
 
There are several factors that may explain the decline in net interest margin observed in this 
period. First, it is the result of the increase in the relative share of non-productive assets, 
that is, assets that do not earn interest, such as non-performing loans or foreclosed assets.  
 
In addition, this period saw a severe contraction in banks’ credit portfolios, a reflection of 
the  sharp  correction  in  the  high  indebtedness  accumulated  by  Spanish  households  and 
firms in the pre-crisis years, and of the loss of share of the banking system in the financing 
of the economy. Banks cushioned the balance sheet effect of this contraction in their credit 
portfolios by increasing their exposure to other assets, especially through government debt 
purchases. As these debt securities provide lower returns than lending to households and 
firms,  in the  long  run this  portfolio  rebalancing  resulted in  a  fall  in  the  average  return on 
assets. However, when the sovereign debt crisis came to an end, the increase in value of 
these debt securities provided a positive, albeit short-lived, boost to profitability.  
 
On our estimates, the overall effect of these changes in asset composition – associated with 
the  increase  in  non-performing  loans  and  the  decrease  in  the  relative  share  of  credit  on 
balance  sheets  –  would  explain  some  70%  of  the  decline  in  net  interest  margin  in  the 
Spanish banking system between 2007 and 2018. 
 
The fall in market interest rates has also played its part in narrowing the net interest margin, 
since the cost of liabilities, and especially of deposits, which are the main source of funding 
for  Spanish  banks,  tend  to  be  less  sensitive  to  changes  in  market  returns  than  the 
remuneration of assets. This effect heightens when interest rates move close to cero, since 
this level has served as a lower bound for the cost of deposits. The reason for this downward 
stickiness in the cost of deposits is that negative interest rates in these instruments could 
reduce the supply of funds, especially in the case of households, as they would prefer to 
hold cash, which has zero but not negative remuneration, rather than deposits.  
 
An analysis of the average loan-deposit gap in the case of outstanding balances shows that 
there is in effect a historically positive relationship between this variable and the level of 
market interest rates. Nevertheless, the fact that since 12-month EURIBOR turned negative 
in February 2016 the loan-deposit gap has not narrowed and in fact has widened is quite 
striking. There are two reasons for this. The first is that average remuneration of loans has 
been sustained in recent years by the decline in non-performing loans, which has reduced 
the proportion of loans not earning interest. The second reason is that in February 2016 
there was still some margin for decline in the cost of deposits, which averaged 0.35% for 
outstanding balances and 0.20% for new business. As a result, since that date deposit rates 
on new business have fallen by a similar amount as average remuneration of loans. Now, 
 9/13 
 however, as the cost of deposits has come very close to zero, it would be more difficult to 
pass any further decreases in remuneration of assets through to the cost of deposits. 
 
It is often argued that banks’ net interest income is being adversely affected not only by the 
low level of interest rates but also by the flattening of the yield curve observed in recent 
years.  This  effect  depends,  first,  on  the  extent  to  which  there  are  positive  differences 
between the maturity of the assets and the liabilities of banks. In general, these financial 
intermediaries receive short-term funding and provide long-term financing; this is known as 
maturity  transformation.  However,  in  order  for  the  flattening  of  the  yield  curve  to  have  a 
negative impact on net interest income, in addition to there being maturity transformation, 
banks need to be granting fixed-rate loans. If they are lending at variable interest rates, the 
remuneration  will  usually  be  linked  to  short-term  yields,  thus  contributing  to  holding  the 
loan-deposit gap steady. 
 
In the case of Spain, although banks operate with maturity transformation, the bulk of their 
long-term lending is variable rate. In consequence, the flattening of the yield curve in recent 
years should have had less impact on Spanish banks’ net interest income than on the net 
interest income of banks in other European jurisdictions such as Germany or France where 
fixed-rate loans predominate.  
 
In any event, in order to assess the overall effect of interest rates on the profitability of banks, 
it is necessary to take into account that interest rates not only impact the net interest margin 
but they also impact other items in the income statement.  
 
In particular, lower interest rate levels help to lessen losses in the credit portfolio due to their 
favourable effect on borrowers’ repayment capacity associated with both the lower cost of 
credit, and higher income and lower unemployment tied to the macroeconomic impact of 
lower  interest  rates.  These  effects  may  be  particularly  important  in  countries  like  Spain 
where the banking system started out with a high level of non-performing loans and where 
short-term or variable rate lending was prevalent, since this results in movements in market 
returns passing through rapidly to the costs of outstanding debt2. Thus, part of the fall in the 
non-performing loans ratio in recent years can be explained by this effect. 
 
Furthermore, declines in interest rates contribute to increasing the prices of financial and 
real assets. This effect is immediate for fixed-income securities, particularly long-term ones 
since prices are more sensitive to changes in yields. Valuations of equities and real assets, 
such  as  housing,  are  also  boosted  by  the  fall  in  interest  rates  due  to  the  effect  on  the 
discount factor, although the price of these other assets is influenced by other conditioning 
factors such as macroeconomic expectations. All the above entails capital gains for banks 
exposed to these financial and real assets, at the same time as it increases the value of loan 
collateral.  This  also  favours  an  improvement  in  the  credit  quality of loans  and,  therefore, 
smaller losses in the credit portfolio. 
 
It is true, in any event, that these capital gains dry up once interest rates stop falling and 
remain  at  low  levels.  Furthermore,  there  is  also  evidence  that,  since  the  ECB’s  deposit 
                                                                                              
2 See, Banco de España (2018): Annual Report 2017, Chapter 2, “The challenges facing the Spanish banking sector” 
and Banco de España (2017): Annual Report 2016, Chapter 1, Overview, Box 1.3. 
10/13 
  facility rate has stood below zero, negative surprises in short-term interest rates have been 
accompanied by declines in European banks’ stock prices.3 
 
Given  the  endogenous  nature  of  the  monetary  policy  response  to  projected  economic 
developments, this change in banks’ stock prices due to monetary surprises may reflect, on 
one hand, the negative impact of less favourable projections for the future macroeconomic 
setting and, on the other, the market view on the direct negative effect of additional interest 
rate cuts on the future profitability of banks against the backdrop of protracted negative 
rates.4 
 
In recent years, Spanish banks have partially cushioned the fall in net interest income by 
generating  other  income  and,  in  particular,  by  increasing  fee  and  commission  income. 
Noteworthy among these fees is the relative increase in fees for selling products such as 
investment funds, against a backdrop of growing demand for these assets, bolstered by 
households  seeking  more  profitable  investments  than  deposits  given  their  low  returns. 
These developments have resulted in the ratio of gross income to assets, which includes 
fees in addition to net interest income, having fallen to a lesser extent than the net interest 
margin. 
 
Banks  have  also  made  huge  efforts  to  reduce  their  operating  expenses  through  branch 
closures  and  job  cuts,  but  to  date  these  expenses  have  declined  more  moderately  than 
gross income. This was reflected in a continued increase in the ratio between these two 
magnitudes, that is, the efficiency ratio, until 2017, which underlines the deterioration in their 
efficiency during this period. This trend seemed to come to a halt in 2018 when this ratio 
improved slightly. In terms of assets, in 2018 operating expenses were at similar levels to 
their pre-crisis ones. However, in a setting where the share of credit in assets is currently 
significantly lower than it was then, these expenses should also be smaller given that the 
costs associated with the management of non-credit assets are lower. 
 
The information in the consolidated statements also shows that the most recent levels of 
the  efficiency  ratio  are  above  pre-crisis  ones,  therefore  indicating  a  situation  of  lower 
efficiency. However, despite this deterioration, the ratios of the Spanish banking system in 
this area continue to be more favourable than those of the main European banking systems 
and also than those of banks in the United States and Japan, although they are worse than 
those of the Scandinavian countries.  
 
Main challenges affecting the future profitability of Spanish banks 
 
Next, I shall briefly mention the main challenges facing Spanish banks which affect their 
future  profitability  outlook.  These  challenges  are  not  confined  to  the  Spanish  banking 
system but are largely shared with other jurisdictions. 
 
One of the major challenges which banks must face is linked to technological change. New 
technologies  represent  both  threats  and  opportunities  for  banks.  On  one  hand,  they 
promote the emergence of new competitors, such as fintechs and big techs. The latter pose 
                                                                                              
3 See Ampudia and Van den Heuvel (2018). 
4 Recent literature on monetary surprises distinguishes between purely monetary surprises and other surprises which 
disclose private information about the future state of the economy. See, for example, Jaroncinski and Karadi (2018). 
 11/13 
 a more obvious disruption, given their larger size and advantages in terms of the availability 
of information, a key asset in the digital and financial worlds. Some of these companies have 
already begun to offer specific financial services which were traditionally provided by banks 
or have announced that they intend to do so shortly. 
 
Yet  on  the  other  hand,  adopting  technological  innovation  may  also  mean  efficiency 
improvements for banks, although it is true that in the short term adapting to the new way 
of  providing  financial  services  and  managing  their  assets  will  entail  hefty  costs  for 
established banks. 
 
For  society  as  a  whole,  the  use  of  new  technologies  in  finance  may  mean  significant 
advantages  in  terms  of  cost  savings  and  financial  inclusion.  As  regulators,  we  have  to 
promote the adoption of innovation while continuing to treat all participants symmetrically 
so that regulations governing the same activities are comparable, irrespective of the type of 
company providing the services. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, the decrease in non-productive assets has been one of the main 
factors which has contributed to the return to profitability of the Spanish banking system in 
recent years. Nevertheless, although it has decreased significantly, the share of these assets 
in banks’ balance sheets continues to be historically high and, consequently, banks should 
take advantage of this point in the cycle to make further progress in this area. 
 
Another  important  challenge  for  Spanish  banks  relates  to  the  need  for  them  to  achieve 
reputational improvements. After the economic crisis, litigation increased notably, resulting 
in sizeable costs for banks which have a negative effect on their profitability. This increase 
in legal costs is not confined to the Spanish banking system but has also been observed in 
other jurisdictions. In addition to having an impact on profitability through higher legal costs, 
this situation has been accompanied by a reputational deterioration which, if not reversed, 
may lead to a loss of business in the medium term. This is particularly significant in a setting 
such  as  the  present  one  with  the  emergence  of  new  competitors  described  above. 
Consequently, it is essential for the sector to recover customers’ trust as soon as possible, 
this being a key asset in the financial business. 
 
Also, Spanish banks have to complete their adaptation to the new international regulatory 
and  supervisory  framework.  As  indicated,  although  their  capital  ratios  are  above  the 
minimum requirements in the area of solvency, the Spanish banking system still remains 
below other European countries in the case of the highest quality ratio (CET1). Strengthening 
capital would not only lead to greater resilience to adverse shocks but it would also bring 
down issuance costs.5 In  addition, higher solvency would help facilitate compliance with 
MREL  requirements  (Minimum  Requirement  for  own  Funds  and  Eligible  Liabilities)  that 
Spanish banks will have to gradually meet over the coming years. It will be a considerable 
challenge for smaller banks to comply with these requirements since they do not usually 
obtain funding by regularly tapping the capital markets. 
 
Lastly,  another  significant  challenge  is  that  associated  with  climate  change  and  the 
transition  towards  a  more  sustainable  economy  which,  although  it  affects  all  economic 
agents, has a particular impact on the financial sector. Banks face two types of risks in this 
                                                                                              
5 See Financial Stability Report, Spring 2019, Banco de España. 
12/13 
  area: “physical risks” linked to the direct effect of climate change on their asset values and 
“transition” risks connected with the process of technological and regulatory transition to a 
more sustainable economy. Identifying, quantifying and mitigating these risks will require 
considerable  effort  over  coming  years,  although  the  notable  development  of  green 
sustainable financial markets in Spain in recent years should be underlined. 
 
Conclusions 
 
I  shall  now  conclude  my  speech  by  emphasising  two  main  ideas  regarding  the  role  of 
economic policies in the current situation of economic uncertainty and the importance of 
addressing the challenges facing the banking sector.  
 
During my speech I have endeavoured to show that monetary policy has and continues to 
be  effective  in  supporting  economic  activity  and,  consequently,  inflation.  However,  it  is 
necessary  to  underline  that  this  cannot  be  the  only  lever  of  stimulus.  Accordingly,  it  is 
imperative  for  national  and  European  authorities  to  undertake  structural  reforms  which 
improve the efficiency of the main product and factor markets and increase the euro area’s 
growth potential. 
 
Likewise, given the worsening of growth projections, fiscal policy needs to provide greater 
stimulus to economic growth where there is scope for it to do so. It is even more important 
that  European  political  authorities  assess  the  suitability  of  deploying  euro-area  wide 
budgetary  instruments  for  macroeconomic  stabilisation,  which  would  contribute  to 
mitigating one of the main limitations in the original design of our common currency. 
 
All these  (monetary,  fiscal  and  structural)  policies may  be  especially  effective  is  they  are 
adopted jointly, thus harnessing the positive complementarities that exist between them. 
 
As I discussed at the beginning of my speech, profitability has a direct and indirect effect 
on the Spanish banking sector’s resilience to adverse shocks and, therefore, on the extent 
to which these intermediaries can contribute to amplifying or smoothing the impact of these 
shocks  on  the  economy.  Consequently,  it  is  essential  for  Spanish  banks  to  address  the 
challenges  which will  mark  their  profitability  in  future,  such  as  technological  change,  the 
reduction of non-productive assets, the strengthening of capital and the improvement of 
their reputation. 
 
Thank you for your attention. 
  13/13 
