  An address by Lesetja Kganyago, 
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the World Bank Reserves Advisory and Management Program 
 Washington, D.C. 
15 April 2019 
  Building resilience   
 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. It is a great pleasure to be 
here.  
 
The  recent  World  Economic  Outlook  highlights  that  although  global 
economic  conditions  remain  benign,  in  recent  months  growth  in  both 
emerging and advanced economies has begun to decelerate. At the same 
time, risks to the global economy are tilted to the downside, linked to both 
political and financial developments. An important element of managing 
risk 
focus  on  building 
macroeconomic resilience.  
 
My comments today will be centred around that theme. In particular, I’d 
like to share some thoughts around how emerging market central banks 
can contribute to economic resilience.  
 
I  will  begin  by  outlining  a  broad  definition  of  resilience  in  the 
macroeconomic context. In addition, I will put forward some principles that 
can underpin a policy framework aimed at supporting resilience. I will then 
in  such  an  uncertain  environment 
to 
is 
 Page 1 of 15 
discuss the experience of emerging markets and finally South Africa in 
addressing vulnerabilities and building macroeconomic resilience.    
 
Resilience conceptualised  
 
When thinking about economic resilience, it is important to focus on two 
distinct issues. The first is about how an economy responds to adverse 
shocks.  
 
The other relates to an economy’s propensity to avoid these shocks. As 
such,  resilience  can  be  defined  as  minimising  both  the  depth  and  the 
frequency of economic downturns.    
 
Resilience  is  important  because  the  incidence  of  a  downturn  may 
influence the future growth potential of an economy. Indeed, there is a 
growing  body  of  scholarly  evidence  indicating  that  recessions  are 
associated with permanent output losses.1 In particular, the longer output 
remains below its pre-crisis trend, the less likely it is to return to that trend. 
Containing  shocks  and  minimising  their  frequency  could,  therefore, 
produce lasting benefits.  
 
Another  important  justification  for  striving  to  achieve  macroeconomic 
resilience is that it can shield the most vulnerable in society from adverse 
outcomes. We know that lower-income families and smaller firms are less 
able  to  smooth  consumption  during  downturns.  As  a  result,  negative 
                                                           
1 See, for example: Cerra, M and Saxena, M. 2017. ‘Booms, crises, and recoveries: a new paradigm 
of the business cycle and its policy implications’. International Monetary Fund Working Paper No. 
17/250. 
 Page 2 of 15 
shocks  can  have  severe  and  lasting  effects  on  the  economically 
vulnerable, even if the aggregate output loss is relatively small.  
 
In thinking about resilience, we do, however, need to be guided by some 
broad principles. 
 
Resilience principles 
 
Since  the  global  financial  crisis,  many  central  banks  have  seen  an 
expansion of their mandates. The South African Reserve Bank (SARB) 
has been no exception, as we have recently been given the significant, 
but shared, responsibility for promoting financial stability.  
 
The expanded mandate comes with a larger policy toolkit. Consequently, 
central bankers face a distinct challenge in coordinating their monetary, 
exchange rate and financial stability policies.  
 
One  useful  way  of  achieving  coordination  is  by  assessing  whether  a 
particular  policy  mix  is  supportive  of  macroeconomic  resilience.  To 
facilitate  this,  I  would  like  to  suggest  four  key  principles,  which  should 
underpin  any  policy  framework  aimed  at  promoting  and  sustaining 
macroeconomic resilience.  
 
In  short,  policy  should  aim  to  increase  the  flexibility  of  an  economy  in 
response  to  shocks,  to  be  countercyclical  as  far  as  possible,  to  be 
consistent, and attempt to contain negative externalities.  
 
Let me expand on each principle briefly.   
 
 Page 3 of 15 
On the topic of flexibility, various policies can be undertaken to ensure that 
an  economy  is  able  to  adjust  to  changing  conditions  in  a  way  that 
minimises disruptions. Within the realm of central banking, this calls for a 
focus  on  the  way  in  which  financial  shocks  propagate  through  an 
economy. For example, ensuring that the banking sector is liquid and well 
capitalised improves the ability of banks to finance projects through the 
cycle. Having buffers in place to reduce shock amplification also frees up 
policy space.      
 
This  leads  me  to  the  second  principle,  which  is  countercyclicality.  The 
scope to support an economy during a downturn, and curb exuberance 
during a boom, is a key element of resilience. The Keynesian revolution 
in economics popularised monetary and fiscal stimulus during recessions. 
Now,  central  banks  are 
introducing  countercyclical 
macroprudential  policies.  Although  the  theory  clearly  supports  this 
approach,  there  are  significant  challenges  in  achieving  countercyclical 
policy outcomes. I will elaborate on some of these challenges later in this 
speech.  
 
Next,  let  me  briefly  expand  on  the  principle  of  consistency.  It  is  very 
important  to  regulate  same  activities  in  a  similar  way.  This  reduces 
opportunities  for  regulatory  arbitrage  and  avoids  the  inefficiencies 
associated  with  gaming 
in  monetary  and 
macroprudential  policy,  a  consistent  and  predictable  reaction  function 
ensures that policy itself is not a source of significant uncertainty.   
 
The final principle is that of addressing negative externalities. Economic 
downturns  are  often  caused  by  exuberance  in  prior  periods,  be  those 
strong  capital  inflows  or  rapid  increases  in  private  credit.  What  such 
regulation.  Similarly, 
increasingly 
 Page 4 of 15 
episodes  often  have  in  common  is  the  tendency  for  private  actors  to 
expose the broader economy to undue risk. This is a so-called negative 
externality  because  the  persons  taking  the  risk  do  not  bear  the  full 
economic cost, should the risk materialise. As a result, more risk than is 
socially optimal is undertaken in the absence of regulation. It is therefore 
necessary to have a policy framework that incentivises, the alignment of 
private  and  social  interests  as  far  as  possible.  There  are  a  number  of 
areas  in  which  this  principle  is  currently  being  explored.  For  example, 
some jurisdictions regulate the variable pay of bank CEOs2, to limit their 
incentive for risk taking.3   
 
I think that, by applying these four principles, central bankers can craft a 
set of policies that appropriately reinforce resilience.  
 
Let me turn now to a discussion of resilience within emerging markets and 
South Africa specifically.  
 
Resilience in emerging markets  
 
Reforms 
 
Since  the  crises  of  the  1990s,  emerging  market  policymakers  have 
undertaken a number of key reforms to reduce external vulnerabilities and 
build macroeconomic resilience, many of which have been in the spirit of 
the principles I have just outlined.  
 
                                                           
2 chief executive officers 
3 See, for example: Cerasi, V, Deininger, S, Gambacorta, L and Oliviero, T. 2017. ‘How post-crisis 
regulation has affected bank CEO compensation’. Bank for International Settlements Working Paper 
No. 630.  
 Page 5 of 15 
A  particularly  important  policy  choice  has  been  to  reduce  the  risks 
associated  with  foreign  currency-denominated  debt.  One  strategy  has 
involved  building  foreign  exchange  reserve  buffers  and  working  with 
international organisations to strengthen the global financial safety net. 
Indeed, over the past 20 years, global foreign exchange reserve assets 
have  grown  more  than  sixfold,4  with  the  bulk  of  the  growth  driven  by 
emerging market economies. Meanwhile, bilateral swap lines and regional 
financing  arrangements  have  grown  in  prominence,  complemented  by 
increased International Monetary Fund (IMF) resources. 
 
A supporting strategy has involved structural reforms to limit reliance on 
foreign  currency  debt.  This  broadly  includes  the  development  and 
deepening of domestic capital markets, as well as legal and institutional 
reforms  to  address  frictions  impeding  bank  credit  growth.  The  shift 
towards local-currency borrowing in emerging markets has provided an 
important layer of resilience against external shocks.      
 
There  has  also  been  a  concerted  effort  to  enhance  monetary  policy 
frameworks  and  stabilise  inflation  at  lower  levels.  Many  countries, 
including South Africa, have opted for an inflation-targeting framework in 
order to shift the public’s focus away from the exchange rate as a nominal 
anchor. By moving the focus to a stable inflation anchor, it has become 
easier and less costly to contain inflation shocks. Reduced inflation risk 
has also helped to support credit growth, particularly at longer durations. 
All of which has been positive for resilience.   
 
                                                           
4 This is total reserve assets including gold. (Sources: IMF and World Bank.) 
 Page 6 of 15 
Linked to the change in monetary policy frameworks has been an increase 
in exchange rate flexibility. Such flexibility has introduced greater scope 
for monetary policy countercyclicality and has allowed the exchange rate 
to play a role in absorbing shocks.    
 
Meanwhile,  most  emerging  market  economies  have  undertaken  some 
form of financial sector liberalisation, be it increasing private involvement 
in the sector, reducing controls on capital flows, or increasing the extent 
to which markets determine the price of credit.  
 
We, however, must acknowledge that while these reforms have provided 
important benefits, in some cases an excessive pace of capital account 
liberalisation  has  been  associated  with  heightened  volatility  and  even 
crisis. But, generally, the research on this topic shows that the adverse 
effects  associated  with  capital  flow  liberalisations  have  tended  to  be 
concentrated in those countries where financial development is relatively 
low.5 This indicates that the sequencing of reforms is also an important 
consideration.  
 
Challenges 
 
Despite  significant  improvements  over  the  past  20  years,  emerging 
market  central  banks  continue  to  face  challenges  in  building  and 
sustaining macroeconomic resilience.  
 
As I’ve alluded to earlier, procyclicality has been difficult to avoid in some 
countries.  Indeed,  we  continue  to  see  central  banks  give  in  to  the 
                                                           
5 Furceri, D, Loungani, P and Ostry, J. 2018. ‘The aggregate and distributional effects of financial 
globalization: evidence from macro and sectoral data’. IMF Working Paper No. 18/83. 
 Page 7 of 15 
temptation of providing stimulus, even when an economy is operating near 
full capacity.  This  is  particularly  prevalent  in  countries  that  lack central 
bank independence.  
 
However, other challenges related to procyclicality are also present. For 
example,  there  are  significant  difficulties  in  measuring  business  and 
financial cycles in real time. This has been compounded by substantial 
changes in potential growth across various parts of the world in recent 
years.  
 
A further source  of  procyclicality  is that  many  emerging market central 
banks have not had the luxury of considering only domestic conditions 
when setting policy. The widespread emerging market currency sell-off in 
2013 was a prime example of an exogenous shock that forced procyclical 
tightening in some countries. Nevertheless, that episode also provided an 
important  lesson.  Those  economies  that  had  created  policy  space  by 
anchoring  inflation  expectations  were  under  less  pressure  to  act  in  a 
procyclical fashion.6  
 
An associated challenge with respect to policymaking is that of data gaps. 
These  preclude  regulators  from  accurately  monitoring  risk  and  making 
cross-country  comparisons.  Such  gaps  may  also  be  exploited  by  firms 
seeking to avoid regulation. Policy challenges in this area are exacerbated 
by developments in cybersecurity and financial technology, which pose 
new types of risk.   
 
                                                           
6 Bems, R, Caselli, F, Grigoli, F and Gruss, B. 2019. ‘Gains from anchoring inflation expectations: 
evidence from the taper tantrum shock’. IMF Working Paper No. 19/75. 
 Page 8 of 15 
But, the familiar problem of elevated debt level poses the greatest risk to 
resilience.    Since  2008,  private  non-financial  sector  debt  in  emerging 
markets has more than tripled to almost US$40 trillion.7 While China has 
played a significant role in this outcome, the trend of rising private debt 
has  been  broad-based.  Furthermore,  benign  financing  conditions  have 
supported  substantial  foreign  currency  borrowing  in  a  number  of  key 
economies,  increasing  debt  risks.  This  is  a  real challenge to  resilience 
because a large debt overhang can amplify adverse shocks and weaken 
recovery.  
 
Let me now turn to the resilience of the South African economy.   
 
Resilience in the South African context 
 
I believe that South Africa’s macroeconomic framework has contributed to 
significant  resilience  in  spite  of  various  challenges.  In  particular,  the 
combination  of  a  floating  exchange  rate,  inflation  targeting  and  sound 
prudential  regulations  has  helped  to  contain  externalities  and  has 
provided for significant flexibility to macroeconomic shocks.   
 
South Africa has been an exception to the trend seen in other emerging 
economies of late. It is one of only a few countries that have experienced 
a decline in private sector debt over the past decade. Despite receiving 
strong capital inflows after the global financial crisis, bank credit extension 
has remained relatively muted. Instead, capital inflows have largely found 
their  way  into  listed  assets  and  bonds.  Indeed,  foreign  ownership  of 
                                                           
7 Source: Bank for International Settlements 
 Page 9 of 15 
domestic government bonds has increased significantly, from 22% in early 
2011 to approximately 38% today. 
 
Flows  into  the  bond  market  have  supported  substantial  public  sector 
borrowing. General government debt, as a share of GDP8, has more than 
doubled  over  the  past  decade.  At  56%  of  GDP,  gross  public  debt  is 
relatively high by emerging market standards. The trajectory and size of 
this debt implies a lack of fiscal space. However, the National Treasury 
has  taken  a  number  of  steps  to  contain  the  negative  externalities 
associated  with  the  debt.  For  example,  the  average  maturity  of  the 
outstanding debt stock has been increased to about 15 years, reducing 
rollover risk, while almost 90% of the debt is denominated in rand.  
 
Similarly, South Africa’s private debt is mostly in domestic currency. The 
economy’s  large  banking  sector,  alongside  deep  capital  markets,  has 
provided a stable source of local-currency funding, allowing the corporate 
sector to keep its foreign currency liabilities low.9 Furthermore, in the spirit 
of containing externalities, the SARB has in place a number of prudential 
limits  on  the  banking  sector  with  respect  to  foreign  currency  risk.  For 
example,  domestic  banks  are  required  to  keep  their  net  open  foreign 
currency position below 10% of their capital.  
 
As a result, South Africa’s foreign liabilities are largely in local currency, 
while its foreign assets are nearly all foreign currency-denominated. This 
structure makes the flexible exchange rate a powerful shock absorber. In 
addition,  full  exchange  rate  flexibility  reinforces  the  structure  of  the 
economy’s liabilities by disincentivising foreign currency borrowing.  
                                                           
8 gross domestic product 
9 Foreign currency-denominated debt of the non-bank private sector is approximately 8% of GDP.  
 Page 10 of 15 
 
Given  the  make-up  of  South  Africa’s  assets  and  liabilities,  periods  of 
exchange  rate  weakness  have  been  associated  with  an  improving  net 
international  investment  position  (IIP).  The  IIP  itself  has  been  further 
supported  by  strong  growth  in  domestic  equity  investments  abroad. 
Consequently, South Africa belongs to a small group of emerging market 
economies with a positive IIP.10  
 
As  a  result  of  the  shock-absorbing  capacity  of  the  exchange  rate,  the 
SARB  has  not  had  to  actively  utilise  its  international  reserves  since 
adopting inflation targeting in the year 2000. Instead, we have opted to 
gradually rebuild the country’s reserve buffers, having faced substantial 
losses  while  defending  the  currency  during  the  1990s.  The  SARB 
currently  holds  approximately  US$50  billion  in  gross  international 
reserves, largely as a precaution against severe market dysfunction.   
 
This level is regarded as being well below the IMF’s assessed reserve 
adequacy. However, at about 15% of GDP, the SARB holds a similar level 
of reserves (relative to the size of the economy) as various other large 
emerging  markets  do  –  a  level  which  for  many  countries  exceeds  the 
IMF’s  assessed  reserve  adequacy.  Furthermore,  as  I  have  mentioned, 
South Africa’s foreign currency debt levels and IIP are better than many 
of its peers.  
 
Indeed, a key driver of South Africa’s assessed reserve shortfall is the 
large  share  of  portfolio  liabilities.  The  extent  to  which  we  should  hold 
reserves  against  these  liabilities  is  a  subject  of  debate,  particularly 
                                                           
10 The IIP was 16.3% of GDP at the end of September 2018. 
 Page 11 of 15 
because  the  SARB  does  not  actively  intervene  in  the  exchange  rate. 
Nevertheless,  we  remain  committed  to  reserve  accumulation  and  will 
continue to grow our reserve assets on a measured basis.  
 
The  fact  that  capital  inflows  have  been  directed  largely  towards  listed, 
local-currency investments has both positive and negative dimensions for 
resilience. On the negative side, portfolio investment is believed to be a 
more volatile source of funding, potentially exposing the economy to the 
risk  of  rapid  capital  flow  reversals.  Furthermore,  the  disproportionate 
demand  for  financial  assets  has,  in  the  past,  reflected  relatively  weak 
domestic  GDP  growth  and  a  perceived  lack  of  direct  investment 
opportunities.  
 
On the positive side, however, foreign procurement of listed assets means 
that asset prices adjust rapidly to changing demand. Fast price discovery 
is key for ensuring that capital flow volumes remain intact even as global 
conditions 
Indeed,  we  often  observe  counterbalancing 
behaviour by domestic residents during periods in which foreign investors 
are  selling  assets.  This  is  usually  prompted  by  sizable  asset  price 
changes, which encourage domestic investors to repatriate capital from 
abroad.  
 
Moreover, the international demand for South Africa’s financial assets is 
an indication of the relative strength of our financial markets. Daily foreign 
exchange turnover, for example, is among the largest of any emerging 
market economy (when measured as a share of GDP).11 This ensures a 
high level of liquidity for portfolio investors.  
fluctuate. 
                                                           
11 IMF Article 4 Assessment of South Africa (2018)  
 Page 12 of 15 
 
Improving the depth and sophistication of the domestic financial markets 
has been a joint effort between the authorities and the private sector. One 
of the most important outcomes associated with more complete markets 
is  enhanced  sharing  and  allocation  of  risk.  For  example,  there  are 
relatively  liquid  currency  hedging  opportunities  in  South  Africa,  which 
means  that  foreign  investors  can  acquire  local-currency  assets  even  if 
they do not wish to have exposure to the rand.  
 
Now let me turn to the banking sector, which we believe to be a key pillar 
of macroeconomic resilience. The sector is well capitalised, with ample 
liquidity.  It  was  strong  enough  to  withstand  the  global  financial  crisis 
without any bank failures or recapitalisations required. Presently, South 
Africa’s regulations are broadly compliant with Basel III.  
 
To  further  build  on  the  resilience  of  the  financial  sector,  the  SARB, 
alongside other regulators, is currently introducing deposit insurance and 
a  resolution  framework  for  banks  and  other  systemically  important 
financial institutions. Deposit insurance is expected to reduce the risk of 
retail bank runs, while the resolution framework will formally introduce the 
possibility of private creditor bail-in. Both regulations will limit the public 
cost  of bank  failures.  This  is  particularly  important for  preserving  fiscal 
space.    
 
Moving to monetary policy, the introduction of inflation targeting in 2000 
has  steadily  improved  the  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  and  has 
reduced  the  level  of  inflation.  In  recent  years,  the  SARB  has  been 
attempting to steer inflation expectations closer to the midpoint of the 3-
 Page 13 of 15 
6% inflation target range. We believe that this will improve policy flexibility 
and increase the scope for countercyclicality. 
  
However,  while  much  has  been  done  to  boost  domestic  resilience,  a 
number of challenges remain. Rising public debt and the threat of further 
sovereign credit rating downgrades pose risks to both the financial sector 
and  the  real  economy.  In  particular,  these  developments  have  already 
lifted  longer-term  borrowing  costs  and  adversely  affected  private 
investment. Furthermore, should a crisis materialise, the scope for fiscal 
stimulus  will  be  very  limited  –  a  fact  which  further  underscores  the 
importance of creating monetary policy space.  
 
Perhaps the biggest threat to the economy’s resilience is the presence of 
various  binding  structural  constraints.  These  have  given  rise 
to 
persistently  low  GDP  growth.  The  SARB  estimates  that  South  Africa’s 
growth  potential  is  a  little  over  1%  at  present.  This  pace  of  growth  is 
insufficient to address the high level of inequality and joblessness in the 
country. Aside from eroding growth potential, structural challenges are a 
real  threat  to  resilience  because  they  reflect  a  substantial  degree  of 
inflexibility in the economy. Various reforms are therefore required if South 
Africa is to grow faster and become more resilient. However, these are 
beyond the remit of the SARB.  
 
Concluding remarks 
 
To recap: I believe that central banks can play an integral role in building 
economic resilience. In particular, this can be achieved by operating in a 
countercyclical fashion, ensuring policy consistency, addressing financial 
sector externalities, and putting in place policies that increase the flexibility 
 Page 14 of 15 
of  an  economy  in  response  to  shocks.  Of  course,  the  central  bank’s 
contribution is necessary, but not sufficient, to ensure broader economic 
resilience. Well-functioning product and labour markets as well as sound 
fiscal management are also key.      
 
Thank you. 
 
 Page 15 of 15 
