Yandraduth  Googoolye:  Blockchain  technology’s  potential  to
benefit society and the economy
Speech by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, Prelude to Banquet in
the context of the ADC Global Blockchain Summit, Adelaide, 27 March 2019.
 Honourable Steven Marshall, Premier of South Australia
Major General the Honourable Michael Jeffery, Forum Patron
Excellencies
Ladies and gentlemen
All protocol observed
Good Evening
I feel truly privileged to address such a distinguished audience.
I would like to thank the Honourable Steven Marshall and the Australian Davos Connection for the
invitation which gives us such a unique opportunity to attend this ADC Global Blockchain Summit
in Adelaide, the gem of South Australia.
South Australia is a region that is known for its proverbial welcome and hospitality.  It is a region
that  is  not  only  culturally  and  aesthetically  marvellous  but  which  also  has  to  its  credit  some
astonishing feats.
Astonishing indeed is one of the anecdotes I have come across with regard to South Australia:  I
do not think that there is in this second millennium, any other place in the world where the iconic
Coca-Cola has been outsold by 3 to 1 by the Farmers Union Iced Coffee. I hope there is some
around as I definitely look forward to having a sip of this beverage.
Ladies and Gentleman, I shall now get back to the reason behind this august gathering, the ADC
Global  Blockchain  Summit.    This  platform  stands  out  by  the  fact  that  it  has  brought  together
world  leading  entrepreneurs,  financiers,  regulators,  researchers,  innovators  and  business
leaders to focus on strategies and practical applications for business growth.
From what I have gathered, this is the largest and highest level of speakers ever assembled in
South Australia for a Blockchain event involving C-level, owner, entrepreneur and minister level
participation from over 30 countries across various geographies.
It is a privilege that we shall, across the days, hear and learn from the most respected authorities
worldwide  all  that  needs  to  be  understood  on  one  of  the  most  intriguing  yet  promising
technological breakthroughs… I am referring to blockchain…
Ladies and gentlemen, blockchain technology has tremendous potential to positively impact the
social  and  economic  landscapes.    Its  attributes  are  several.  Its  feature  of  full  transparency
across  networks  makes  blockchain  stand  out  as  one  of  the  most  likable  and  adaptable
technologies  out  of  different  technologies  available  in  the  market. Add  to  this  the  element  of
robust security that makes blockchain networks virtually impermeable and you have a solution
that simply stands out as the most favourable digital value-based technology.
For  me,  as  a  central  banker,  there  is  one  aspect  of  blockchain  that  I  am  very  eager  to
understand. It is the fact that blockchain, by mitigating the burden on the financial industry, is a
game  changer  in  an  environment  where  traditional  financial  transaction  models  are  quite
expensive.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
This shift in concept and the new patterns of behaviour and business this will create, is of topical
significance, the more so that we are stepping in the second generation of the internet which,
from what we can foresee, will significantly bring down transaction costs within the banking and
finance industry.
Alex  and  Don  Tapscott,  the  world-renowned  authors  of  the  seminal  book ‘The  Blockchain
Revolution’, have been adamant to underline that blockchain goes far beyond the second phase
of the internet.
Allow me to emphasize Alex Tapscott’s view that, I quote, ” With its advent, we will not need to
trust each other in the traditional sense, because trust is built into the system itself.” Unquote.
Just  imagine  exploring  myriads  of  opportunities  that  blockchain  is  already  opening  up…  This
being said, the world is far from being filled with selfless individuals and we unfortunately must
also come to terms with the fact that the genie is out of the bottle and that its powers must be
properly harnessed if we want them to be used constructively.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am sure that I am not the only one within the audience for whom the
ADC Global Blockchain Summit is key to understanding the way forward regarding not only the
benefits and application but also the regulation of blockchain technology.
This is of utmost importance if, like me, you are steering a central bank in a small island nation
that endeavours to use technology to build a better, brighter and more inclusive tomorrow for its
people. At the Bank, we have set up a dedicated Blockchain Committee to see how best we can
use this innovative technology to pave the way for a modern banking landscape.
Mauritius,  where  I  come  from,  is  working  hard  to  give  itself  the  means  to  achieve  its  socio-
economic ambitions by exploring the potential of fintech for shaping an innovative banking and
financial services industry.
The Mauritian Government has set up a Regulatory Committee on Fintech and Innovation-driven
Financial Services.  Another high-level team is also working on a strategic blueprint for financial
services with the support of world-acclaimed experts.
May I take the liberty of paying tribute to two of these respected authorities who happen to be with
us tonight… I have named Ms Loretta Joseph and Lord Meghnad Desai…
Ladies and Gentlemen, I am certain that this ADC Blockchain Summit will provide us all with the
answers we are hoping for and that this unique platform will help us forge mutually beneficial
relationships between stakeholders and participants.
I once again wish to thank the Honourable Premier Steven Marshall and the Honourable Michael
Jeffery  as  well  as  the  ADC  organising  team  and  sponsors  for  their  priceless  initiative  and
endorsement. I look forward to learning and discovering as much as I can on a technology that is
set to take on the world.
On this, Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
