Sabine  Lautenschläger:  Euro  Cyber  Resilience  Board  for  pan-
European Financial Infrastructures
Introductory  remarks  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  third  meeting  of  the  Euro  Cyber  Resilience  Board  for  pan-
European Financial Infrastructures, Frankfurt am Main, 28 June 2019.
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  welcome  you  back  to  Frankfurt.  As  you  may  know,  I  recently  became
responsible  for  market  infrastructures  and  payments  at  the  ECB. As  this  includes  the  ECB’s
work on the cyber resilience of financial market infrastructures (FMIs), I have taken over Benoît
Cœuré’s  chairmanship  of  the  Euro  Cyber  Resilience  Board  for  pan-European  Financial
Infrastructures (ECRB). I would first like to thank Benoît for his contribution in establishing the
ECRB and for this opportunity to continue the excellent work on cyber resilience at European
level which he has personally driven forward.
Six  months  have  passed  since  our  last  meeting  in  December,  during  which  time,  all  of  us  –
whether on behalf of a public or private financial infrastructure, a supervisor or an overseer –
have been busy enhancing the cyber resilience of our respective financial infrastructures and of
the financial sector as a whole. But cybercriminals have been making progress too, and they
remain persistent and relentless in their pursuits. As widely reported in the press, a major cyber
incident occurred at a significant bank earlier this year, seriously affecting the real economy in a
specific European country. This publicly known incident reminds us of the debilitating impact a
cyberattack  can  have  on  our  financial  system.  So  the  need  for  continued  vigilance,  work  and
collaboration in this field is imperative.
1
You  will  recall  that  –  in  December  2018  –  the  ECB  published  its  cyber  resilience  oversight
expectations , a tool meant for both FMIs and overseers. These expectations contain detailed
best practices for implementing the CPMI-IOSCO Cyber Guidance  and are now being followed
by  FMI  operators  at  national  and  European  level.  Overseers  are  working  with  their  respective
FMIs  to  ensure  that  they  do  what  is  necessary  to  enhance  their  cyber  resilience.  I  am  also
pleased that the World Bank has recently embraced our cyber resilience oversight expectations
with a view to boosting the cyber resilience of FMIs in developing and emerging countries under
its mandate, and consequently promoting global harmonisation.
2
Last  year,  the  Eurosystem  also  developed  the  European  Framework  for  Threat  Intelligence-
based  Ethical  Red  Teaming  (TIBER-EU) .  Red  teaming  helps  entities  assess,  by  means  of
controlled  “ethical  hacking”,  if  and  how  they  are  capable  of  withstanding  a  cyberattack.  And
because  TIBER-EU  involves  high-end  testing  on  live  production  systems,  we  are  currently
reflecting on how to foster an accreditation and certification capability in the EU. This would allow
cybersecurity service providers to raise standards around threat intelligence and red team testing
and to have their capabilities in this field validated.
3
I am pleased to say that, since its publication, TIBER-EU has been implemented – or is currently
being  implemented  –  in  Belgium,  Denmark,  Germany,  Ireland,  the  Netherlands,  Romania  and
Sweden, and by the ECB in its oversight capacity. The ECB is also in close dialogue with other
EU and non-EU jurisdictions that are considering TIBER-EU as a tool for their respective financial
sectors.  The  gradual  roll-out  of  TIBER-EU  will  ensure  that  threat-led  penetration  testing  is
conducted in a harmonised way across the EU, avoiding duplication of work for financial entities
and authorities alike.
Already in March 2018, at the first ECRB meeting, we presented the results of a cyber resilience
survey that had been developed under the Eurosystem oversight cyber resilience strategy. The
survey  had  been  conducted  across  more  than  75  payment  systems,  central  securities
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
depositories  and  central  counterparties  throughout  Europe.  You  will  recall  that  the  survey
highlighted a number of weaknesses prevailing at the time, such as cyber governance, training
and awareness, and cyber incident response. Today we will update you on the second round of
the cyber resilience survey, which we conducted again across mostly the same population of
FMIs  throughout  Europe.  The  results  have  given  us  an  insight  into  how  the  sector  has
progressed,  and  indeed,  while  we  see  improvement  in  some  areas,  there  is  still  much  to  be
done.
When  we  established  the  ECRB,  the  aim  was  essentially  to  create  a  forum  for  strategic
discussions at board level, to raise awareness of the topic of cyber resilience, to catalyse joint
initiatives to develop effective solutions for the market and to share best practices and foster trust
and collaboration. In this context, I am very pleased that the spirit of the ECRB is living up to
expectations. As you will recall from the UNITAS crisis communication exercise last year  , we
identified  two  key  areas  in  which  the  ECRB  could  drive  improvements  forward: information
sharing  and crisis management.  This  year,  thanks  to  your  commitment  and  contribution,  we
have  set  up  two  working  groups  of  experts  drawn  from  your  institutions  and  we  have  made
significant progress in these areas. I would like to sincerely thank you for your contributions and
for sustaining our spirit of trust and collaboration.
4
The ECRB working group on information sharing will tell us about their proposed model, which
sets out the building blocks for sharing information and intelligence. It is clear that, among other
things,  financial  infrastructures  should  have  effective  cyber  threat  intelligence  processes;  they
should  actively  participate  in  information-sharing  arrangements  and  collaborate  with  trusted
stakeholders  within  the  industry.  The  working  group’s  proposal  seeks  to  address  this  by
facilitating information and intelligence sharing, enabling you to better protect yourselves and the
wider ecosystem. As discussed at our last meeting, regulatory reporting on cyber incidents is
intentionally not part of this work.
We will also receive an update on the work of the ECRB working group on crisis management,
and we will touch upon third-party risk and ecosystem recovery and coordinated reconciliation.
As you may guess from my brief remarks today, we have a great deal of work ahead of us. I
believe  that  sharing  information,  knowledge  and  expertise  among  financial  infrastructures  and
authorities in a non-regulatory context remains essential for tackling the cyber challenge we all
face. I am convinced that we can only do this by joining forces. I want to thank you for being here
today and I look forward to a fruitful discussion.
1
2
3
4
ECB (2018), Cyber resilience oversight expectations, December.
Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures and International Organization of Securities Commissions
(2016), Guidance on cyber resilience for financial market infrastructures, June.
ECB (2018), TIBER-EU Framework, May.
ECB (2018), UNITAS Crisis communication exercise report, December.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
