Elvira Nabiullina: Review of recent inflation developments in Russia
and economic outlook
Statement by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, in the follow-up to the Board
of Directors meeting, Moscow, 22 March 2019.
 Today, the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to keep the key rate at 7.75% p.a.
We have every reason to believe that the decisions to raise the key rate made last year are most
likely to be sufficient to bring annual inflation back to the near 4% target in the first half of 2020.
Some  indicators  have  performed  better  than  we  expected  in  December:  foreign  financial  and
commodity  markets  have  stabilised,  the  VAT  pass-through  to  prices  is  quite  moderate,  and
inflation expectations have turned to decline. In these circumstances, inflation stands somewhat
below our December forecast, while short-term proinflationary risks have softened.
Given these trends, we expect end-2019 inflation to come in at a lower level of 4.7-5.2% instead
of the 5-5.5% range forecast earlier.
Let me set out in further detail the factors that were central to our decision.
First, as I have mentioned, annual inflation in January-February proved somewhat lower than we
expected at the end of last year, In February, it came in at 5.2%. Monthly price growth rates have
already been going down. Annual inflation will pass its peak in March-April on the back of the
base  effect.  Our  updated  estimates  suggest  that  at  its  highest  point  inflation  may  surge  to
approx. 5.5%. You will recall that in December we did not rule out that inflation might considerably
exceed this level.
There are several reasons for such inflation dynamics.
First of all, the contribution of the VAT hike to annual inflation currently stands at approx. 0.6-0.7
pp, which is close to the lower bound of our expectations. According to our estimates, the VAT
pass-through  to  prices  has  already  largely  materialised.  This  is  suggested  by  the  analysis  of
prices of goods and services for which the VAT was raised. These are mostly non-food goods
and services. Annual price growth in most of them has accelerated only moderately. In monthly
terms,  it  returned  in  February  to  the  growth  pace  seen  in  September-December  last  year
(seasonally  adjusted);  however,  it  still  holds  somewhat  above  4%  in  annual  terms.  Weekly
inflation estimates suggest similar developments. After a surge in the first two weeks of this year,
they have dropped in recent weeks, though holding somewhat above the path that corresponds
to our inflation target. Moreover, we do not rule out that the deferred effects of the VAT hike may
manifest themselves in the months to come. It is also of note that in February, both monthly core
inflation and most other indicators adjusted for volatile components and seasonality exceeded
4% in annual terms.
There is evidence that risks that prices of certain food products may grow at an elevated pace
have decreased. In February, a decline was registered in prices of a number of products which
had  made  a  considerable  contribution  to  acceleration  of  food  inflation.  Furthermore,  both
domestic and external prices of main crops stopped growing in recent months. Current harvest
expectations for this year are favourable, which also limits risks in this part.
Petrol and diesel prices were comparatively stable in December-February, and even drifted down
slightly in February. This constrained inflation acceleration. Furthermore, the ruble appreciated in
the opening months of the year; this had a favourable effect on prices and inflation expectations.
  Inflation  expectations  is  the  second  factor  we  closely  monitor.  We  had  concerns  about  their
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
possible  response  to  inflation  acceleration.  Expectations  of  professional  analysts  remain
anchored.  Analysts  understand  the  temporary  nature  of  this  year’s  inflation  acceleration
associated with one-off factors, in particular, the VAT. Therefore, as the Bank of Russia, they
forecast a moderate increase in inflation in 2019 and expect inflation to come in at 4% from next
year onwards.
to 
  Households  and  businesses  responded 
inflation  acceleration  more  pronouncedly.
Expectations of households rose from a historic low of 7.8% seen last April to 10.4% in January,
that  is  returned  to  their  mid-2017  readings.  Businesses’  price  expectations  also  jumped
considerably.  However,  household  inflation  expectations  dropped  to  9.1%  as  early  as  March.
Price  expectations  of  businesses  also  declined.  However,  they  both  remain  elevated.  It  is  of
special  note  that  inflation  expectations  of  households  and  businesses  demonstrated  last  year
that they remained unanchored. They follow current changes in prices, primarily petrol and food
prices, and ruble exchange rate fluctuations.
  The  third  important  factor  we  took  into  account  is  consumer  demand.  Lending  underpins
consumption but slowing wage growth constrains a rise in demand. Consumption growth slowed
down after a short-term acceleration in November, which was likely associated with preemptive
purchases  of  non-food  goods  in  the  run-up  to  the  VAT  hike.  We  can  see  it  from  retail  sales
figures.  The  rise  in  consumer  activity  does  not  exert  pressure  on  prices.  This,  among  other
things, is an important reason of a moderate VAT pass-through to prices.
 The fourth factor is external conditions. A number of changes which only started to emerge in
December, intensified at the beginning of this year. The US Fed and the European Central Bank
eased  their  rhetoric  as  regards  the  monetary  policy  outlook.  Improvements  were  seen  in
markets’ expectations regarding the negotiations of international trade restrictions. These factors
supported  emerging  market  currencies  and  reduced  their  risk  premiums.  We  may  say  that
external risks declined in this part. At the same time, geopolitical risks remain in place.
Oil prices in the first quarter were higher than projected in the baseline scenario. However, risks
are high that oil production will exceed consumption this year.
Finally, overall monetary conditions have changed little if at all since the start of the year. Deposit
rates  have  edged  higher,  while  loan  rates  have  stabilised.  OFZ  yields  dipped  on  the  back  of
improving conditions in global financial markets, as well as a result of reviewed expectations of
market participants as to the future key rate path. These OFZ yield movements, while working to
constrain  the  potential  of  loan  and  deposit  rate  growth,  are  laying  the  groundwork  for  their
subsequent decrease.
With due account for the totality of factors I have mentioned, we have downgraded our inflation
forecast for the end of this year to 4.7-5.2%. At this point in time, it is with a certain degree of
confidence  that  we  can  say:  provided  that  the  situation  unfolds  according  to  our  baseline
scenario, the preventive steps we have made so far to increase the key rate last year are most
likely to be sufficient to ensure annual inflation returns to 4% in the first half of 2020.
 I will now proceed to speak on the risks, as usual. Despite the reduction in short-term risks, the
overall balance of medium-term risks remains tilted towards proinflationary ones. As before, we
should approach the assessment of external conditions with great caution. The risks related to
geopolitical factors remain high. We continue to observe manifold sources of uncertainly in the
global economic outlook. Investor sentiment is subject to rapid change in this environment, which
is  set  to  impact  on  OFZ  yields  and  the  exchange  rate.  Certainly,  elevated  and  unanchored
inflation expectations, as I have said, also remain a material risk.
Moreover, it is premature at this stage to make a precise estimate for the ultimate impact of the
VAT increase on prices and inflation expectations. At the present time, producers and retailers
are  essentially  compromising  part  of  their  margins  to  ensure  customer  retention.  The  muted
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
demand  and  competition  for  market  share  both  work  to  prevent  them  quickly  passing  the  tax
change on to higher prices. This is why they proceed on a piecemeal basis, each time they are
able  to  do  so.  Moreover,  there  are  still  stocks  built  up  before  the  VAT  hike. As  contracts  are
renewed, goods taxable at the new rate will come into the market. Taking into account these
factors,  we  do  not  rule  out  that  the  VAT  change  pass-through  to  prices  could  be  protracted.
Having said this, our baseline scenario suggests that the VAT pass-through to consumer prices
is mostly complete.
As  regards  the  main  changes  to  our  medium-term  forecast,  beginning  from  today,  it  will  be
published as part of the key rate press release. You have had the opportunity to read it.
The principal change in the forecast is a downward revision of inflation projections for this year.
Furthermore, we have refined the average level of oil prices for this year based on their actual
movements at the start of the year. The baseline scenario has been revised upwards from $55 to
$60 a barrel; the high oil price scenario has been revised downwards from $75 to $70. Our oil
price  forecast  for  2020–2021  remains  unchanged.  These  adjustments  have  made  no  major
impact on expected economic growth indicators in the context of the operating fiscal rule.
 Finalised data suggest GDP growth was 2.3% last year, above our expectations. Our estimates
suggest that the accomplishment of major investment projects emerged as key enablers of this
growth. With due regard for this, we, first, reconfirm our assessment of the nature of economic
growth:  the  economy  is  close  to  its  potential;  its  expansion  does  not  create  additional
proinflationary pressure. Second, we keep our GDP growth estimate in the baseline scenario at
1.2-1.7% for this year. The growth rates will accelerate to 1.8-2.3% in 2020 and 2-3% in 2021 as
the positive effect of national projects and structural reforms provided that these deliver.
The oil price adjustments in the forecast carry implications for balance of payments indicators. In
the  baseline  scenario,  the  forecast  current  account  balance  for  this  year  has  been  upgraded
from $71 billion to $88 billion, chiefly on the back of a higher value of oil and gas exports. The
balance of the financial account of the private sector has also been raised from with $20 billion to
$35 billion. This is based on the actual data for the first two months of the year along with greater
opportunities for the buildup of foreign assets given the higher export revenues. Over a medium-
term horizon, balance of payments trends remain unchanged.
This year’s revision of the estimate for foreign currency reserves from $52 billion to $59 billion
comes  a  result  of  higher  foreign  currency  purchase  volumes  based  on  the  fiscal  rule  in  the
context of higher oil prices.
 In conclusion, I would like to make the following comment. Should the situation unfold according
to our baseline forecast, we hold open the prospect of a key rate reduction somewhat sooner
than we assumed back in December last year. We do not rule out that this may occur in 2019.
The  Bank  of  Russia  will  make  its  key  rate  decisions,  as  it  always  does,  taking  into  account
inflation  and  economic  dynamics  against  the  forecast  as  well  as  risks  posed  by  external
conditions and the reaction of financial markets.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
