 M a y   3 0 ,   2 0 1 9 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
Economic Activity, Prices, 
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Shizuoka 
Makoto Sakurai 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
  I. Economic Activity at Home and Abroad: Recent Developments and the Outlook 
A. Overseas Economies 
Let me start with developments in overseas economies. 
 The growth in world trade volume, which had decelerated to a level below 1 percent on a 
year-on-year basis at the beginning of 2016, rebounded later in the year, and recorded a high 
growth of over 5 percent in the latter half of 2017. Amid increasing world trade volume, the 
annual  growth  rate  of  the  global  economy  rose  to  nearly  4  percent  in  2017.  This  global 
economic  growth  accompanied  by  world  trade  expansion  was  well  balanced,  in  that  it 
occurred simultaneously in both advanced and emerging economies. 
 However, the global economy started to slow from the latter half of 2018 due mainly to the 
effects of China's deleveraging measures, the U.S.-China trade conflict, and a slowdown in 
the European economy. Growth in world trade volume  fell from around 5 percent in early 
2018 to 1 percent at the end of the year. The outlook for the global economy for 2019 was 
revised  downward  by  0.2  percentage  point  in  the  April  2019  World  Economic  Outlook 
released by the International Monetary Fund. 
 Given this situation, since the start of 2019, policy stances in some countries and regions have 
shifted to address economic slowdown. For example, the United States and Europe have been 
cautious in raising interest rates, and China has adopted economic stimulus measures. 
 In China, measures had been discussed from an early stage of an economic slowdown that 
started in the beginning of 2018 due mainly to the effects of deleveraging measures and the 
start of an adjustment phase in IT-related goods. As the U.S.-China trade conflict intensified 
in the latter half of 2018, economic stimulus measures were introduced at the start of 2019. 
This  comprehensive  package  of  measures  extended  from  monetary  policy  to  fiscal  policy, 
namely,  from  gradually  introducing  funding  support  for  firms  to  tax  cuts  worth  nearly  2 
trillion yuan. 
 Despite  the  signs  of  slowdown  that  have  been  observed  recently,  overseas  economies  are 
expected  to  continue  their  moderate  growth  partly  due  to  materializing  of  the  effects  of 
1 
  stimulus measures and progressing of global adjustments in IT-related goods. Their growth 
rates  are  likely  to  start  increasing  in  the  latter  half  of  2019.  Nevertheless,  the  outlook  for 
overseas economies is highly uncertain, as the political and social issues -- including trade 
conflicts  --  need  to  be  addressed.  Thus,  it  is  important  to  carefully  monitor  economic 
developments for the time being. 
 B. Recent Developments in Japan's Economy 
Next, I will talk about developments in Japan's economy. 
 Japan's exports and production have shown some weakness recently, having been affected by 
the  slowdown  in  overseas  economies,  particularly  China.  On  the  other  hand,  domestic 
demand has been firm compared with external demand, and business fixed investment has 
continued on an increasing trend. Private consumption has also been increasing moderately 
against the background of steady improvement in the employment and income situation. A 
virtuous cycle from income to spending has continued to operate. 
 From  the  latter  half  of  fiscal  2016  through  the  beginning  of  fiscal  2018,  Japan's  economy 
generally  maintained  growth  at  a  pace  above  its  potential,  which  was estimated  to  be in a 
range of 0.5-1.0 percent. While economic growth in fiscal 2016 was led by external demand 
-- in other words, recovery and expansion in the global economy -- this changed from around 
fiscal 2017 to growth led by an expansion in domestic demand. Such growth paths started to 
bring about moderate growth in regional economies through  fiscal 2018. Although Japan's 
economic growth rate has somewhat decelerated since the latter half of fiscal 2018 due mainly 
to  natural  disasters  and  slowdown  in  overseas  economies,  Japan's  economy  has  continued 
growing at about the same pace as its potential growth rate. The output gap -- an indicator of 
the utilization of labor and capital -- has continued to widen moderately in positive territory, 
suggesting that the economy has maintained well-balanced growth on both the demand and 
supply sides. 
 Next, I will elaborate on developments in Japan's economy from two aspects, the household 
sector and the corporate sector. 
 2 
  In the household sector, employment has continued to expand over the past six and a half 
years. As for labor market conditions, the unemployment rate has remained at a low level, in 
the range of 2.0-2.5 percent, and the active job openings-to-applicants ratio has continued to 
be well over 1. Reflecting these tight supply and demand conditions in the labor market, the 
labor  force  participation  rate  mainly  of  women  and  seniors  is  increasing  and  employee 
income  is  also  rising.  These  factors  are  underpinning  the  moderate  increase  in  private 
consumption. 
 Turning  to  the  corporate  sector,  corporate  profits  have  remained  at  a  high  level,  although 
exports  and  production  have  shown  some  weakness  recently.  This  suggests  that  overall 
corporate  profits  have  been  underpinned  by  the  nonmanufacturing  sector:  the  decline  in 
profits in the manufacturing sector, which is dependent on external demand, has been offset 
by high profits in the nonmanufacturing sector, which is dependent on domestic demand. This 
is also evident from developments in the diffusion index for business conditions, which were 
noted in the Bank of Japan's Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan). 
With the positive economic growth that has been sustained since 2016, firms have increased 
business fixed investment in the expectation of a future expansion in demand. This is how 
economic  growth,  initially  led  by  external  demand,  has  come  to  be  upheld  by  domestic 
demand, which involves a wider range of industries. Accordingly, economic growth has been 
maintained  for  a  prolonged  period.  Compared  with past  averages,  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase in the business fixed investment plans for fiscal 2019 has turned out to be relatively 
high, underpinned by domestic demand-related investment, although the rate is lower than 
that for fiscal 2018. 
 Thus, since around 2017, changes on the supply side have begun to be observed through an 
increase  in  the  labor  force  participation  rate  due  to  labor  shortage  and  an  enhancement  in 
production  capacity  by  business  fixed  investment.  With  these  changes,  I  consider  Japan's 
economic  structure  to  have  started  to  gain  robustness  that  can  also  withstand  changes  in 
external demand. I will explain this point later in detail. 
3 
  C. Outlook for Japan's Economy 
Japan's  economy  has  maintained its moderate  expanding  trend.  However,  uncertainty  over 
the outlook for the economy remains high. The outlook is highly susceptible to two factors: 
developments  in  overseas  economies,  especially  those  in  China,  and  the  impact  of  the 
consumption  tax  hike  scheduled  for  October  2019. As  for  the  consumption  tax  hike,  the 
impact  on  the  economy  is  likely  to  be  limited,  as  the  government  has  already  introduced 
policy measures to ease such impact. However, if slowdown in overseas economies is still 
observed  in  October  2019,  downward  pressure  on  Japan's  economy  may  increase.  In  this 
regard, the effects on Japan's economy of developments in overseas economies, including the 
consequences of trade conflicts, need to be carefully examined. 
 According to the Bank's April 2019 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, the medians 
of the Policy Board members' forecasts for the real GDP growth rate are 0.8 percent for fiscal 
2019,  0.9  percent  for  fiscal  2020,  and  1.2  percent  for  fiscal  2021. The  forecasts  are  made 
assuming that (1) the global economy is likely to turn toward a moderate recovery in the latter 
half  of  2019,  (2)  the  effects  of  the  scheduled  consumption  tax  hike  on  the  economy  are 
expected  to  be  limited,  and  (3)  infrastructure-related  public  investment  is  expected  to 
maintain  its  growth,  mainly  reflecting  policy  measures  to  strengthen  the  functions  of 
important infrastructure, even after the fallback in demand related to the 2020 Tokyo Olympic 
Games. 
 II. Prices 
A.  Recent  Price  Developments  in  Relation  to  Structural  Changes  in  the  Inflation 
Mechanism 
Next, I will turn to price developments. 
 The year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh 
food has continued to rise moderately, at nearly 1 percent. On the other hand, the output gap 
widened after turning positive in the October-December quarter of 2016, and reached a high 
level that exceeded 2 percent at the end of 2018. In theory, the widening output gap should 
place upward pressure on prices, but there are no signs of inflation at the moment. 
 4 
  I  consider  the  reason  for  inflation  being  constrained  to  be  structural  changes  in  Japan's 
inflation  mechanism.  As  moderate  economic  growth  has  continued,  since  around  2017, 
changes in the supply capacity of the economy -- specifically, for labor and capital -- have 
begun to constrain inflation. 
 In  what  follows,  I  will  elaborate  on  the  structural  changes  in  the  inflation  mechanism  by 
dividing  the  elements  into  two  factors  placing  upward  pressure  on  prices  and  three 
constraining inflation. 
 The first factor that places upward pressure on prices is the positive output gap, as I mentioned 
earlier. As the output gap widens, the upward pressure on prices increases. 
 The second factor is the behavior of firms to increase sales prices by passing on and absorbing 
cost  increases,  such  as  increases  in  raw  materials  costs. As  I  will  explain in the  following 
section, however, while the tolerance of households for price rises remains low, the range of 
products and services that cost increases can be passed on to is limited, for example, those 
that consumers cannot easily replace with other items. 
 As  for  factors  constraining  inflation,  the  first  factor  is  that  the  deflationary  mindset  of  the 
public, deeply embedded through experiencing Japan's past economic downturns, has been 
exerting downward pressure on prices. In response to the prolonged sluggishness in demand 
after  the  burst  of  the  bubble,  firms  lowered  sales  prices  by  restraining  costs  through,  for 
example, reining in labor costs and cancelling business fixed investment. Such behavior by 
firms caused a decline in the supply capacity of the economy  -- in other words, its growth 
potential -- both on the labor and capital sides. The phenomenon in which a cyclical economic 
downturn  exerts  downward  pressure  on  the  economy's  long-term  growth  potential  by 
affecting the supply capacity is called "hysteresis." As hysteresis became embedded in Japan's 
economy, firms started to be more cautious in setting sales prices and households became less 
tolerant of price rises. Consequently, prices remained sluggish for a protracted period. The 
behavior of firms to pass  cost increases on to sales prices  -- which I mentioned  -- has not 
grown  widespread  so  far,  and  I  find  this  partly  attributable  to  the  persistent  deflationary 
mindset that has been constraining inflation. 
5 
  The second factor is that upward pressure on wages has been weak. While the year-on-year 
rate  of  change  in  wages  remains  positive,  this  is  not  to  say  that  the  rate  of  increase  is 
accelerating. The mechanism -- namely, one in which firms pass labor cost increases on to 
sales prices, thereby causing a rise in prices -- is therefore not necessarily working. This is 
basically because the increase in non-regular employees reflecting the increased labor force 
participation of women and seniors is working as labor slack. In other words, it is causing a 
slackening of the labor market even amidst an intensifying labor shortage. In fact, the number 
of employed persons continues to increase while being accompanied by a rise in the labor 
force participation rate. It can also be confirmed that the proportion of non-regular employees 
with relatively low wages is continuing to rise moderately. 
 The third factor is that an improvement in labor productivity has constrained inflation, which 
has  been  observed  since  around  2017.  With  the  labor  shortage  growing  more  acute,  the 
corporate  sector  has  been  urged  to  increase  labor-saving  investment  through  utilizing  the 
Internet of Things (IoT) and artificial intelligence (AI), as well as investment intended for 
domestic capacity expansion. Progress in labor-saving investment is also suggested by the 
fact that software investment has been expanding recently in some previously labor-intensive 
industries of the nonmanufacturing sector, such as construction as well as accommodation 
and food services.  Labor-saving investment leads to an improvement in labor productivity 
through  a  rise  in  capital  intensity,  which  represents  capital  per  worker.  Firms  are  facing 
upward  pressure  on  labor  costs  fueled  by  the  labor  shortage.  Given  the  low  tolerance  of 
households for price rises, firms have been trying to deal with cost increases by improving 
labor  productivity  rather  than  passing  them  on  to  sales  prices. This  is  due  to  their  fear  of 
losing market share through raising prices. In short, an improvement in labor productivity has 
been acting as a constraint on inflation. 
 The current delay in inflation can be considered to be a result  of the combination of these 
three constraining factors at work, even with the output gap remaining positive. 
 Of the factors I have mentioned, the second factor -- upward pressure on wages being weak 
-- and the third factor -- an improvement in labor productivity constraining inflation -- can be 
6 
  understood  collectively  through  the  concept  of  the  real  wage  gap.1   The  real  wage  gap  is 
defined as the deviation of real wages from labor productivity. Put differently, a positive real 
wage gap implies that the rate of change in real wages exceeds that in labor productivity. In 
such cases, firms must raise their sales prices in order to make up for the labor cost increases, 
which leads to inflation. The real wage gap currently remains in negative territory, and firms 
have so far managed to absorb upward pressure on wages by raising labor productivity. These 
developments suggest that upward pressure on prices will not increase easily. 
 B. Outlook 
Predicting the outlook for prices under such a complex inflation mechanism has become more 
challenging than before. For example, if labor market conditions remain tight and the number 
of  people  who  wish  to  work  as  non-regular  employees  --  whose  increase  has  caused  a 
slackening  of  the  labor  market  --  begins  to  decrease,  it  is  likely  that  wage  growth  will 
accelerate, leading to a rise in prices through the passing of cost increases on to sales prices. 
However,  it  may  take  more  time  to  see  inflation  if  wage  increases  are  absorbed  by  an 
improvement in productivity, thereby causing a delay in the passing of cost increases on to 
sales prices. 
 Having said that, there is a limit to which productivity can improve. If the output gap remains 
positive and the economy continues to grow moderately until wage increases act sufficiently 
as  a  factor  in  raising  prices,  this  eventually  will  lead  to  achievement  of  the  price  stability 
target. 
 III. Monetary Policy 
A. Current Monetary Easing Policy and Its Basic Framework 
The basic framework for the Bank's current monetary easing policy introduced in September 
2016  is  Quantitative  and  Qualitative  Monetary  Easing  (QQE)  with  Yield  Curve  Control. 
Under this framework, with the aim of achieving the price stability target under yield curve 
control -- in which short- and long-term interest rates are controlled -- the Bank sets the short-
term  policy  interest  rate  at  minus  0.1  percent  and  the  target  level  for  10-year  Japanese 
                                                   
1  For details, see Kimura Takeshi and Koga Maiko, "Keizai hendō to mittsu no gyappu -- GDP gyappu, 
jisshitsu kinri gyappu, jisshitsu chingin gyappu," Bank of Japan Review, no. 2005-J-3, February 2005. 
7 
  government bond (JGB) yields at around 0 percent. It also purchases JGBs to facilitate the 
formation of these interest rates consistent with yield curve control. 
 Subsequently, in July 2018 -- as I have described so far -- given the assessment that it would 
take time to achieve the price stability target, the Bank introduced a set of additional policy 
measures,  including  forward  guidance  and  conducting  JGB  purchases  in  an  increasingly 
flexible manner, to enhance the sustainability of monetary easing while maintaining its basic 
framework. 
 Furthermore,  at  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  in April  2019,  members  of  the  Policy 
Board  shared  the  view  that  uncertainties  regarding  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and 
prices, including developments in overseas economies, remained high and that it was highly 
likely that the price stability target would not be achieved during the projection period, that 
is, through fiscal 2021. Based on this view, the Bank judged that it was important to further 
clarify  its  unchanged  policy  stance  to  persistently  continue  with  current  accommodative 
monetary  policy.  Under  these  circumstances,  with  the  aim  of  further  strengthening  public 
confidence in the sustainability of the monetary easing policy, the Bank decided to clarify its 
forward  guidance  and  take  measures  contributing  to  the  smooth  implementation  of  fund-
provisioning and to market functioning, such as expanding eligible collateral for the Bank's 
provision of credit. 
 Alongside the implementation of these policy measures, the Bank will continue with large-
scale monetary easing. In carrying out its policy, I find it essential for the Bank to persistently 
continue  with  monetary  easing  by  examining  matters  from  a  broad  perspective,  including 
developments in financial markets and the financial system as well as economic activity and 
prices, while carefully considering the balance between the positive effects and side effects 
of continuing monetary easing. 
 8 
  B. Future Conduct of Monetary Policy 
The Bank will persistently continue with the current powerful monetary easing in line with 
the recently clarified forward guidance for policy rates. Let me raise the following as points 
requiring particular attention in the future conduct of monetary policy: (1) the effects of the 
slowdown in the global economy on Japan's economy; (2) heightening uncertainty regarding 
the inflation mechanism; and (3) the balance between the positive effects and side effects of 
continuing monetary easing. 
 The first point warrants considerable attention for the time being in predicting the outlook for 
Japan's economic activity. Specifically, such factors as the extent of the effects of stimulus 
measures in China and the timing of their emergence need to be carefully examined. 
 Regarding  the  second  point,  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  on  prices  are  no  longer 
straightforward in the sense that an improvement in labor productivity constrains inflation -- 
as I have mentioned -- and uncertainty in this context is likely to remain high. Considering 
that an increase in labor productivity in itself is not detrimental to Japan's economy, being 
fixated on the resultant delay in inflation and proceeding with additional easing to confront it 
should much rather be avoided. This can also be said in terms of seeking a balance between 
the positive effects and side effects of monetary easing. 
 As for the third point, speaking of side effects, the side effect on the financial system -- namely, 
the  profitability  of  financial  institutions  declining  under  the  prolonged  low-interest  rate 
environment, leading to a weakening of their financial intermediation functions -- remains a 
grave issue in the future conduct of monetary policy. 
 Largely speaking, there are two patterns to the way in which side effects materialize. The first 
pattern is characterized by a gradual emergence of side effects. When interest rates decline 
due to monetary easing, lending margins of financial institutions  narrow, given the limit to 
reducing  loan  interest  rates,  and  their  capital  adequacy  ratios  remain  under  downward 
pressure as they are unable to secure profits commensurate with their risk-taking. In contrast, 
the  second  pattern  involves  a  rapid  emergence  of  side  effects.  With  lending  margins 
narrowing and yields on securities declining, financial institutions increase their amount of 
9 
  risk-taking in lending and investment in order to acquire profits. These investments and loans 
transform into impaired assets in the event of an economic downturn, and the capital adequacy 
ratios  of  financial  institutions  consequently  plunge  as  credit  costs  in  particular  increase 
rapidly. In Japan, the number of debt-free firms has been increasing since the latter half of the 
1990s,  as  the  corporate  sector  has  earned  a  reputation  for  creating  a  trend  of  producing 
surpluses. An increase in loans in such a situation requires careful monitoring, as it suggests 
both  a  decline  in  lending  margins  resulting  from  intensified  competition  and  a  rise  in  the 
leverage ratios of borrowing firms. 
 At the moment, the capital adequacy ratios of financial institutions appear to be at sufficient 
levels relative to regulatory requirements from a macroprudential perspective. Nevertheless, 
the fact that the figures have been on a trend of secular decline warrants attention. In the April 
2019 issue of the Financial System Report (FSR), the heat map -- used to assess from a wide 
range of perspectives whether there are any signs of overheating or contraction in the financial 
system and to show the degree of deviation of various Financial Activity Indexes from their 
trends  --  reveals  some  overheating  although,  overall,  this  is  nothing  in  comparison  to  that 
observed during the bubble period in the late 1980s. 
 In  addition  to  the  analyses  it  releases  in  the  FSR,  the  Bank  will  also  examine  risks  in  the 
financial system through various means, such as on-site examinations and off-site monitoring, 
and when necessary, encourage financial institutions to address these risks. As for monetary 
policy, it is important for the Bank to make policy decisions in an appropriate manner while 
carefully examining the positive effects and side effects of policy measures, including the risk 
of accumulation of financial imbalances. 
 IV. Changes in Japan's Economy and the Conduct of Monetary Policy 
I will now describe somewhat longer-term structural changes in Japan's economy and how 
monetary policy should be conducted in response to these changes. 
 10 
  A. Structural Changes in Japan's Economy and Their Stages 
With the Bank's monetary easing having been conducted for roughly six years since 2013, 
changes on the supply side have also come to be clearly observed since around 2017 due to a 
continued moderate expansion in demand. In elaborating on the structural changes in Japan's 
economy during the past six years, let me divide these changes into four stages: (1) economic 
expansion led by external demand and growth in outward investment by firms; (2) spillover 
to the domestic business fixed investment of firms; (3) rise in the labor force participation 
rate, reflecting an acute labor shortage; and (4) improvement in the robustness of the economy 
owing to these three stages of structural changes. 
 The  first  stage  is  economic  expansion  led  by  external  demand  and  growth  in  outward 
investment  by  firms.  The  still  ongoing  economic  expansion  was  initially  led  by  external 
demand,  in  other  words,  growth  in  exports.  Meanwhile,  the  share  of  exports  in  GDP  also 
increased. 
 To  take  advantage  of  the  growth  in  overseas  economies,  firms  expanded  their  overseas 
production capacity through outward direct investment, including mergers and acquisitions. 
As  a  result,  a  breakdown  of  the  current  account  indicates  that  the  contribution  of  income 
generated through outward direct investment and outward portfolio investment has been on a 
consistent  increase  while  that  of  transactions  in  goods,  which  previously  was  the  main 
contributor, has shrunk. 
 The  second  stage  is  a  spillover  of  positive  developments  to  domestic  business  fixed 
investment  by  firms.  Firms  increased  their  domestic  business  fixed  investment  given  the 
economic expansion  led by  external  demand. When  making  a  decision  regarding  business 
fixed  investment,  the  following  become  key  determinants:  from  a  micro  perspective,  the 
present value of expected future cash flow of an investment, and from a macro perspective, 
the future economic growth rate. Since 2016, firms have proceeded with domestic business 
fixed  investment,  which  they  had  long  postponed,  as  positive  economic  growth  in  Japan 
continued and the economic outlook as seen by firms turned positive. Such active investment 
among firms is also suggested by a decrease in the average equipment age -- the number of 
years that have passed since installation -- since 2016. 
11 
  The  components  of  business  fixed  investment  vary  according  to  the  external  environment 
surrounding firms. These range from investment to renew facilities and equipment that had 
become obsolete -- as well as that aimed at saving labor to deal with acute labor shortage -- 
to  investment  in  the  services  sector  to  meet  increased  inbound  demand,  to  name  a  few. 
Business fixed investment is unlikely to come to a halt in the immediate future, considering, 
for example, that it is based on various incentives, and that some of it had been postponed 
due partly to the effects of the labor shortage in the construction sector. Moreover, considering 
that firms had postponed their fixed investment for a long time due to the effects of hysteresis, 
it is plausible that at the time of investment, they will decide to replace their facilities and 
equipment with the latest ones with higher productivity. The effects of expanding production 
capacity and saving labor can therefore be considered highly likely to steadily materialize. 
Alongside this, the increase in business fixed investment in the nonmanufacturing sector is 
also worth taking note of. 
 The third stage is a rise in the labor force participation rate, reflecting an acute labor shortage. 
The  positive  structural  changes,  namely,  an  increase  in  external  demand  spilling  over  to 
domestic demand and in turn leading to an increase in business fixed investment, also brought 
about an increase in labor demand. As I mentioned earlier, the employment rate continued to 
rise amid tight labor market conditions, supported by an increase in labor force participation 
rates, especially those for women and seniors. An improvement in the labor input gap has 
continued since the latter half of 2016, and labor market conditions remain tight. 
 The fourth and final stage is an improvement in the robustness of the economy owing to the 
three stages of structural changes I have mentioned. The economy increased its robustness to 
shocks  as  it  continued  to  undergo  these  structural  changes.  Its  increasing  robustness  to 
changes  in  the  external  demand  is  suggested  by  the  progress  in  the  diversification  of  the 
production  sites  of  firms  due  to an  expansion in  outward  investment and  by  the  increased 
share of the nonmanufacturing sector in Japan's GDP. As a result, I would say that a virtuous 
cycle  from  income  to  spending  is  being  maintained,  even  with  the  slowdown  in  overseas 
economies being observed recently. 
 12 
  What is unique about these structural changes is that they have occurred as a by-product of 
business fixed investment in the private sector being stimulated by changes in the external 
environment -- such as an increase in external demand and an acute labor shortage -- coupled 
with support from accommodative financial conditions. Initially the recipient of the action, 
the  structural  changes  that  followed  are  now  considered  proactive.  It  is  my  hope  that  the 
government  will  proceed  with  efforts  toward  structural  reform  and  that  this  will  produce 
synergy  effects  with  the  structural  changes  already  being  observed  in  the  private  sector, 
thereby leading to a further increase in productivity and a rise in the potential growth rate. 
 B. Monetary Policy Supporting Changes in Japan's Economy 
Through its policy conduct, the Bank aims to achieve price stability and ensure the stability 
of the financial system, thereby contributing to the sound development of Japan's economy. 
As  a  result  of  the  Bank's  continued  conduct  of  monetary  easing  based  on  this  aim,  the 
economy has achieved sustained growth. So far, policy effects seem to have in many cases 
emerged in the form of the "sound development of Japan's economy." With regard to prices, 
the inflation rate remains positive and the economy has improved to the point where it is no 
longer in deflation in the sense of a sustained decline in prices, although achievement of the 
price  stability  target  has  been  delayed.  This  is  believed  to  be  attributable  to  the  inflation 
mechanism  having  become  complex,  which  in  turn  has  been  affecting  the  relationship 
between monetary policy and prices, as I have touched upon earlier. 
 Continuing  with  monetary  easing  for  a  prolonged  period  led  to  a  positive  change  in  the 
behavior of firms, which turned out to play a role in the delay in achieving the price stability 
target.  This  process  can  be  considered  an  important  structural  change.  The  nature  of  the 
relationship between the price stability target and monetary easing is undergoing a gradual 
change due to the economy's structural changes over the past six years. Taking into account 
the newly identified supply-side factor, that is, constraints on inflation resulting from the rise 
in labor productivity, there is a reason to believe that it is not appropriate to be fixated on the 
fact that the price stability target has not been achieved nor to attempt to resolve this through 
additional monetary easing. In fact, such action also carries with it the risk of a build-up of 
financial imbalances. 
 13 
  The Bank's monetary policy itself does not have any direct impact in terms of altering the 
economic  structure;  however,  it  can  support  the  structural  changes  in  Japan's  economy  by 
creating  accommodative  financial  conditions. While  carefully  examining  developments  in 
overseas  economies  and  the  possible  side  effects  on  the  financial  system,  the  Bank  will 
persistently continue with monetary easing, thereby maintaining moderate economic growth 
and the positive output gap. By doing so, it aims to achieve the price stability target with a 
virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending  at  work.  These  steps  are  essential  for  ensuring 
stability in Japan's financial and economic conditions. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
 14 
 