 
Remarks  
 by 
Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile 
Governor, Bank of Uganda 
 At the 
 High Level Stakeholders’ Engagement on  
Building a 21st Century Ugandan Economy  
 Kampala Serena Hotel 
 Tuesday, September 3, 2019 
 The Bank of Uganda (BoU) has not only successfully achieved 
its inflation objective of low and stable inflation, but has done 
so  while  supporting  economic  activity.  In  the  last  two 
Financial  Years  (FY),  Uganda’s  economy  has  grown  on 
average  by  6.1  per  cent  from  a  growth  of  3.9  per  cent  in 
FY2016/17. Investor surveys suggest that business conditions 
and  sentiments  are  strong.  Credit  to  the  private  sector  has 
improved; helped by accommodative monetary policy stance.  
 
The economy is expected to maintain this growth momentum 
and  is  projected  to  grow  by  between  6.0    and  6.3  per  cent  in 
FY 2019/20, and between 6.5 and 7.0 per cent in the medium 
term.  The  growth  prospects  are  supported  by  private  sector 
credit  growth;  public  investment  in  infrastructure;  higher 
agricultural  output  due  to  favourable  weather  and  positive 
government interventions in agriculture; pick-up in activity in 
the mineral sector; improved regional security (with peace in 
South  Sudan  and  DRC),  which  are  expected  to  boost 
Uganda’s exports.  
 
There are downside risks to growth, including:  
a) Lower  external  demand  due  to  a  depressed  global 
economy. 
b) Political and policy uncertainty, which are very elevated 
in  several  major  economies  with  global  growth 
continuing  to  be  biased  downwards.  Already,  the 
probability for a global recession is very high. 
Page 2 of 5 
c) Climate  change  which  will  increase  uncertainty  of 
weather patterns and constrain the agricultural sector. 
 
inflation  remains  subdued,  with 
the  annual 
Domestic 
headline and core inflation averaging 2.7 per cent and 3.7 per 
cent, respectively, in the quarter to August 2019. The inflation 
outlook  is  favourable,  with  inflation  projected  to  stabilize 
around the 5.0 per cent target in the medium term. Given the 
current inflation outlook, BoU has kept the policy rate on hold 
since  October  2018.  Low  inflation  protects  the  purchasing 
power of Ugandans, especially for the poor households. 
BoU  has  successfully  ensured  financial  sector  stability, 
including  through  resolving  commercial  banks  that  posed 
systemic  risks  by  being  very  highly  interconnected,  both  by 
the  number  and  size  of 
the  other 
commencial  banks.  Currently,  commercial  banks  are  well-
capitalized,  liquid,  and  profitable.  Improvements  in  asset 
quality  have  contributed  to  an  easing  of  lending  standards 
and  credit  recovery.  The  latest  stress  tests  indicate  that  the 
banking system can withstand shocks.  
As the current credit expansion cycle gains momentum, BoU 
remains focused on maintaining strong supervision to ensure 
that  banking  sector  loans  and  advances  do  not  drastically 
worsen  if  the  economic  growth  momentum  unexpectedly 
slows  down.  Although  bank  supervision  and  regulatory 
structures broadly follow international best practices, BoU has 
stepped  up  the  strengthening  of  commercial  banks’  financial 
reporting,  internal  controls,  and  governance.  Weaknesses  in 
transactions  with 
Page 3 of 5 
these  areas  were  at  the  core  of  the  most  recent  commercial 
bank failures. 
Despite  strong  economic  performance  since  the  early  1990s, 
Uganda’s  financial  sector  remains  shallow.  Private  sector 
credit  could  play  a  bigger  role  in  supporting  growth  that  is 
the  case  at  this  moment.  Private  sector  credit  remains  low  at 
12 per cent of GDP. Although large corporates have access to 
credit  on  more  favourable  terms,  smaller  firms  in  need  of 
financing  have  limited  options.  They  often  do  not  meet 
financial  accounting  standards  that  would  facilitate  access  to 
long-term capital. A law to allow movable assets as collateral 
has  been  passed.  However,  legal  uncertainty  over  property 
rights and lengthy proceedings to recover collateral continue 
to  weigh  down  on  banks’  credit  risks.  The  stock  market 
remains  largely  untapped  with  only  9  listings  of  domestic 
companies  and  rather  limited  trading  in  the  shares  of  those 
that are listed.  
On  a  more  positive  note,  around  85  per  cent  of  Ugandans 
have  access  to  financial  services,  including  through  mobile 
money.  The  BoU  together  with  other  stakeholders 
is 
implementing a five-year financial inclusion strategy so as to 
improve  financial  literacy,  develop  the  credit  infrastructure 
and promote formal savings, investment, and insurance while 
ensuring  consumer  protection.  In  2018,  access  to  financial 
services  benefited  from  the  introduction  of  agency  banking. 
Uganda  has  recently  issued  regulations  for  Islamic  banking 
and  preparations  are  underway  for  the  introduction  of  the 
first Islamic financial products. The BoU in collaboration with 
Page 4 of 5 
other stakeholders is working towards adopting the National 
Payments  System  Act,  which  will  provide  a  legal  basis  for 
BoU  to  supervise  the  mobile  money  sector  and  support 
modernise of the financial system. 
In  conclusion,  Uganda  has  made  impressive  development 
gains  over 
last  3  decades,  while  maintaining 
macroeconomic  stability.  The  prudent  approach  to  fiscal  and 
monetary policy has served the country well. The challenge is 
to build on this momentum so as to achieve economic take-off 
in the next few years. 
the 
 Page 5 of 5 
