    September  4,  2019 
Bank  of  Japan 
Integrating Finance and Technology 
for New Growth Opportunities   
Remarks at the FIN/SUM 2019 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
Introduction 
I am delighted to be given this opportunity to speak to you at the FIN/SUM 2019. 
The main theme of this year's FIN/SUM is "new sources of growth." The key to raising 
economic growth is to stimulate potential needs and further provide goods and services 
for  which  people  are  willing  to  pay.  According  to  Schumpeter,  firms  need  to  make 
innovation that leads to the introduction of a new good and the opening of a new market. 
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in FinTech. It has been driven by the 
dramatic evolution of information technology, but this is not the only factor. Financial 
services that did not exist before have been created by information technology. As these 
services have been met with high demand by the public and have begun to transform the 
way of living, FinTech is drawing more attention. 
Typical  examples  include  financial  services  using  smartphones.  Smartphones  are 
palm-sized  computers  that  enable  cashless  payments  and  internet  banking  services. 
However, they are not just a payment tool. Integrating payment functions with digital 
marketing and search functions helps create new demands, improving the convenience 
of  services.  Smartphones  enable  us  to  pay  train  fares,  pick  up  and  pay  for  taxis,  and 
search for and purchase goods. Incorporating payment tools into a range of commercial 
services provides new added value. 
The Role of the Banker 
Schumpeter is well known for highlighting the importance of innovation for economic 
growth in his book, The Theory of Economic Development. He also mentions the role of 
the "banker" in economic development. 
The process of "creative destruction," as defined by Schumpeter, begins with an attempt 
by visionary entrepreneurs to innovate. Namely, they do so through the introduction of a 
new good, the introduction of a new method of production, the opening of a new market, 
the conquest of a new source of supply of raw materials, and the carrying out of a new 
organization  of  any  industry.  The  banker  then  evaluates  entrepreneurs'  potential  and 
provide finance to support their innovations, which facilitates economic development. 
The banker searches for entrepreneurs who can create innovative businesses and select 
 1 
the  most  promising  ones.  Competition  among  bankers  to  find  skillful  entrepreneurs 
contributes  to  improvements  in  the  efficiency  of  their  operations,  thereby  increasing 
their  profits.  Such  behavior  of  the  banker  helps  achieve  efficient  resource  allocation 
from a macroeconomic perspective, which endogenously enhances economic growth. 
The banker discussed here is not confined only to the literal meaning of a banker. They 
include  investors  such  as  venture  capitalists  who  have  an  eye  for  assessing  the 
businesses  and  risks  of  startups.  The  role  of  capital  markets,  including  stock  and 
corporate  debt  markets,  would  also  be  considered  as  the  banker  in  a  broad  sense. 
Moreover, FinTech firms have begun to partly play the role of what Schumpeter calls a 
"banker" in recent years. Let me explain in more detail. 
Taking Advantage of Corporate Payments and Commercial Information 
As  discussed,  a  range  of  commercial  and  financial  services  are  now  provided  in  an 
integrated  manner  with  smartphones.  Commercial  and  financial  functions  are  closely 
linked  and  inseparable;  this  has  not  changed  since  the  olden  days.  As  banks  used  to 
provide credit mainly by discounting commercial bills, lending services were essentially 
incorporated into commercial businesses. That is, banks engaged in payment services 
with access to commercial information, which enabled them to provide credit efficiently 
to the economy. Given payment information is derived from commercial information, 
the latter is more fundamental than the former. Clients' commercial information is the 
key to better assessing their creditworthiness. 
In other words, ensuring access to  fundamental commercial information enables even 
nonbanks  to  gain  a  competitive  advantage  in  information  production,  and  perform 
financial  intermediation  functions.  Indeed,  FinTech  firms,  including  accounting 
software  vendors,  have  started  accumulating  corporate  commercial  and  payment 
information  in  recent  years.  A  chronic  labor  shortage  in  Japan  has  facilitated  the 
introduction  of  accounting  software  in  the  corporate  sector  to  streamline  the 
bookkeeping process. With clients' consent, FinTech firms such as accounting software 
vendors can access  granular payment and  commercial information in an  efficient and 
instant  manner.  In  addition,  artificial  intelligence  and  machine  learning  technologies 
help  analyze  data  to  assess  clients'  creditworthiness.  A  wider  access  to  clients' 
 2 
commercial and payment information by FinTech firms has led to the recent expansion 
of transaction lending businesses. 
Schumpeter describes innovation as "new combinations" in his original book. FinTech 
firms have literally achieved a "new combination" as "entrepreneurs" by incorporating 
accounting  information  processing,  and  credit  information  production,  to  provide 
transaction  lending  services.  This  new  combination  helps  establish  efficient  lending 
frameworks  that  reduce  costs  for  credit  assessment,  shorten  screening  processes,  and 
improve the performance of credit risk models. 
In  the  meantime,  meeting  the  demand  for  loans  from  clients  is  a  challenge  for  some 
FinTech  firms  that  do  not  have  sufficient  funding  sources.  In  this  regard,  financial 
institutions can cooperate with FinTech firms by providing funding. This helps financial 
institutions  ensure  new  growth  opportunities  by  finding  new  clients  with  whom  no 
business  deal  was  previously  made  because  of  the  profitability  of  the  deal.  These 
initiatives also bring opportunities for startups and small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs) with insufficient collateral and guarantee capacity to expand their businesses. If 
FinTech  firms  and  financial  institutions  --  which  have  a  comparative  advantage  in 
information production and fund provision respectively -- work together to play the role 
of  the  "banker,"  that  could  result  in  better  financial  services.  This  would  be  a  good 
example of new growth opportunities within the context of financial intermediation.   
Conclusion 
The  Bank  of  Japan  established  the  FinTech  Center  to  facilitate  the  development  of 
FinTech in 2016, the year when the FIN/SUM first took place. The topic of corporate 
payments and commercial data utilization, for example, has been discussed with a wide 
range of experts at our FinTech Forum as well and we have released the insights and 
perspectives gained from the discussion on our website. The Bank will continue to make 
efforts so that better financial services and the creation of new businesses will lead to 
economic growth. 
In this year's FIN/SUM, we welcome a rich variety of participants, including those from 
the  financial  and  technology  sectors.  I  sincerely  hope  that  interactions  between  the 
 3 
participants will lead to "new sources of growth" -- which is the theme of this  year's 
FIN/SUM. 
Thank you for your attention. 
  4 
