Benoît  Cœuré:  Heterogeneity  and  the  European  Central  Bank’s
monetary policy
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  Bank  of  France  Symposium  &  34th  SUERF  Colloquium  on  the  occasion  of  the  20th
anniversary of the euro on "The Euro Area: Staying the Course through Uncertainties", Paris, 29
March 2019.
 From the beginning of the euro area’s existence, it was well known that it did not meet all of the
classic requirements of an optimal currency area. Some critics have seen heterogeneity across
Member States as the factor that would ultimately cause the collapse of the single currency.
But the euro is still here, despite years of crisis. While managing heterogeneity between regions
and  countries  has  been  a  challenge  –  at  times  tremendously  so  –  this  challenge  is  not
insurmountable. No single currency area in the world is free of heterogeneity, including the ones
widely regarded as most homogeneous.
In my remarks this morning, I will argue that the ECB has always found ways to accommodate
heterogeneity,  particularly  at  times  when  it  threatened  to  impair  the  uniform  transmission  of
monetary policy.
But I will also argue that if we want to minimise episodes of demoralising output and employment
losses,  as  we  experienced  after  the  financial  and  euro  area  crises,  and  if  we  want  to  avoid
overburdening  monetary  policy,  then  policymakers  need  to  act  more  forcefully  to  reduce  the
major sources of euro area heterogeneity – that is, we need a better economic policy framework.
Pre-crisis view on heterogeneity
To structure my remarks, I would like to briefly recall the pre-crisis view on heterogeneity in the
euro area.
Inflation differentials between regions and countries were not only thought to be unavoidable, they
were  in  fact  thought  to  be  a  desirable  feature  of  a  currency  union.   The  idea  was  that  the
structural transformations sparked by monetary integration and the single market, together with
the  free  movement  of  goods,  capital,  services  and  labour,  would  create  the  conditions  for  all
countries to thrive and exploit their comparative advantages.
1
The  prime  concern  at  the  time  was  that  if  these  inflation  differentials  persisted,  they  could
undermine price competitiveness and thus hold back growth. This view was corroborated by the
fact  that  inflation  dispersion  among  euro  area  countries  was  not  very  different  from  the  level
observed between US metropolitan areas, but it was much more persistent. You can see both
aspects on my first slide.
 1 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  idea  that  heterogeneity  could  impair  monetary  policy  transmission  and  jeopardise  the
stability of the euro area was a distant thought, for three main reasons.
First, cross-border financial integration was on the rise and was increasingly seen as an effective
shield against idiosyncratic shocks. A broad operational framework for monetary policy that took
into account the heterogeneity of both the ECB’s counterparties and available collateral would
2
complement growing market-based defences.
Second,  the  euro  area  was  built  on  the  idea  –  or,  one  might  say  the  hope  –  of  monetary
dominance, with policymakers in all other domains supporting the ECB’s area-wide mandate by
addressing nominal and real rigidities and by running prudent fiscal policies which could be used
in  rainy  days.  Such  support  was  a  necessary  complement  to  a  single  monetary  policy  which
would be overburdened if it were held accountable for national developments.
And, third, the pre-crisis view was inspired by growing evidence that inflation expectations across
the euro area had largely decoupled from actual national inflation outcomes and had converged
3
towards the ECB’s definition of price stability.
In other words, the combination of balanced fiscal policies over the cycle, the ECB’s track record
and a clear primary mandate provided for a stable nominal anchor for the euro area as a whole.
This served to coordinate the largely decentralised decisions of price and wage-setters within
and between heterogeneous economies.
The need to enhance private risk-sharing in the euro area
This pre-crisis view was not wrong. But it underestimated the shortcomings in the euro area’s
institutional framework and its potential to unleash diverging forces.
 2 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let me take each aspect in turn, starting with financial integration.
European capital markets indeed appeared to be becoming more integrated, and hence provided
for increased cross-border risk-sharing, before 2008. You can see this clearly on my next slide,
which shows a composite indicator of euro area financial integration produced by the ECB. But
since the crisis broke, integration has reversed. It currently stands at 0.2 on a scale where zero
represents full fragmentation.
As a result, cross-border risk-sharing in the euro area is almost non-existent. On my next slide
you can see that, currently, around 80% of a country-specific output shock remains unsmoothed,
while in the United States it is at most 40% for a state-specific shock.4
 3 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
More worryingly, the negative green bars point to a dangerous procyclical credit channel in the
euro  area.  That  is,  households  and  firms  borrow  abroad  in  good  times  and  pay  back  in  bad
5
times.
These  aspects  were  often  overlooked  before  the  crisis.  Financial  frictions,  for  example,  were
largely absent from mainstream central bank models.  Generally speaking, there was a lack of
attention to “financial plumbing” – to the fact that differences in liquidity, capital and supervisory
7
standards meant that banks’ reaction to shocks could magnify heterogeneity.
6
The creation of the banking union has fixed many of these shortcomings, but not all of them. In
particular,  without  further private  risk-sharing,  idiosyncratic  shocks  will  continue  to  cause
persistent dispersion in economic outcomes. You can see this clearly on my next slide.
 4 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Dispersion  in  real  per  capita  private  consumption  across  euro  area  countries  was  twice  its
historical levels for a period of more than three years after the outbreak of the global financial
crisis. By the same standard, the effects of recession and financial crisis are hardly visible for
the United States.
Monetary policy cannot eliminate such persistent differences, but it can accommodate them. We
have proven that a carefully calibrated package of non-standard policy measures, including our
targeted  long-term  refinancing  operations,  asset  purchases,  forward  guidance  and  negative
rates,  can  successfully  overcome  even  significant  causes  of  heterogeneity,  such  as  the
impairment  of  the  bank  lending  channel  across  large  parts  of  the  single  currency  area  in  the
wake of the euro area’s sovereign debt crisis. You can see this on my next slide.
 5 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Today, the bank lending channel in the euro area is fully operational after years of fragmentation.
To protect this achievement, we decided at our last monetary policy meeting in March to launch a
new series of targeted long-term refinancing operations, “TLTRO-III”, starting in September 2019.
But to address the underlying vulnerabilities, and to bolster the credit and capital channels of risk-
sharing, we urgently need to make progress in completing the banking union and kick-starting the
capital markets union. Financial markets that can absorb shocks efficiently reduce the need for
macroeconomic stabilisation and thereby free up costly political capital.
Structural policies to enhance resilience and feed convergence
The second aspect of pre-crisis thinking concerned the role other policy domains should play in
supporting the single monetary policy. I will focus here on the structural side and turn to fiscal
policy in a minute.
Although  pre-crisis  policy  advice  strongly  focused  on  reducing  nominal  and  real  rigidities  in
product and labour markets, today there are still significant differences across countries in the
response to common euro area-wide shocks.
My next slide shows two ways of looking at this.
 6 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the left-hand side you can see ECB research on the extent to which output in each country
responds to a common area-wide shock. Clearly, there are significant differences, even among
countries of broadly comparable size.
On the right-hand side you can see Eurosystem estimates of the slope of the Phillips curve.  It
shows  a  high  degree  of  heterogeneity  across  euro  area  countries  for  the  sensitivity  of  core
inflation  to  economic  slack.  In  other  words,  country-specific  factors  of  inflation  remain
considerable, for example the degree of wage negotiation centralisation. These factors are also
related to national institutions.
8
The upshot is that, in this environment, monetary policy is more difficult to calibrate. Different
transmission  mechanisms  propagate  the  same  shock  to  different  degrees  and  with  lags  that
may vary across countries.
Minimising these differences in transmission does not require all countries to adopt the same
economic structures.   What  matters  is  for  countries  to  have  institutions  that  deliver  the  right
outcomes,  both  individually  and  jointly.  Our  system  of  economic  coordination,  the  European
Semester, still falls short of achieving this objective.
 And as a consequence, it still falls short of
supporting adequately the single monetary policy.
10
9
Strengthening domestic institutions is not only about improving shock absorption capabilities. It is
also about cohesion and sowing the seeds for renewed convergence. You can see this on my
next slide.
 7 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The more benign pre-crisis view of heterogeneity reflected the fact that the direction of travel was
at least similar among euro area countries, and not too different from, say, the United States. As
you  can  see  from  the  chart,  the  longer  we  wait  to  improve  the  quality  of  the  institutions  that
underpin domestic growth and living standards, the larger the gap will be that separates the best
from the rest.
My  next  slide  emphasises  the  close  empirical  relationship  between  the  quality  of  national
institutions and living standards. This is primarily a national responsibility, meaning that in order
to recreate convergence the heavy lifting has to be done by reforms in individual Member States.
That said, the recently proposed budgetary instrument for competitiveness and convergence in
the euro area is a useful and necessary complement.
 8 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Strengthening policy complementarities
The third and last pre-crisis aspect concerned the role of monetary policy in coordinating price
adjustments  in  a  heterogeneous  currency  union.  The  ECB’s  definition  of  price  stability  had
become  a  strong  area-wide  nominal  anchor  that  largely  marginalised  the  effects  of  actual
inflation outcomes on expected future inflation, thereby cushioning cross-country heterogeneity.
You  can  see  this  on  my  next  slide.  Before  the  crisis,  survey-based  long-term  inflation
expectations  revealed  no  statistically  significant  response  to  changes  in  actual  HICP  inflation.
They were well anchored at levels below but close to 2%. You can see this on the right-hand
side.
 9 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
But the persistence of the effects of the crisis has, at times, challenged the coordinating role of
monetary  policy.  We  have  faced  instances  where  protracted  softness  in  actual  inflation  has
contributed to a reappraisal of medium to long-term inflation expectations. You can see this in the
grey range moving away from the zero line on the left-hand chart between 2010 and 2015.
Forceful monetary policy action has succeeded in restoring the important role that stable inflation
expectations play for the inflation process in a heterogeneous currency union. The chart clearly
demonstrates that the announcement of the asset purchase programme in January 2015 helped
to avert the danger of current inflation dragging down expected inflation.
But  vulnerabilities  remain.  Nowhere  is  this  more  visible  than  in  market-based  inflation
expectations. You can see this on the left-hand side of my next slide. According to option prices,
the  probability  that  inflation  would  be  between  1.5%  and  2%  over  the  next  five  years  fell
measurably as the euro area economy weakened over the course of 2018. On the right-hand
side you can see that medium-term inflation expectations are currently close to 1.3%, down from
2.5% ten years ago.
 10 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
This no doubt partly reflects global factors. Inflation expectations in the United States have fallen
too. But apart from a short, temporary blip at the end of 2016, the gap between market-based
medium-term inflation expectations in the United States and the euro area is the widest it has
been for more than four and a half years.
This suggests that idiosyncratic factors are at work too. I would argue, though, that this is unlikely
to be related to concerns about the ECB’s credibility.
A breakdown of inflation-linked swap rates into expected inflation and an inflation risk premium
suggests that medium-term inflation expectations have remained close to levels consistent with
price  stability.  You  can  see  this  on  the  left-hand  side  of  my  last  slide.  This  is  in  line  with  our
reading of survey-based inflation expectations.
 11 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Rather, the marked fall in the inflation risk premium suggests that investors assign only a small
probability to inflation turning out to be higher than expected. Again, this is a global phenomenon
but in my view it is also linked to the unique institutional architecture that sets the euro area apart
from other constituencies.
 It relates to the question of how monetary and fiscal policies can
optimally interact and reinforce each other in an environment in which policy space is significantly
smaller today than it was before the crisis.
11
Our  response  to  such  concerns  should  not  be  to  challenge  our  institutional  arrangements.  It
should  not  be  about  blurring  the  lines  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policies.  Central  bank
independence, which has clear and indisputable benefits, is a public good that needs protection.
Instead, our response should be about strengthening complementarities.
ECB research shows that, during the early stages of the latest recovery, monetary policy was
the dominant driver of growth. You can see this on the right-hand side. Other policies subtracted
from growth.
This  has  changed  more  recently.  The  euro  area  aggregate  fiscal  stance  will  be  slightly
expansionary in 2019, and will thereby support monetary policy. But to do it in a sustainable way,
it  needs  to  be  adequately  distributed:  while  countries  that  have  fiscal  space  should  use  it,  in
countries  where  government  debt  is  high,  rebuilding  fiscal  buffers  is  the  best  contribution  to
support the single monetary policy.
And  while  not  all  countries  have  the  space  to  spend more,  all  have  the  opportunity  to  spend
better.
12
 12 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
If fiscal policy preferences contribute to disinflationary concerns – for example, by holding back
public investments in education, future technologies and research and development – then they
directly counteract the efforts of monetary policy to bring inflation back to levels closer to 2%.
Conclusion
Heterogeneity is part of the euro area’s DNA. It is a source of strength, provided our institutions
and  markets  have  the  instruments  and  ability  to  effectively  absorb  idiosyncratic  shocks.
Heterogeneous currency unions need a sufficient degree of private and public risk-sharing, and
they  need  economic  policymakers  doing  their  part  to  preserve  and  nurture  cohesion  and
convergence. Not doing so means that too much of the burden of macroeconomic stabilisation
falls  on  the  ECB,  thereby  challenging  the  achievement  of  its  medium-term  price  stability
objective.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
See, for example, ECB (2005), “Monetary policy and inflation differentials in a heterogeneous currency area”,
Monthly Bulletin, May.
See Cœuré, B. (2016), “The ECB’s operational framework in post-crisis times”, speech at the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City’s 40th Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, 27 August.
See, for example, Trichet, J.-C. (2007), “The euro area and its Monetary Policy”, President’s address at the
conference “The ECB and its Watchers IX”, Frankfurt am Main, 7 September; and Trichet, J.-C. (2011), “Two
continents compared”, keynote address at the “ECB and its Watchers XIII” conference, Frankfurt am Main, 10
June.
See Cimadomo, J. et al. (2018), “Risk sharing in the euro area”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, ECB.
Also note that the credit channel includes both private and public borrowing, meaning the contribution of private
risk-sharing is likely to have been even more negative if one accounts for the establishment of the European
Financial Stability Facility/European Stability Mechanism in 2010. Research shows that these institutions made
a substantial contribution to the absorption of country-specific shocks. See, for example: Cimadomo, J., Furtuna,
O. and Giuliodori, M. (2018), “Private and public risk sharing in the euro area”, Working Paper Series, No 2148,
ECB, May; and Milano, V. (2017), “Risk sharing in the euro zone: the role of European institutions”, CeLEG
Working Paper Series, No 1701, LUISS University, March.
See Beyer, A., Cœuré, B. and Mendicino, C. (2017), “The Crisis, Ten Years After: Lessons Learnt for Monetary
and Financial Research”, Economie et Statistique / Economics and Statistics, Institut National de la Statistique et
des Études Économiques (INSEE), Issue 494–495–4, pp. 45–64.
See, for example, de Santis, R. and Surico, P. (2013), “Bank lending and monetary transmission in the euro
area”, Working Paper Series, No 1568, ECB, July; and Singh, M. (2014), “Financial Plumbing and Monetary
Policy”, IMF Working Papers, No 14/111, International Monetary Fund, June.
See Ciccarelli, M. and Osbat, C. (eds.) (2017), “Low inflation in the euro area: Causes and consequences”,
Occasional Paper Series, No 181, ECB, January.
See Cœuré, B. (2017), “Convergence matters for monetary policy”, speech at the Competitiveness Research
Network  (CompNet)  conference  on  “Innovation,  firm  size,  productivity  and  imbalances  in  the  age  of  de-
globalization”, Brussels, 30 June.
See,  for  example,  ECB  (2018),  “Country-specific  recommendations  for  economic  policies  under  the  2018
European Semester”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 5.
The  importance  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  interactions  has  been  well  known  ever  since  Sargent  and
Wallace’s seminal work. See Sargent, T. J. and Wallace, N. (1981), “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic”,
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Vol. 5, No 3, pp. 1-17. See also Galí, J. and Monacelli, T.
(2008), “Optimal monetary and fiscal policy in a currency union”, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 76, No
1, pp. 116–132; Beetsma, R.M.W.J. and Jensen, H. (2005), “Monetary and fiscal policy interactions in a micro-
founded  model  of  a  monetary  union”, Journal of International Economics,  Vol.  67,  No  2,  pp.  320–352;  and
 13 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Bianchi, F. (2012), “Evolving Monetary/Fiscal Policy Mix in the United States”, The American Economic Review,
Vol. 102, No 3, pp. 167–72.
12
See ECB (2017), “The composition of public finances in the euro area”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 5; and Coenen
et al. (2012), “Effects of Fiscal Stimulus in Structural Models”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
Vol. 4, No 1, pp. 22–68.
 14 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
