Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Luis
de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 25 July 2019.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council,
which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the key  ECB
interest rates unchanged. We expect them to remain at their present or lower levels at least
through the first half of 2020, and in any case for as long as necessary to ensure the continued
sustained convergence of inflation to our aim over the medium term.
We  intend  to  continue  reinvesting,  in  full,  the  principal  payments  from  maturing  securities
purchased under the asset purchase programme for an extended period of time past the date
when we start raising the key ECB interest rates, and in any case for as long as necessary to
maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.
The Governing Council also underlined the need for a highly accommodative stance of monetary
policy for a prolonged period of time, as inflation rates, both realised and projected, have been
persistently below levels that are in line with its aim. Accordingly, if the medium-term inflation
outlook continues to fall short of our aim, the Governing Council is determined to act, in line with
its  commitment  to  symmetry  in  the  inflation  aim.  It  therefore  stands  ready  to  adjust  all  of  its
instruments,  as  appropriate,  to  ensure  that  inflation  moves  towards  its  aim  in  a  sustained
manner.
In  this  context,  we  have  tasked  the  relevant  Eurosystem  Committees  with  examining  options,
including ways to reinforce our forward guidance on policy rates, mitigating measures, such as
the design of a tiered system for reserve remuneration, and options for the size and composition
of potential new net asset purchases.
Incoming information since the last Governing Council meeting in early June indicates that, while
further  employment  gains  and  increasing  wages  continue  to  underpin  the  resilience  of  the
economy, softening global growth dynamics and weak international trade are still weighing on the
euro  area  outlook.  Moreover,  the  prolonged  presence  of  uncertainties,  related  to  geopolitical
factors, the rising threat of protectionism, and vulnerabilities in emerging markets, is dampening
economic  sentiment,  notably  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  In  this  environment,  inflationary
pressures  remain  muted  and  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  have  declined.  Therefore,  a
significant  degree  of  monetary  stimulus  continues  to  be  necessary  to  ensure  that  financial
conditions remain very favourable and support the euro area expansion, the ongoing build-up of
domestic price pressures and, thus, headline inflation developments over the medium term.
Let  me  now  explain  our  assessment  in  greater  detail,  starting  with  the economic  analysis.
Following a rise of 0.2% in the fourth quarter of 2018, euro area real GDP increased by 0.4%,
quarter on quarter, in the first quarter of 2019. Incoming economic data and survey information
continue to point to somewhat slower growth in the second and third quarters of this year. This
mainly reflects the ongoing weakness in international trade in an environment of prolonged global
uncertainties, which are particularly affecting the euro area manufacturing sector. At the same
time, activity levels in the services and construction sectors are resilient and the labour market is
still  improving.  Looking  ahead,  the  euro  area  expansion  will  continue  to  be  supported  by
favourable  financing  conditions,  further  employment  gains  and  rising  wages,  the  mildly
expansionary  euro  area  fiscal  stance  and  the  ongoing  –  albeit  somewhat  slower  –  growth  in
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
global activity.
The risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook remain tilted to the downside, reflecting the
prolonged  presence  of  uncertainties,  related  to  geopolitical  factors,  the  rising  threat  of
protectionism, and vulnerabilities in emerging markets.
Euro area annual HICP inflation increased to 1.3% in June 2019, from 1.2 % in May, as higher
HICP inflation excluding food and energy more than offset lower energy price inflation. On the
basis  of  current  futures  prices  for  oil,  headline  inflation  is  likely  to  decline  over  the  coming
months, before rising again towards the end of the year. Looking through the recent volatility due
to  temporary  factors,  measures  of  underlying  inflation  remain  generally  muted.  Indicators  of
inflation  expectations  have  declined.  While  labour  cost  pressures  have  strengthened  and
broadened  amid  high  levels  of  capacity  utilisation  and  tightening  labour  markets,  the  pass-
through  of  cost  pressures  to  inflation  is  taking  longer  than  previously  anticipated.  Over  the
medium  term  underlying  inflation  is  expected  to  increase,  supported  by  our  monetary  policy
measures, the ongoing economic expansion and stronger wage growth.
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) growth stood at 4.5% in June 2019, after
4.8% in May. Sustained rates of broad money growth reflect ongoing bank credit creation for the
private  sector  and  low  opportunity  costs  of  holding  M3.  The  narrow  monetary  aggregate  M1
continues to be the main contributor to broad money growth on the components side.
The annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations remained unchanged at 3.8% in
June 2019. Notwithstanding some moderation from the peak recorded in September 2018, the
annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  continues  to  be  robust.  The  annual
growth  rate  of  loans  to  households  also  remained  unchanged  at  3.3%  in  June,  continuing  its
gradual  improvement.  Overall,  loan  growth  is  still  benefiting  from  historically  low  bank  lending
rates.  The  euro  area  bank  lending  survey  for  the  second  quarter  of  2019  indicates  that  loan
growth continued to be supported by increasing demand across all loan categories. At the same
time, credit standards for loans to enterprises tightened in the second quarter amid concerns
about  the  economic  outlook,  while  they  remained  broadly  unchanged  for  loans  for  house
purchase.
Our  monetary  policy  measures,  including  the  forthcoming  new  series  of  targeted  longer-term
refinancing operations (TLTRO III), will help to safeguard favourable bank lending conditions and
will  continue  to  support  access  to  financing,  in  particular  for  small  and  medium-sized
enterprises.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from the monetary analysis confirmed that an ample degree of monetary accommodation is still
necessary for the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close
to, 2% over the medium term.
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute more decisively to raising the longer-term growth potential and reducing vulnerabilities.
The  implementation  of structural  reforms  in  euro  area  countries  needs  to  be  substantially
stepped up to boost euro area productivity and growth potential, reduce structural unemployment
and  increase  resilience.  The  2019  country-specific  recommendations  should  serve  as  the
relevant signpost. Regarding fiscal policies, the mildly expansionary euro area fiscal stance is
providing support to economic activity. At the same time, countries where government debt is
high  need  to  continue  rebuilding  fiscal  buffers.  All  countries  should  reinforce  their  efforts  to
achieve  a  more  growth-friendly  composition  of  public  finances.  Likewise,  the  transparent  and
consistent implementation of the European Union’s fiscal and economic governance framework
over  time  and  across  countries  remains  essential  to  bolster  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area
economy.  Improving  the  functioning  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  remains  a  priority.  The
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Governing Council welcomes the ongoing work and urges further specific and decisive steps to
complete the banking union and the capital markets union.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
