Dimitar  Radev:  Achieving  the  financial  stability  objective  through
macroprudential  measures  cannot  be  sustainable  without
understanding the financial cycle
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Dimitar  Radev,  Governor  of  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank,  at  the
Conference "The Current Global and European Financial Cycle: Where Do We Stand and How
Do  We  Move  Forward?",  jointly  organized  by  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank  and  the  Bank  for
International  Settlements  on  the  occasion  of  the  140th Anniversary  of  the  Bulgarian  National
Bank, Sofia, 7-8 July 2019.
 Dear colleagues,
Distinguished guests,
We are delighted to have you with us to participate and share in our joint BNB-BIS conference
organized on the occasion of the 140  anniversary of the Bulgarian National Bank. I would like to
extend my special thanks to the General Manager Agustín Carstens and the BIS for their support
in organizing this event. This is only a latest example in decades of cooperation between our two
institutions.
th
1
The  BNB  is  among  the  oldest  central  banks  in  the  world,  13   by  order  of  establishment .
Today’s conference, therefore, marks a long history of central banking in Bulgaria.
Evolution of a central bank’s mandates
th
A central bank is historically associated with the goal of keeping the national currency and prices
stable. After the Great Depression of the 1930  supervision has become a function entrusted to
or taken away from central banks in cycles depending on crisis experiences. With respect to
supervision as a central bank function, the 2007/2008 global crisis had two effects. First, it led to
bank supervision becoming the responsibility of an increasing number of central banks. Second,
the  focus  on  systemic  stability  led  to  the  emergence  of  macroprudential  supervision  as  an
explicit concept and task for which naturally central banks have become responsible.
s
In Bulgaria the monetary regime can be viewed as a rather traditional one, the primary objective
of the BNB being to maintain price stability through ensuring the stability of the national currency.
For more than 20 years now, our regime has been based on the operation of the currency board.
The BNB also conducts micro- and macroprudential policies. As a matter of fact, well before the
recent global crisis we designed and applied countercyclical macroprudential measures, even
though the term ‘macroprudential’ was still not being used. Many other countries in the region,
subject to massive capital inflows at the time, did the same.
Therefore,  the  BNB’s  tasks  and  responsibilities,  as  we  see  them  today,  are  an  outcome  of
decades of evolution. And this reflects, and is consistent with, the long-term developments of
central banks’ mandates globally. It can be argued from a historical perspective that changes in
these mandates follow common evolutionary paths which are often shaped by crises, such as
the global one in 2007/2008.
The financial stability focus
That led to reassessing the importance of financial stability as a policy objective of central banks.
Before  the  2007/2008  global  crisis,  central  banks  focused  on  price  stability  as  their  primary
objective. The crisis triggered a change in the broad environment in which central banks operate
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
and  thereby  also  necessitated  a  continued  evolution  of  the  role  and  governance  of  our
institutions. Concerns were raised regarding the ability of central banks to prevent and manage
financial  crises.  This  provoked  a  discussion  of  central  banks’  role  in  safeguarding  financial
stability. Ultimately, there was recognition of the need to reconsider or adjust the central banks’
responsibilities related to financial stability.
A major policy response since the global crisis was the enhancement of macroprudential policy
framework  and  the  assignment  of  additional  responsibilities  to  central  banks  in  the  fields  of
financial  stability.  Then  central  banks  developed  tools  for  the  practical  implementation  of  the
macroprudential framework.
Understanding the financial cycle
The  new  policy  framework  and  tools,  however,  can  only  be  as  good  as  the  capability  to
“diagnose” when their application is needed. They have limited value, if any, for the purpose of
safeguarding financial stability unless the macroprudential authority can detect the accumulation
of cyclical systemic risk in the financial system.
In  other  words,  achieving  the  financial  stability  objective  through  macroprudential  measures
cannot be sustainable without understanding the financial cycle. That is why we have considered
this to be a topical issue to devote our anniversary conference to.
There is no single generally accepted theoretical basis, nor a dominant method, for measuring
the financial cycle. Thus the role of research becomes significant for policymaking. That is why
today’s conference is conceived to bring together academic research and central bank practice.
The conference structure reflects an understanding that the global financial cycle affects the euro
area and its monetary policy, which in turn affects the financial cycle in Europe beyond the euro
area.
Therefore, the first session of the conference is on the current phase of the global financial cycle
which is to a large extent driven by the US monetary policy. We recall from the 2007/2008 crisis
how the financial disruptions originated and triggered a full-scale global crisis.
The  second  session  is  focused  on  the  euro  area  financial  cycle,  as  influenced  by  the  global
financial cycle, and its implications for asset prices and financial stability.
Since the ECB policies also shape the financial cycle in Europe outside the euro area through
economic and financial channels, although divergences do exist, our third session is devoted to
the financial cycle in the non-euro area EU member states.
By way of example from Bulgaria, the BNB recent research and relevant estimates for the local
financial cycle indeed show that we are currently in the upward phase of accumulation of cyclical
risk.  We  have,  correspondingly,  decided  to  activate  and  then  raised  the  rate  of  our
countercyclical capital buffer.
Turning to actual policy reactions in dealing with financial cycles, our conference ends with a
panel where Governors will share with us their views.
Dear colleagues and guests,
In  conclusion,  let  me  sum  up  my  main  points.  First,  the  central  banks’  objective  of  financial
stability  has  emerged  in  the  course  of  the  historical  evolution  of  their  legal  mandates  and
responsibilities. Second, the application of macroprudential tools to safeguard financial stability
requires, as a pre-condition, knowledge of the financial cycle. Third, our conference programme
is organized so as to discuss this critical topic in a conceptual sequencing: starting from the
global view, elaborating on the euro area, and then turning to the financial cycle in non-euro area
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Europe.
I believe our speakers and discussants will provide both theoretical insights and first-hand policy
experiences, from global and regional perspectives, for all of us to benefit from a frank exchange
of ideas and relevant practices today.
Thank you very much once again for joining us and participating in this conference, and I wish
you a very pleasant and productive stay in Sofia.
More information about the event you can find here.
1
See  F  Capie,  C  Goodhart  and  N  Schnadt,  “The  development  of  central  banking”,  in  F  Capie,  S  Fischer,  C
Goodhart  and  N  Schnadt,  (eds),  The  future  of  central  banking:  the  tercentenary  symposium  of  the  Bank  of
England, Cambridge University Press, 1994, p 6.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
