  Satellite Seminar on Financial Inclusion 
held in conjunction with the 61st World Statistics Congress  
  Opening remarks by Mr. Abdellatif JOUAHRI
 Governor of Bank Al-Maghrib 
 
Marrakech, 
2017
 
ly 14,
Ju
    1 
  “While data is important, the right data is essential”  
  Albert Einstein 
  
Honorable Chair of the Irving Fisher Committee, 
Honorable Governor of the BEAC, 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 
 
It is with great pleasure that I welcome you to Morocco on the occasion 
of  this  international  seminar  on  financial  inclusion,  which  will  focus  on 
data  and  their  important  role  in  developing  policies  and  strategies  that 
take  into  account  on-the-ground  realities  and  then  measuring  and 
assessing the impact of these policies. 
 
First of all, I would like to thank our partners, the Irving Fisher Committee 
on Central Bank Statistics and the Center for Latin American Monetary 
Studies  for  their  valuable  contribution  to  the  organization  of  this  event, 
held as usual on the sidelines of the 61st World Statistics Congress. 
 
The topic of our meeting further underscores the importance that central 
banks  and  international  standardization  bodies  attach  to  financial 
inclusion. It is a subject that is of increasing interest to them, particularly 
with regard to its interactions with financial stability, resulting in hindering 
the  policies  put  in  place  to  develop  access  to  and  use  of  financial 
services. 
 
A  sustainable  and  efficient  financial  inclusion  requires  a  long-lasting 
balance  between  innovation  and  the  safeguards  that  need  to  be 
developed in order to ensure the soundness of the financial sector. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
As  you  know,  financial  inclusion  has  become  an  important  factor  in 
economic  efficiency  and  social  equity,  and  international  organizations 
have,  for  nearly  a  decade,  underlined  its  importance  and  the  need  for 
public authorities to adopt national strategies for financial inclusion. 
 
The World Bank considers financial inclusion as a key factor for poverty 
alleviation  and  has  set  itself  the  goal  of  achieving  universal  access  to 
2 
   financial  services  by  2020.  Under  this  framework,  it  targets  25  priority 
countries, including Morocco. 
 
To  this  end,  it  launched  in  2012  the  Financial  Inclusion  Support 
Framework  (FISF),  aligned  with  the  Maya  Declaration,  to  support  the 
implementation of country commitments. 
 
For  its  part,  the  G20  has  made  financial  inclusion  one  of  its  working 
themes, and in 2009 established an expert group who drew up the nine 
Core  Principles  for  Innovative  Financial  Inclusion.  In  2010,  the  G20 
launched the Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion, including all G20 
countries  and  interested  non-G20  countries.  This  partnership  helps 
strengthen  coordination  and  collaboration  between  the  various  national 
and  international  stakeholders  through  its  three  key  Implementing 
Partners:  the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  (AFI),  the  Consultative 
Group  to  Assist  the  Poor  (CGAP),  and  the  International  Finance 
Corporation (IFC). 
 
Certainly, all these organizations, to name but a few, and policy-makers 
are aware of the increasingly critical role of data and its impact on the 
efficiency  of  the  decision-making  process,  from  the  design  phase  to 
monitoring and evaluation. 
 
The  use  of  rigorous,  objective  and  reliable  data  helps  to  accurately 
assess  the  state  of  financial  inclusion,  set  realistic  goals,  identify 
obstacles, design relevant policies and monitor and assess the impact. 
 
Based  on  this  premise,  several  international  initiatives  have  been 
launched  to  contribute  to  the  development  of  standard  indicators  and 
study  tools  in  order  to  better  understand  the  components  of  financial 
inclusion  and  better  analyze  their  impact  on  financial  stability  and 
integrity as well as on economic development and the population’s well-
being. 
It  is  within  this  framework  that  the  World  Bank  and  the  International 
Monetary Fund have developed surveys specifically designed to assess 
financial inclusion from the “supply” and “demand” side. 
The Global Findex is currently the most comprehensive global database 
to  assess  the  financial  behavior  of  individuals  by  analyzing  the  use  of 
financial services in nearly 140 countries. 
 3 
 The IMF’s Financial Access Survey,  conducted annually since 2009, is 
another  important  source  of  data  on  financial  inclusion.  It  provides  an 
overview  of  the  availability  and  use  of  financial  services  by  individuals 
and firms by collecting appropriate information from various providers of 
financial services. 
Data  collected  through  these  surveys  have  enabled  policymakers  in 
several  countries  to  benefit  from  the  opportunities  identified  to  further 
promote  financial  inclusion.  They  also  provide  analysts  with  a  reliable 
basis for understanding the causal links between financial inclusion and 
financial stability, on the one hand, and between inequality and economic 
growth, on the other. 
In  addition  to  surveys,  international  organizations  have  mobilized  to 
develop  a  range  of  indicators  to  assess  the  different  dimensions  of 
financial inclusion. 
Since the Cannes Summit in 2011, the G20 has focused on developing 
financial inclusion indicators, including indicators on access to and use of 
financial  services,  financial  literacy,  and  the  quality  of  financial  service 
provisioning and consumption, as part of a continuous reflection process 
integrating new international trends in this field, notably the development 
of  new  distribution  models  and  the  emergence  of  digital  financial 
services. 
The AFI also published a set of basic indicators on access to and use of 
financial  services  in  2013  and  on  quality  in  2016  with  the  aim  of 
harmonizing data among its members by providing them with a common 
tool to ensure comparability and foster peer learning. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In  Morocco,  since  2007  both  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Bank  Al-
Maghrib  have  considered  financial  inclusion  as  a  major  instrument  to 
develop a comprehensive strategy of the financial sector by 2020 which 
aims  to  deepen  the  national  banking  market,  develop  capital  markets 
and position our country as a regional financial hub. 
Through  our  commitment  to  the  Maya  Declaration  in  2013,  we 
announced our pledge to promote access to and use of quality financial 
services based on sound and solid foundations. That same pledge was 
 4 
 reaffirmed  in  2016  as  part  of  the  roadmap  of  aligning  the  Moroccan 
financial  sector  to  sustainable  development  goals  at  the  COP  22  held 
last year in Marrakech. 
This commitment reflects our willingness and determination to continue 
our financial inclusion efforts, which have enabled Morocco to become a 
regional benchmark, given the significant progress it has achieved in this 
regard. Such efforts have been reported by the World Bank and the IMF 
during their last Financial Sector Assessment Mission (FSAP) conducted 
in 2015. 
two 
indicators  which  address 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Aware of the importance of data for designing relevant policies, Bank Al-
Maghrib has taken specific measures to develop, in line with international 
standards,  a  set  of 
fundamental 
dimensions of financial inclusion: access to and use of financial services. 
As for the “quality” dimension, it is monitored for the time being through 
the  Banking  Services  Price  Index,  which  we  developed  in  2011  and 
which accurately reflects the cost and trend of banking services. 
Moreover,  considering  the  weight  of  very  small,  small  and  medium 
enterprises (VSMEs) in our industrial fabric and their role in employment 
and  wealth  creation,  we  mobilized  various  public  and  private  actors  to 
establish an observatory for VSMEs. Founded in 2016, this observatory 
aims  at  (1)  centralizing  national  and  regional  data  and  information  on 
VSMEs,  and  (2)  generating  demographic,  economic  and  financial 
information  on  economic  sectors  in  order  to  allow  stakeholders  to 
respond more effectively to the issue of financing this specific category of 
companies. 
We have also established two credit bureaus, the first in 2007 and the 
second in 2016, in order to provide credit institutions and similar bodies 
with a common platform for the exchange of data. The objective of this 
platform is to help these institutions better assess the risks incurred on 
their  counterparties, 
the 
commitments  of  their  customers  and  their  payment  behaviors.  It  also 
allows Bank Al-Maghrib to measure the use of loans by the population 
and to evaluate the impact of actions taken on the supply and demand 
side. 
reports  specifying 
through  solvency 
 5 
 And  in  2013  we  launched,  jointly  with  the  World  Bank,  a  survey  on 
Moroccan  households’  perception  of  financial  services.  This  survey 
helped  us  identify  the  barriers  hindering  the  development  of  financial 
inclusion  and  allowed  us  to  better  prepare  our  first  national  financial 
education strategy. 
A second survey called “Global FINDEX” will be conducted shortly and 
will serve as a basic diagnosis to define our national financial inclusion 
strategy. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The data collected over the past few years show the real progress made 
and the challenges ahead: disparities between regions, rural and urban 
areas,  gender,  data  quality  improvement  and  the  development  of  an 
effective tool to measure impact. 
These challenges emphasize the need to continue our joint efforts, both 
nationally  and  internationally,  and  to  get  mobilized,  in  an  overall  and 
harmonized  manner,  to  develop  financial  inclusion  of  the  population 
across all segments. 
Data  reliability  is  not  an  issue  specific  to  Bank  Al-Maghrib.  This  was 
evidenced by the last report of the Irving Fisher Committee on “Measures 
of  Financial  Inclusion  -  Central  Bank  Perspectives”,  prepared  on  the 
basis  of  a  survey  carried  out  during  the  4th  quarter  of  2015  in  47 
countries. 
The findings and recommendations of this report, which will be debated 
at length today, reveal that it is of paramount importance to improve data 
in  a  much  more  concerted  and  shared  framework  for  a  better 
international coordination. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Our one-day high-level meeting will cover a number of themes that are 
challenging  to  all  of  us:  Is  financial  inclusion  a  challenge  for  national 
financial  stability?  How  does  it  affect  monetary  policy  transmission? 
What measure should central banks take to safeguard the objectives of 
financial  stability  and  monetary  stability  while  improving  access  to 
financial markets? 
 6 
  
I  remain  convinced  that  making  this  gathering  an  annual  tradition  will 
enable  us  to  provide  the  most  appropriate  responses  to  meet  these 
challenges. 
I  wish  full  success  to  this  seminar  and  wish  you  a  pleasant  stay  in 
Morocco. 
 7 
