Yannis Stournaras: Greek economy - current developments
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the Belgian Business Club
(BBC), Athens, 5 September 2019.
A. General outlook and developments in the real economy
 The Greek economy continues το recover, although with relatively moderate growth rates due to
the global slowdown. Economic sentiment has increased to multiyear highs, bank funding and
liquidity  conditions  have  improved,  property  prices  started  to  increase  and  bond  yields  have
declined  significantly  in  recent  months,  particularly  following  the  May  European  Parliament
elections  and  the  July  national  elections.  Confidence  in  the  banking  sector  has  improved
substantially and capital controls were fully lifted on September 1st.
he new government has been elected on a reform agenda and a platform of business-friendly
economic policies with a focus on attracting investment, particularly foreign direct investment, by
improving the investment climate, accelerating reforms, speeding up privatizations, unfreezing
large  investment  projects  and  reducing  taxation,  while  at  the  same  time  maintaining  fiscal
discipline  and  the  agreed  fiscal  targets.  Short-term  economic  indicators  suggest  that  the
economy shows significant resilience to the global slowdown. This is due to the strengthening of
domestic  demand  as  the  economy  emerges  from  a  long-lasting  recession,  which,  to  a  large
extent, counterbalances the negative effect from the global slowdown.
In particular:
–  Economic  sentiment  of  both  consumers  and  businesses  has  reached  a  twelve-year  high.
Consumer confidence is at its highest level since September 2000.
- PMI remains firmly above the threshold of 50 for twenty-seven months in a row, suggesting
robust growth in the industrial sector.
- The recovery in the labour market continues for the fifth year, with net inflows of new jobs in the
private sector exceeding 280 thousand in the first eight months of the year.
-  Revenues  from  tourism  in  real  terms  increased  at  double-digit  numbers  during  the  first  six
months of the year despite a slight decline in tourist arrivals compared to last year, suggesting a
geographic rebalancing of tourist arrivals from countries with relatively higher per capita income
compared to previous years.
- In the external sector, exports of goods decelerated slightly in the first six months of the year,
driven by the decrease in oil exports, while exports of all other goods registered positive growth
rates. Exports of services continued to grow strongly with an improvement in both the travel and
the transport balances.
- Second quarter 2019 data suggest that the recovery of the Greek economy continues with a
growth rate of 1.9%, while GDP in the first semester of 2019 grew by 1.5%. The main drivers of
GDP growth in Q2 were net exports and public consumption. According to forecasts by the Bank
of Greece, economic activity is projected to increase by 2.3% in the second semester of 2019
and by 1.9% in the year as whole.
Financial  indicators  have  also  improved  substantially,  suggesting  increased  confidence  in  the
prospects of the Greek economy.
In particular:
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
– Government bond yields have declined sharply since the start of the year. For example, 10-
year  yields  came  down  to  1.56%  at  the  end  of August  from  nearly  4.5%  in  the  beginning  of
January 2019.
-  Deposit  inflows  have  continued.  €12.3  billion  of  domestic  private  deposits  have  returned  to
banks since the start of 2018.
-  Bank  credit  to  non-financial  corporations  recorded  an  annual  rate  of  growth  of  2.9%  in  July
2019, which is the highest rate since mid-2010.
- House prices have increased for six quarters in a row after suffering significant declines since
the start of the crisis.
Nevertheless, Greece faces a number of challenges looking forward:
- Given the country’s poor demographic outlook and tight budget constraints, achieving economic
growth significantly higher than the current levels of 2% in the long term is a demanding task and
requires structural reforms to boost productivity as well as investment, in particular foreign direct
investment.
-  Tackling  the  problem  of  non-performing  loans,  which  still  represent  43.6%  of  total  loans,  is
critical to the health of the banking system and to its ability to finance investment and support the
real economy.
In order to contain future risks and address the remaining challenges and crisis legacies, the
government  must  quickly  implement  its  business-friendly  reform  agenda  it  was  elected  to.
Moreover, the continuation of reforms is an obligation to which Greece is bound in the context of
enhanced surveillance as well as a precondition for the activation of the medium-term debt relief
measures.  Strengthening  the  credibility  of  economic  policy  through  the  implementation  of
reforms, the speeding up of privatizations, and the unblocking of already approved investment
plans will increase market confidence in the growth prospects of the Greek economy.
B. Non-performing loans (NPLs) and developments in the banking sector
With about €75 billion in non-performing loans (NPLs) as of mid-2019, equivalent to 43.6% of all
loans, Greece remains a crucial testing ground for the strategy of “risk reduction” in the euro
area. Although economic activity resumed in 2017, higher and sustainable growth rates require
the end of banks’ deleveraging. This will need to be backed by a comprehensive transfer of bad
loans from bank balance sheets, combined with private debt restructuring.
The high ratio of NPLs in Greek banks has been an early and highly visible effect of the financial
and economic crisis in the country. Over the past three years to mid-2019, the absolute stock of
NPLs fell by about  €30  billion,  largely  through  write-offs  and  sales.  Moreover,  several  reforms
have also enhanced the framework for private debt resolution:
• acceleration of the sale by banks of collateral in defaulted loans through electronic auctions;
• simplification of the sale of NPLs through the liberalisation of the loan-servicing regime and the
introduction of a secondary loan market;
• an out-of-court debt restructuring framework, which also included a write-down of tax arrears,
though only a few cases up to now have been concluded under this procedure;
• a reform of the insolvency regime for households and enterprises.
Ambitious targets for NPL reduction have been agreed between the four largest banks and the
ECB/SSM, and under a similar framework by the Bank of Greece for smaller banks. NPL ratios
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
are to fall to 35% by the end of this year, and close to 20% by the end of 2021. It should be noted
however that even if these targets are met, Greek banks will have more than five times higher
NPL ratios that the EU average.
In this regard, it is important that a truly systemic solution, resembling an Asset Management
Company, is implemented in order to complement the individual efforts of each bank to swiftly
improve asset quality. Greece has been dealing with asset quality issues for many years and
now  it  is  the  time  to  speed  up  efforts  in  order  to  approach  EU  averages  within  a  reasonable
amount of time. Over the next few months, adequate instruments should be established for an
orderly and swift debt resolution, while the European Commission should provide the necessary
authorisation  without  undue  delays,  taking  into  account  the  probability  of  external,  worldwide
downside risks. It should be reminded that all Member States under financial stress have made
use of similar systemic solutions, in the form of Asset Management Companies.
Greek banks have maintained satisfactory capital adequacy ratios and this has been extremely
significant for financial stability considerations. Going forward, it will be up to each individual bank
and their equity-holders to assess their business models and growth prospects.
At present, legacy NPLs impose a major constraint upon Greek banks’ profitability. In particular,
first half 2019 results produce a Return on Equity (RoE) for systemic banks of only 2.1%, despite
the satisfactory increase of pre-provisioning income compared to the same period last year.
Net  interest  margin  declined  to  2.2%  in  the  first  half  of  2019,  compared  to  2.4%  in  the  same
period of 2018, while the cost of risk continues to be close to 2%. These trends indicate that
unless NPLs are removed from bank balance sheets very quickly, Greek banks will not be able to
generate enough capital internally. Moreover, such a high level of NPLs blocks Greek banks from
extending much needed credit to the real economy. As already mentioned, rapid growth cannot
be  achieved  unless  the  banking  sector  can  finance  investment  at  an  adequate  level  and  at  a
reasonable  cost. A  substantial  reduction  of  NPLs  will  lead  to  improved  rating  scores  for  the
banks, thus allowing access to private funding at a lower cost, which translates to lower interest
rates for the borrowing entrepreneur.
Although sales, primarily through securitizations, and loan write-offs are the main drivers of NPL
reduction, this should not lead banks to relax their efforts to successfully restructure the loans
that are still in their portfolios. On this front, progress is rather slow and the Bank of Greece in
cooperation with the SSM will increase pressure to improve the performance of long-term loan
modifications so that the observed high rate of redefault is contained.
Foreclosed  real  estate  assets,  obtained  by  the  banks  via  auctions  or  otherwise,  is  another
challenge but also an opportunity. Currently they amount to €2.3 billion and are expected to rise
as the real estate market improves. Such assets may lead to significant capital gains for the
banks.
More work is needed to further improve the regulatory framework so as to remove bureaucratic
obstacles and legal loop holes that delay the utilization of the recently established policies. The
new regime of primary residence protection must fit into a single and permanent legal framework
for the insolvency of physical persons, while the out-of-court work out regime must be radically
reviewed.
High  expectations  have  also  been  created  with  respect  to  the  performance  of  the  newly
developed NPL servicing market. It is still too early to draw conclusions, but the Bank of Greece
will closely monitor the results achieved by independent servicers, in order to ensure that there is
real value added for banks and the economy as a whole.
The liquidity conditions of the Greek banking system have substantially improved, as reflected in
the elimination of ELA (as of March 2019) and the overall, significant reduction in total central
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
bank funding (at end August it stood at €8.2 billion). The decrease in central bank financing is a
result of the following positive developments:
First, domestic private sector deposits have been on a constant upward path since their lows in
May 2016, registering at the end of July a cumulative increase of around €24 billion and reaching
their highest level since February 2015. Deposits are expected to continue increasing steadily,
reflecting positive developments in terms of economic growth and confidence in the stability of
the financial system.
Second, Greek banks have improved considerably their access to the interbank market and have
increased  their  funding  from  other  sources  (issuance  of  debt  securities,  loan-sales  and
securitization). Specifically, Greek banks have increased their funding from the secured market
under  improved  terms,  against  an  expanded  set  of  international  counterparties  and  collateral.
Moreover, they have returned to the capital markets with the successful placement of, initially,
covered bonds starting in late-2017. In 2019 further positive steps have been made, including
issuances of Tier II bonds, aiming to improve their capital.
Another  positive  factor  for  the  banks,  was  the  considerable  increase  of  the  available  eligible
collateral  for  ECB  monetary  policy  operations,  following  the  upgrade  of  Greek  banks’  covered
bond  programmes  to  investment  grade.  It  is  noteworthy  that  for  the  first  time  since  2012,  all
Greek covered bond issuers have investment grade rated programmes.
Last,  but  not  least,  the  valuation  of  assets  held  by  the  banks  increased  considerably.  Most
prominently,  as  it  has  already  been  said,  Greek  government  bonds  exhibited  an  outstanding
performance throughout 2019, with the 10-year bond yield reaching the historical low of 1.56% at
the  end  of August.  Positive  sentiment  has  also  been  reflected  in  the Athens  Stock  Exchange
price index, which briefly rose above 900, the highest since March 2015, before correcting to 868
at the end of August, an increase close to 45% in 2019.
The sustained progress in the liquidity conditions was a contributing factor to the recent abolition
of  capital  controls.  This  positive  development,  in  conjunction,  inter  alia,  with  the  reduction  of
NPLs, is expected to trigger further upgrades in the rating of the banks, along with the expected
upgrades in the rating of the sovereign. In turn, this would support their efforts to further improve
their liquidity and, in line with the decrease in the sovereign’s cost of funding, to issue unsecured
bonds. Against  this  background,  one  can  be  confident  that  the  liquidity  of  the  Greek  banking
system will be further strengthened in the coming months.
C. Fiscal developments in 2019 and projections
The legislation of an expansionary fiscal package in May 2019 put at stake the attainment of the
primary  surplus  target  of  3.5%  of  GDP  agreed  in  the  context  of  the  enhanced  surveillance.
According to Bank of Greece estimates, with end of June fiscal data, a fiscal gap of about 0.6%
of GDP was projected for 2019.
This development necessitated an adjustment of expenditure in order to fulfill the fiscal targets in
the  context  of  the  enhanced  surveillance.  Indeed,  latest  (August)  cash  fiscal  data  indicate,
according to the Bank of Greece, that the 2019 fiscal target will be met. This outcome is driven
by adjustment of expenditure as well as by revenue over-performance (mainly VAT) in the last
two summer months.
However,  fiscal  risks  are  tilted  to  the  downside  and  mainly  relate  to  the  yield  of  the  latest
instalment scheme. Another downside risk relates to the pending court decisions reversing past
pension  cuts.  This  would  entail  a  one-off  expenditure  in  retroactive  payments.  There  is,
furthermore, an additional risk of a permanent increase in expenditure on a yearly basis in case
the Council of State rules that the provisions of the 2016 pension reform are unconstitutional too.
Although  the  latter  decision  is  expected  by  October,  any  development  is  unlikely  to  affect  the
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
2019 budget year. 
The general government debt is projected to decline, driven mainly by primary surpluses, and a
favourable interest-growth rate differential. The debt sustainability analysis of the Bank of Greece
shows  that  the  debt  relief  measures  agreed  by  the  Eurogroup  on  21  June  2018  considerably
improve  debt  sustainability  in  the  medium  term,  but  risks  remain  elevated  beyond  the  early
2030s.
Further  revenue  gains  could  be  generated  from  wider  use  of  non-cash  transactions.  Bank  of
Greece  research  estimates  that  an  increase  by  one  percentage  point  in  the  share  of  private
consumption  spent  through  payment  cards  increases  VAT  revenue  by  1%  through  increased
compliance. The gradual relaxation of cash restrictions experienced so far does not appear to be
reversing the use of cards, albeit the increase in the share of consumption spent through cards
appears to have halted.
Another challenge to be faced is related to the revenue-heavy fiscal mix. The Bank of Greece has
repeatedly  stressed  the  need  to  shift  the  current  fiscal  policy  mix  away  from  distortionary
taxation, with a view to making fiscal policy more growth-friendly and sustainable. For example, in
the  latest  Monetary  Policy  Report  (July  2019),  research  carried  out  at  the  Bank  of  Greece
showed that a lower tax burden on labour income can generate considerable permanent gains in
economic activity. Furthermore, a lower tax burden on labour could become self-financed already
in the medium term, if combined with fiscal structural reforms that improve tax compliance.
It is a positive development that the government stated, right from the beginning of its term, that it
will respect the agreed fiscal targets. At the same time, and as the Bank of Greece has been
arguing for a number of years, the government is negotiating with the institutions a reduction,
directly or indirectly, of the primary surplus target.
A  lower,  more  realistic,  primary  surplus  target  compared  to  the  current  one  of  3.5%  of  GDP
through 2022, if combined with more reforms and privatisations, would very probably imply lower,
rather than higher public debt. This is so because, with a public debt-to-GDP ratio of 180%, a one
percentage  point-higher  growth  rate  (likely  to  mateliarise  if  the  lower  primary  surplus  target  is
achieved through lower taxes and social contributions, combined with more privatisations and
reforms)  and/or  100  basis  points-lower  borrowing  costs  (already  materialised,  relative  to  the
European Commission’s baseline scenario) are 1.8 times more effective in reducing the debt
ratio than an additional GDP percentage point of primary surplus.
The  fact  that  borrowing  rates  today  are  much  lower  than  under  the  baseline  scenario  in  the
European Commission’s debt sustainability analysis provides leeway for easing the fiscal targets
without  compromising  debt  sustainability.  Moreover,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  allows  for
fiscal flexibility so long as additional reforms increase potential growth.
Overall, there are plenty of arguments in favour of lower primary surplus targets and ample room
for a compromise solution. In such a solution, primary surpluses could be lowered in exchange
for an acceleration of reforms; the outcome will be a win-win situation for both Greece and its EU
partners, given that Greece will be able to return faster to a high growth path that safeguards
fiscal  sustainability  and  the  repayment  of  bail-out  funds.  Downside  risks  related  to  external,
worldwide factors also justify the reduction of the primary surplus fiscal target. In this context,
Christine Lagarde’s comments yesterday in the European Parliament arguing for a lower primary
surplus in Greece are fully justified.
D. Conclusions
The  above  mentioned  economic  developments  along  with  the  recent  elimination  of  capital
controls, are expected to facilitate the reinstatement of Greek government bonds to investment
grade  status  soon,  which  will  pave  the  way  for  their  inclusion  in  the  ECB’s Asset  Purchase
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Programme.  This,  in  turn,  will  further  lower  borrowing  costs  for  the  Greek  economy,  thereby
boosting growth and improving debt sustainability. In such a benign scenario, higher growth rates
than currently projected, that is a growth rate close to 3%, could be achieved through increased
investment, taking also into account the still negative output gap.
Having said all the above, Greece at the moment has a narrow window of opportunity given the
global conditions of still positive growth rates and the current low interest rate environment. The
government should proceed with its reform programme as quickly as possible to deal with the
medium  and  long-term  risks  of  the  Greek  economy  and  address  challenges  such  as  low
productivity growth, demographic trends and low investment, as these favourite conditions might
be reversed anytime in the future, given the downside risks in the world economy.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
