Adnan  Zaylani  Mohamad  Zahid:  Keynote  address  -  Bank  Negara
Malaysia  and 
the  Malaysian  Bar  Joint  National  AML/CFT
Conference 2019
Keynote address by Mr Adnan Zaylani Mohamad Zahid, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  and  the  Malaysian  Bar  Joint
National AML/CFT Conference 2019, Kuala Lumpur, 29 August 2019.
 It is a great pleasure and honour to welcome you this morning to the Joint National Anti-Money
Laundering and Counter Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) Conference 2019. 
I understand that this conference, jointly organised by Bank Negara Malaysia and the Malaysian
Bar,  forms  part  of  the  initiatives  under  the  capacity  development  programme  to  elevate  the
understanding and level of AML/CFT compliance outside of the financial sector, the designated
non-financial businesses and professions and other non-bank financial sectors or in brief known
as the DNFBP sectors and the legal fraternity, in particular.
On this note, I would like to express Bank Negara Malaysia’s appreciation to the Malaysian Bar
for their continuous support to Bank Negara Malaysia as the competent authority under the Anti-
Money  Laundering,  Anti-Terrorism  Financing  and  Proceeds  of  Unlawful  Activities  Act  2001
(AMLA), particularly in advancing AML/CFT capacity development initiatives.  Apart from today’s
conference, the Malaysian Bar has also since mid-2018, incorporated AML/CFT requirements as
part  of  its  Continuing  Professional  Development  (CPD)  module,  in  addition  to  the  on-going
engagements  and  discussions  to  instil  compliance  culture  among  the  legal  fraternity.  It  is
encouraging to note that similar efforts are being observed with other licensing authorities, self-
regulatory bodies and industry associations governing respective DNFBP sectors. 
We are also privileged to have with us today, a representative from the Law Society of Singapore
who will be sharing Singapore’s perspective and experience on the implementation of AML/CFT
requirements. 
Recognising  the  growing  money  laundering  and  terrorism  financing  threats,  many  countries
including Malaysia have intensified efforts to develop and maintain an AML/CFT regime that is
robust and can effectively respond to the constantly evolving threats and vulnerabilities. These
efforts  are  aimed  at  protecting  the  integrity  of  the  financial  system  and  the  economy  and
preventing the abuse for criminal and terrorism purposes.
In  Malaysia,  the  AML/CFT  regime  was  first  introduced  in  2001,  initially  scoping  in  financial
institutions. This was extended to include non-financial institutions between 2003 and 2010, to
more  effectively  address  money  laundering  risks  that  fall  outside  of  the  financial  sector.  The
Malaysian AML/CFT regime is characterised by four pillars: a comprehensive legal framework,
implementation of preventive measures, effective enforcement of laws and regulations and close
cooperation between agencies, both domestically and internationally.
In 2015, the third report on Malaysia’s AML/CFT framework was published by the Financial Action
Task Force (or the FATF), arising from an independent assessment of Malaysia’s compliance
with the International Standards on Combating Money Laundering and the Financing of Terrorism
and Proliferation. The report acknowledged Malaysia’s ‘high degree’ of technical compliance and
a ‘substantial to moderate’ level of effectiveness in the implementation of international standards.
As  a  result,  Malaysia  was  accorded  full  FATF  membership  status  in  2016,  which  not  only
demonstrates a strong commitment to combat money laundering and financing of terrorism, but
also reflects a safe business environment in Malaysia.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Importantly,  this  recognition  enables  Malaysia  to  better  participate  in  the  international  financial
system without qualifications and sanctions, enabling our business and economy to transact and
exchange freely with the rest of the world. Such a recognition is priceless for an open and trading
economy like ours.
Maintaining the integrity of the financial system and safeguarding legitimate business activities is
thus paramount in ensuring that this recognition is preserved and that we have a thriving and
conducive  business  environment.  Preventing  and  combating  financial  crime  is  a  shared
responsibility of all stakeholders. Hence, it is imperative that all DNFBP sectors including legal
professionals play an important complementary role to financial institutions in safeguarding this
by preventing the proceeds from unlawful activities and funding of terrorism from penetrating into
our financial system, while facilitating investigations and prosecution of these financial crimes.
The legal fraternity also plays a crucial role in the public sphere as an instrumental component in
the administration of justice as well as in upholding the rule of law. In many financial transactions
or exchanges, the legal fraternity also acts as a gatekeeper, or intermediary arising from their
position of trust. In doing so, the legal professionals are thus well positioned to detect or identify
and  prevent  the  conduct  of  illegal  activities,  which  involve  such  financial  transactions  that  the
profession is mediating.
The  resultant  impact  of  a  lawyer’s  inappropriate  conduct  when  dealing  with  a  client,  if  left
unchecked, may pose reputational risks and loss of confidence, not only to the affected individual
lawyer or the associated firm but the legal fraternity as a whole. It is on this note that I urge the
lawyers to always conduct yourselves in a manner that upholds the public trust and confidence in
the legal profession. It is our hope that lawyers will err on the side of caution in interpreting their
compulsory reporting obligations under the AMLA. 
Based  on  the  outcome  of  the  National  Risk  Assessment  in  2017  on  DNFBP  sectors,  in
particular, the legal sector has been assessed as Medium High and Medium level for net money
laundering (ML) and terrorism financing (TF) risk, respectively. The rating is predominantly driven
by the inherent higher risk services provided by lawyers which are vulnerable to abuses for ML
related activities, for example, the use of client account, conveyancing and provision of nominee
services,  which  are  further  aggravated  by  the  marginal  level  of  AML/CFT  control  measures
generally implemented by the legal fraternity. 
Consequently,  the  recent  two  years  have  seen  the  intensification  of  our  outreach  to  the  legal
fraternity, in particular and to DNFBP sectors, in general, with the mix of on-site examinations,
awareness and engagement sessions, off-site data and information submission activities. While
we  have  observed  positive  and  progressive  improvements  by  the  DNFBP  sectors,  overall
AML/CFT  compliance,  however,  remains  relatively  inadequate,  mainly  attributed  to  the  lack  of
awareness and understanding of AML/CFT obligations and risks. 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has,  increasingly  over  the  years,  taken  more  stringent  enforcement
actions  on  reporting  institutions  for  non-compliances  with  AML/CFT  requirements.  While  the
focus  so  far  has  been  on  financial  institutions,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  will  continue  to  pursue
enforcement actions against all reporting institutions, where warranted.
In this regard, it is of utmost importance for the DNFBP sectors to understand the vulnerabilities
of its sector to ML and TF risks that its products or services may be exploited by criminals to
advance ML and TF related crimes, and be vigilant in protecting themselves from being abused
or inadvertently facilitating ML or TF activities. In this manner, the DNFBPs in general and legal
professionals  in  particular,  are  in  a  position  to  detect  irregularities  in  the  transactions  and
discharge  their  obligation  in  submission  of  suspicious  transaction  reports  to  Bank  Negara
Malaysia, in a timely manner.   
So,  how  can  we  mitigate  the  risk  of  inadvertently  facilitating  ML  and  TF  activities? Apart  from
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
elevating  our  understanding  and  subsequent  implementation  of  your  AML/CFT  reporting
obligations, or preventive measures, there should also be efforts to:   
1.  keep ourselves abreast with recent and emerging trends of ML/TF;
2.  abide by all ethical obligations and applicable professional rules; and also
3.  properly distinguish between legitimate client requests and transactions or structures that
may be intended for criminal activities or to frustrate law enforcement.
Today’s conference seeks to address the concerns raised by legal professionals that are often
cited  as  a  hurdle  or  stumbling  block  to  effectively  implement AML/CFT  obligations.  Themed,
“Building AML/CFT Compliance Effectiveness: Risks and Challenges”, the conference will have:
1.  discussions on the application of risk-based approach;
2.  a  discussion  on  AML/CFT  compliance  vis-à-vis  the  legal  professional  privilege  and
professional secrecy;
3.  sharing of experience or best practices by industry players; and
4.  finally, sharing by law enforcement agencies on ML and TF cases involving abuse of lawyers
and other gatekeepers, to facilitate ML and TF related crimes or activities.
Before I end, I wish to highlight two key updates:
1.  first, Bank Negara Malaysia is in the midst of finalizing revision to Sector 5 Policy Document
(or the AML/CFT Guidelines issued pursuant to the AMLA) and will be issuing the exposure
draft in September. All reporting institutions are invited to provide comments and views on
the  draft  which  may  be  organized  through  relevant  licencing  authorities,  self-regulatory
bodies, industry associations or directly to Bank Negara Malaysia; and
2.  second, I would also like to take this opportunity to remind all reporting institutions, that Bank
Negara Malaysia is increasing its supervisory and enforcement of AML/CFT compliance, in
which we intend to  pursue more deterrent action including taking appropriate enforcement
actions under the AMLA, for any identified non-compliances, beginning 2020.
As such we urge all reporting institutions present today to engage and discourse any compliance
issues with the wide ranging of experts that we have lined up for this conference.
With  that,  I  wish  everyone  a  fruitful  discussion  ahead  and  Selamat  Menyambut  Hari
Kemerdekaan.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
