  17.06.2019 
 The Spanish banking system: transformations and challenges 
Opening of the seminar “Sustainable finances and their importance in the 
future of the economy”, Universidad Internacional Menéndez Pelayo, organised 
by the Spanish Association of Economics Journalists 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Ladies and gentlemen, good morning: 
It  is  an  honour  and  a  pleasure  to  be  able  to  participate  in  the  opening  of  this  seminar, 
organised  by  the  Spanish  Association  of  Economics  Journalists  (APIE)  as  part  of  the 
Universidad Internacional Menéndez Pelayo’s summer programme of seminars, being held, 
once again, on this Santander soil, of which I am so fond.  
I  should  like  to  begin  by  recalling,  here  in  this  historic  Magdalena  palace,  that  2019  is 
particularly rich in anniversaries relating to the opening up and liberalisation of the Spanish 
economy. The process began with the Stabilisation Plan 60 years ago, while one of the most 
important milestones was passed 20 years ago, when Spain adopted the single European 
currency, the euro.  
And, exactly 25 years ago, in order to reach that stage, it was necessary for the Spanish 
parliament to approve the Law of Autonomy of the Banco de España, which confirmed the 
Spanish central bank’s autonomy and independence. By means of this law, moreover, Spain 
established an institutional framework in line with the requirements for adopting the single 
currency, and also put in place a fundamental pillar for a culture of stability in the conduct 
of economic policy.  
Accountability and transparency are essential counterparts of independence, and the media 
play  a  fundamental  role  in  ensuring  that  they  are  put  into  practice,  which  is  why  our 
participation in events such as this one is so important. So I should like to thank the APIE 
for organising this event and inviting us to participate.  
This look back reminds us that, more than 10 years ago now, an international financial crisis 
hit  Spain  particularly  strongly,  arriving  at  a  time  when  the  economy  was  suffering  from 
significant domestic and external macro-financial imbalances. Spain’s banking system was 
clearly excessively large at the time, over-concentrated on lending funds to real estate and 
residential construction activities and highly dependent on international wholesale financing.  
These significant vulnerabilities meant that the cost of the crisis in terms of GDP and – even 
more importantly for society – unemployment, was very high and much larger than for our 
main competitors. In fact, Spain’s GDP returned to its pre-crisis level only two years ago. 
As regards the labour market, the unemployment rate is still five percentage points higher 
than in 2008 and more than 10 percentage points higher than in countries like the United 
States and Germany.  
And  that  is  a  reminder  of  the  importance  of  strengthening  mechanisms  to  analyse  and 
diagnose promptly the risks and vulnerabilities facing the economy and, in particular, the 
financial system. 
     3/17 
  Many of these vulnerabilities have been corrected during the current decade, in particular 
those relating to the high indebtedness of the non-financial private sector, which is now at 
similar levels to those of the euro area, having fallen by 69 percentage points of GDP since 
peaking  in  2010.  However,  new  vulnerabilities  have  emerged,  such  as  public  debt.  This, 
among other  consequences,  limits  fiscal  policy’s  future  room  for  manoeuvre.  However,  I 
would like to focus today on the financial sector and the challenges it will have to address.  
A decade of transformation and downsizing of the Spanish banking industry 
As I have already mentioned, the crisis highlighted the need to adjust the size of the banking 
industry.  Since  non-financial  private  sector  debt  was  excessive  by  any  reckoning,  its 
reduction had to be matched by a slimming down of the financial sector and, thus, banks, 
whose  assets  accounted  for  two  thirds  of  the  total  assets  of  the  sector.  This  capacity 
adjustment, moreover, had to be confined to business in Spain, since business abroad was 
one of the main factors behind the resilience of some institutions. 
       4/17 
    In fact, the geographical diversification of Spanish  banks, especially their participation in 
emerging economies, which were little affected by the international financial crisis, allowed 
Spanish banks with an international presence (which accounted for almost half of total bank 
assets) to limit their overall losses and to continue to cover part of their capital requirements 
internally. Furthermore, these institutions played a very important role in resolving the crisis, 
since they were able to take over other institutions in a weaker position.  
It is not surprising, therefore, that the international presence of Spanish banks has increased 
since the crisis, in contrast to that of the banks of most European countries, which have 
tended to reduce their international operations. Over the last decade, Spanish banks have 
increased  their  international  exposure  by  45%,  while  the  banks  of  countries  such  as 
Germany, France and Italy have reduced theirs by 38%, 16% and 15%, respectively. 
      5/17 
    
On  the  other  hand,  the  effort  to  adjust  business  in  Spain  has  been  highly  significant. 
Specifically, over the last 10 years, the total assets of business in Spain have been reduced 
by 20% and employment in the industry by 32%. Also, the number of institutions has fallen 
by 34%, with a decrease in the number of domestic banks1 from 122 at the beginning of the 
crisis  to  61  in  2018.  As  a  result,  concentration  has  increased  significantly.  Most  of  the 
mergers and takeovers have given rise to healthier banks, with significant cost savings.  
                                                                                              
1 Grupos consolidados y entidades sin grupo, de propiedad nacional. 
6/17 
 One effect of this consolidation process has been the disappearance of 43% of the bank 
branches  existing  in  Spain.  However,  analysis  of  Spanish  bank  capillarity  shows  that 
between  2007  and 2017 the  increase  in  the proportion of  the  population  without  a  bank 
branch nearby was 0.7%, as the closures were concentrated in areas of high branch density. 
Also, the emergence of new technologies allows  bank services to be offered using more 
flexible  and  mobile  methods.  In  any  case,  we  should  not  forget  that  the  average  size  of 
Spanish bank branches remains small, in comparison with other European countries. 
  This  drive  to  correct  the  excessive  size  of  the  Spanish  banking  system  has  been 
accompanied  by  significant  restructuring.  As  you  well  know,  the  financial  crisis  led  to 
considerable  deterioration  in  the  quality  of  Spanish  banks’  assets.  In  fact,  the  excessive 
concentration of Spanish banks on the real estate sector and the intensity of the recession 
caused the non-performing loan (NPL) ratio to reach, within just five years, unprecedented 
levels of around 14% by the end of 2013. Moreover, as a consequence of defaults, banks 
foreclosed a considerable volume of real estate, which formed part of the collateral for many 
loans. In 2014, their foreclosed assets amounted to more than €80 billion.  
The lower return on assets, along with the increase in provisions for NPLs, when a large part 
of the general provisions built up during the preceding expansion had been used, caused 
the banking industry as a whole to  post a loss in 2012. This obviously had an impact on 
bank solvency, giving rise to significant capital requirements for some banks, which needed 
public support to cover the capital shortfalls identified. 
Since then, the situation has improved considerably, with the help of the monetary policy 
measures  implemented  by  the  European  Central  Bank  to  ensure  that  solvent  banks  had 
sufficient funding.  
Against  a  background  of  significant  decline  in  banking  activity,  banks  have  managed  to 
reduce the weight of troubled assets in their balance sheets very significantly. Specifically, 
 7/17 
 the  NPL  ratio  has  fallen  by  more  than  eight  percentage  points  to  stand  at  5.8%  of  total 
lending. Foreclosed assets, meanwhile, are only 50% of the level recorded in 2014, so that 
their weight has been reduced to 3.6% of assets, vis-à-vis the resident private sector. Active 
management  of  these  assets  by  banks,  under  supervisory  pressure,  has  played  a  very 
important role in this process. In any event, there is still significant room for improvement; 
before the international financial crisis, the NPL ratio was below 1% and foreclosed assets 
were practically non-existent.  
 The restructuring of credit institutions is also reflected in the reduction in the weight of the 
real estate sector (broadly defined),2 which stood at 52% of GDP in 2018, as compared with 
99% in 2008.  
                                                                                                    
2 Loans for house purchase, plus loans to businesses in the construction industry and related areas. 
8/17 
   At the same time, there is also evidence that these developments have been accompanied 
by some degree of borrower selection for the supply of credit, so that access to funding has 
improved more markedly in the case of firms in a more favourable economic and financial 
situation.  This  has  been  reflected  in  an  increase  in  the  positive  association  between  the 
receipt of loans by firms and their productivity. 
 This period has also seen a significant improvement in credit institutions’ solvency ratios, 
with their tier 1 capital ratio rising from 7.5% in 2007 to 13.5% by the end of 2018. 
 9/17 
 Current situation and future challenges of the Spanish banking sector  
Despite  all  these  improvements,  the  Spanish  banking  sector  still  faces  significant 
challenges.  
The challenge to banks represented by the task of reducing troubled assets is now greater, 
because the troubled assets already sold were naturally the most attractive ones. It is thus 
crucial for banks not to relax their credit standards if they wish to minimise their new bad 
debts and maintain their active management of NPL and foreclosed asset portfolios.  
 While net interest income has held steady, the decrease in unproductive assets and write-
offs has helped to improve profitability. Specifically, at the end of 2018 the return on equity 
stood at 7.2%, the highest since the global financial crisis and also above the European 
average.  
Despite this, the return on equity is still below the cost of capital, making low profitability 
one  of  the  main  risks  facing  Spanish  and  European  banks.  Improved  profitability  is, 
furthermore, one of the requirements for banks to be able to generate capital organically 
and raise their solvency.  
     10/17 
   In  recent  years  the  legal  risk  of  Spanish  banks  associated  with  litigation  has  increased 
significantly. Banks have been involved in a large number of legal proceedings questioning 
certain contractual conditions of their mortgage exposures. In many cases they have already 
paid the cost of these proceedings (for example, in relation to floor clauses more than €2,200 
million was refunded to customers up to January 2019), but there are still many major legal 
proceedings yet to be resolved.  
Above and beyond the cost that litigation may entail for banks, a more general implication 
is the loss of reputation for the banking sector. Banks must make an effort to reverse this 
perception  by  providing  their  customers  with  necessary  information  in  a  clear  and 
transparent manner and affording them access to financial products suited to their needs 
and financial knowledge.   
          11/17 
   All this must not distract banks from persevering in their efforts to improve their efficiency 
ratios and pursue investments, particularly in new technologies, to enable them to reduce 
costs in the medium term.  
It should be kept in mind that in the coming years banks will have to issue considerable 
volumes of debt with various levels of subordination to meet minimum requirements for own 
funds and eligible liabilities. The costs of issuing these liabilities are higher than those for 
senior debt and other secured instruments and, in fact, rise as they become more similar to 
capital in terms of seniority. But their cost also decreases  as the solvency of the issuing 
bank increases. 
12/17 
  Compared with other European countries, Spanish banks have lower solvency levels almost 
irrespectively of what definition of capital is used. It is true that they comfortably exceed 
minimum regulatory requirements, that stress test results suggest they are more resilient to 
the risks now facing them, that is there is a certain dispersion among banks and that, in 
terms of leverage ratio, they exceed the European average. However, in a highly integrated 
world of competition for global financial resources, solvency is a key signal. Moreover, as I 
mentioned earlier, capital is the first line of defence against unexpected losses and therefore 
a means of reducing the likelihood of a systemic crisis.  
 In  this  respect,  over  the  last  two  years  the  phase-in  top-quality  capital  (CET1)  ratio  has 
decreased by nearly one percentage point. This indicates that banks as a whole have not 
replaced to a sufficient extent the lower quality capital elements temporarily included in this 
category by others with a higher loss-absorbing capacity. This has not been an across-the-
board phenomenon (many banks have raised their solvency ratios), but some have been 
guilty in this respect. 
 Main macro-financial risks  
Apart  from  these  challenges,  what  are  the  macro-financial  risks  confronting  the  Spanish 
financial system?  
As emphasised in our Financial Stability Report published last May, the first of these risks is 
that derived from the possibility that asset prices may undergo a downward adjustment as 
a  result  of  rising  risk  premia.  The  potential  triggers  of  this  situation  are  a  slowdown  in 
economic activity and geopolitical uncertainty.  
  13/17 
  Trade tensions indeed seem to have grown and the risk of a hard Brexit now seems greater. 
In  addition,  the  economic  situation  in  the  euro  area  has  deteriorated  more  than  in  other 
areas, particularly in some countries such as Italy and Germany.  
Meriting  special  mention  are  some  emerging  economies  where  Spanish  banks  operate, 
which are undergoing difficulties associated with their high net borrowing in foreign currency 
and lack of a substantial cushion of international reserves.  
Thus, Turkey, which went through a recession in the second half of 2018 and has shown 
weak  momentum  in  recent  months,  is  moreover  facing  a  complicated  political  situation 
which has given rise to significant depreciation of the lira in the past year. 
Meanwhile, the economic plan implemented in Argentina as part of the financial support 
programme agreed with the International Monetary Fund is helping to reduce its fiscal and 
external imbalances at the cost of a sharp recession, but has not altered the deterioration 
on the inflation front. Additionally, much uncertainty persists mainly in relation to the results 
of  the  presidential  elections  to  be  held  at  the  end  of  the  year  and  which  will  define  the 
economic model for the coming years. 
      14/17 
   Regarding the Spanish economy, the latest forecasts of the Banco de España, published 
some  days  ago,  indicate  that,  although GDP is  expected  to  decelerate  somewhat,  it will 
continue growing above potential and the output gap will hence become progressively more 
positive.  
This is therefore the time to reduce some of the structural vulnerabilities of our economy, 
derived partly from high external and public sector debt, which limit the room for manoeuvre 
of fiscal policy and increase vulnerability to rising interest rates or risk premia. 
The financial cycle of the Spanish economy also seems to be gathering impetus, although 
according to our forecasts, some time will pass before it reaches the warning levels. Total 
credit to the non-financial private sector has begun to increase, albeit very slightly, and it 
continues to decrease as a proportion of GDP, albeit at a progressively slower pace. Only 
some  specific  portfolios,  such  as  consumer  lending,  show  high  credit  growth,  so  banks 
must  tighten  their  credit  standards  in  order  to  reduce  the  significant  rise  in  NPLs  being 
observed. 
        15/17 
  However, the largest credit portfolio continues to be mortgage loans. Therefore analysis of 
the real estate sector is crucial for financial stability. As I have noted on other occasions, 
this market is reawakening, with an increase in transactions and rising house prices which, 
even so, are still on our estimates at levels compatible with their fundamentals. However, 
there  is  notable  unevenness  across  geographical  areas,  with  specific  areas  of  the  main 
Spanish  cities  and  of  the  Balearic  and  Canary  Islands  where  housing  prices  are  rising 
sharply.  
This rise in real estate activity is not resulting in an increase in the associated lending. Bank 
credit to real estate and construction firms continues to fall at rates above 10%, partly due 
to  the  sale  of  packages  of  non-performing  loans.  In  addition,  the  stock  of  household 
mortgage loans is practically stagnant. It is true that the flow of new lending is fairly buoyant, 
but starting from a low level. 
Furthermore, household mortgage credit standards remain prudent. Specifically, practically 
all the loans granted are for an amount below the value of the real estate transaction, as 
compared with only 50% before the crisis. Mortgages represent, on average, less than four 
times  the  annual  income  of  households,  and  the  related  debt  service  (repayments  plus 
interest) accounts for less than 20% of that income in 50% of mortgages. Also, mortgages 
with long maturities, of over 30 years, represent less than 10% of the total.    
In  any  event,  it  should  not  be  overlooked  that,  although  the  credit  associated  with  this 
activity is not increasing and new household mortgages are being granted with prudence, a 
potential  downward  adjustment  to  housing  prices  would  still  have  a  negative  impact 
(although  logically  a  smaller  one)  on  deposit-taking  institutions  through  the  effect  on 
foreclosed asset valuations and the indirect impact on aggregate levels of consumption and 
activity.  
16/17 
  A cyclical downturn not associated with prior excessive credit growth may also affect the 
profitability and solvency levels of financial institutions. It is thus advisable to improve banks’ 
capital levels when the macroeconomic circumstances are propitious. 
In short, to address these macro-financial challenges and risks, we need to internalise in our 
decision-making what should constitute responsible and efficient management of private 
and public matters: accumulating buffers in good times so they can be used in hard times. 
And  this  applies  not  only  to  lenders,  but  also  to  borrowers  and,  above  all,  to  those 
responsible for managing economic policies, including myself. Contributing transparency 
and rigour to the establishment of this culture of stability is part of the mission entrusted to 
the Banco de España as an independent institution at the service of the community. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 17/17 
