Luis  de  Guindos:  Communication,  expectations  and  monetary
policy
Intervention by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the ECB
policy  panel  of  the Annual  Congress  of  the  European  Economic Association,  Manchester,  27
August 2019.
 Introduction
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Every year, the ECB organises a policy panel at the Annual Congress of the European Economic
1
Association.
The  intention  of  these  panels  is  to  combine  the  results  of  research  and  the  views  of  policy
makers  to  advance  our  thinking  on  a  topic  of  great  policy  relevance.  This  year,  it  has  been
straightforward to decide on such a topic. Communication and expectations are central to the
conduct of monetary policy, and there is a substantial body of research that allows us to have an
informed discussion on the topic. It is therefore a great pleasure for me to speak at this year’s
policy panel.
Central banks communicate with many different groups of economic actors. Let me focus my
remarks  on  two  such  groups,  both  of  which  are  essential  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,
namely participants in financial markets on the one hand, and the general public on the other
hand.
The central role of financial market expectations in the conduct of monetary policy
There  is  a  tight  two-way  relationship  between  central  banks  and  financial  markets.  Extensive
research has dealt with the flow of information from central banks to financial markets, and has
2
shown that central bank communication exerts strong effects on financial markets.
For instance, as central banks have become transparent about their objectives and their reaction
functions,  the  inflation  expectations  that  are  priced  into  financial  assets  have  become  better
anchored. They have become less volatile and broadly aligned with the central banks’ inflation
aims.  Beyond  this,  markets  also  react  strongly  to  the  communication  of  the  central  bank’s
3
assessment of the current conjunctural situation and the economic outlook.
At the same time, the influence also goes in the other direction: financial markets send signals to
the central bank, which constitute a central input to decision-making. It is important for us to get
the market view about where the economy stands, and where it is heading. This helps us cross-
checking  our  own  views,  and  it  provides  us  with  a  benchmark  against  which  we  can
communicate  our  own  assessment.  For  instance,  our  projections  are  based  on  market
expectations about the future path of short-term interest rates, oil and non-oil commodity prices
and stock market prices – effectively, we are therefore telling the markets where, in our view, the
economy is heading if their expectations were to materialise.
To put it in other words, central bank communication has to be two-way. The central bank talks
and listens to financial markets at the same time. There are two points in this relationship which I
want to highlight.
First, by influencing asset prices and expectations of financial market participants, the central
bank  affects  the  very  signals  which  it  wants  to  use  as  input  to  its  policy  making.  This  has
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
become known as the “echo chamber effect”. As Hyun Shin from the BIS has put it, “the louder
4
the central bank talks, the more likely it is to hear its own echo.”
This is particularly prominent in times when the central bank gives strong forward guidance. ECB
research has shown that in such circumstances, market expectations become “cemented”, i.e.
5
they do no longer respond to news about the macro economy.
This  is  something  we  need  to  keep  in  mind  when  designing  our  communication  strategy  and
when reading the signals from financial markets – the more forward guidance we give, the less
informative are market signals for gauging the state and the expected evolution of the economy.
A  second  point  is  that  even  if  central  bank  transparency  and  communication  has  helped
anchoring market-based inflation expectations, they do remain rather volatile. The volatility itself
is a signal that is useful for us to understand. However, even if markets are volatile, central bank
policy cannot be volatile. Hence, we need to look through some of this volatility to get a feeling for
the underlying pricing that would result in the absence of short-term market moves that are likely
to revert quickly.
The echo chamber effect and the inherent noisiness of market signals are reasons why we need
to take the expectations that are priced in financial markets with a pinch of salt. This means that
we  need  to  also  rely  on  other  sources  of  information  to  ensure  that  we  conduct  a  robust
monetary  policy.  The  incoming  macroeconomic  data  are  one  such  source.  As  we  keep
stressing, our monetary policy is data dependent, not market dependent: indications from market
expectations cannot replace our policy judgement. Another way of robustifying our analysis is to
6
look for expectations beyond those expressed in financial market prices.
The importance of communication with the general public
This brings me to the second group of actors I want to mention, the general public. Central bank
communication with the general public has only more recently gained the attention of academic
research. Also here, we need to think of the interaction as a two-way street.
On the one hand, central banks have a lot to learn from consumers. For instance, consumers
form  inflation  expectations  that  can  tell  us  to  what  extent  the  central  bank’s  inflation  aim  is
perceived to be credible. Variations in consumer inflation expectations are also an indicator that
central banks monitor, because these affect household decision-making and do therefore shape
7
economic outcomes.
While we have ample data available on expectations formed in financial markets, we know much
less about those of consumers. To bridge this gap, we have just recently started to develop a
new  consumer  expectations  survey.  This  project  is  still  in  its  early  stages  (we  will  soon
implement a pilot survey), but it will provide us with a tool to collect information at regular intervals
on household expectations and decisions, covering a broad range of topics including household
income  and  finances,  consumption,  inflation,  labour  and  housing  markets.  This  will  allow
deepening  our  understanding  of  consumer  behaviour  in  the  euro  area  and  give  us  up-to-date
information on expectations that can feed into our policy analysis.
On the other hand, central banks do not only want to learn from the general public, they also
actively reach out to it, making this a two-way interaction. They do so for several reasons. First,
to  manage  expectations  about  economic  outcomes  –  inflation  expectations,  but  also
expectations  about  financial  stability  and  the  safety  of  individual  banks.  Second,  independent
central banks need to make sure they are accountable to the public.
For  both  objectives,  first-order  importance  should  be  given  to  making  sure  the  general  public
understands the mandate of the central bank, and trusts its commitment and ability to deliver on
its mandate. There is ample evidence that this matters.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
ECB  research  finds  that  general  trust  in  the  ECB  has  an  impact  on  consumers’  inflation
8
expectations, in two ways.
First, it lowers their uncertainty about future price developments. Second, those who trust are
less likely to have inflation expectations that are far from the ECB’s inflation objective. In other
words,  trust  in  the  ECB  helps  anchoring  inflation  expectations  around  the  ECB’s  inflation
objective, as agents are more likely to view deviations of inflation from the target as temporary.
And  it  matters  how  the  central  bank  drafts  its  communications  –  research  has  shown  that
relatively simple, but targeted messages, are particularly effective in shaping consumers’ inflation
9
expectations.
So it is important to increase awareness about the central bank mandate and to enhance trust in
the central bank. Just as an aside – the ECB’s task here is particularly challenging, as we need
to communicate in 24 different languages. In any case, we have stepped up our efforts along
these lines in several dimensions. Let me highlight three of them:
First,  we  have  developed  educational  material  about  the  ECB  and  its  policies  that  is  made
available on our website – for the young generation in particular, but also more generally: there
are educational games and videos, and we have published a large number of “explainers” where
we give answers to frequently asked questions. Just to give one example – with our Euro@20
game, we reached 1.6million people.
Second,  we  are  now  much  more  present  in  the  social  media.  This  is  an  important  channel
whereby  central  banks  can  reach  out  a  relatively  broader  audience  directly,  without
intermediaries, and interact with the public, for instance through our Q&A sessions on Twitter.
Third, we are also working to make our regular policy publications more accessible to the general
public. Our most recent Financial Stability Review, with a streamlined structure and clear focus
on core messages, is presented on the ECB’s website in a way that makes the content more
easily understood, for instance by using visuals. Our efforts are already bearing fruit – with a
significant increase in its readership.
Conclusion
Let me conclude by reiterating the central role of expectations in the conduct of monetary policy.
We are well aware that our communication influences the very expectations that we want to use
as input into our decision-making. We do therefore need to ensure that we base our decisions on
a multitude of information, covering not only financial markets and experts, but also the general
public. At the ECB, we are enhancing our toolkit for the communication with the general public in
two ways – both by collecting more information about consumers, and by targeting some of our
communication efforts more directly at the general public. I am confident that this investment will
pay off and help us achieving three objectives at the same time – being a trusted institution, being
accountable to the public, and maintaining price stability.
1
2
3
4
5
Prepared by M. Ehrmann (DG-R/MPR), with input and comments from Dimitris Georgarakos, Gabriel Glöckler,
Jean-Francois Jamet, Marek Jarocinski, Eric Persson, Hanni Schölermann and Stefania Secola.
Blinder, A., M. Ehrmann, M. Fratzscher, J. de Haan, and D.-J. Jansen (2008), Central Bank Communication and
Monetary Policy: A Survey of Theory and Evidence. Journal of Economic Literature 46(4), 910–945.
See,  inter  alia,  Jarocinski,  M.  and  P.  Karadi  (2019).  Deconstructing  Monetary  Policy  Shocks:  The  Role  of
Information Shocks. Forthcoming, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.
Shin,  H.S.  (2017). Can Central Banks Talk too Much? Speech at the ECB conference on “Communications
Challenges for Policy Effectiveness, Accountability and Reputation”.
Ehrmann, M. G. Gaballo, P. Hoffmann and G. Strasser (2019). Can More Public Information Raise Uncertainty?
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The International Evidence on Forward Guidance. ECB Working Paper No. 2263.
6
7
8
9
See  also  Cœuré,  B.  (2019). Inflation Expectations and the Conduct of Monetary Policy.  Speech  at  an  event
organised by the SAFE Policy Center.
Duca,  I.,  Kenny,  G.  and  Reuter, A.  (2017).  Inflation  Expectation,  Consumption  and  the  Lower  Bound:  Micro
Evidence from a Large Euro Area Survey. ECB Working Paper No. 2196.
Christelis, D., D. Georgarakos, T. Jappelli and M. van Rooij (2019). Trust in the Central Bank and Inflation
Expectations. Forthcoming, International Journal of Central Banking.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko and M. Weber (2019). Monetary Policy Communications and their Effects on
Household Inflation Expectations. NBER Working Paper No. 25482.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
