Øystein Olsen: Managing natural resources - lessons from Norway
Speech by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the seminar
&quot;Preparing  Mozambique  for  natural  gas&quot;,  Bank  of  Mozambique,  Maputo,  27  March
2019.
Accompanying slides.
 Let me start by expressing my heart-felt sympathy for the victims of the cyclone that struck your
country. I am both honoured and saddened to be here at this difficult time. I can hardly imagine
the pain and sorrow so many of your people are now experiencing.
Mozambique  is  a  country  of  great  beauty  and  is  now  an  emerging  leader  in  the  natural  gas
industry.. For Norway, on the other hand, petroleum production peaked some years ago. As a
nation, we have benefited tremendously from the revenues and the activities. Let me share some
of our experiences with you.
Norway  is  a  small,  open  economy,  which  was  transformed  by  the  discovery  of  oil  on  our
continental shelf almost 50 years ago. Back in 1970, the year after the first discovery, income
levels  were  relatively  low  compared  with  other  western  countries.  That  picture  has  changed
completely. Today, Norway ranks among the richest countries in the world.
For some countries, natural resource discoveries have been identified as a curse. For Norway,
the discovery of oil has been a blessing. We have managed to transform oil and gas resources
into real and financial assets. Luck has been supplemented with what I dare to claim is sensible
resource  management,  based  on  a  well-functioning  democracy  and  longstanding  and
trustworthy institutions.
The first point I would like to emphasise is related to ownership of the natural resources. At an
early stage, it was concluded that such resources belong to the Norwegian people.
Direct  government  participation  in  the  industry  and  an  extraordinary  tax  rate  on  oil  company
profits, currently 78 percent, ensure that most of the resource rents flow into government coffers.
The government also has direct ownership stakes in the most profitable oil fields.
Chart: From natural resources to financial wealth
Petroleum  revenues  have  been  redistributed  to  all  inhabitants  in  form  of  investment  in
infrastructure  and  public  services,  such  as  education  and  health  care.  At  the  same  time,
revenues have been put aside.
This brings me to my second main point. It is important to remember that although revenues
from  the  extraction  of  a  depletable  resource  count  as  income  in  the  national  accounts,  these
revenues  are  of  a  special  kind.  In  many  ways,  it  would  make  more  sense  to  view  them  as
transformation of wealth – from natural resources in the ground to financial assets. This is the
idea  behind  the  Norwegian  sovereign  wealth  fund,  known  as  the  Government  Pension  Fund
Global.
Chart: The petroleum fund mechanism
All  oil  revenues  are  channelled  to  the  fund.  The  fund’s  capital  is  invested  abroad,  mainly  in
equities,  but  also  in  bonds  and  real  estate.  Investments  are  spread  across  most  markets,
countries  and  currencies  to  achieve  broad  exposure  to  global  growth  and  value  creation,  and
ensure good risk diversification.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The fund was established in 1990, during Norway’s deepest recession in the postwar period. At
the time, it was not obvious that the fund would gain much in value. The government ran budget
deficits in the following years. The first capital transfer to the fund was made in 1996, reflecting a
net  fiscal  surplus.  From  then  on,  the  value  of  the  fund  started  to  increase  rapidly.  Higher  oil
revenues  towards  2000  led  to  calls  for  higher  spending.  Political  pressure  to  spend  more
evolved. A fiscal rule was established in response to this development. The aim was to phase
petroleum revenues into the economy gradually.
The fiscal rule guides the annual transfers from the fund to the fiscal budget. It limits average
petroleum revenue spending over the cycle to the expected real return on the fund – currently
estimated at 3 percent – over a business cycle.
The  rule  established  a  long  term  petroleum  revenue  spending  strategy.  The  government  may
deviate  from  the  3  percent  rule  depending  on  the  circumstances.  If  the  economy  is  facing  a
severe downturn, there should be room for a more expansionary policy. During the great financial
crisis,  the  Norwegian  government  was  able  to  allow  public  spending  to  increase  in  order  to
counteract the downturn. More recently, petroleum revenue spending over the fiscal budget has
been less than 3 percent of the value of the fund. This has happened in a situation where the
economic cycle has turned up at the same time as the value of the fund has increased rapidly.
Fiscal restraint has proved to be a wise policy.
Together,  the  oil  fund  and  the  fiscal  rule  have  shown  themselves  to  constitute  a  robust
framework. This framework enjoys cross-party support. After the fiscal rule was introduced in
2001, all succeeding governments have based their policy on this guideline
The  advantages  of  this  framework  are  many.  First,  it  allows  us  to  separate  spending  from
income.  When  we  smooth  petroleum  revenue  spending  over  time,  we  reduce  the  risk  of
crowding out private businesses. At the same time, we protect public budgets from substantial
fluctuations in revenues.
Second,  the  considerable  savings  amassed  in  recent  years  mean  that  future  generations  will
also benefit from petroleum revenues. Norway’s petroleum wealth does not only belong to those
living today. We try to be good stewards, like the farmer who cares for the soil and passes it on
to succeeding generations so they too can harvest from it. In the case of Norway, we pass our
natural resource wealth on to our descendants in the form of financial assets.
Chart: The GPFG – Governance model
Before  continuing,  let  me  say  some  words  about  the  fund’s  governance  structure  and  the
interaction between the Norwegian parliament, the Ministry of Finance and Norges Bank. Norges
Bank has been tasked with managing the fund since its establishment. The legislative basis for
the fund is decided by the parliament, while the Ministry lays down the management mandate
that  is  issued  to  Norges  Bank.  Moreover,  the  Ministry  has  established  a  practice  whereby
decisive changes are submitted to the parliament for approval.
According  to  the  management  mandate,  the  Norges  Bank  shall  seek  to  achieve  the  highest
possible long-term real return with moderate risk. The mandate sets the benchmark index and
tracking  error  limits.  In  addition,  the  mandate  imposes  constraints  on  the  fund’s  investment
universe. The investment strategy is largely determined by the mandate. The role of the Bank
and its Executive Board in formulating and elaborating the management mandate is to advise the
Ministry. This is an important job.
For the Ministry, the formulation of the management mandate, reporting and supervision will be
important tools for ensuring that investments are managed in line with objectives. Thanks to its
extensive reporting, the fund enjoys a reputation of being one of the world’s most transparent
sovereign wealth funds. For a fund with the entire population as actual owners, transparency is
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
vital for ensuring democratic control and confidence in investment management.
Chart: A large fund
Since the first transfer to the fund was made in 1996, the value of the fund has risen to almost
three  times  mainland  GDP.  During  periods  of  substantial  oil  and  gas  revenues,  large  capital
transfers have been made to the fund. In this chart this is shown as the dark blue bars. The
return on the fund has been solid, as shown as the light blue bars. The accumulated income
from financial assets makes up a significant part of the fund’s current value. The yellow bars in
the chart show fund withdrawals used to finance the structural non-oil budget deficit.
Both returns and exchange rates vary over time. Rising equity prices have generated substantial
gains for the fund in recent years. But this means we must also be prepared for losses when
markets turn, as they did last year.
As I have said, Norwegian society has gained in several ways from petroleum extraction. The
earnings  from  selling  oil  and  gas  are  only  a  part  of  the  story.  The  emergence  of  a  highly
advanced and skilled offshore industry is another part. This is the third experience I would like to
share with you. From the start of Norway’s petroleum era, we needed foreign technical expertise.
Foreign oil companies were required to develop the petroleum fields in partnership with a state-
owned oil company. Just as important as a certain degree of national control was the transfer of
knowledge.
There was also a clear expectation from the very beginning that Norwegian industry and service
providers should be involved. The timing was perfect. In the 1970s, the Norwegian shipbuilding
industry faced a sharp drop in demand for ships. The industry had resources and skills that could
be reoriented to production of platforms and other oil industry inputs.
Since then, Norway has benefitted greatly from the opportunities that the petroleum sector has
provided.  The  spillover  effects  from  the  oil  sector  to  the  wider  Norwegian  economy  are
substantial.  Oil-related  jobs  can  be  found  throughout  the  country.  More  than  10  percent  of  all
employed persons in Norway either directly or indirectly work for the oil industry. Innovation and
skills development in the industry have also benefitted other sectors.
From where Norway stands today, one may get the impression that our history as an oil nation is
only a story about success. This is not the case.
Chart: Oil and gas revenues and government spending
Policymakers’ handling of Norway’s newly discovered petroleum wealth got off to a rather bumpy
start. During the first 25 years of oil production, Norway experienced two deep recessions. Both
downturns were rooted in wildly optimistic income expectations. In the 1970s, public spending
surged before oil export revenue started to kick in. Eventually the government had to tighten fiscal
policy. In the 1980s, a credit-fuelled consumption boom in the private sector led to necessary
cut-backs after the oil price plunge in 1986. The turbulence made clear how vulnerable a small
economy is to terms of trade disturbances. Let that part of our history stand as a warning. But
lessons were learned, and formed the basis for the framework that was put in place from 1990
and onwards.
During the past 50 years, Norway has experienced how oil prices can change almost overnight in
response to international politics, economic disturbances or disruptive technologies. Recently, a
new risk factor has emerged. Impacts of global warming are high on the international agenda.
Policy  measures  and  shifts  in  consumption  patterns  and  production  methods  towards  lower
emissions will reduce demand for fossil fuels. The change to a more climate-friendly policy may
have a considerable impact on petroleum prices.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Looking  ahead,  Norway  must  now  be  prepared  for  a  time  when  the  petroleum  industry  is  no
longer expanding, but gradually declining. We will need innovation and growth in other industries
to pick up the slack. We have always known that oil and gas activities will be phased out sooner
or later. Oil and gas are non-renewable resources. A stricter global climate policy or a green-
technological breakthrough may mean that this will occur sooner than foreseen earlier.
In contrast to Norway, Mozambique is at the beginning of its gas era. I hope the lessons from
Norway can give you some guidance on your way forward.
One  main  lesson  is  that  depletable  natural  resources  must  be  viewed  as  part  of  a  country’s
wealth. Revenues from extracting oil and gas is just a transformation of this wealth and should
be managed with a long-term prospective.
At the same time, the development of oil and gas reserves can have valuable spillovers to the
rest  of  the  economy.  Not  only  demand  from  the  petroleum  industry,  but  also  innovations  and
technological  skills  developed  in  the  industry  can  be  of  great  value  to  other  sectors.  The
productivity gains to the economy can be more long lasting than the petroleum industry itself.
And never forget: The real test of how a petroleum producing country has managed its fortune,
will  come  when  the  boom  in  the  petroleum  industry  ends.  Oil  and  gas  resources  do  not  last
forever.  Emphasis  should  therefore  be  given  to  further  development  of  human  capital  as  the
primary source of long-term prosperity and wealth.
Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
