Nestor  A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Disruptors,  enablers  and 
consequences
Message by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), during the Peso Net Launch, Manila, 8 November 2017.
intended
 In the September issue of The Asset, the cover depicted a caricature of me as a superhero with
the blurb labeling me as a disruptor.   I can only chuckle gamely at this obvious hyperbole.  If
there is a disruptor today, it is us, as we move collectively to radically change our fate.  For the
better.
We know that the things cannot continue on “business as usual” and that great strides to level
up, modernize, and innovate should be taken in this fast changing economic landscape.
Today we do just that.  We launch the first Automated Clearing House (ACH) under the National
Retail  Payment  System  (NRPS).    It  is  wonderfully  disruptive  to  the  existing  status  quo.    It  is
innovative and it is expected to create new markets and add new value.  Today, we celebrate a
milestone in our shared goal of having a safer, more efficient, affordable, and reliable payment
system.
Today, we move closer to our objective of improving the retail payment system and creating a
cash-lite economy....
Indeed, we have made significant strides through constant and close dialogue and collaboration
with  you,  our  partners  our  partners  in  the  industry,  and  with  the  other  government  agencies
represented here.  In a way, we have united as a proud disruptive league of our own.
The Secretary of Finance Carlos Dominguez cannot join us today because he is on his way to
Vietnam. His proxy is still on his way. But let me acknowledge him – his strong support for our
initiative, and the rest of government, my colleagues in the monetary board ; the Chairman of
Philippine Payments Management, Inc. (PPMI), Mr. Justo “Tito” Ortiz, the PPMI Board members,
I  met  all  of  them  yesterday;    Mr.  Jeffrey  Lehrer,  Director  of  the  USAID  Office  of  Economic
Development  and  Governance,  distinguished  guests  from  the  private  business  sector;  let  me
acknowledge specifically Mr. Domingo Yap, the president of the Filipino – Chinese Chamber of
Commerce and Industry, friends from the banking community; many of you here are represented
by no less than your president/CEOs. Thank you for your support to this endeavor, our other
what we called BSFIs, non-bank electronic money issuers, non-bank regulated entities who are
partners of the BSP and the industry as well in this endeavor represented also by your senior
officers,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  my  colleagues  from  the  BSP  welcome  to  the  BSP  and  good
afternoon to all of you!
Implementing NRPS
Three (3) years ago (in 2014) there was a survey conducted by the Better Than Cash Alliance.
Remember this? And I keep citing this in some of my earlier speeches. The survey revealed that
only one percent (1%) of retail payments by volume of transactions are being done electronically!
That was in 2014.
The compelling challenge that we all faced was how can this dismal statistic be improved.  So
we articulated a vision. In December of 2015, the BSP launched the National Retail Payment
System or NRPS initiative.  Great industry and government collaboration was required to do this. 
It aimed to create an inter-operable ecosystem allowing seamless electronic fund transfers and
payments from one account to another.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Today’s  event  was  actually  preceded  by  several  singular  acts  —  accomplishments  that  built
upon one another that ultimately comprise the foundation on which the NRPS is built.
Laying the NRPS Foundation:  PSMB and PPMI
In March of this year,  the Charter of the envisioned Payment System Management Body (PSMB)
was  signed  by  the  industry  players.    The  interim  Board  of  the  PSMB  –  the  Retail  Payments
Consultative  Group,  is  a  distinguished  group  comprising  of  the  Executive  Committee  of  the
Bankers Association of the Philippines.
The  PSMB  was  subsequently  incorporated  into  a  legal  entity  now  known  as  the  Philippine
Payments Management, Incorporated  (PPMI) and this was incorporated last August 30.
The PPMI, the industry-led self-governing body, will assist the Bangko Sentral in overseeing the
payments industry while driving innovation and reforms in the payment space.
The PPMI shall play a major role in carrying out NRPS principles.
PESO NET, Another Step Towards the Goal
The  pioneer ACH  we  launch  today  under  the  NRPS  framework  is  one  of  those  dynamic  and
disruptive steps towards our goal.  It implements a batch electronic fund transfer (EFT) scheme. 
The participants have christened it, “The Philippine EFT System and Operations Network”... quite
a mouthful but it is shortened to, “PESO Net". And I can see that the logo that they adopted is a
combination of green and blue. I don’t know what kind of discussion went in behind the color
scheme  of  this  PESO  Net.    I  think  I  share  everyone’s  excitement  for  this  initiative.    Through
PESO  Net,  businesses,  the  government,  and  even  individuals  will  be  able  to  conveniently
perform account-to-account payments and fund transfers.
It will provide an electronic alternative to the still widely used paper-based check system.
PESO Net’s Benefits to Business
What’s in it for business?   PESO Net will enable  e-commerce, open up markets and lower the
cost of doing business.
As an inclusive platform for electronic fund transfers, business-to-business (B2B) and customer-
to-business (C2B) payments will become more convenient. Payments will be settled within the
day  and  at  full  value.  Compare  this  to  the  next  day  clearing  for  checks....  Plus  there  is  no
recipient fee, meaning you get the full amount at the receiving end. With PESONet, business
enterprises will be able to manage their liquidity better.  This will result in increased economic
activities.
It will also be easier for businesses for example to pay salaries.  Businesses can simply issue
payment instructions to their banks to credit their employees’ individual bank accounts even if
these are maintained in different banks. For the employees, this means freedom of choice in
their banking relationships.  That’s liberating and truly empowering!
PESO Net’s Benefits to the Government and Public
PESO Net will also enable the digitization of government collections and payments. This will be
realized through the collaboration with various agencies such as the Department of Finance, the
Bureau  of  the  Treasury,  Bureau  of  Internal  Revenue,  Department  of  Information  and
Communications  Technology,  and  the  Department  of  Budget  and  Management  and  the
Commission on Audit.
Imagine a significant increase in person-to-government (P2G) payments!  Taxes, fees, and other
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
obligations will be paid more efficiently through the retail payment network!  While this is already
being partially implemented by some providers, with PESO Net, we foresee greater and wider
government  agency  participation.  Increased  government-to-person  (G2P)  and  government-to-
government (G2G) payments will lead to more efficient budget administration and will make it
easier for citizens and businesses to do business with government.
Convenience to businesses, government, the public is the most obvious and foreseeable benefit
of PESO Net.
Foreseen and Intended Gains from Promoting Electronic Payments
Yes,  foreseeable  consequences  are  important.    But  in  evaluating  government  action,  wise
analysts  are  always  keen  to  identify  the  unintended  consequences  of  public  policy.  These
indirect,  unintended  consequences  or  unanticipated  effects  may  be  positive  or  negative.  But
these can be very powerful.
The  french  economist  Frederic  Bastiat  wrote,  “...the  bad  economist  confines  himself  to  the
visible effects, the good economist takes into account both the effect that can be seen and those
effects that must be foreseen.”
With the launch of PESO Net (and other ACHs of the NRPS down the road) we in  the Bangko
Sentral foresee not just the direct and practical consequences to businesses, the government
and  the  public.    We  see  beyond  the  immediate  result  of  having  affordable,  fast  and  efficient
payments.
We anticipate (and are very excited about) several other benefits.   These are:  First, increased
innovation  of  financial  services;  Second,  lowered  costs  for  businesses  and  for  government;
Third, faster economic development from accelerated velocity of payments; and Fourth, greater
financial inclusion.
Increased Innovation
We  envision  that  with  the  launch  of  PESO  Net  and  other ACHs,  innovation  in  the  delivery  of
financial  services  will  thrive.    With  an  efficient  retail  payments  infrastructure,  we  predict  that
various services will emerge in response to the rapidly evolving needs of financial consumers. 
This is how markets work and it is wonderful.   The self-interest of disciplined and prudent market
players will eventually lead to ingenuity ultimately promoting public welfare!
We  look  forward  to  the  emergence  of  new  competitive  space  where  service  innovation  is
encouraged. New business models, technologies, industry wide collaborations and partnerships
will be developed.
Lowered Costs
Innovation and a greater competitive space can lower payment system   costs.
The  use  of  electronic  payments  will  also  lead  to  the  reduced  usage  of  cash.  To  businesses,
payment system providers such as banks, and the government, this translates to cost savings
since cash handling and cash services entail security, transport, overhead, and other incidental
costs.
Economic Development
Greater  efficiencies  in  electronic  channels  will  also  bring  about  an  accelerated  velocity  of
payments. This will increase economic activities.
When payment beneficiaries are enabled to quickly obtain the liquidity that they need, they are
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
able to pursue productive activities at a faster rate.
Financial Inclusion
Perhaps the result of increased electronic payments usage that I personally look forward to the
most is of course greater financial inclusion. This is actually what triggered us to move in this
direction.
Studies show that 98 percent of unbanked Filipinos can be banked through electronic channels. 
Mobile phones, especially smart phones, of which the country has a very high penetration rate,
can be particularly used  for this purpose.
Enabling Regulations
For all these reasons, the BSP is pushing NRPS forward. Our task is to enable you – industry
players,  stakeholders,  payment  service  providers  and  end  users,  to  actively  participate  in  the
NRPS.  We do this through policy formulation and regulations.
Keeping  our  financial  stability  mandate  in  mind,  we  have  issued  regulations  to  encourage  the
growth of financial innovations including those linked to payments.
Recently, the Monetary Board approved the NRPS Framework, now issued as BSP Circular 980.
This framework sets out the overarching principles that will govern the retail payment system.
The objective is to achieve greater interoperability among payment participants so that a wide
range  of  electronically-accessible  payment  products  and  services  can  be  made  available
anytime, at the least possible cost.
In  support  of  electronic  payments,  the  BSP  will  also  continue  to  work  with  other  government
agencies in developing a biometric foundational ID system to enable access to government and
financial services.
Another upcoming regulation pertains to the offering of Basic Deposit Accounts or BDAs which
will further support client on-boarding. Designed as a low cost, low friction account, everyone can
now  aspire  to  have  a  transaction  account  that  connects  him  or  her  to  the  digital  financial
ecosystem that the NRPS is creating.
In  order  to  protect  our  emergent  digital  financial  infrastructure,  we  are  likewise  updating  our
technology risk management guidelines to improve the resilience of BSP-Supervised Financial
Institutions against cyber-attacks.
The  Monetary  Board  recently  approved  the  issuance  of  updated  cybersecurity  guidelines.
Payment systems continue to face increasing security threats and industry players need to step
up.
The  string  of  regulations  to  improve  technology  risk  management,  together  with    consumer
protection, even as we enable, digital payments are collectively aimed toward creating a stable
environment for financial services and innovation.
Marketing, Collaboration and Cooperation are Key
As we offer PESO Net, communication to customers could be a challenge, because people are
simply not familiar or used to electronic payments. Every good product or service needs to be
promoted. To reach a truly inclusive market, banks and non-banks must understand and connect
to their target customers. You have to go out of your way to bring this to the people. Messages
that will appeal to their experiences and needs must be crafted. Through effective and sincere
communication, customers can be convinced to participate in the formal financial system as we
build a critical mass of users.  The network effects will draw in even more participants. 
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is through these sustained efforts that we can bring about a payment ecosystem that we can
all be proud  about... an ecosystem that is a symbol of digital ingenuity.  In this regard, we are all
disrupters and enablers.
On the part of the BSP, we remain strongly committed to creating an enabling and supportive
environment for our shared vision to come into full fruition.
We look forward to working with all of you as we take our leap to bring about a safe, efficient,
reliable, and affordable retail payment system supportive of inclusive growth.
Congratulations to all of us!
Mabuhay ang PESO Net!  Mabuhay ang NRPS.  Mabuhay ang Pilipinas. Salamat po.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
