François Villeroy de Galhau: The challenges of the euro area at the
dawn of 2019
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at a seminar at the
Bank of Portugal, Lisbon, 22 February 2019.
Acccompanying slides of the speech.
Ladies and Gentlemen, [meus caros amigos],
 It is a real pleasure to be with you in Lisbon – Cidade da Luz e Rainha do Mar [City of light and
Queen of the Sea] – the first bridge between Europe and Asia thanks to the audacity of your
descobridores [explorers].  And  still  today,  your  country  is  an  inspiring  example  of  economic
recovery thanks to its courageous reforms. I wish to express my warmest thanks to my friend
and colleague, Governor Carlos Costa, for his invitation. Before focusing on our challenges for
th
2019,  let  me  start  my  speech  on  a  more  positive  note,  as  this  same  year  marks  the  20
anniversary of the euro, and elaborate a bit on its success.
  I. The euro’s success was built on three principles that are now more vital than ever
As to whether the euro has been a success, there are few among us today who would have any
doubts. It is more interesting to look back on the reasons for this success, which, to my mind,
was built on three founding principles: the Eurosystem’s mandate of maintaining price stability;
the means employed to carry out this mandate, i.e. independence; and the spirit that drives its
action – general European interest.
1. The mandate: price stability
The Eurosystem has been entrusted with a very clear mandate by the European treaties;  its
primary  objective  is  to  “maintain  price  stability”,  in  other  words  to  avoid  prolonged  periods  of
excessive inflation – as seen in Germany after World Wars I and II – or deflation – seen following
the crisis of 1929 –, which have consistently negative effects on the economy. Some observers
still advocate a “dual mandate” to target both inflation and growth or full employment, as is the
case with the US Federal Reserve, for example. This would have been politically unattainable
given the traumatic history of inflation in some European countries. Besides, let me recall two
elements:
1
price  stability  is  to  be  maintained  “over  the  medium  term”.  As  stressed  inter  alia  by  F.
Smets, there is an “equivalence between the length of the policy horizon and the weight on
output gap stabilisation”,  and hence employment.
as stated by the treaty, "without prejudice to the objective of price stability”, the Eurosystem
should support “the general economic policies in the Union”
2
Let me add that the more precise and focused the mandate, the more accountable the ECB can
and must be. Yet, those who advocate a broader mandate are often the same people who quite
inconsistently are quick to criticise the lack of accountability of the ECB.
In 1998, the ECB established a quantitative definition of price stability that it went on to clarify in
2003:  to  maintain  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  Other  major
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
central banks such as the Fed and the Bank of Japan followed the example of the ECB, in 2012
and  2013  respectively,  and  also  adopted  the  same  2%  inflation  target.  This  “conceptual
convergence”  is remarkable.
With regard to our mandate, the results are tangible [slide 1]. During the 20 year period prior to
the introduction of the euro (1979-98), average inflation in the euro area was at 4.9%, compared
with only 1.7% during the 20 years that have followed. What’s more, better controlled inflation
means lower financing costs as risk premia are reduced: interest rate differentials and sovereign
spreads have narrowed significantly [slide 2]. The France-Germany spread fell from an average
of  1.9%  between  1986  and  1993  –  the  period  of  the  single  market  without  a  single  currency,
between the Single European Act and Maastricht – to 0.4% in 2017-19. The Portugal-Germany
spread narrowed by 5.5 percentage points over the same period.
Furthermore, in terms of growth [slide 3], and unlike a common misperception, euro area per
capita  GDP  has  improved  almost  as  rapidly  as  in  the  United  States  since  the  euro  was
introduced. It increased at an annual average of 1.1% between 1999 and 2017, compared with
1.2% in the United States, with the gap between the two widening only temporarily during the
2011-12 European crisis.
2. The means: independence
4
We are all aware of the strong academic and empirical evidence in favour of independence of
Central  banks  since  the  Great  inflation  of  the  1970s.   Nevertheless,  independence  is  still
contested in our democracies. On both sides of the Atlantic, the governments that are currently
most  critical  of  independence  are  the  very  same  that  most  demonstrate  its  necessity:  their
unsustainable fiscal policies, without the anchor of a credible central bank, would pose a threat to
price  stability. Independence  is  not  for  the  protection  of  central  bankers;  it  is  for  the
protection  of  the  citizens,  and  their  collective  confidence  in  the  currency. But
independence only  has  real  value  if  there  is  a  clear  mandate  –  price  stability  –  and
accordingly  a robust  performance-based  accountability  to  the  country’s  citizens  and  their
representatives: every year the President of the ECB testifies four times a year at the European
Parliament and gives eight lengthy press conferences (compared with four press conferences
for the Fed up to 2018). At the same time, the ECB must increasingly take heed of economic and
social players.
Independence is not only secured in legislation, but also by the people [its grandes homens] that
have embodied it for the past 20 years: Wim Duisenberg, Jean-Claude Trichet, and today, Mario
Draghi.  I  would  go  so  far  as  to  talk  of  threefold  independence:  from  national  governments  of
course,  but  also  from  short-term  trends  in  the  media  or  financial  markets,  and  last  from
entrenched camps (the hawks and the doves) or schools of thought, even if all three of them had
their own well-established economic background. Consequently, they have been able to take a
pragmatic  approach  to  innovation:  for  example,  when  Jean Claude  Trichet  addressed  bank
liquidity  risk  through  the  fixed  rate  full  allotment  policy  in  2008  or  introduced  the  first  security
purchases with the SMP in 2010; and of course when Mario Draghi gave his famous “whatever it
takes” speech in July 2012 or began expanding non-standard instruments in 2014.
3. The spirit: general European interest
These  three  men  have  also  upheld  the  European  spirit,  through  their  culture  and  their
convictions. Far from being a technocratic arrangement, initially the euro was actually a political
aspiration advocated by Helmut Kohl, Jacques Delors and François Mitterrand among others in
parallel  with  German  reunification  [slide  4].  And  it  is  now  supported  by 75%  of  euro  area
citizens – the highest approval rating since 2003 – and as many as 77% of Portuguese and 81%
of Germans. This popular support is our greatest success and our greatest asset. And it proves
that the concept of Europe is popular as long as it stops being abstract and takes the form
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
of concrete projects. 
However, during the past 20 years, the euro area has essentially forged ahead through crises,
with  the  creation  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  to  help  Member  States  in  2012  –
supporting among others Portugal – or the Banking Union in 2014 in response to the Spanish or
Irish  crises.  As  distance  grows  with  the  last  financial  crisis,  general  European  interest  has
nowadays waned. This is a very serious problem: in 2017 and 2018, in what might be seen as
the sunny summer of the economic cycle, we, Europeans, proved unable to fix the roof. And this
takes me to our challenges for 2019. 
II. Our challenges in the face of 2019’s uncertainties
1. A slowdown and not a recession.
A word first on our economic environment. At the global level, activity is clearly decelerating, but
we are not heading towards a recession. According to the IMF, global growth could stand at 3.5%
in 2019 after 3.7% in 2018. The main explanation for this slowdown is the increase in general
uncertainty due to geopolitical  risks,  starting  worldwide  with  trade  tensions  initiated  by  the  US
administration and in Europe with the prospect of a hard Brexit, very damaging but unfortunately
less  and  less  implausible.  Uncertainty  is  depressing  business  confidence  and  possibly
investment  by 
in  France,
manufacturers’ expectations on the overall economic outlook have turned down earlier and more
significantly than their expectations on their own production. And in the US, there is a divergence
between weaker soft data like the ISM manufacturing survey index and still rising hard data on
industrial production. Hence, restoring confidence should be the priority and it is the responsibility
of political leaders: the best antidote to the current slowdown is to reduce geopolitical risks, more
than changing economic policies.
fostering  a  wait-and-see  attitude [slide  5].   For 
instance, 
5
The French economy has been slowing down but less than in some other European countries,
due to increasing purchasing power and resilient domestic demand. In 2019, French growth is
expected to be higher than that of Germany and close to the euro area average. Beyond internal
demand, the second pillar of European resilience should be the extension of domestic reforms. I
would like here to take the example of the Portuguese recovery since 2014, after a severe crisis
and courageous adjustment efforts: GDP is now growing at 2.1% in 2018. Ambitious reforms
have improved cost competitiveness, boosted export performance and led to a sharp fall in the
employment rate, which has  more  than  halved  since  2013.  This  clearly  demonstrates  that,  in
Europe, reforms do have a positive impact. 
2. Our monetary policy is able to combine clarity and flexibility.
 Let me turn to the consequences for our monetary policy: to deal with uncertainty, we have to
combine clarity and flexibility, as we did in our December’s chained guidance. I will come back to
this.  In  the  present  context,  we  should  favour  state-dependent  analysis  over  time-dependent
variables. In other words, we should pay close attention to the economic data in coming quarters
and in particular we need to assess the extent to which the recent deceleration in growth and the
current drop in inflation are temporary phenomenon or more structural in nature:
Regarding growth,  the  current  slowdown  in  the  euro  area  is  partly  driven  by  temporary
factors, such as disruptions causing contraction in the German manufacturing output, and
the  impact  of  the  yellow  vest  movement  in  France.  If  these  drags  fade  away,  and  if
geopolitical risks recede, GDP growth could rebound from next spring or summer. Indeed,
consumption remains solid and continues to be supported by rising wage growth especially
in  the  core  countries.  But  should  a  downturn  last  beyond  that  horizon  –  a  less  plausible
scenario  but  one  which  cannot  be  excluded  –  we  would  be  ready  to  adapt  our  monetary
policy guidance.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Regarding inflation, the fall in oil prices will have a significant downward impact in 2019.
After peaking at 2.2% in October 2018, euro area headline inflation currently stands at 1.4%
and will fall to around 1% in some months of this year. Beyond these temporary fluctuations,
the key trend to watch is core inflation. The improvement in the labour market has already
led  to  a  substantial  acceleration  in  wage  inflation.  However,  it  has  not  yet  been  passed
through  to  core  price  inflation.  Though  we  are  recording  some  early  signals  of  a  price
acceleration – such as the services component of the HICP estimated at 1.6%  in January
–,  we  observe  a  weakening  in  the  pass-through  from  wages  to  prices:  here  also,  is  this
weakening  temporary  –  due  to  an  increased  time  lag  –  or  attributable  to  more  structural
factors?  We have to consider this issue carefully, which is also currently at stake in the
United States.
6
In this context, I still believe that the gradual normalisation of our monetary policy is desirable.
Our chained guidance of last December has been less noticed than the successful end to our
net  asset  purchases.  But  it  is  efficient  in  combining clarity  about  the  sequencing  –  full
reinvestments will last for an extended period after a first rate-hike – and flexibility  about  the
timing of each step. Consequently, financial markets tend to adapt their calendar expectations –
and hence financial conditions – to the perceived outlook: our chained guidance already provides
some stabilisation function, without prejudice to our future decisions.
Beside  flexibility  in  the  calendar,  let  me  stress  another  capacity  of  our  monetary  policy:
pragmatism  in  its  intensity,  thanks  to  the  powerful  “trio”  of  instruments  at  our  disposal:  the
reinvestments of assets, interest rates and liquidity.
Concerning this third instrument (provision of liquidity), everybody is aware of the forthcoming
expiry  of  the  TLTRO-2  programme,  starting  in  June  2020.  The  Governing  Council  will  decide
about this in due time, with two prerequisites. As Mario Draghi stressed, “there should be a good
case for monetary policy”  for the euro area as a whole: our policy cannot be designed according
to the specific needs of some banks or jurisdictions. And secondly, we should look at the whole
spectrum of possible tools, including various forms of LTRO, to decide about the recalibration of
conditions and maturities.
7
Regarding interest rates, I have often stressed in the past the usefulness but also the obvious
limits of negative interest rates. Let me quote what I said as early as 2017: “they are difficult to
accept by households and SMEs, and so impossible in practice to pass through to them” . And
thus they are believed by many, if maintained for too long, to weigh negatively on the profitability
of financial intermediation with possible adverse consequences for the smooth transmission of
monetary policy. Hence, if we had to use negative rates for a longer period than expected, we
should  study  pragmatically  how  to  contain  their  possible  adverse  effects  on  the  bank
transmission of our monetary policy.
8
3. Relentless efforts towards a stronger Europe
Let  me  come  back  to  the  European  spirit  I  pleaded  for.  Today,  it  is  also  an  economic
requirement: faced with the slowdown and the uncertainties, monetary policy cannot be the only
game in town. This is a German worry I fully share with many others. But then, we need to push
relentlessly for a strengthening of our Economic Union. The commitment of Mario Centeno, as
Chairman  of  the  Eurogroup,  is  essential.  The  advances  made  by  the  European  Council  in
December 2018 are a step in the right direction but clearly need to be strengthened and built
upon.
The  success  of  the Banking  Union  will  depend  on  the  establishment  of  a  solid  resolution
mechanism, – probably even more than a full common deposit insurance scheme. Regarding
the  backstop  of  the  Single  Resolution  Fund,  in  the  interests  of  financial  stability,  we  should
consider extending the maturities on the credit lines. And we will not achieve an effective and
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
profitable Banking Union without cross-border consolidation in Europe: there are still too many
roadblocks  and  not  enough  cross-border  restructuring.  Unfortunately,  there  was  almost  no
progress at all on the Capital Markets Union in the December agreement. Let us finally move
on  from  a  rhetorical  consensus  in  principle  to  concrete  headway,  notably  on  harmonising
bankruptcy regimes and strengthening ESMA. Both the Banking Union and the Capital Markets
Union are the key components for a genuine “Financing Union for Investment and Innovation”: I
have put forward this idea as a way of better channelling our abundant resources – our EUR 340
billion private savings surplus – towards the concrete needs of European economy: the energy
transition, SMEs’ equity or digital innovation.
But  the  strengthening  of  the  euro  area  should  also  include public  mechanisms  of  solidarity.
Regarding the ESM, it should not be just about managing crises ex post, but about preventing
them ex-ante above all by reinforcing our precautionary tools. We need to avoid having ex ante
criteria  that  are  so  strict  that  in  practice  they  prevent  the  ESM  from  being  used  preventively.
These  actions  should  also  be  supplemented  by  a  common  fiscal  capacity:  these  words  are
probably less contentious than a common “budget”, but as the President of the ECB wrote last
week,  we  shouldn’t  shy  away  from  its  stabilisation  function.  If  so,  it  would  support  the  single
monetary policy and price stability.
 I will conclude by quoting President Mário Soares, one of the key actors of Portugal's accession
to  the  European  Community:  “Recent  history  has  shown  that  rather  than  deferring  crises  we
must  confront  them  head  on,  with  a  determination  to  overcome  them ”.  Let  us  face  the
challenges  for  2019  with  this  determined  spirit:  Brexit  and  the  European  elections  as  well  as
national domestic elections including in Portugal, and now in Spain. Our role as European central
bank is to be faithful to our mandate while remaining totally independent. But we also have to be
more  attentive  than  ever  to  our  environment:  we  have  to  be  ready  to  react  in  response  to
economic  uncertainties,  and  we  must  plead  for  a  sensible  strengthening  of  European
sovereignty. Thank you for your attention.
9
 [i] See Article 127 of The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
[ii]    Hartmann,  Philipp,  Smets,  Frank,  “The  first  twenty  years  of  the  European  Central  Bank:
monetary policy”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 2219, December 2018.
[iii]  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  2014:  "Central  Banking  in  the  Crisis:  Conceptual  Convergence  and
Open Questions on Unconventional Monetary Policy" Business Economics, Palgrave Macmillan;
National  Association 
for  Business  Economics,  Vol.  49(2),  pp.  74-84,  April.
www.perjacobsson.org/lectures/101213.pdf
[iv] See Kydland, F. and E. Prescott (1977) “Rules rather than discretion: The inconsistency of
optimal plans”, Journal of Political Economy, 85(3), pp. 473-92 and Alesina, A. and L. Summers
(1993)  “Central  bank  independence  and  macroeconomic  performance:  Some  comparative
evidence”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 25(2), pp. 151-162.
[v] See Nicholas Bloom  (2009), “The Impact of Uncertainty Shock”, Econometrica, Volume77,
Issue3, Pages 623-685
[vi] The final version is scheduled for publication on 22 February 2019.
[vii] Press conference given by Mario Draghi, 24 January 2019.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
[viii] “ECB Monetary Policy and the Resilience of the Eurozone”, Columbia University, New York,
19 April 2017, speech by François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Banque de France.
[ix]  Address  given  by  Mário  Soares  on  the  European  Community  of  the  future  (Lisbon,  19
October 1990).
 
Download the PDF version of this document
123456789
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
See Article 127 of The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
  Hartmann, Philipp, Smets, Frank, “The first twenty years of the European Central Bank: monetary policy”, ECB
Working Paper Series, No 2219, December 2018.
Jean-Claude Trichet, 2014: “Central Banking in the Crisis: Conceptual Convergence and Open Questions on
Unconventional Monetary Policy” Business Economics, Palgrave Macmillan; National Association for Business
Economics, Vol. 49(2), pp. 74–84, April. www.perjacobsson.org/lectures/101213.pdf
See  Kydland,  F.  and  E.  Prescott  (1977)  “Rules  rather  than  discretion:  The  inconsistency  of  optimal  plans”,
Journal  of  Political  Economy,  85(3),  pp.  473–92  and  Alesina,  A.  and  L.  Summers  (1993)  “Central  bank
independence and macroeconomic performance: Some comparative evidence”, Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 25(2), pp. 151–162.
See Nicholas Bloom  (2009), “The Impact of Uncertainty Shock”, Econometrica, Volume77, Issue3, Pages 623–
685
The final version is scheduled for publication on 22 February 2019.
Press conference given by Mario Draghi, 24 January 2019.
“ECB  Monetary  Policy  and  the  Resilience  of  the  Eurozone”,  Columbia  University,  New  York,  19 April  2017,
speech by François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Banque de France.
Address given by Mário Soares on the European Community of the future (Lisbon, 19 October 1990).
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
