John C Williams: Monetary policy - a "data dependent" approach
Remarks by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  New  Jersey  Bankers  Association's  Economic  Leadership  Forum,
Somerset, New Jersey, 18 January 2019.
 As prepared for delivery
Introduction
Good  morning  everyone.  I  wish  every  conference  I  went  to  had  such  an  incredible  opening—
Joe’s certainly a hard act to follow. I have a son who’s a very talented artist, but he didn’t get
those genes from me. So I’m going to stick to what I know—monetary policy.
Today  I’ll  talk  about  the  economy,  how  I’m  assessing  the  outlook,  and  what  that  means  for
monetary policy. It’s early in the day, so I’ll try and keep the recitation of facts and figures to a
minimum. But I know there are a lot of bankers in the room and that the direction of interest rates
plays a vital role in your business, so, rest assured, I won’t skimp on that topic.
Given  that  I’ve  promised  to  talk  about  interest  rates,  before  I  say  another  word  I’ll  give  the
standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect
those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System.
The Dual Mandate
I want to start this morning by reminding everyone what the goals of the Federal Reserve are. It’s
easy to think of the Fed as just setting interest rates, and of course that’s a major part of what we
do. But we do so in order to achieve two goals set by Congress: maximum employment and
price stability. In Fed-speak it’s called the dual mandate.
There  are  serious  debates  taking  place  amongst  economists  and  policymakers  about  what
maximum  employment  actually  looks  like,  and  they  probably  deserve  another  speech  of  their
own. But I promised not to deluge you with numbers, so I’ll focus on a few highlights.
The unemployment rate last year averaged just under 4 percent, the lowest such annual figure
since 1969. The latest jobs numbers also showed very strong growth, with over 2.6 million jobs
added last year. The ongoing strength in the labor market has led to encouraging gains in wages.
No matter how you cut it, the labor market is strong, consistent with our maximum employment
goal.
When we say price stability, our goal is to keep inflation around 2 percent.  Those of you who are
of my generation will remember the runaway inflation of the 1970s and early 1980s. Obviously
that’s something we must avoid repeating. But the challenge of more recent years actually hasn’t
been too  high  inflation.  Instead,  it’s  been  inflation  that’s  persistently too  low.  Over  the  past
decade, inflation has more often than not come in below our goal.
1
But things are looking better. Underlying measures of inflation have been running just below 2
percent over the past 12 months, and I expect them to be right at 2 percent this year. And I don’t
see any worrying signs of inflationary pressures building. So, from the perspective of the Fed’s
dual mandate as a whole, things are looking very good.
Of  course,  for  this  healthy  jobs  market  and  low  and  stable  inflation  to  persist,  we  need  solid
growth in the economy. While GDP growth in 2018 looks to have been a robust 3 percent, we’re
hearing anxiety both in the markets and the commentary, about what’s to come in 2019.
1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
I  wish  I  could  now  tell  you  with  certainty  what  will  happen  to  the  economy,  but  anyone  who
promises they can see into the future is a charlatan. However, what I can do is provide you with
some insight into how I assess the health of the economy and what that means for my view on
the monetary policy decisions before us.
Data Dependent
I often say I’m data dependent, and I’ve talked about the major economic indicators, GDP growth,
inflation, and employment. But these headline numbers aren’t the only things that inform my view
on monetary policy, or the economy more broadly. I’m looking at a whole raft of information about
what’s going on and where risks may be lurking.
Employment  and  unemployment  numbers  provide  a  useful  summary  measure  of  what’s
happening  in  the  labor  market.  But  “data”  doesn’t  stop  there.  There  are  many  sources  of
information  on  labor  market  conditions  that  I  regularly  consult.  They  range  from  very  granular
data that zero in on individuals’ experiences in the labor market, to indices of job openings, how
many people are quitting their jobs, and labor market participation, to name a few.
But  it’s  not  just  these  hard  numbers  that  matter.  I  also  find  surveys  of  households  and
businesses provide valuable and timely perspectives about economic conditions. For example,
there’s a questionnaire that asks people whether jobs are “hard to get.” It’s helpful because it
gives the perceptions of normal people (and not economists!) about whether there are a lot of
open positions. This survey continues to report that it’s relatively easy to find work, which is a
2
very good sign about the strength of the economy.
Beyond the economic data and surveys, financial market indicators are a critical source of up-to-
the minute information on how investors view the economy. In addition, stock prices and interest
rates affect the spending decisions of households and businesses, and the value of the dollar
affects demand for exports and imports, so these are important factors shaping the economy’s
trajectory.
More  broadly,  I  look  at  a  wealth  of  data  on  international  financial  market  developments  and
banking conditions, which feed into my understanding of the global outlook.
Finally, and perhaps least well known, I spend a great deal of time speaking with members of the
public, at our Board and Advisory Group meetings, community and business leader forums, and
events like today’s. I get immense value from their insights, whether it’s the challenges they face
in filling positions, their plans for capital investments, or how global developments are influencing
their decisions. These discussions provide a huge amount of detail and texture to the economic
picture. One of the great strengths of the Federal Reserve System is our extensive networks of
contacts in our communities, and we share what we learn from these conversations when we
meet at the FOMC.
Being "data dependent" means taking this holistic view when thinking about the economy and
monetary policy. Not all of these types of data draw headlines the way shifts in the stock market
do, but together they provide a much richer and more complete depiction of what’s happening.
And  they  also  tell  me  whether  the  signals  we’re  getting  from  the  markets  are  reflected  in  the
economy as a whole.
2018 Tailwinds
In  thinking  about  where  the  economy  is  heading,  it’s  worth  reflecting  on  where  we  were  12
months ago.
At the start of last year the message I was getting—from business leaders, economic data, and
the  markets—was  one  of  overwhelming  positivity.  This  reflected  three  tailwinds:  strong  global
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
growth, fiscal stimulus, and quite accommodative financial conditions. Each of these was giving
the economy an extra boost. Indeed, these tailwinds provided even more of a boost over most of
2018 than forecasters had anticipated.
Fast forward 12 months and indicators in Europe and Asia point to less optimism about global
growth. The initial lift from the fiscal stimulus will likely wane over the course of this year. And
financial conditions have become less accommodative over the past several months. In addition,
we are now seeing some emerging headwinds to growth from the partial government shutdown
in the United States and elevated geopolitical uncertainties abroad.
Other “data” confirm that the winds in our sails have calmed. The headlines have been about
investors’ concerns around growth, which have contributed to volatility in markets. This is also
showing through in surveys  of  households  and  businesses,  who  say  that  they  are  somewhat
less  confident  about  future  economic  prospects.  For  example,  the  latest  Empire  State
Manufacturing Survey and New York Fed Business Leaders Survey both point to slowing growth
in the region. And there is no doubt that my colleagues and I are hearing the same thing directly
from our business and financial market contacts, who are more focused on the possibility of a
3
weaker economic outlook this year.
But let me be clear: a softer economic outlook doesn’t mean we should prepare for doom and
gloom. On the contrary, it’s likely we’ll see GDP growth somewhere between 2 and 2½ percent
this year. That’s a step down from 2018, but still consistent with a healthy, growing economy.
Supporting a Strong Economy
So, how should the Fed respond to an outlook of slowing growth and one that’s less certain than,
say, this time last year? In a word: carefully.
At the start of 2018, when the economy was growing well above trend and interest rates still were
still  quite  low,  gradually  raising  rates  was  the  obvious  and  necessary  choice.  Twelve  months
later, the tailwinds have lost their gust, interest rates are closer to normal levels, and inflation is
tame. The approach we need is one of prudence, patience, and good judgment. The motto of
“data dependence” is more relevant than ever.
If growth continues to come in well above sustainable levels, somewhat higher interest rates may
well be called for at some point. However, if conditions turn out to be less robust, then I will adjust
my policy views accordingly.
I assure you that I have my eyes wide open and my ear to the ground when it comes to thinking
about how the economic outlook will unfold in the year ahead, and as ever I’ll be guided by the
data in all its forms.
The Balance Sheet
Aside from my views on interest rates, the other issue I get asked about is the normalization of
the balance sheet. When we first announced our plans in June 2017, I was poised to expound on
them in great detail.  But when I raised the topic I was sorely disappointed to be met with glazed
eyes and general indifference. Sadly, nobody seemed to care!
4
Now that’s changed, and I’m getting more interest on this topic.
It’s important to remember why the Fed took unconventional monetary policy actions in the first
place. Large-scale asset purchases, forward guidance on the future path of interest rates, and
seven years where the federal funds rate hovered close to zero, were all measures necessary
for the full recovery from the Great Recession.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
A  decade  later  and  the  FOMC  has  slowly  but  surely  been  moving  monetary  policy  “back  to
normal.” We’ve moved interest rates closer to neutral, scaled back on forward guidance, and are
5
over a year into the process of winding down the balance sheet.
Our goals throughout the policy normalization process have been twofold. First and foremost, to
support a strong, sustainable expansion of the economy. Second, to do this in a predictable and
transparent way that creates as little disruption as possible.  So far, this plan has worked very
well, with the economic expansion nearing record duration.
6
But it is important to stress that if circumstances change, I will reassess our choices regarding
monetary policy, including the path of balance sheet normalization. Data dependence applies to
all that we do. And, as always, if the outlook deteriorates in a material way, we stand prepared to
deploy all our policy tools as appropriate in support of the economy.
Conclusion
I’d like to conclude where I began, with the dual mandate. There’s sometimes a view that Fed
policymakers are fixated on two data points: inflation and employment. And the reason is that’s
how we’re judged by Congress at doing our job.
But  underpinning  these  is  a  strong  economy,  and  ultimately  that’s  what  we’re  always  using
monetary policy to support. So, as the year unfolds I’ve got my eyes wide open, looking at the
data  and  listening  to  experience—whether  it’s  coming  from  household  surveys,  market
indicators, or from leaders in my District.
The  economy is  strong,  the  outlook is healthy, and my number one priority is using monetary
policy  to  keep  it  that  way.  In  short,  I’m  watching,  listening,  and  prepared  to  adjust  my  views
depending on the data.
1
2
3
4
5
6
For more information on how the FOMC specifies its goals, see Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary
Policy Strategy, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, amended January 30, 2018.
This question on whether jobs are “hard to get” is part of the survey conducted by Nielsen for the Conference
Board  that  is  used  to  calculate  the  Conference  Board’s  consumer  confidence  index.  Information  about  the
survey, 
latest  press 
is  available  at www.conference-
board.org/data/consumerconfidence.cfm.
release  of 
including 
index, 
the 
the 
For example, the minutes of the December FOMC meeting stated that “Participants also reported hearing more
frequent concerns about the global economic outlook from business contacts” (page 8). Later on the same
page, the minutes said “However, contacts in a number of Districts appeared less upbeat than at the time of the
November  meeting,  as  concerns  about  a  variety  of  factors—including  trade  policy,  waning  fiscal  stimulus,
slowing global economic growth, or financial market volatility—were reportedly beginning to weigh on business
sentiment.” See Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee: December 18–19, 2018, Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, January 9, 2019.
See FOMC  issues  addendum  to  the  Policy  Normalization  Principles  and  Plans,  Board  of  Governors  of  the
Federal Reserve System, June 14, 2017.
See John C. Williams, 'Normal’ Monetary Policy in Words and Deeds, September 28, 2018.
See FOMC  Communications  related  to  Policy  Normalization,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve
System, updated June 13, 2018.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
