BANK OF BOTSWANA 
 2019 Media Economic Briefing - Welcome Remarks 
 by 
 Moses D Pelaelo 
Governor 
 May 21, 2019 
 Let  me  thank  you,  Distinguished  Members  of  the  Media,  for  honouring 
the Bank’s invitation to today’s Economic Briefing, which also marks the 
launch  of  the  2018  Bank  of  Botswana  Annual  Report.  As  I  have 
repeatedly  indicated,  the  Bank  of  Botswana  values  greatly  the  critical 
role played by the Media in the dissemination of financial, economic and 
other information to the nation; it is, therefore, not a coincidence that this 
economic briefing comes immediately after the briefing of His Excellency 
The President and Members of the Cabinet.  
 The  Annual  Report  is  published  in  compliance  with  the  Bank  of 
Botswana Act and, as a statutory requirement, contains a report on the 
Bank’s  operations  and  audited  financial  statements,  that  is  to  say,  it  is 
the primary vehicle for accountability to the nation on the operations and 
financial performance of the Bank.  
 In addition to the statutory aspects of the report, it is a tradition that the 
Annual  Report  also  includes  a  review  of  economic  developments  and 
outlook,  as  well  as  a  theme  topic  section.  The  review  provides  an 
analytical  content  and  explanations  for  economic  developments  and 
prospects,  as  well  as  background  to  policy  conduct  and  operations  by 
the  Bank.    In  particular,  this  is  with  respect  to  monetary  and  exchange 
rate  policies,  financial  stability,  banking  sector  regulation,  currency 
management,  payments  infrastructure  and  the  management  of  foreign 
exchange reserves.  The successive theme topics contribute to national 
economic  policy  analysis  and  evaluation  and,  hence,  the  requisite 
response  and  transformation  needed  to  sustain  the  desired  level  of 
inclusive and diversified growth of the economy. 
 Distinguish  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  Bank’s  financial  performance 
and  operations  in  2018  is  against  the  background  of  moderation  in  the 
pace  of  global  economic  growth,  associated  with  slack  in  growth  of 
demand in an environment of policy uncertainty induced by increasingly 
inward looking policies, heightened trade and geopolitical tensions, lack 
of progress on Brexit and adverse climate.  Meanwhile, in the region and 
domestically,  prospects  for  growth  and  transformation  continue  to  be 
adversely  affected  by  both  the  inadequate  pace  and  lack  of  traction  of 
structural and policy reforms.  
 Distinguished Members of the Media, you will note that the combination 
of  international  developments  and  the  domestic  context  affect  the 
immediate  as  well  as  the  medium-  to  long-term  outcomes.  The  first 
presentation  this  morning  will  relate  more  to  the  immediate  outcomes, 
being the report on the Bank’s Operations and Financial Statements by 
the Chief Financial Officer, Mr Daniel Loeto.  
 Mr  Loeto  will,  among  others,  highlight  the  performance  of  the  foreign 
exchange  reserves  that,  in  turn,  have  a  major  impact  on  the  Bank’s 
financial  performance  and  resulting  revenues  to  government,  and 
identify  the  various  influences.  At  this  stage,  I  will  just  preface  his 
detailed explanations by indicating that the significant influences include, 
an environment of low global interest rates, volatile valuations of assets 
traded  in  global  markets  and  currencies,  trade  and  capital  flows, 
 2 
government  operations  and  fiscal  balances  as  well  as  changes  in  the 
Bank’s investment guidelines and associated portfolio rebalancing.   
 Distinguished  Media  Practitioners,  as  you  would  be  aware,  the  Bank  of 
Botswana  is  one  of  the  few  central  banks  in  the  world  whose  financial 
statements  are  prepared  and  audited  in  accordance  with  international 
reporting  and  auditing  standards.  I  also  wish  to  add  that,  the  Bank’s 
financial  statements,  as  has  been  the  norm  over  the  43  years  of  the 
Bank’s  existence,  have  obtained  a  clean  audit  report  that  confirm 
appropriate  maintenance  of  accounts,  existence  of  sound 
risk 
management and internal control environment and, in general, effective 
governance structures at the Bank of Botswana.  
 In this respect,  I would like to assure the nation and other stakeholders 
globally,  that  contrary  to  some  unfortunate  and  inaccurate  reporting  by 
some  in  the  Media,  that  there  is  no  single  Thebe  that  is  not  fully 
accounted for by the Bank of Botswana.  For the record, kindly note that, 
the Bank of Botswana is not audited by the Auditor General; the Bank of 
Botswana  is  a  separate  legal  entity,  a  central  bank,    audited  by  an 
independent statutory public audit firm appointed in accordance with the 
provisions  of  Section  67  of  the  Bank  of  Botswana  Act.    These  public 
audit  firms  are  subject  to  rotation  rules,  of  both  the  lead  engagement 
partner  and  the  audit  firm  itself,  after  a  prescribed  period  of  time  in 
accordance with international best practice. 
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen  of  the  Media,  you  will  also  hear 
from  the  Director  of  Research  and  Financial  Stability,  Dr  Tshokologo 
Alex  Kganetsano,  who  will  lay  out  the  outcomes  and  explanations  for 
economic developments in 2018, as well as prospects going forward. He 
will  specifically  discuss  output,  inflation,  credit  and  interest  rates, 
 3 
exchange  rates,  as  well  as  the  main  components  of  the  balance  of 
payments and their impact on the nation’s foreign exchange reserves.  
 Following  the  review  of  economic  developments,  Dr  Kganetsano  will 
summarise  the  theme  topic  for  2018,  which  is  “Financing  Strategies  for 
Industrialisation  and  Transition  to  High  Income  Status”.    He  will  explain 
that this theme topic is a sequel to the 2016 and 2017 ones; intended to 
complement  and  further  enrich  the  policy  analysis  and  prospects  for 
success  of  the  national  industrialisation  strategy.  This  is  through 
highlighting  areas  for  improvement,  especially  relating  to  funding  and 
related institutional governance and operational effectiveness necessary 
for  beneficial  mobilisation  and  harnessing  of  financial  resources  using, 
where  relevant, cross-country  examples, such  as  Brazil, Singapore  and 
the Republic of Korea.  
 You  may  recall  that,  last  year  I  alluded  to  disharmony  or  misaligned 
nexus  between  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment  and  weak 
economic  outcomes;  specifically 
insufficient  growth 
rates,  high 
unemployment levels and income inequality, and the resulting slow pace 
towards  attainment  of  the  high-income  status.    Let  me  bring  to  your 
attention a recent study by the International Monetary Fund on  “Growth 
in Southern Africa: Issues and Reform Options”; it is not contained in the 
Annual Report; but pertinent for public discourse on the “middle-income” 
trap.  
 The  study  identified  three  factors  that  continue  to  detract  from  growth 
prospects  and  transition  to  high-income  status.  First,  the  lacklustre 
relative  export  performance  and  shrinking tradeable  sector.   In  contrast 
to countries that attained middle-income status rapidly (in Latin America 
and  South-East  Asia,  for  example),  for  Botswana,  over  the  last  few 
 4 
years,  the  private  tradeable  sector  declined  as  a  share  of  the  country’s 
GDP.  The  second  factor  relates  to  the  low  and  declining  total  factor 
productivity encompassing land, capital and labour. The third one is the 
relatively large public sector, including state-owned enterprises, with the 
resulting  sub-optimal  delivery  of  services  and  utilities,  compared  to 
middle-income peers. In their respective country assessments, the rating 
agencies, Moody’s and  S & P Global Ratings, also emphasise this last 
point,  namely, the need for a dynamic and expanded role of the private 
sector in the economy, to achieve economic diversification and inclusive 
growth.  The  combination  of  these  factors  contributes  to  declining 
competitiveness  in  the  country,  in  terms  of  access  to  infrastructure  and 
utilities, skills and, ultimately, tradeable goods and services.  
 Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen of the Media, while the analysis is 
obviously relative and involves country rankings, the Bank suggests that 
the study provides relevant issues for consideration of policy responses.  
Notably,  this  is  in  the  areas  relating  to  the  balance  between  inward 
versus  outward-looking  industrialisation  options,  land  economy  and 
management, governance and accountability frameworks of institutions, 
domestic  resources  mobilisation  and  allocative  efficiency,  capital 
markets development and skills transformation, among others.  I suggest 
that,  to  sustain  medium  to  long-term  prospects  for  the  economy, 
diversified  and  inclusive  growth  and  transition  to  high-income  status, 
policy  should  focus  on  raising  potential  growth  through  structural  and 
fiscal 
reforms,  while  maintaining  sound  macroeconomic  policy 
frameworks and a stable financial sector, as well as rebuilding buffers to 
boost  resilience.    The  2018  theme  topic  is,  therefore,  a  contribution  in 
this regard.  
  5 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  allow  me  to  introduce  to  you  my 
colleagues  here  in  the  room  and,  thereafter,  call  upon  the  Chief 
Financial Officer, Mr Daniel Loeto to kick-start the presentations.   
 I thank you for you kind attention. 
 6 
