John C Williams: The joys of spring
Remarks by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the 21st Annual Bronx Bankers Breakfast, Bronx, New York, 10 May 2019.
As prepared for delivery
 It’s an honor to be kicking off Bronx Week, and I’d like to thank Borough President Ruben Diaz,
Jr., for the kind invitation. I first visited the Bronx—and first met Ruben—back in November, when
I also spent time with students discussing their plans for the future. I was particularly impressed
by  their  talent,  energy,  and  enthusiasm,  which  is  a  true  reflection  of  this  vibrant  and  proud
community.
Today  I’m  going  to  share  some  brief  remarks  on  the  national  and  global  economy.  I’ll  then
discuss  what  that  means  for  monetary  policy  today  and  going  forward.  For  me,  the  most
interesting part of this event is hearing and responding to your questions, so please, don’t be shy
when I open the floor for discussion.
I’ve warned you that monetary policy is on the agenda, so before I go any further, I have to give
the usual Fed disclaimer that everything I say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of
the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System.
The U.S. Economy
With that out of the way, let me start by saying the U.S. economy is in a very good place. Late
last year, as the long, dark winter closed in, there were considerable jitters in financial markets,
with some observers fretting that the economy may be on the verge of a hard landing. Indeed,
there was a lot of talk about the possibility of a recession looming.
I am happy to report that the economy has emerged from the New York freeze. The sun is out,
the  tulips  and  the  cherry  blossom  are  now  in  full  bloom  and  the  picture  of  the  economy  is
similarly rosy. In the first four months of the year, the U.S. economy added over 800,000 jobs,
and the unemployment rate is now 3.6 percent—the lowest level in nearly 50 years.
The  latest  GDP  numbers  indicate  that  the  economy  remained  in  high  gear  through  the  first
quarter, with growth clocking in at an impressive 3.2 percent annual rate.
Despite this very strong economy, we are not seeing any signs of inflationary pressures. In fact,
the latest inflation data have come in lower than expected, with core inflation over the past 12
months dipping to 1.6 percent. Now, most people don’t seem that bothered by inflation that is a
touch  too  low,  but  at  the  Federal  Reserve  we  have  set  a  long-run  inflation  goal  of  2  percent.
When inflation runs persistently above or below that goal, we take that very seriously.
So  far,  the  recent  downward  movement  appears  mostly  to  reflect  normal  volatility  in  inflation
statistics.  For  example,  if  you  look  at  my  preferred  measure  of  underlying  inflation,  called
trimmed-mean inflation—which removes the most volatile price movements—it’s been running at
2 percent. This measure of inflation hasn’t shown any signs of trending up or down. That said, I
will be watching developments closely for signs of a persistent shift away from our 2 percent
long-run goal.
As I mentioned, the economy started the year with a lot of momentum. But there are reasons to
believe  that  the  surge  in  growth  won’t  persist  through  the  remainder  of  the  year.  Taking  into
account of all the indicators we follow, I anticipate a step-down of economic growth, from the 3
percent growth recorded last year to a still-solid pace of about 2-1/4 percent in 2019.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  is  good  news.  It’s  above  the  economy’s  underlying  potential,  but  not  unsustainably  so.
Healthy economic growth should in turn fuel solid job gains, higher wages for workers, and some
further declines in unemployment. The strong economy and labor market should also support
inflation returning to 2 percent, the Federal Reserve’s long-run goal.
The Global Picture
In addition to the positive data we’ve been getting for the U.S., we’ve also seen encouraging signs
that risks from global economic and financial markets are abating. Last year there were worries
that the global growth slowdown centered in China and Europe would spill over onto our shores.
This was one factor contributing to a more downbeat assessment of U.S. growth and the stock
market sell-off.
Since then, we’ve seen more positive readings on China’s economy, in part due to steps the
authorities have taken to reignite growth. And financial markets have definitely rebounded from
their winter doldrums.
Still, we’re not entirely out of the woods regarding risks from a global growth slowdown. Signs of
weakness  in  Japan,  South  Korea,  and  some  regions  of  Europe  continue,  so  I  am  particularly
vigilant about monitoring the international data. Trade tensions and ongoing uncertainty regarding
Brexit continue to present downside risks.
Monetary Policy
What  does  this  mean  for  monetary  policy? At  last  week’s  meeting,  the  Federal  Open  Market
Committee decided to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, between 2-1/4
and  2-1/2  percent.  We  also  reiterated  our  patient  approach  to  assessing  the  need  to  adjust
interest rates in the future.
In a nutshell: The economy remains on a path of healthy growth, with a very strong labor market
and without the emergence of inflationary pressures. The current setting of policy positions us
well to keep it that way.
Although my view that we are in the right place in terms of monetary policy has not changed of
late,  the  reasons  for  it  have  evolved  in  line  with  the  economic  and  financial  developments  I
sketched  out  earlier  in  my  remarks.  The  strength  of  recent  data  on  economic  activity,  the
rebound of growth in China, and the reversal in the tightening of financial markets all imply that
near-term risks to growth have receded somewhat. This has increased my confidence that the
economy remains on track for moderate growth going forward. At the same time, recent price
data reaffirm that inflationary pressures remain muted.
Conclusion
Looking  ahead,  although  the  baseline  forecast  I  laid  out  looks  very  good,  the  situation  can
change.  We  need  to  remain  vigilant  in  responding  to  evolving  economic  conditions  and  the
outlook, with our eye on sustaining the expansion, keeping the labor market strong, and fostering
price stability.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
