Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
OECD Forum on Blockchain, September 2019 
 
High-level Policy Panel Discussion on Central Bank Digital Currencies 
Remarks by Mario Marcel, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile 
 
Disruptive  technologies  in  Finance  or  “FinTech”  are  transforming  the  financial  industry  landscape,  challenging 
traditional business models. These technologies have been able to address some gaps in the traditional financial 
industry that can be grouped into five categories: Access, Speed, Cost, Transparency, and Security. 
 
Leveraging on open-source technologies and Smartphone penetration, FinTech has seen fast adoption, disrupting 
all  areas  of  the  financial  services  such  as  payments,  investments,  savings  &  lending,  insurance  and  risk 
management. 
   
One  example  of  the  innovation  across  different  financial  services  is  this  research  framework  from  the  World 
Economic  Forum.  Fintech  innovations  are  identified  and  grouped  into  clusters,  which  in  turn  are  a  result  of 
innovation triggered by common themes that cut across financial services. These themes are enabled by different 
technologies. 
 
The  main  takeaway  here  is  to  understand  the  potential  of  these  technologies  to  innovate  across  all  financial 
services and have a visual image of how this is reshaping the financial services. As this reshaping is taking place, 
the policy makers, regulators, and supervisors need to understand the forces driving this innovation wave, in order 
to assess the risks and opportunities of these new business models. 
 
 Page 1 of 11 
 Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
  Our  Central  Bank  understands  that  a  new  ecosystem  is  being  developed  and  has  responded  to  these  new 
challenges with the 2018-2022 Strategic Plan, where the disruptive technologies are one of its five main focuses.  
Specifically, we have put in place two initiatives to address FinTech challenges: the Technological Observatory and 
the TechLab.  
 
The Technological Observatory seeks to play an active role in financial technology research, assessing potential 
impacts, risks, and policy actions, as well as to strengthen coordination with other institutions. During 2018, the 
Observatory’s  work  focused  on  understanding  the  various  business  models,  risks,  and  opportunities  of  the 
domestic  FinTech  ecosystem.  Therefore,  communication  with  the  FinTech  industry  has  been  intense  through 
articulated meetings, consultation, informal briefings, seminars, workshops and publications. Internally, the work 
has focused on agreeing on the areas in which we need to build knowledge. 
 
The areas of interest are open banking, SupTech, securities and cash settlement of the CBC’s operations using DLT, 
cryptoassets  from  a  financial  stability  perspective,  digital  payments  (retail  and  cross–border,  mainly),  CBDCs, 
cybersecurity from a financial stability perspective, and Big data and digital economy. 
 
On the other hand, the TechLab’s objective is to implement in an experimental stage disruptive technologies that 
impacts cross-cutting processes within the CBC, such as cryptocurrencies, big data, artificial intelligence, and the 
   Page 2 of 11 
 
like. Currently we are experimenting with blockchain and machine learning techniques. Anyway, the TechLab was 
started only three months ago and we are also exploring initiatives with other technologies such as APIs. 
 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
  Let us talk a little bit more about the technology that brings us together, blockchain. This technology has several 
use cases for a central bank: (i) Central bank digital currencies; (ii) Financial Market Infrastructures such as large-
value  payment  systems  and  trade  repositories,  or  more  generally  RegTech  or  SupTech  implementations;  (iii) 
Issuance and lifecycle of financial instruments; and (iv) opportunities of optimization of back office processes, such 
as settlement of operations and reconciliation. 
  
Notwithstanding the potential this technology has, there are some yellow flags that need to be addressed: 
 
 a.  DLT technology is still on an early stage and there might be unidentified drawbacks. Smart contracts that 
can build on top of this technology make it significantly more powerful, but there is little experience on 
how this works in practice. 
b.  Borderless  technologies  raise  concerns  in  regulatory  compliance  across  regions.  Coordination  and 
information sharing may be especially relevant. 
c.  Proof of  Work  (PoW)  consensus  protocol  is  slow  and  needs  intensive  use  of energy.  Other  consensus 
protocols have limited use at this point: Proof of Stake or Proof of Authority. 
 Page 3 of 11 
  d.  Regulatory gaps may arise: identifying theses gaps is a central point in the exploration of the technology. 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
  
Therefore, we need to understand this technology in order to embrace its benefits and mitigate the risks that 
some use cases may involve. 
 
With that in mind, we started a Project in collaboration with our local Central Securities Depository (CSD). This 
project explores the feasibility of issuing bonds in a blockchain platform, and managing the whole life cycle of the 
bonds in this platform. Hence, settlement of primary auctions and corporate actions are done in blockchain. 
 
First, we discussed a conceptual model that would be a better fit to our regulatory framework. Secondly, two use 
cases were selected and implemented as a proof of concept (PoC). Dummy versions of our real systems simulated 
interaction with the DLT platform. Finally, a report with our conclusions will be released in November, once the 
PoC is completed and possible corrections of the conceptual models are included. 
 
  Having several other use cases that we could have implemented, why did we choose this one? The most important 
reasons are: (i) duplicity of ledgers in current systems needing reconciliation periodically; (ii) more than one entity 
access and write on the ledger, even though this conceptual model only had the Central Bank issuing, this model 
was conceived to be used by other primary issuers (this is where the business model makes more sense!); (iii) 
 Page 4 of 11 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
 
opportunities in optimization of settlement processes for issuance and corporate actions; and (iv) to study the 
feasibility of this technology (as an alternative) for the renewal of the current systems that manage our issuance 
and the lifecycle of our bonds. 
 
As  a  consequence  of  our  first  hands-on  experience  with  this  technology,  some  questions  which  are  still 
unanswered were raised during the process: 
 
a.  How  could  this  primary  market  be  integrated  with  the  secondary  market?  Could  this  same  model  be 
useful? 
b.  There is the need for further analysis of our legal framework and identify possible gaps (the PoC scope 
only has a high-level legal analysis). 
c.  When will this technology be mature enough to be considered as an alternative for critical systems? 
  
Now, I will narrow the topic of blockchain to  Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDC), which is the focus of our 
panel, and talk about the motivations, benefits and concerns. 
 
To begin with, it is important to understand that CBDCs are not new, and Central Banks have been issuing CBDCs 
since the first RTGS systems were around. These are the commercial banks’ reserves held in the RTGS systems. 
Even though this form of CBDC is not blockchain based, it is important to mention that the CBDC concept is not a 
novelty. 
 
  Page 5 of 11 
 Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
  That being said, the central banks need to have a clear motivation to issue a CBDC. These motivations will be 
different and therefore the CBDCs will be different in their design, benefits and concerns. 
 
One way of categorizing CBDCs is by their access: general purpose, or retail, and wholesale. For retail use, the 
motivations in emerging economies are mainly to reduce cash in circulation, or promote electronic payments, 
foster  financial  inclusion,  and  reduce  informality  and  tax  evasion.  On  the  other  hand,  the  motivations  for 
wholesale use are mainly efficiency and security. 
 
We could also mention cross-border payments as a motivation for either of the two categories as well. 
 
 
In terms of the benefits, I can mention the following: 
 
 a.  Some  research  indicates  that  DLT  may  enhance  market  efficiency.  DLT  registers  based  on  real  user 
identities can improve competition, price transparency and liquidity. 
b.  Crisis management  around the Zero Lower Bound. In a world of low  real interest  rates, the impact of 
unconventional monetary policies, such as QE, nominal GDP targeting and forward guidance, appears to 
be  limited (Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia and Mauro, 2013, Gagnon and Sack, 2018). Fixing negative nominal 
interest rates in a flexible way could improve the Central Banks’ toolkit (Rogoff, 2019). However, there 
 Page 6 of 11 
 are some drawbacks. The general public could interpret negative interest rates as a new tax and probably 
legislators  would  restrict  it  (Rogoff,  2019).  Also,  price  and  wage  rigidity  can  persist,  due  to  habit-
consumption, market power, organizational inertia, information frictions. 
 Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
 
Continuing with the benefits: 
 
 c. 
In a world with a widely used CBDC, commercial banks could be smaller/less systemic. CBDCs can give 
central banks more intervention tools and reduce the risk of runs (Kumhof and Noone, 2018). 
d.  Transparent balance sheets can make it easier to unwind troublesome financial institutions and divest 
their assets. 
e.  Monetary policy channels in a world with CBDCs may be faster and more powerful. Today monetary policy 
works by affecting the balance sheets of banks and some financial intermediaries, which do not pass on 
all the rate changes to final users due to market power and other frictions. If central banks can reach out 
to more and more agents (businesses, households), then their role will become ever more central and 
effective. 
 
   Page 7 of 11 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
 
Lastly, use of CBDCs could be explored as a more efficient alternative for remittances.  
 
In Chile, immigration has had a sharp increase in few years. As in other parts of the world, they face high costs for 
their remittances when using traditional methods based on a structure of correspondent entities. An alternative 
option  that  is  being  used,  although  because  of  its  nature  is  not  possible  to  have  detailed  information,  are 
remittances based on cryptoassets. While these remittances may be faster and even cheaper, they are outside of 
the  regulatory  perimeter  and  thus  their  customers  are  exposed  to  several  risks  (counterparty,  liquidity, 
operational). 
 
The cross-border use of CBDC would reap the benefits of crypto-based methods, without their risks. Certainly, this 
would require coordination between the central banks involved. 
 
 
On the other hand, some concerns have still not been fully addressed: 
 a.  Development and management costs of a CBDC, specially a retail CBDC that is available for a large number 
of people, can be substantial. Technical capacity is still not mature enough, and risks of cyberattacks are 
exacerbated. 
b.  The level of anonymity that the CBDC should have is still a matter of discussion. In digital networks it can 
be easy to identify anonymous users due to their links to non-anonymous nodes, such as large companies. 
The  public  is  already  frightened  by  how  much  sensitive  individual  information  is  stored  (NSA,  Uber, 
Google, Facebook…), it is possible that a CBDC could create anonymity concerns. 
  Page 8 of 11 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
c.  Some of these concerns end up in a discussion about which is the optimum design features: anonymous 
or pseudo-anonymous? Interest bearing? Guaranteed convertibility of bank deposits into CBDCs? 
d.  Finally,  there  are  some  additional  risks  to  take  into  account:  Reputational  risk  if  CBDC  is  not  widely 
adopted by the public, or if privately issued currencies gain more traction; Financial exclusion of the “non-
tech” persons? 
     
Even though many CBDC experiences are from developed economies such as Canada and Sweden, there are also 
some  experiments  in  developing  economies  such  as  China,  Colombia  and  Uruguay.  For  emerging  economies, 
where persons tend to be financially underserved, is CBDC the most efficient way to solve this problem? Other 
alternatives, such as fast payments solutions, can be evaluated. 
 
  Page 9 of 11 
 In conclusion: 
 
Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
  a.  Blockchain technology implies opportunities and concerns that should be carefully addressed: Which is 
the goal of technology adoption? 
b.  This is especially important in the case of CDBC: financial inclusion, response to new forms of e-money, 
facilitate wholesale payments, faster payments, cross-border payments?  
c.  CDBC does not necessarily need blockchain.  
 
Our understanding is that DLT or Blockchain technologies are more useful when several participants of a 
given system need to have access to a ledger of information and/or when participants do not necessarily 
trust each other (and therefore proof of work requirements make the register almost immutable).  
 
However, when a Central Bank issues its currency -- either in physical or digital format -- trust should be 
a given. Also is far from obvious that all market participants should have access to sensitive information 
such as all transactions in which the CBDC was used. In fact, the pilot program of Uruguay (“e-Peso”) was 
not blockchain-based. 
 
d.  There are different policies being explored and there is no “one size fits all” answer.  
e.  Nevertheless, countries could largely benefit form sharing their experiences. 
  Page 10 of 11 
   Central Bank of Chile 
September 2019 
   Page 11 of 11 
