Vitas  Vasiliauskas:  Central  banks’  policy  signals  in  informational
noise
Speech by Mr Vitas Vasiliauskas, Chairman of the Board of the Bank of Lithuania, at the fourth
Annual Research Conference "Central Bank Communications: From Mystery to Transparency",
hosted by the National Bank of Ukraine in collaboration with the National Bank of Poland, Policy
Panel 2 "Central banks’ policy signals in informational noise", Kyiv, 23 May 2019.
Ladies and Gentlemen: Good morning!
 First of all, let me thank the organizers for inviting me to participate in this conference. It is a
pleasure to speak on today’s panel.
Before I begin, I would like to take a moment to recognize the achievements of the National Bank
of Ukraine in enhancing its transparency. As I am sure you all aware, at the beginning of this year
the Bank was awarded the prestigious international Transparency Award for making impressive
efforts to increase its openness, including clear communication about the banking system and
communicating monetary policy. I wish to express my congratulations on this accomplishment
and for being on the right track.
As the Governor of the Bank of Lithuania and a member of the ECB Governing Council, today I
will  talk  about  communicating  monetary  policy  –  and  not  only  about  the  ECB  experience,  but
central bank communication in general – as part of the larger policy toolkit.
We’ve just heard stimulating presentations regarding the effects of forward guidance. The latter
has  become  an  essential  tool  to  preserve  an  accommodative  stance  in  the  low  interest  rate
environment that we have been witnessing in many advanced economies.
Forward guidance – in any form it comes – is used to influence market expectations by clearly
communicating  about  possible  future  policy  moves.  This  helps  markets,  businesses  and
consumers  to  better  formulate  expectations  about  future  movements  and  adjust  their  actions
accordingly.
We  have  to  admit  that,  in  times  when  the  standard  monetary  policy  instruments  have  been
bounded, there is a need for a supplementary tool to help preserve market expectations, primarily
about continuous accommodation in the economy. As such, communication about the possible
trajectory of monetary policy tools (first, interest rates; later – also asset purchases) has become
a distinct monetary policy tool unto itself.
To  grasp  the  significance  of  this  operational  shift,  we  can  recall  that  communication  has  not
always been an item on the central banks’ agenda. Until not so long ago, central banks were
rather secretive institutions: policy decisions were communicated in a very reserved way, to say
the  least.  For  example,  the  US  Federal  Reserve  used  to  be  silent  even  about  interest  rate
decisions, leaving the outside world to use market reactions to discern those decisions.
This approach – that is looking from the so-called “high priests’” perspective – started changing
back in the 90s. Since then, central banks have been gradually opening up: for instance, in the
mid-90s – I would like to emphasize – only since the mid-90s – the US Federal Reserve started
to publicly announce its interest rate decisions in real time – something that policymakers had
previously  deemed  unnecessary.  The  ECB,  for  its  part,  has  not  always  been  as  transparent
about monetary policy as it is now. For instance, the accounts of monetary policy meetings of the
Governing Council began to be published publicly just a few years ago.
So, what has changed? I suppose that there are two main factors to consider.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
First, while being independent institutions, central banks have become increasingly accountable
to  the  general  public.  This  accountability  leads  to  building  public  confidence  through  more
intensive  communication  about  monetary  policy:  explaining  decisions  based  on  the  economic
situation as well as on policymakers’ goals. In essence, this helps strengthen the perception that
a central bank is able to fulfil its mandate of ensuring price stability. In other words, the purpose
of more in-depth central bank communication is not only to reduce uncertainty, but also to bolster
central bank credibility.
Second,  the  post-crisis  low  interest  rate  environment  laid  the  ground  for  central  bank
communication  to  play  a  key  role,  and  also  for  it  to  become  much  more  forward-looking.
Economic  agents  act  in  a  forward-looking  way,  but  they  must  manage  a  vast  amount  of
information surrounded by a lot of uncertainty. As such, it is important to guide them to formulate
appropriate expectations. Ultimately, a better understanding of policy makers’ actions enhances
the transmission of central bank policies.
Hence, we started to use forward guidance as a monetary policy tool in and of itself. And, as you
can see from the survey results in the graph, many central bank governors and academics claim
that  central  bank  communication  has  been  intensifying.  The  use  of  this  tool,  moreover,  is
widespread: for example, all major central banks globally used it in order to achieve adequate
accommodation in the past decade.
Having  discussed  the  aims  of  forward  guidance,  I  would  now  like  to  touch  upon  two  related
issues, namely, its effectiveness and its future.
In the previous session, we heard discussions on the effectiveness of forward guidance. I can
affirm  that,  among  policymakers,  there  is  no  doubt  that  forward  guidance  helps  to  steer
expectations. Yet, the effects of forward guidance are not as straightforward as we might like
them to be. Unsurprisingly, the results depend on a few things: first, on the particular form of
forward guidance chosen; second, on the central bank’s credibility; and, finally, on agents’ private
information and the general level of informational noise.
Although in practice forward guidance is rarely perceived in such pure terms, here I would like to
distinguish between the so-called Delphic and Odyssean types. Delphic guidance is a statement
of how policymakers see interest likely to evolve, but it makes no promises about future policy
actions. In Odyssean guidance, by contrast, policymakers commit to some (contingent) actions
in the future.
The horizon of Odyssean guidance can be state-contingent, have an end date, or even be left
open-ended.  For  example,  currently,  the  ECB’s  forward  guidance  is  that  interest  rates  are
expected  to  remain  unchanged  at  least  through  the  end  of  this  year.  Research  indicates  that
different types of forward guidance differ systematically in how they impact on expectations and
reduce  disagreements  in  the  markets  about  the  future  path  of  interest  rates.  More  detailed,
specific forward guidance – such as time- and state-contingent Odyssean guidance – seems to
be more effective in guiding expectations.
Intuitively, this effect makes sense: such central bank communication tones down some of the
informational  noise  and  diminishes  uncertainty.  Nonetheless,  this  statement  should not be
interpreted as advocating any particular type of guidance, as the effects should depend on the
interest-rate environment in which we are living.
Thus, in times of low interest rates, we strengthen forward guidance and make it more explicit.
When  interest  rates  are  not  bounded  (and  are,  therefore,  at  higher  levels),  we  can  rely  on  a
‘lighter’ form of guidance.
Going further, any discussion on forward guidance would be incomplete without touching upon
the controversy regarding “who is leading who” in this “game” of exchanging information. Is the
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
central bank leading the financial markets, or have central banks become overly dependent on
the market reaction function? In other words, are we “catering” to the markets? Meaning, are we
putting the needs of financial markets – that is, mainly private investors – before the needs of the
real economy as a whole (price stability target)?
There are no simple answers to these questions. On the one hand, central banks have to take
into  account  every  nuance  in  the  economy,  including  how  financial  markets  might  process
implicit and explicit signals from the central bank. On the other hand, central banks should not
solely rely on how the markets may or may not react.
We  are  all  sailing  in  unchartered  waters:  the  current  high  level  of  accommodation  is
unconventional, and we see that financial markets may have a heightened sensitivity to changes
in  monetary  policy.  Therefore,  now  that  the  major  central  banks  are  starting  monetary  policy
normalization,  we  –  policymakers  –  are  extra  careful,  as  we  want  to  avoid  destabilizing
expectations that could prompt a negative market reaction. By a negative reaction, I mean that
we could observe more rapid interest-rate increases in the markets than we consider necessary
to reach our policy target.
This  is  why,  with  respect  to  forward  guidance,  balancing  the  pace  and  rhetoric  of  policy
normalization  with  potential  market  reactions  is  crucial,  even  though  such  caution  could  be
interpreted by some as “catering” to financial markets.
Finally, we arrive at the issue of the future use of forward guidance. As you can see from the
graph, most scholars and central bank governors believe that forward guidance, in one form or
another, will remain in the monetary policy toolkit. The survey is from 2016, and I believe this
convention is even stronger today.
Is forward guidance here to stay, then? I believe it is. In what form? The answer to that question
will depend, to a large extent, on the interest-rate environment. Moreover, the form itself is not so
essential. The critical point is to remain open to the public; in this case, to hold steady central
banks’ communication about the future trajectory of policy decisions.
In  my  view,  there  is  no  reason  to  remove  a  policy  tool  that  has  proven  useful,  even  if  the
environment in which it was introduced evolves. The key role of forward guidance might lessen if
standard tools are in play again. However, removing forward guidance from the toolkit – even in
times when the effective lower bound is not binding – might be perceived as unwelcome closing-
off in attitude.
Markets  are  now  used  to  a  certain  amount  of  communication.  Reducing  this  communication
could run counter to the goal of transparency and, as a result, diminish the credibility required for
effective monetary policy.
Moreover,  less  communication  could  be  perceived  as  a  negative  signal,  and  thus  cause
unwanted market reactions. The current monetary policy normalization is unprecedented, and
well-structured  communication  (providing  guidance  on  how  the  central  bank  will  proceed)  is
needed to smooth the process.
I believe that forward guidance has become an effective supplement to conventional tools; should
we need another monetary easing cycle soon, conventional instruments would arguably play a
less prominent role than in previous downturns.
To  wrap  up,  I  think  it  is  safe  to  say  that  central  bank  communication  has  become  a  proper
monetary policy tool. The statements following monetary policy meetings in every major central
bank  gather  a  substantial  attention,  and  watchers  analyse  every  sentence  –  down  to  the  last
word.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Consequently,  any  change  in  communication  –  either  what  is  said  or  what  is  left  unsaid  –  is
immediately  noticed  and  widely  interpreted.  To  water  down  the  statements  into  less  detailed,
more “reserved” language would be, in my opinion, going backwards in terms of the pursuit of
greater transparency and credibility. It is worth bearing in mind that the latter is directly linked to
achieving the core price stability target.
Thank you.
   4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
