Ed  Sibley:  Monetary  and  financial  stability  -  the  implications  for
prudential supervision
Speech by Mr Ed Sibley, Deputy Governor (Prudential Regulation) of the Central Bank of Ireland,
at the 46th OeNB Economics Conference "European Economic and Monetary Union: the first
and the next 20 years", in cooperation with SUERF, Vienna, 2 May 2019.
Introduction
Good afternoon, it is a pleasure to speak to you today.
 The theme of the conference ‘European Economic and Monetary Union: the first and the next 20
years’ gives us wide scope to share some of our thoughts. We have much to learn from the last
twenty years.
If we look back to 2007, problems had started to crystallise and accelerated in 2008, particularly
post  Lehmans,  as  market  participants  retreated  towards  safe  assets.  This  tendency  was
intensified by the complexity and lack of transparency in the financial system. In other words, due
to  the  complexity  of  the  market,  participants  could  not  establish  with  confidence  which  risks
would end up with whom and how they might be exposed to the ultimate holder of certain types
of  risks.  Consequently,  the  market  moved  away  from  many  higher  risks.  This  included  Irish
banks with their large property exposures. The move away from the higher risks due to concerns
about solvency took the form of a withdrawal of short-term liquidity, leading to the failure of the
Irish banks and many others.
1
The crisis exposed a long list of contributing factors including:
Underestimation of the riskiness of securities created with financial engineering;
Misaligned incentives;
Excessive funding of long term assets with short-term liabilities;
Ratings agencies failures;
Flawed assumptions regarding house prices;
Elevated household debt;
A belief by bankers that their institutions were too big to fail;
Global imbalances;
Appropriate accounting of financial assets;
Excessively loose monetary policy;
Inadequate or flawed micro and macropudential regulation; and
Deep flaws in supervision.
The  crisis  also  highlighted  the  fundamental  importance  of  financial  stability  to  protecting
consumers and investors and that it is a collective responsibility to safeguard financial stability.
Of the financial firms themselves, of regulators and supervisors of all segments of the financial
sector, of central banks, of macroprudential authorities, of resolution authorities, and indeed of
governments to ensure the right legislative and institutional frameworks and incentives exist for a
stable financial system.
And the architecture of Banking Union has been built to reflect this collective responsibility.
The  global  monetary  policy  response  since  2008,  for  example,  has  dampened  volatility  and
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
addressed system-wide liquidity concerns.
The  continued  monetary  accommodation  has  –  in  addition  to  incentivising  banks  to  lend  –
afforded  banks  the  time  and  space  to  build  buffers,  repair  their  balance  sheets  and  deal  with
legacy issues.
In his remarks, Andreas mentioned the interaction of monetary policy and macroprudential policy.
I will pick up the baton there.
I will conclude by giving my thoughts on Banking Union. But in the first part of my remarks today I
will endeavor to address how new measures to address financial stability have changed how we
supervise  banks  and  discuss  how  in  turn,  our  supervision  promotes  and  contributes  to
safeguarding financial stability.
The  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  has  a  wider  and  more  diverse  mandate  than  most  Central
Banks.  We  are  including  the  National  Central  Bank,  National  Competent  Authority  for  credit
institutions,  investment  firms,  funds  and  insurance  firms,  National  Macroprudential  Authority,
National Resolution Authority and have important roles in conduct, consumer protection and Anti-
Money Laundering (AML).
Given  this  wide  mandate  and  relatively  large  financial  sector  in  Ireland,  we  therefore  must
consider financial stability in a holistic fashion across different segments of the financial sector.
Moreover, given the nature of financial services operating in Ireland, we necessarily must take a
wider  European  and  global  view.  We  concern  ourselves,  directly  and  through  our  work  in  the
regulatory and supervisory ecosystem, with the functioning of the financial system with the aim of
ensuring that it is serving the needs of the economy, consumers and investors.
My key message today is a comprehensive approach to financial stability is needed – not just at
national level, but also at a European level. Not just for banks, but also other segments of the
financial  system.  This  will  require  closer  coordination,  more  information  sharing  and  deeper
embedding of macro-financial analysis and policy into prudential supervision. More also needs to
be done in Europe with respect to resolution, deposit insurance, capital markets union and the
cultures within financial institutions. I will return to this towards the end of my remarks. Lastly, the
effect  of  the  “regulatory  pendulum”  has  been  a  feature  of  financial  booms  and  busts.    It  is
important  then  that  we  do  not  let  memories  fade.    We  must  recognise  the  important  role  of
strong  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  in  delivering  a  resilient  and  stable  financial
2
system.
Macroprudential policy, financial stability, and prudential supervision
To  promote  financial  stability,  macroprudential  policy  aims  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the
financial system so that it can withstand adverse movements in credit and property prices, and
other macroeconomic shocks.
Policy  measures  are  forward-looking  and  seek  to  reduce  the  potential  for  imbalances  to
accumulate, given that they could lead to financial distress.
Intermediate objectives are:
To prevent excessive credit growth and leverage;
To prevent excessive maturity mismatch and market illiquidity;
To limit direct and indirect exposure concentration; and
To reduce the potential for systemically important banks to adopt destabilising strategies and
3
to mitigate the impact of such actions.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
These are also of fundamental concern for microprudential supervisors – we just look at it from
an individual institutional perspective.
4
In the main, supervisors are involved in National Macroprudential Authorities.  But the advent of
macroprudential policy has also coincided with a change in banking supervision.
Macroeconomic assessments
First, macroeconomic assessments have become a fundamental component of microprudential
supervision. Stress testing, for example, is now a key tool of supervisors with the recent EU-wide
banking sector stress test showing the variety of macroeconomic variables considered including
5
  Stress  tests  involve  macro
GDP,  inflation,  unemployment,  asset  prices  and  interest  rates.
considerations in identifying risks and setting out a plausible scenario while the results showing
how banks are affected are a key input into setting individual bank capital requirements.
Business model analysis also takes macro-financial factors into account when assessing risks
faced by banks. Last year, for example, ECB Banking Supervision published a thematic review
on  profitability  and  business  models,  which  highlighted  that  low  profitability  and  pressure  on
revenues  from  the  economic  environment,  among  other  factors,  affect  the  European  banking
sector.  The findings from the thematic review feed into the Supervisory Review and Evaluation
Process (SREP).
Capital requirements
6
Second,  broadly  speaking,  capital  levels  have  increased  markedly  in  Europe  over  the  past
decade. At the end of 2009, the average Tier 1 capital ratio stood at 10.2 per cent while at end-
2018, this had improved to 16.3 per cent.  Today, capital requirements of banks are decided by
8
different authorities and institutions.
7
This  reflects  the  various  elements  that  need  to  be  taken  into  account  when  assessing  bank
capital  requirements.
Different  macroeconomic  and  financial  cycles,  different  structures  of  economies  and  different
structures  of  financial  systems,  among  other  factors,  justify  different  capital  requirements.
Banking  union  does  not  render  these  differences  inconsequential  –  just  as  single  supervision
does not mean that every institution has the same capital requirements, banking union does not
mean that every banking system has the same level of capital requirements.
Thus,  capital  requirements    are  determined  through  decisions  taken  by  microprudential
supervisors  with  respect  to  pillar  I  and  pillar  II  requirements,  but  also  through  the  polices
implemented  by  macroprudential  authorities  with  respect  to  the  Other  Systemically  Important
Institutions  (O-SII)  buffer  and  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  (CCyB),  for  example. Another
aspect of banks’ capital requirements that is relevant is the Minimum Requirement for own funds
and Eligible Liabilities (MREL), which is decided upon by resolution authorities.
Supervisors must therefore cooperate and coordinate effectively with macroprudential authorities
and resolution authorities – whilst respecting their differing mandates – to ensure the resilience
and stability of the banking system.
Borrower based measures
Third,  borrower  based  measures  such  as  loan-to-income  limits  (LTI)  and  loan-to-value  limits
(LTV) make both banks and borrowers more resilient.
Increased Co-ordination
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Wider institutional fora are important when thinking about the joint responsibility ‘authorities’ have
9
for financial stability. These vary in composition and mandate at national level.
At  European  level,  the  ESRB  was  established  in  2010  to  oversee  the  financial  system  of  the
European  Union  (EU)  and  prevent  and  mitigate  systemic  risk.  It  is  an  important  forum  which
brings together representatives of EU institutions, Governors of National Central Banks, and high
level representatives of the National Competent Authorities.
10
For the euro area, the Macroprudential Forum is composed of the Governing Council  and  the
Supervisory Board of the ECB and it is a platform for regular, high-level discussions, bringing
together microprudential and macroprudential perspectives from across Europe.
11
The advent of macroprudential policy has therefore coincided with and reinforced an important
change  in  thinking  about  microprudential  supervision.  This  is  embedded  in  our  framework  for
supervision and our tools for stress testing.
Effective cooperation and coordination given the multi-level and joint responsibility is critical to
preserve financial stability.
Resolution, financial stability and prudential supervision
The establishment of national resolution authorities and the Single Resolution Board has been an
important  institutional  development  since  the  crisis.  However,  the  introduction  of  the  Bank
Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) and Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) goes well
beyond this, and has also had a wider impact on how we supervise banks.
The BRRD was introduced to provide authorities with a regulatory toolkit to manage bank failure,
with  the  objectives  of  ensuring  the  continuity  of  critical  economic  functions,  minimising  the
impact on the economy and financial system, avoiding the destabilisation of financial markets
and limiting the cost to taxpayers.
Resolution is therefore fundamentally a financial stability issue.
The BRRD has also importantly changed how we supervise banks.
Resolution  authorities  have  the  primary  responsibility  for  resolution  planning  and  execution.
Nonetheless,  supervisors  should  be  actively  considering  the  resolvability  of  a  firm,  alongside
financial  resources  (for  example,  supervisors  review  institutions’  internal  capital  and  liquidity
adequacy assessment processes), business model sustainability and governance, culture and
risk  management.  Ultimately,  whether  a  firm  can  be  resolved  should  be  reflected  in  our
supervisory risk appetite.
The supervisor is consulted on resolution plans, prepared by resolution authorities, which gives
us  a  deeper  knowledge  on 
internal  and  external
interdependencies  (i.e.  essential  services  etc),  IT  systems,  access  to  financial  market
infrastructures,  preferred  resolution  strategies,  and  separability  to  name  just  some  of  the
contents. Moreover, supervisors should be actively working with resolution authorities to address
impediments to resolvability.  This is not without its challenges, but if a bank is only surviving
because it is not resolvable, it is not viable, and requires appropriate supervisory intervention
legal  structure,  critical 
functions, 
Supervisors now also review recovery plans, prepared by banks which map out what they will do
if they get into difficulty.
We now assess detailed recovery options, scope and timelines for action for each bank.
We have financial impact assessments and feasibility assessments which include financial,
operational,  reputational,  legal  and  business  model  risks,  as  well  as  a  consideration  of  a
12
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
much wider range of factors.
Plans  are  required  to  include  the  assumptions  underlying  effects,  governance  and
implementation,  impact  on  critical  shared  services,  critical  functions  and  core  business
lines,  impact  on  stakeholders  and  systemic  consequences,  communications  plans,  and
preparatory measures.
Last  year,  ECB  Banking  Supervision  undertook  a  review  of  recovery  plans  to  learn  from  best
practice and experience to help further shape operational success of plans going forward.
Whilst much has been achieved, there is still considerable room for improvement in terms of
feasibility, credibility and options for recovery.
This new EU recovery and resolution framework is not a panacea. It remains a work in progress.
But important work in progress.
Much work therefore remains to be done to ensure financial stability going forward.
The  measures  introduced  to  date  however,  have  already  changed  how  we  supervisors  think
about risk and risk mitigation.
Non-bank financial intermediation, financial stability and prudential supervision
To maintain financial stability, we cannot solely focus on banks.
Non-bank  finance  has  become  an  increasingly  important  source  of  financing  of  economic
activity. Since the crisis in 2008, globally (as reported by the Financial Stability Board (FSB)),
banks’ share of total global financial assets has declined from 45% to 39%, as so-called ‘OFIs’ or
other financial intermediaries take larger shares (from 26% to 31%).
13
This  evolution  can  bring  with  it  different  types  of  systemic  risk  which  can  threaten  financial
stability, be they via direct exposures or indirect exposures – for example when common assets
are held or move together.
Just one salient example of this is Commercial Real Estate (CRE).
14
The size, interconnectedness and use of high leverage makes CRE important for financial
stability,  and  hence  important  for  supervisors.  This  is  particularly  important  in  today’s
monetary policy environment with low interest rates and search for yield dynamics which are
increasingly pushing up prices.
On the one hand, the fact that CRE financing is moving outside domestic banking systems
is  positive  for  financial  stability  –  potential  losses  can  be  shared  more  widely,  liquidity  is
increased and foreign investors may exit an overheating market sooner, thereby dampening
a boom.
On the other hand, given growing interconnectedness boom-bust cycles could be amplified
as  CRE  markets  become  more  synchronised  globally. Authorities  need  to  be  ever  more
vigilant in monitoring leverage and maturity mismatches of non-bank entities.
Forthcoming  research  by  staff  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  highlights  these  risks  and
vulnerabilities  and  that  shocks  to  market-based  finance  can  be  a  source  of  disruption  of
services to the real economy in and of itself.
15
16
What does this mean for supervision?
It means all sectoral supervisors must have a wider view of the financial system in which
firms are operating.
It means supervisors must increasingly focus on macro-financial dynamics.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
It  means  financial  stability  assessments  must  be  fully  embedded  in  supervisory  risks
frameworks.
It means that where National Competent Authorities for banking are separate from funds or
insurance for example, they must cooperate more intensively.
This is not easy to achieve.
However  to  maintain  financial  stability  we  must  take  a  holistic  perspective  and  pursue  an
integrated approach. This is important to ensure that the entire financial system serves the best
interests of consumers and wider society.
Banking Union and CMU
So where does this leave us?
Much progress has been made to increase financial stability in the EU and euro area, initially with
the establishment of the European System of Financial Supervision encompassing the European
Supervisory Authorities and the ESRB, and then with the establishment of the Banking Union –
notably  with  the  establishment  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  and  Single
Resolution Mechanism.
The first 20 years of EMU have been chequered; the culmination of a 30-year upswing in the
global financial cycle, and the worst economic crisis since the 30’s.
17
The crisis resulted in many important legislative and institutional innovations, with the introduction
of the SSM and SRM being the most visible.
However, the job is not yet complete.
To list a few areas of priority:
Significant work is required in the banking sector to ensure adequate risk reduction in the
level of non-performing loans and a build-up of MREL.
The issue of liquidity in resolution will need to be addressed within Banking Union to ensure
there is a lender of last resort to provide liquidity support if and when required.
More is needed to ensure that banks are resolvable without recourse to the taxpayer.
Therefore, the second pillar of banking union remains incomplete.
The  third  pillar  of  the  banking  union  –  a  European  deposit  insurance  scheme  (EDIS)  –
remains missing. Deposit protection should transfer to the European level, as has already
happened with banking supervision and bank resolution.
Completing Capital Markets Union (CMU) should also be a priority. Deep and liquid capital
markets  have  the  potential  for  private  risk-sharing  to  smooth  economic  shocks,  thus
increasing stability.
So,  much  has  changed  for  prudential  supervision  in  response  to  the  measures  enacted  to
preserve financial stability going forward.
And what does the next twenty years have in store?
Well, a lot of work: from regulators and supervisors of all segments of the financial sector, from
central  banks,  from  macroprudential  authorities,  from  resolution  authorities,  and  indeed  from
governments to ensure the right legislative and institutional frameworks and incentives exist for a
stable financial system.
We  have  the  infrastructure  but  the  effectiveness  of  the  interaction  between  macro  and  micro
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
needs to be continually worked on, reinforced and improved. Without effectiveness of both, the
financial system is prone to excessive risk taking, short-termism, and failure. This does not serve
the longer term needs of the European economy nor its citizens.
Thank you, I look forward to the discussion.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
See David Aikman, Jonathan Bridges, Anil Kashyap and Caspar Siegert, ‘Would  macroprudential  regulation
have prevented the last crisis?’ Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 747.
See Dagher, Jihad, ‘Regulatory cycles: Revisiting the Political Economy of Financial Crises.’ IMF working Paper
(18/8).
See details on macroprudential policy here.
See List of national macroprudential authorities and national designated authorities in EU Member States and
List of National Supervisors.
See Adverse scenario for the EBA 2018 EU-wide banking sector stress test.
See SSM thematic review on profitability and business models.
See EBA Risk Dashboard Q3 2013 and EBA Risk Dashboard Q4 2018.
See List of national macroprudential authorities and national designated authorities in EU Member States and
List of National Supervisors.
See List of national macroprudential authorities and national designated authorities in EU Member States and
List of National Supervisors.
See details of ESRB governance here.
See details of Macroprudential Forum here.
See ECB Banking Supervision Report on Recovery Plans, July 2018.
See FSB Global Monitoring Report on Non-Bank Financial Intermediation 2018.
See ESRB Report on vulnerabilities in the EU commercial real estate sector, November 2018.
See ‘Non-bank involvement in the Irish commercial property market,’ Central Bank of Ireland Financial Stability
Note (forthcoming). 
Ibid.
See ‘Europe and the euro 20 years on,’ address by Mario Draghi, at Laurea Honoris Causa in Economics by
University of Sant’Anna, Pisa, 15 December 2018.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
