  21.03.2019 
 Closing remarks 
Event on the “Impact of the new law on real estate credit”/PWC 
Margarita Delgado 
Deputy Governor 
 
  Good afternoon,  
I would like to thank PWC for kindly inviting me to speak at the close of today’s event on 
the new real estate credit law. I shall try to speak about the most innovative features of the 
new law from the supervisor’s standpoint, not dwelling too long on the details of the legal 
changes introduced, as I am sure that they have been widely discussed over the course of 
the morning. 
Specifically, I shall focus on the three features of the new law that strike me as particularly 
important from a supervisory viewpoint: (i) the emphasis given to customer protection, (ii) 
the need to ensure legal certainty for the mortgage market to function properly and (iii) the 
growing importance of credit conditions. I shall also refer to the potential short and medium-
term consequences of this law for access to owner-occupied housing, and shall conclude 
with some thoughts on how the new macroprudential tools may shape the way we supervise 
certain banking businesses, notably real estate lending. 
 Introduction 
  As we know only too well, access to home ownership is an issue of great concern to Spanish 
society.  Worldwide,  Spain  has  traditionally  been  among  the  countries  with  the  highest 
owner-occupancy rates. Although this rate has declined from the peak reached in 2002, it 
is still higher than in other European countries. 
Obviously,  I  am  not  going  to  analyse  here  our  cultural  preference  for  home  ownership, 
although I will say that, in my opinion, there are both positive and negative aspects to this. 
On the positive side, ownership affords households greater stability and financial security 
 3/15 
 for retirement. As a matter of fact, our home often represents the main part of our “savings” 
when the time comes for us to retire. Evidently, this tendency also has a less positive side. 
For instance, it is an obstacle to personal and professional mobility at different stages of life 
and reduces the proportion of savings we hold in the form of financial products.  
At any rate, buying a home is one of the most important financial decisions in a person’s life 
and, in many cases, our biggest investment, which normally requires financing and means 
entering into a long-term payment commitment with a lending institution. As the financial 
crisis  has  painfully  reminded  us,  this  long-term  commitment  is  a  potential  source  of 
problems at times of financial instability or job insecurity. 
  Let me remind you that the mortgage market has historically given millions of individuals 
access to owner-occupied housing. Also worth mentioning is the fact that mortgage lending 
fared relatively well during the crisis, with the average default rate of residential mortgages 
remaining below 6% at all times. In contrast, that observed in the real estate development 
and  construction  segment  reached  levels  of  more  than  36%.  Therefore,  although  it  may 
seem  obvious,  when  we  talk  about  default  rates,  we  are  not  referring  to  household 
mortgages,  but  primarily to  real  estate  development  exposures  and to  financing  for  land 
purchases and other real estate business activities. To use an English expression, we are 
referring to what is known as “pipeline risk”.  
However, despite the relatively favourable behaviour of residential mortgages, the financial 
crisis has clearly exposed certain weaknesses in the mortgage market which need to be 
addressed and which have had a painful social impact and financial consequences that still 
linger on.  
We must also recognise that there were highly questionable banking practices before and 
during  the  crisis.  In  many  cases,  bank  managers  introduced  perverse  incentives  for 
mortgage sales, which led to the outcome that is all too familiar.  
4/15 
    In  recent  years,  in  addition  to  the  dramatic  social  and  economic  situation,  we  have 
witnessed  a  period  of  unprecedented  litigiousness  and  legal  uncertainty.  Much  of  this 
litigiousness has notably centred on the mortgage market, according to the complaints data 
of the Banco de España.  
  A case in point here are floor clauses. The number of complaints filed through the ad hoc 
system established by RDL 1/2017 has come to almost 1.2 million, with refunds amounting 
to more than €2,300 million to date. This high level of litigiousness is also apparent in the 
courts of justice. 
 5/15 
 It  is  worth  remembering  that  litigiousness  and  the  attendant  uncertainty  is  not  only  very 
detrimental to banks, but also negative for the customer. Uncertainty means that sometimes 
it is impossible for the costs and risks of a transaction to be known, which may have the 
effect of freezing up the market.  
Banks can react to legal uncertainty in two ways. First, by limiting or reducing the number 
of transactions, which ultimately limits access to credit. Second, by increasing the cost of 
new loans, in order to cover the cost of potential litigation. Of course, if we apply this to the 
real  estate  market,  the  result  is  that  access  to  housing  becomes  more  difficult,  when, 
paradoxically, this is precisely what has to be protected. 
In this context, the Banco de España takes a favourable view of the legal certainty provided 
by the new real estate law. In our opinion, as well as transposing Directive 2014/17/EU and 
thus removing the risk of financial penalties, the law introduces measures to safeguard and 
protect bank customers and restores legal certainty, essential for the proper functioning of 
the mortgage market.  
 Customer protection and legal certainty 
  The law is based on the asymmetrical nature of the contractual relationship between lender 
and borrower, which is not addressed simply by providing the customer with information 
and  advice.  The  law  requires  the  dominant  party  to  assume  added  responsibility,  as  a 
professional, in its conduct vis-à-vis the borrower.  
In particular, the law regulates the documentation that the borrower must be provided with 
in  advance  of  the  date  of  signing  and  specifies  the  customer’s  right  to  advice  from  the 
notary. Moreover, it sets limits on the remuneration policy applicable to staff who assess 
6/15 
  solvency  and  sell  mortgages  and,  lastly,  requires  such  staff  to  have  a  minimum  level  of 
knowledge. 
I would like to underline that the new law, which protects customers by ensuring that (i) they 
are fully informed in a timely way by trained staff, (ii) the contractual clauses applied are 
clear and comprehensible, (iii) the product is genuinely adapted to the customer’s needs 
and  (iv)  there  are  no  hidden  charges,  is  precisely  helping  to  ensure  legal  certainty  and 
significantly  reducing  litigation  risks,  which,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  entail  costs  which 
ultimately make loans more expensive for the customer.  
I believe that customer protection, far from hindering the business and profitability of banks, 
is  central  to  a  banking  business  model  that  is  viable  and  sustainable  in  the  long  term. 
Evidently,  in  economic  terms,  the  cost  of  litigation  and  its  very  negative  impact  on  the 
reputation of the entire sector, far exceed any hypothetical profit that individual banks might 
have obtained through highly dubious practices.  
On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  stressed  that  only  through  ethical  conduct  towards  their 
customers can banks recover, in the medium term, their reputation and their customers’ 
trust, an essential asset that takes much effort and time to build up and which, unfortunately, 
can be lost in no time.  
Against this background, it is important to point out that there needs to be a cultural change 
in the way banks relate to their customers. Banks must integrate customer protection in the 
risk appetite framework and in the three lines of defence.  
Of  course,  as  with  all  cultural  change,  to  be  successfully  implemented,  it  must  begin  at 
senior management level. In order to be able to develop and implement this new culture, it 
is essential for the governing bodies to be committed and actively involved in aspects such 
as  the  design  and  governance  of  the  products  sold  by  banks,  as  well  as  in  training  and 
changes to incentive mechanisms for sales staff.  
 Credit standards: ability to pay vs. value of collateral. 
Apart from the strengthening of transparency and protection of customers, I would like to 
mention an aspect of the law which seems to me especially significant from a supervisory 
viewpoint.  Specifically,  the  law  requires  lenders  to  assess  the  solvency  of  potential 
borrowers,  sureties  and  guarantors  in  depth  before  entering  into  loan  agreements.  This 
quires  them  to  evaluate,  among  other  matters,  their  employment  situation,  present  and 
future income, assets, available savings, and any other fixed expenditure or commitment 
they may have already assumed.  
Of course, as a supervisor I fully agree with all these requirements, which are absolutely 
necessary  and  obvious.  However  it  is  somewhat  disheartening  to  have  to  see  them 
specifically  mentioned  in  legislation.  The  text  of  this  law  shows  that  on  many  occasions 
institutions  relaxed  their  standards  and  basic  principles  excessively,  in  order  to  carry  on 
lending. That does not say much for us supervisors either, since we did not react sufficiently 
to the weakness of credit standards. 
 7/15 
 The crisis has clearly shown that the fundamental consideration when granting a loan is not 
the value of the collateral, but the borrower’s ability to pay. There should be no need to 
mention that whenever a loan is granted it is necessary to consider the probability that the 
principal and agreed interest will be paid, not the supposed quality of the collateral.  
A  property  bubble,  like  the  one  seen  in  Spain,  can  only  occur  if  sufficient  financing  is 
available. Hence the responsibility of the banking industry, and by extension the supervisor, 
to avoid another similar bubble in future. Clearly, if the analysis carried out prior to granting 
a  loan  is  based  excessively  on  the  value  of  the  collateral  supplied,  there  is  no  effective 
practical limit to credit growth, at least as long as the value of collateral also continues to 
rise. 
  Certainly, if the amount of financing granted is close to the value of the property or, worse 
still, based on expectations of future growth in the value of the dwelling, the consequences 
will be even more dire.  
In  this  respect,  we  can  see  in  the  chart  how  two  ratios  that  are  highly  relevant  from  a 
supervisory viewpoint have changed since 2004. The blue line represents the median loan 
as a proportion of the appraisal value (the so-called “loan to value” - LTV), while the red line 
shows the median loan as a proportion of the transfer price, according to the transfer deed. 
The chart shows that the ratio between the median loan amount and the transfer value of 
the dwelling as stated in the transfer deed was very high and rising during the years leading 
up to the crisis. After the crisis, the ratio declined gradually, until it stabilised at around 80%. 
By contrast, the LTV was much more stable over the same period.  
The differences between these two ratios reveal two things. First, that the appraisal value 
was  clearly  higher  than  the  transfer  value  before  the  crisis,  the  difference  between them 
having subsequently been reduced. Second, that the appraisal value has been more cyclical 
than the transfer value: it rose more steeply during the upturn and fell to a greater extent 
8/15 
  during the recession. In my view we can conclude that, to ensure greater stability in the 
property market, we need rigorous, prudent and, thus, less volatile appraisals.  
Naturally, the importance of the appraisal value was at its greatest when it justified, to a 
large  extent, the granting  of  credit. This is  another  basic  and,  therefore,  essential lesson 
which is also reflected in the new law, in so far as it requires that the solvency assessment 
must not be based primarily on the value of the collateral or on the hypothesis that the value 
of such collateral will increase.  
Needless to say, had the debtor’s solvency and ability to pay been strictly used as the main 
consideration when granting credit, as proposed in the new law, this would have helped 
curb the runaway growth of credit before the crisis.  
  At this point, it is worth asking where we currently stand in terms of ability to pay. We can 
see in the left-hand chart that, having peaked in 2007, the ratio between the price of housing 
and the median household income declined until 2012 and subsequently rose again after 
2014. 
However, if we consider the red line, which represents the affordability of housing, we see 
that the instalments payable in the first year are currently slightly above 30% of monthly 
household income, in contrast to the level of over 50% reached in 2008. Admittedly, we 
need  to  treat these  affordability  data with  caution.  Since  interest  rates  remain  at historic 
lows, monetary policy normalisation in the medium term will inevitably have an effect on 
mortgage payments.  
 9/15 
  We  should  not  forget  that,  although  the  proportion  of  fixed  rate  mortgages  has  recently 
reached 40% of all new transactions, 87% of the existing stock of mortgage loans remain 
linked to a variable rate, so that our mortgage market continues to be particularly sensitive 
to rising interest rates.  
Consequently, we take a positive view of the facilities to encourage conversion of variable 
to fixed rate loans introduced by the new law. In any event, it is worth mentioning again that 
at no point in the crisis did non-performing mortgage loans exceed 6% of the total. 
Consequences of the application of the law on access to housing 
The crisis has also reminded us again that the worst business to do is to grant a mortgage 
to a person who, a priori, is unlikely to fulfil their payment obligations. In economic terms 
this is bad business for the customer concerned, but also for the institution, which will have 
to deal with an irregular loan and, possibly, following a lengthy and difficult judicial process, 
assume the cost of having a property on its books, managing it and paying all the attendant 
costs. Finally, given the painful situations we have lived through recently, there is no need 
to spend much time discussing the social effects of such business. 
Precisely because of the asymmetric positions of the lender and borrower in the contractual 
relationship, the new law provides that incorrect assessment of solvency will not entitle the 
lender to terminate, rescind or modify the loan agreement. That is to say, the responsibility 
for analysing the ability to pay falls entirely on the institution, and not on the customer. The 
law also protects the debtor who is unable to make payments, by making enforcement of 
mortgages in the event of default more complicated.  
Naturally,  all  these  legal  provisions  reinforce  the  idea  that  extreme  caution  must  be 
exercised when granting new loans.  
At  the  same time,  it  is  common  knowledge  that  the  law  has  assigned  most of  the  costs 
associated with granting a mortgage to the institution. Some institutions have even decided 
10/15 
  to assume the cost of appraisal as well, which is in practice the only one that the law places 
upon  the  customer.  In  addition,  the  requirements  relating  to  the  minimum  number  of 
instalments that must be due and payable before it is possible to initiate judicial enforcement 
proceedings, will delay the recovery of debt outstanding on non-performing loans, which 
will  inevitably  increase  the  costs  of  the  foreclosure  process.  This  will  also  initially  have 
negative effects on the overall level of non-performing mortgage loans. 
Clearly,  banks,  like  any  other  firm,  can  only  survive  if  they  are  profitable.  Consequently 
institutions  must  be  able  to  measure  the  costs  and  risks  associated  with  each  new 
transaction. I would like to stress here that, to guarantee their viability and to be able to 
adequately  remunerate  their  capital,  each  individual  institution must  have  an  appropriate 
pricing policy allowing it to cover all the costs and risks associated with each loan, and must 
establish  governance  structures  and  management  processes  that  ensure  effective 
management of such risks.  
When  assessing  solvency  and  assigning  an  appropriate  price  to  each  new  transaction, 
institutions will have to optimise the use of the information available on their customers. For 
this  purpose  they  need  to  have  technological  solutions  enabling  such  information  to  be 
appropriately collected and used efficiently subsequently.  
Finally, we must remember that the application of strict standards, as required by the law, 
will, at least in the short term, limit the access to owner-occupied housing of certain low 
income groups. I sincerely believe that in the medium and long-term the effect will be more 
positive, by fostering greater price stability over the business cycle. We should remember 
that runaway growth of prices is the main factor that ultimately restricts access to owner-
occupied housing.  
In any event, it is up to public authorities to shape the social measures that aim to guarantee 
decent  homes  for  the  less  well  off.  It  should  be  noted  that  construction  of  subsidised 
housing is currently at low levels, despite the economic recovery. Certain initiatives in our 
neighbouring  countries  are  of  interest,  such  as  the  role  played  by  the  deposits  and 
consignments fund in France or the state guarantee arrangements in the Netherlands for 
housing up to a certain value. It is true that banks must not forget to apply strict economic 
criteria in their business, but it is just as true that a fair and responsible society should not 
be guided by economic criteria alone. 
  11/15 
 Use of the new macroprudential tools. 
 In the last part of my speech I would like to depart a little from the real estate credit law to 
discuss the new macroprudential tools recently introduced by Royal Decree-Law 22/2018. 
As  I  have  already  mentioned,  the  crisis  highlighted  the  insufficiency  of  microprudential 
supervision  to  identify,  prevent  and  mitigate  the  materialisation  of  systemic  risk.  In  fact, 
during  the  stage  when  structural  imbalances  were  building  up  on  bank  balance  sheets, 
institutions never failed to comply with the solvency requirements.  
A significant part of the response to the  crisis  has been based on regulatory changes to 
correct  the  design  of  the  capital  framework.  However,  apart  from  this  traditional  micro 
response,  the  introduction  of  the  macroprudential  viewpoint  in  supervision  has  been  a 
notable development. The purpose of this perspective is to contribute to the correction of 
macrofinancial imbalances and improve control over the credit cycle, which should result in 
more stable and sustainable economic growth.  
A  necessary  condition  to  be  able  to  develop  this  function  is  the  early  identification  of 
macroeconomic  imbalances  and  analysis  of  the  interconnections  between  individual 
institutions and markets. As we all know, the Banco de España has been performing these 
tasks  of  identifying  and  monitoring  financial  system  vulnerabilities  since  2014  and, 
moreover, has the option of introducing countercyclical capital buffers. Consequently, one 
might ask what changes have recently been made to Spanish law and why they are relevant.  
First, a royal decree setting up a macroprudential authority in Spain was finally approved on 
1 March. This needed to be done as Spain was the only EU country, apart from Italy, that 
had still not established such an authority.  
12/15 
   Second,  last  December  saw  the  publication  of  RDL  22/2018,  which  assigned  additional 
powers  to  the  Banco  de  España,  in  the  form  of  new  tools,  such  as  the  sectoral 
countercyclical capital buffer and limits on credit conditions and sectoral concentration of 
credit exposure. 
What  is  the  difference  between  these  tools  and  the  ones  approved  in  2014?  The  first 
fundamental difference is that instead of a global buffer, we can now make use of much 
more focused tools.  
In this respect, we need to be aware that, although the application of a global capital buffer 
affects lending, it does so indiscriminately, and in certain circumstances its application may 
have unintended consequences. 
Allow  me  to  give  an  example.  Imagine  that  the  supervisor  observes  excessive  growth in 
consumer credit and decides to activate the global buffer to limit this growth. It is very likely 
that  institutions  will  react  to  this  tightening  of  capital  requirements  by  increasing  credit, 
precisely  in  those  sectors  that  offer  the  highest  returns,  in  order  to  compensate  for  the 
increase in their capital costs. Therefore, the activation of this global buffer may mean that 
consumer  credit  growth,  instead  of  moderating,  increases,  largely  at  the  expense  of 
financing to other sectors, in which the supervisor had not observed any problem. 
The new legislation, by giving the Banco de España the power to limit the assumption of 
risk at sectoral level, allows the measures to be restricted to exposures to the specific sector 
in which the risks are concentrated. As a result, the new tools allow exposures to that sector 
to  be  deterred.  The  application  of  a  global  buffer,  on  the  other  hand,  does  not  alter  the 
relative  incentives  across  the  different  lending  segments,  which  may  have  unintended 
consequences.  
Also, other tools are made available to the regulator that do not impact lending institutions’ 
capital requirements, but rather the characteristics of borrowers and even of loans. Unlike 
 13/15 
 capital tools, which are designed to increase institutions’ capacity to absorb shocks, these 
new tools seek to reduce the vulnerability of borrowers or to limit the appearance of bubbles.  
Finally,  to  be  able  to  cover  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  the  legislation  gives  other 
sectoral  supervisors  similar  tools.  In  the  design  of  macroprudential  instruments  that  go 
beyond  banks,  Spain  has  taken  the  lead  in  European  regulation,  although  clearly  the 
coordinated application of these tools will be one of the tests that the new macroprudential 
authority has to pass.   
Of course, these tools can never be applied automatically. Their use must be measured and 
fine-tuned  responsibly  by  the  supervisor.  In  any  event,  activation  of  these  measures  in 
cyclical upswings is likely to meet with criticism from public opinion, consumers and the 
institutions themselves. We must not forget that the aim is to restrict credit, with the focus 
on a particular sector. When applied to the property sector, the measures will curb credit 
and make it more expensive, hampering access to owner-occupied housing, even if only 
temporarily.  
It  will  also  be  necessary  to  decide  when  and  how  to  loosen  or  remove  these  credit 
restrictions at low points in the cycle. I am sure that this part will prove to be more popular 
and easier to sell to public opinion, but it is worth remembering that a buffer can only be 
released at a low point in the cycle if one has previously been imposed during the boom. 
In  any  event,  in  the  light  of  recent  experience,  I  believe  that  we  can  all  agree  that  the 
consequences of a failure to act by the supervisor is infinitely worse than the alternative, 
although  the  appropriateness  and  timing  of  measures  to  restrict  credit  will  always  be 
controversial.  
 Conclusions 
I would like to finish by reaffirming the Banco de España’s positive assessment of the new 
real estate credit law. We consider that the strict regulation of its provisions, along with the 
increase in the information available to customers in the pre-contractual stage, will help to 
reduce legal uncertainty and the current high level of litigiousness in this market. I would 
also like to point out that implementation of the law involves, in many cases, promoting a 
cultural change in customer relations, for which purpose the wholehearted support of the 
entire organisation is needed, starting with the governing bodies and senior management. 
All these elements should improve the functioning of the mortgage market to the benefit of 
customers and institutions.  
However, it should be noted that the increase in the costs of granting a mortgage borne by 
lenders,  the  limits  on  early  repayment  fees  and  the  delay  in  the  recovery  of  past-due 
amounts  will  inevitably  increase  the  costs  of  new  loans,  which  institutions  will  have  to 
incorporate into their pricing policies for the sake of their viability and to provide an adequate 
return  to  capital.  At  the  same  time,  we  take  a  positive  view  of  the  reminder  of  the  strict 
requirements  to  evaluate  borrowers’  solvency.  Although  this  may  restrict  access  to 
mortgage credit, it will foster greater stability in the mortgage market and an improvement 
in the quality of institutions’ loan portfolios.  
14/15 
 Finally, I trust that the new macroprudential tools that the law has recently made available 
to  us  will  allow  us  to  react  and  take  the  appropriate  corrective  action  before  excessive 
imbalances build up in bank balance sheets. The collective memory is fragile, but I trust we 
will never forget the price of not taking timely resolute action. 
 Thank you very much. 
  15/15 
