February  27,  2019 
Bank  of  Japan 
Economic Activity, Prices,   
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Kagawa 
Goushi Kataoka 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
 I. Economic Activity and Prices 
A. Overseas Economies 
I would like to start my speech by looking at developments in overseas economies.   
 
After the global economy had grown synchronously since the second half of 2016, differences 
in  growth  rates  among  countries  have  recently  become  evident.  I  consider  that  overseas 
economies have now leveled off and are in a state where due attention should be paid to the 
effects of various risks. According to the January 2019  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO) 
Update released by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), as presented in Chart 1, the global 
economic growth rate is projected to remain around 3.5 percent through 2020. However, when 
compared with the April 2018 WEO forecast, downward revisions are evident, as seen on the 
right-hand  side in Chart 1. In addition, the global Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI), as 
shown in Chart 2, has declined to a level seen during the global economic destabilization in 
2016 for both manufacturing and services, although they are still above the 50-point level. 
Thus, the pace of overseas economic growth as a whole for 2019 seems to have weakened 
compared with that for 2018.   
 
Let me elaborate on current developments by major countries and regions. With regard to the 
U.S. economy, interest rate-sensitive housing investment has been weak and some soft data 
have been showing signs of peaking out against the background of a rise in U.S. interest rates, 
while growth in exports has been decelerating. Nevertheless, private consumption has been 
supported by tax cuts and a favorable employment situation. As for the European economy, 
its pace of growth has been decelerating, partly due to the effects of a tightening of European 
Union  (EU)  emission  standards  and  the  political  situations  in  Italy  and  France,  although 
domestic demand has been more or less firm. As with the European economy, the Chinese 
economy has been decelerating, and the impact of this deceleration on emerging economies 
is a matter of concern. 
 
The following factors continue to pose a risk to the outlook: U.S. macroeconomic policies 
and the consequences of protectionist moves, the impact these have on the global economy 
and financial markets, and negotiations on the United Kingdom's exit from the EU. Future 
1 
developments require close attention as the effects of these risks have already been seen in 
some economies.   
 
B. Japan's Economy 
Next, I would like to turn to Japan's economy. Starting with recent developments, the real 
GDP growth rate for the October-December quarter of 2018 recovered to positive territory 
after a decline in the previous quarter. This was partly due to the rebound from the decrease 
in  domestic  demand  caused  mainly  by  natural  disasters  in  the  July-September  quarter. 
However,  the  recovery  from  negative  growth  is  losing  momentum  amid  heightening 
uncertainties regarding overseas economies. Chart 3 shows the real GDP growth rate and the 
breakdown by component. While private consumption and private business fixed investment 
picked up, the contribution of external demand further decreased within negative territory 
compared  with that  for  the  July-September  quarter,  partly  due  to  an  increase  in  imports. 
Although exports increased after a decline in the previous quarter, the overall rate of increase 
remained relatively low given a drop due to the effects of supply-side constraints caused by 
natural disasters.1  The low rate of increase in exports is attributable mainly to a decrease in 
orders  from  China  against  the  background  of  U.S.-China  trade  friction  and  a  gradual 
deceleration in overseas economies. 
 
Turning to the outlook for Japan's economy, as shown in Chart 4, the medians of forecasts 
made by the Bank of Japan's Policy Board members for real GDP growth rates presented in 
the January 2019 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report) are 0.9 percent 
for both fiscal 2018 and 2019, and 1.0 percent for fiscal 2020. My view, however, is that the 
pace of growth will be more modest than these forecasts. Specifically, I would project  the 
growth rate for fiscal 2018 to be around 0.5 percent, as the pace of economic recovery will 
likely remain moderate amid the heightening uncertainties regarding overseas economies. For 
both fiscal 2019 and 2020, the growth rate will likely be in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent. The 
impact on households of the consumption tax hike scheduled to take place in October 2019 
will likely be smaller than that of the previous hike in 2014, as the government will take 
                                                   
1  Attention should also be paid to the fact that real GDP growth rates on an annualized quarter-on-
quarter basis have been on a declining trend since the January-March quarter of 2018, and that the rate 
for the October-December quarter fell for the first time since the October-December quarter of 2014, 
which followed the consumption tax hike in April that year. 
2 
measures  to  smooth  out  possible  fluctuations  in  demand.  Nevertheless,  it  is  a  matter  of 
concern that the pace of expansion in consumption since fiscal 2014 has been quite slow and 
households' sentiment indicators such as the Consumer Confidence Index have continued to 
decline  since  2018  (Chart  5).2   Moreover,  I  consider  that  the  pace  of  pick-up  in  Japan's 
economy will likely be slow from the scheduled consumption tax hike in October onward, 
mainly because the heightening of uncertainties in the global economy, which I mentioned 
earlier, might limit business activity to a certain degree through expectations of a slowdown 
in external demand. 
 
C. Recent Developments and Outlook for Prices 
Next, I will move on to price developments. The year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer 
price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food for January 2019 was 0.8 percent, as shown in 
the  left-hand  graph  of  Chart  6.  Looking  at  the  CPI  in  detail,  it  should  be  noted  that  the 
contribution of a rise in energy prices to the CPI was significant at 0.4 percentage point, and 
the rate of increase for all items less fresh food and energy, which directly reflects supply-
demand conditions, stood at only 0.4 percent year on year. The right-hand graph of Chart 6 
shows some indicators that represent the underlying developments in consumer prices. These 
indicators have continued to show relatively weak developments. 
 
The important indicators that affect underlying price developments are the output gap and 
medium- to long-term inflation expectations. The output gap, as shown in the left-hand graph 
of Chart 7, has remained positive, reflecting improvements in the capital stock and labor 
markets. Nevertheless, the positive output gap shrank slightly for the July-September quarter 
of  2018,  mainly  due  to  the  effects  of  natural  disasters.  Inflation  expectations  have  been 
somewhat weak, as indicated in the right-hand graph of Chart 7. I am convinced that this is 
attributable to the adverse effects of prolonged deflation in the past and recent weak price 
developments. In addition, in my view, the credibility of achieving the Bank's 2 percent price 
stability target has not been sufficiently enhanced among the public, and this is also affecting 
inflation expectations. 
                                                   
2  Looking at the Consumer Confidence Index, the decrease in the consumer perception index since 
2018 was mainly attributable to a decline in perceptions of "employment" (job stability or ease of 
finding a job) and "overall livelihood." 
3 
Turning to the outlook for prices, the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts for the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) presented in the January 
2019 Outlook Report are 0.8 percent for fiscal 2018, 0.9 percent for fiscal 2019, and 1.4 
percent for fiscal 2020, excluding the direct effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike 
and policies concerning the provision of free education (Chart 4).3  Price projections have 
continued to be revised downward, reflecting the weak price developments, but the Bank's 
view  is  that  the  momentum  of  prices  toward  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  will  be 
maintained. However, I dissented from the relevant description in the January Outlook Report 
as I think the possibility of the inflation rate rising toward 2 percent is low at the moment and 
that the momentum of inflation has not been strengthened. There are four main reasons behind 
my position. 
 
First, under the present circumstances, the effects of a widening of the output gap on inflation 
might have become less pronounced.4  Second, there is a possibility that the expanding trend 
of the output gap will not continue. If the expanding trend of the output gap becomes even 
more robust, firms will likely increase prices and wages to better reflect a rise in costs and a 
tightening of labor market conditions. These firms' moves will likely progress more than an 
increase in households' tolerance of price rises. However, taking account of the outlook for 
Japan's economy, I consider that there is a strong possibility that the expanding trend of the 
output gap will rather abate going forward.5  Third, based on the first two points, there is little 
prospect  for  the  time  being  of  an  increase  in  inflation  expectations  through  the  adaptive 
formation  mechanism  pushing  up  the  observed  inflation  rate.  Fourth,  it  is  unlikely  for 
inflation to be spurred by an increase in inflation expectations on the back of an enhancement 
                                                   
3  If a reduction in charges for mobile phone services takes place, it is expected to put downward 
pressure on prices in the short term. 
4  From the second half of 2016 through 2018, the output gap estimated by the Bank's staff widened 
from a level of excess supply to excess demand of around 1.5 percent. Meanwhile, the year-on-year 
rate of change in the CPI for all items less fresh food and energy remained more or less unchanged at 
around 0.3 percent. 
5  As I mentioned in section I. B., the pace of pick-up in Japan's economy will likely be slow from the 
scheduled consumption tax hike in October 2019 onward, mainly considering the following factors: 
in a situation where the pace of expansion in consumption since fiscal 2014 has been quite slow, 
households'  sentiment  indicators  have  continued  to  decline  since  2018,  and  the  heightening  of 
uncertainties  in  the  global  economy  might  limit  business  activity  to  a  certain  degree  through 
expectations of a slowdown in external demand. 
4 
of the credibility of achieving the price stability target. This is because such enhancement is 
unlikely  in  a  situation  where  the  monetary  policy  remains  unchanged  amid  downward 
revisions to the Policy Board members' price projections. 
 
II. Conduct of Monetary Policy 
Let me first outline the Bank's current monetary policy, based on the outlook for economic 
activity and prices that I have described. I would then like to touch on my opinion about the 
Bank's monetary policy conduct. 
 
The Bank conducts monetary policy under the framework of Quantitative and Qualitative 
Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control, aiming to achieve the 2 percent price 
stability target. This current framework consists of three major components (Chart 8). 
 
The first is yield curve control, in which the Bank sets the short-term policy interest rate at 
minus 0.1 percent and the operating target for long-term interest rates at around 0 percent. As 
for long-term interest rates, the Bank purchases Japanese government bonds (JGBs) while 
allowing some degree of fluctuation in long-term yields, depending mainly on developments 
in economic activity and prices. 
 
The second component is the purchase of risk assets, including exchange-traded funds (ETFs). 
The Bank purchases ETFs so that their amount outstanding will increase at an annual pace of 
about 6 trillion yen. With a view to lowering risk premia of asset prices in an appropriate 
manner, the Bank may increase or decrease the amount of purchases depending on market 
conditions. 
 
The  third  component  is  the  Bank's  public  commitment  regarding  the  future  conduct  of 
monetary policy. In July 2018, the Bank introduced forward guidance for short- and long-
term interest rates, stating that "[t]he Bank intends to maintain the current extremely low 
levels of short- and long-term interest rates for an extended period of time, taking into account 
uncertainties regarding economic activity and prices including the effects of the consumption 
tax  hike  scheduled to  take  place  in  October  2019." The  Bank  aims  to  strengthen  market 
confidence and expectations regarding the sustainability of monetary easing by making a 
5 
commitment  to  the  levels  of  future  policy  interest  rates,  in  addition  to  the  inflation-
overshooting  commitment  regarding  the  monetary  base  that  has  been  in  place  since 
September 2016. 
 
Of these three components, I dissented from two: the yield curve control, and the Bank's 
commitment  regarding  the  future  conduct  of  monetary  policy. As  presented  in  the  joint 
statement by the Bank and the government, the Bank's mission is to achieve the price stability 
target at the earliest possible time. With this in mind, as for the yield curve control, in the 
current situation where the observed inflation rate is still evidently far from the 2 percent 
price  stability  target,  I  consider  it  appropriate  to  strengthen  monetary  easing  in  order  to 
encourage further widening of the output gap within positive territory.6  At the same time, I 
judge that it is necessary to strengthen the Bank's commitment in order to promote a rise in 
inflation  expectations. 7   Moreover,  to  overcome  deflation  completely  amid  heightening 
uncertainties regarding economic and price developments, I consider it important to influence 
the expectations and forecasts of market participants and economic entities by implementing 
the appropriate means to further coordinate fiscal and monetary policy.8 
 
Furthermore, I have a difference of opinion regarding the Bank's monetary policy conduct of 
continuing to persist with current monetary easing until the price stability target is achieved. 
It is necessary to pay due attention to the fact that sustaining the situation where the output 
gap is in positive territory over a prolonged period under bold monetary easing entails the 
risk of accelerating business and financial cycles thereafter.9  Due attention is also required 
                                                   
6  Specifically,  I  consider  it  necessary  to  strengthen  monetary  easing  so  that  yields  on  JGBs  with 
maturities of 10 years and longer would broadly be lowered further. 
7  Specifically,  I  consider  it  would  be  necessary  for  the  Bank  to  make  a  commitment  to  taking 
additional easing measures if it revised downward its assessment of medium- to long-term inflation 
expectations. 
8  I would argue that the mindset of firms and households in Japan was formed under the prolonged 
deflationary  environment  after  the  mid-1990s,  such  that  it  has  become  rational  to  assume  that 
economic  activity  is  sustainable  without  inflation.  In  a  situation  where  the  anchor  of  inflation 
expectations has been lost, I believe that to achieve the 2 percent price stability target and maintain 
the target price level in a stable manner, it is important not only to enhance monetary easing, but also 
to further strengthen the coordination of fiscal and monetary policy -- that is, a "policy mix." 
9  Given that the output gap in Japan was in negative territory for a long period, some would argue that 
it is necessary to maintain the output gap within positive territory for a long period in order to change 
6 
to the fact that, if monetary easing is continued for a protracted period, achieving the price 
stability  target  would  become  less  clear  as  uncertainties  regarding  the  outlook  for  the 
economy would be prolonged. In addition, the longer monetary easing is continued, the higher 
the burden on an exit strategy becomes, and the more the side effects of monetary easing 
accumulate. Therefore, I believe that in considering the possible side effects, the discussion 
should be centered on finding ways to achieve the price stability target at the earliest possible 
time in order to prevent monetary easing from continuing for a protracted period. 
 
III. Germany's Industrial Policy and Its Implications for Japan10 
Let me now take a slightly different approach and talk about Germany's industrial policy. I 
am  assuming  many  of  you  have  heard  the  term  "Industrie  4.0"  in  relation  to  Germany's 
industrial policy. In my understanding, "Industrie 4.0" is a strategic initiative that aims for the 
self-optimization of production, not only by improving the efficiency of production processes 
and the quality of products and making small-batch production of a large variety of products 
using  digital  technology,  but  also  by  predicting  changes  in  business  environment  and 
enhancing the ability of production to adapt to such changes. In other words, "Industrie 4.0" 
goes  beyond  the  idea  of  digitizing  production  processes;  it  embodies  the  concept  of 
optimizing production activities using digital technology so that they are able to adapt to 
environmental changes. 
 
"Industrie 4.0" is a national strategic initiative which was set forth by the German federal 
government in 2011. The federal government continues to play a leading role in implementing 
the  policy.  The  framework  of  "Industrie  4.0"  in  Chart  9  shows  the  involvement  of  the 
government, with ministers of the federal government serving as chairs, and an organizational 
structure which encourages extensive cooperation across the public, private, and academic 
sectors, including industrialists, labor unions, and research institutions, as well as within each 
                                                   
the structure in which the inflation rate has remained at a low level. In view of the risks I mention, 
however, I believe that it is best to achieve the price stability target at the earliest possible time, not 
only by widening the output gap within positive territory, but also by raising inflation expectations 
through strengthening the Bank's commitment. 
10  I would like to express my sincere gratitude here to Mr. Georg K. Löer, President of North Rhine-
Westphalia (NRW) Japan K.K. and Mr. Kurando Ogi, Representative in Japan of the Saxony Economic 
Development Corporation for their assistance in compiling this section. 
7 
sector, from the management level to the field level. In other words, the government not only 
drafts the basis of the strategy and promotes the policy, but a structure has been established 
in which the government also gathers opinions and concerns from small and medium-sized 
enterprises in order to spread the effects of the policy to the very end of the value chain. 
Moreover, a virtuous cycle in which cooperation among the public, private, and academic 
sectors is strengthened has become possible, partly because ministers of economic affairs in 
German state government are often highly specialized and researchers at institutions such as 
universities are very keen to have their findings used in business.   
 
In addition to the federal government's "Industrie 4.0," local governments in Germany are 
active in supporting start-ups as a means to promote industrial development. Knowledge, 
skills, and funds are all essential throughout the process of starting up a new business: from 
the early stages of generating business ideas and developing business plans, through raising 
funds and merchandizing products, until the business can finally stand on its own. In each of 
these  stages,  the  local  government  provides  considerable  support  and  invests  in  the  new 
business on its own behalf to actively fulfill its role as a catalyst to encourage investment in 
newly established enterprises. 
 
As indicated in Chart 10, Japan and Germany have common features in that the share of 
manufacturing in all industries is large, and that the birthrate is declining and the population 
aging. Although the pace of aging for managers of small and medium-sized enterprises has 
been more moderate in Germany compared with Japan, smooth business succession and the 
development  of  newly  established  enterprises  are  important  tasks  for  Germany  as  well. 
Another common challenge is that both Japan and Germany need to enhance added value for 
their domestic manufacturing in order to tackle the intensification of global competition in 
manufacturing industry caused by the rise of emerging economies.   
 
On the other hand, there are also differences between Japan and Germany. One particularly 
significant difference is that small and medium-sized enterprises in Germany are more active 
in expanding their businesses overseas and exporting their products than those in Japan. As a 
result, there are many "hidden champions" in Germany -- that is, enterprises that have global 
market shares and are leaders in a particular niche business area. 
8 
 
Given the declining birthrate and aging population, I believe that there are many lessons Japan 
can learn from Germany's industrial policy and from its small and medium-sized enterprises. 
Germany's industrial policy aims to enhance the added value in domestic industries through 
extensive  cooperation  across  and  within  the  public,  private, and academic  sectors, and it 
places importance on supporting innovative enterprises. Small and medium-sized enterprises 
in Germany seek to expand their businesses overseas on their own in search of new markets 
unlike those in Japan whose overseas business expansion typically depends on the corporate 
groups they belong to. Since Japan and Germany share many common features, I believe that 
they can expand each other's business opportunities by strengthening their cooperation. 
 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
9 
Economic Activity, Prices,
and Monetary Policy in Japan
Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Kagawa
February 27, 2019
Goushi Kataoka
Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan
World Economic Outlook by the IMF
Chart 1
January 2019 forecasts
Difference from April 2018 
(y/y % chg.)
forecasts (% pts.)
2018
2019
2020
World
Japan
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
United Kingdom
China
Brazil
India
Russia
d
e
c
n
a
v
d
A
i
s
e
m
o
n
o
c
E
 i
g
n
g
r
e
m
E
i
s
e
m
o
n
o
c
E
3.7
0.9
2.9
1.8
1.5
1.5
1.4
6.6
1.3
7.3
1.7
3.5
1.1
2.5
1.6
1.3
1.5
1.5
6.2
2.5
7.5
1.6
3.6
0.5
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.6
1.6
6.2
2.2
7.7
1.7
2018
－0.2
－0.3
0.0
－0.6
－1.0
－0.6
－0.2
0.0 
－1.0 
－0.1 
0.0 
2019
－0.4
＋0.2
－0.2
－0.4
－0.7
－0.5
0.0
－0.2 
0.0 
－0.3 
＋0.1 
2020
－0.2
＋0.2
－0.1
0.0
＋0.1
－0.2
＋0.1
－0.1 
0.0 
－0.2 
＋0.2 
Note: As for the January 2019 forecasts, figures for 2018 are estimates and those for 2019 onward are projections. All of the figures for the April 
2018 forecasts are projections. For India, figures are presented on a fiscal year basis.
Source: IMF, “World Economic Outlook (January 2019, April 2018).”
Global PMI
Chart 2
Note: Figures are from the J.P. Morgan Global PMI. Figures above 50 indicate improvement and below 50 show deterioration on a
month-on-month basis.
Source: IHS Markit (© and database right IHS Markit Ltd 2019. All rights reserved.) 
Real GDP Growth and 
Breakdown by Component
Chart 3
Source: Cabinet Office, "Quarterly Estimates of GDP for October-December 2018 (First Preliminary Estimates)."
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices
(January 2019 Outlook Report)
medians of Policy Board members' forecasts, y/y % chg.
Chart 4
CPI (all items 
Real GDP
less fresh 
food)
(Reference) Excluding 
the effects of the 
consumption tax hike 
and policies concerning 
the provision of free 
education
Fiscal 2018
Forecasts made in October 2018
Fiscal 2019
Forecasts made in October 2018
Fiscal 2020
Forecasts made in October 2018
＋0.9
＋1.4
＋0.9
＋0.8
＋1.0
＋0.8
＋0.8
＋0.9
＋1.1
＋1.6
＋1.5
＋1.6
＋0.9
＋1.4
＋1.4
＋1.5
Note: The direct effect of the consumption tax hike on the CPI for fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2020 is estimated to be 0.5 percentage points for each year. 
The direct effects of policies concerning the provision of free education on the CPI for fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2020 are estimated to be minus 
0.3 percentage points and minus 0.4 percentage points, respectively.
Source: Bank of Japan, "Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (January 2019)."
Household Consumption
Chart 5
Consumption Before and After Tax Hikes
Consumer Confidence Index
Note: The latest figures are as of December 2001 and December 2018. 
Source: Cabinet Office, "Synthetic Consumption Index."
Note: Households of two or more persons. Consumer Confidence Index is 
composed of four categories: "overall livelihood," "income growth," 
"employment," and "willingness to buy durable goods." There are 
discontinuities between March and April 2013, and between 
September and October 2018, due to changes in the survey 
method.
Source: Cabinet Office, "Consumer Confidence Survey."
Consumer Prices
Chart 6
Consumer Price Index
Measures of Underlying Inflation
Note: Figures are adjusted for changes in the consumption tax rate. 
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, "Consumer 
Price Index."
Notes: 1. The latest figures are as of December 2018.
2. The diffusion index is defined as the share of increasing 
items minus that of decreasing items. The share of 
increasing/decreasing items is the share of items in the CPI 
(less fresh food, consumption tax adjusted) whose price 
increased/decreased from a year earlier. 
Sources: Bank of Japan, "Measures of Underlying Inflation"; Ministry 
of Internal Affairs and Communications.
Output Gap and Inflation Expectations
Chart 7
Output Gap
Synthetic Indicators of Inflation 
Expectations
Notes: 1. The data of the output gap in the left-hand graph are the estimates by the Bank's staff as of January 30, 2019. The CPI figures are adjusted for 
changes in the consumption tax rate.
2. In the right-hand graph, semiannual data from the Consensus Forecasts up through 2014/Q2 are linearly interpolated. Figures for the Bank’s 
Opinion Survey on General Public’s Views and Behavior exclude inflation expectations by respondents whose annual inflation expectations were 
±5% or greater. The output prices DI in the Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) represents the difference between 
the share of firms that raised prices in the preceding three months and the share of firms that lowered prices.
3. In the right-hand graph, inflation expectations of firms are taken from the Tankan and those of households are taken from the Bank’s Opinion 
Survey. For experts’ and markets’ inflation expectations, data from the Consensus Forecasts, the QUICK Survey, and the inflation swap rate are 
used as indicated by their respective lines.
Sources: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, ”Consumer Price Index (Japan; 2015-base)”; Consensus Economics Inc., “Consensus Forecasts”; 
QUICK, "QUICK Monthly Market Survey (Bonds)"; Bloomberg; Bank of Japan.
Outline of the Bank's Monetary Policy
Chart 8
(1) Yield Curve Control
Short-term rate: The Bank will apply minus 0.1 percent to the Policy-Rate Balances.
Long-term rate: The Bank will purchase JGBs so that 10-year JGB yields will remain at 
around zero percent. While doing so, the yields may move upward or downward 
to some extent mainly depending on developments in economic activity and 
prices.
(2) Asset Purchases
The Bank will purchase ETFs and J-REITs so that their amounts outstanding will increase 
at annual paces of about 6 trillion yen and about 90 billion yen, respectively. With a 
view to lowering risk premia of asset prices in an appropriate manner, the Bank may 
increase or decrease the amount of purchases depending on market conditions.
(3) Commitment
Overshooting commitment: The Bank will continue expanding the monetary base until 
the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI (all items less fresh food) 
exceeds 2 percent and stays above the target in a stable manner.
Forward guidance for policy rates: The Bank intends to maintain the current extremely 
low levels of short- and long-term interest rates for an extended period of time, 
taking into account uncertainties regarding economic activity and prices including the 
effects of the consumption tax hike scheduled to take place in October 2019. 
Structure of "Industrie 4.0"
Chart 9
Federal Minister for Economic Affairs and Energy 
and Federal Minister of Education and Research
Technical/practical 
expertise
decision-making
Policy guidance, 
society, multipliers
Activities on the 
market
Steering Body
Strategy Group
 Strategy development, technical 
 Agenda setting, political 
coordination, and decision-
making
 Members: Federal Ministers, 
business representatives, and 
chairs of working groups
Working Groups
1. Reference architecture, 
standardization and standards
2. Technology and application 
scenarios
3. Legal framework
4. Work, education, and training
5. Digital business models
6. Security of networked systems
steering, and multipliers
 Members:
• State Secretaries
• Representatives of steering 
body
• Representatives of Federal 
Chancellery, Interior Ministry
• State representatives 
• Representatives of 
associations
• Representative of trade union
• Representative of science
Research Council
Industrial Consortia and 
Initiatives
 Implementation on the market
 Test beds
 Examples of applications
Standardization Council
Labs Network
Secretariat
Source: Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy in Germany, “Structure of the ‘Industrie 4.0’ platform.”
Chart 10
Similarities and Differences between Germany and Japan
(1) Industrial distribution
(2) Declining birthrate and aging population
(a) Distribution of ages of SME managers
(b) Birth rates
Note: Figures are as of CY 2018 for Germany and as of FY 2017 
for Japan.
Sources:  Statistisches Bundesamt, "National accounts"; Cabinet 
Office, "Annual Report on National Accounts for 2017."
(3) Share of exports by SMEs 
Sources: KfW; The Small and Medium Enterprise Agency, "White Paper on Small and 
Medium Enterprises in Japan"; World Bank.
(4) International comparison of "hidden champion"
Note: Horizontal axes are CY for Germany and FY for Japan. The 
latest figure available for Japan is for fiscal 2015.
Sources: OECD, "Exports by Business Size"; The Small and Medium 
Enterprise Agency, “White Paper on Small and Medium 
Enterprises in Japan.”
Note: The three criteria to be 
considered a "hidden 
champion" are the following:  
(a) the firm is among the top 
three in the global market or 
is number one for a particular 
niche business area on the 
continent where the firm is 
based, (b) the firm has less 
than 5 bil. euro in revenue,
and (c) the firm is little known 
to the general public.
Source: Hermann Simon, Hidden 
Champion of the 21st 
Century.
