 Dear Minister Bytyqi,   
Dear Mr. Marco Mantovanelli, Director of the World Bank for Kosovo and North 
Macedonia, 
Dear Mr. Patrick Etienne – Country Director, Swiss State Secretariat for Economic 
Affairs (SECO) 
Dear Ms. Lori Michealson, representative of the US Embassy  
Dear President of the Board Mr. Mrasori, 
Dear representatives of financial institutions, 
Dear students and teachers,  
Dear representatives of media 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is my pleasure to welcome you to this event marking the Global Money Week in 
the  function  of  financial  education,  with  our  main  affiliates,  the  Ministry  of 
Education,  the  World  Bank,  the  Swiss  State  Secretariat  for  Economic  Affairs 
(SECO)  and  the  European Fund  for  South  East  Europe, who I  would  like  to  take 
this  opportunity  to  thank  for  the  unreserved  support  to  advance  developments  in 
the financial sector in Kosovo in general and financial education in particular.  
This year, Global Money Week is especially important for two reasons:  
Firstly, for the fact that with the activities that we will organize this week, 
we have brought the Republic of Kosovo to the attention of the international 
arena, where the activities that we will organize this week can be followed 
1 
 
internationally through "live streams" from central banks, regulators and 
international organizations dealing with financial education issues; 
Secondly, for the fact already announced by the CBK that 2019 will be the 
year of consumer protection and the activities that we will organize in the 
field of financial education will be in the function of consumer protection. 
In the present environment, where we are all witnessing the financial stability that 
Kosovo enjoys, placing Kosovo's financial system at a level that is comparable not 
only  with  the  countries  of  the  region  but  also  those  of  the  European  Union,  the 
financial  education  has  occupied  a  specific  place  on  our  development  agenda. 
Moreover, the financial services sector has a strong share in economic growth, job 
creation, building of vital infrastructure and sustainable development for Kosovo. 
Services  and  products  of  the  financial  sector  affect  the  life  of  every  citizen  of 
Kosovo. Therefore, we are grateful, to all our associates, some of whom are here 
with  us  today,  for  the  support  they  have  provided  to  the  Central  Bank  and  other 
relevant  institutions  in  building  a  financial  market  that  treats  consumers  fairly, 
encourages  financial  involvement  and  helps  citizens  to  make  effective  use  of 
financial services. 
One of CBK's strategic goals is to encourage the development of a sound financial 
system  in  the  Republic  of  Kosovo  and  to  further  develop  the  financial  education 
function  with  a  view  to  creating  a  sound  financial  culture  that  helps  all 
stakeholders to make the right decisions on the basis of sufficient knowledge. This 
knowledge  can  only  be  gained  through  adequate  financial  education,  which  is 
consequently  transformed  into  financial  behaviours.  This  would  be  the  optimum 
reality that all of us present today aspire, but have we managed to accomplish it? 
The  Central  Bank  is  developing  the  financial  education  in  the  function  of  three 
main dimensions: 
2 
 
   in the function of financial stability,  
in the function of consumer protection, and 
in the function of financial inclusion.  
These three dimensions actually cover the whole process of financial activity, from 
the  first  confrontation  with  the  financial  product/service  to  the  realization  of  the 
right/obligation in this report. 
Financial education in the function of financial stability is built on the premise 
of mutual trust. Financial education is the core of trust building. Without trust 
there  can  be  no  financial  stability. If  we  look  from  the  social welfare point  of 
view, it is very important whether the citizens are able to properly manage their 
finances.  But  on  the  other  hand,  the  benefits  of  financial  knowledge  extend 
beyond the balance sheets and income at the individual or the household level 
to  the  promotion  of  a  stable  financial  system  and  efficient  resource  allocation 
within the real economy. 
 Financial education in the function of consumer protection is an active process 
in which information communication is only the beginning, while the ultimate 
goal is a positive long-term financial behaviour. Customers' decisions on the 
use of products and services are made on the basis of complete and reliable 
information as well as on their understanding of this information, therefore the 
presentation of this information by financial institutions is critical. Moreover, 
such an approach leads to a fair competition of all stakeholders in the financial 
sector. The CBK is committed to contributing to economic growth in the 
country and to work towards raising quality across the financial sector and 
above all to contribute to consumer protection. As a result, with the support of 
the European Fund for Southeast Europe "EFSE", we will implement the 
3 
 
project "Improving the transparency of the banking market through building a 
platform for comparing interest rates for banks". This platform will enable 
citizens to make decisions based on complete and clear information, presented 
on a unified platform for all banks. This platform will also help increase a 
sound competition in the banking sector. Another important project is the 
Collection of Books for Financial Education designed for the lower cycle of 
primary schools, which in cooperation with the Ministry of Education will be 
distributed throughout all Kosovo schools. Kosovo students will have the 
opportunity to get familiarized with the economic-financial educational 
concepts that are important to be installed in early education. 
The  third dimension,  the one  on  financial  inclusion is  a continuous  process  of 
advancing  financial  infrastructure  in  order  to  increase  the  availability  of 
financial products and services at the lowest cost. Financial intermediation has 
advanced  rapidly  through  the  proliferation  of  financial  services  and  products 
but  only  at  the  basic  level.  Building  a  financial  market  that  treats  consumers 
fairly encourages financial involvement and helps citizens to make effective use 
of financial services as the main premise of financial inclusion. Therefore CBK 
has  orientated  the  financial  education  program  in  the  function  of  financial 
inclusion  in  order  to  stimulate  sufficient  demand  for  a  wide  variety  and  wide 
range of services and products. Therefore, with the support of the World Bank 
and  the  Swiss  State  Secretariat  for  Economic  Affairs  (SECO),  we  have 
managed  to  design  the  "Greenback  Project"  targeting  Remittances  as  a  very 
important category of revenues in Kosovo, awareness of senders and receivers 
of  remittances,  so  that  the  destination  of  this  category  of  revenues  is 
transformed  from  consumption  to  investment.  In  addition,  the  Remittance  and 
Payments  Program  will  help  the  CBK  to  further  advance  the  payment  system 
 4 
 
infrastructure,  in  particular,  the  broader  aspect  and  the  cost-effectiveness  of 
small payments.  
 All of us that are here today agree that through financial education we have 
managed to address many challenges within the three dimensions, but there is still 
work to be done. The financial system is constantly evolving towards expanding 
more complex financial products and services, so the financial education program 
should respond proactively to this new dimension. This proactivity imposes the 
need for the National Financial Education Strategy, for which I consider that now 
it is the time to start the dialogue. I consider that today's signing of the Agreement 
of Understanding between the Central Bank and the Ministry of Education will be 
a good start in this regard.   
In  conclusion,  please  allow  me  to  thank  the  Ministry  of  Education,  Science  and 
Technology,  the  World  Bank,  the  Swiss  State  Secretariat  for  Economic  Affairs 
(SECO),  the  EFSE  for  the  excellent  cooperation  in  achieving  the  present  results 
and all you representatives of other relevant institutions for the future cooperation. 
Thank you very much! 
5 
 
