Jens Weidmann: United in diversity
Welcoming  remarks  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and
Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, on the occasion of
the  handover  ceremony  for  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Austria’s  (Oesterreichische
Nationalbank/OeNB) new governor, Vienna, 1 October 2019.
 1 Introduction
Dear Chancellor Bierlein,
dear Vice-Chancellor Jabloner,
dear Finance Minister Müller,
dear President Mahrer,
dear Governor Holzmann,
dear Ewald,
ladies and gentlemen,
Joseph  Schumpeter  once  said  that  to  realise  the  relative  validity  of  one’s  convictions  and  yet
stand  for  them  unflinchingly  is  what  distinguishes  a  civilised  man  from  a  barbarian.   Ewald
Nowotny is an exceedingly civilised man.
1
As an economist, he is aware that many insights are preliminary and potentially mistaken. At the
same  time,  Ewald  Nowotny  is,  in  his  charming  way,  always  an  independent  and  ingenious
thinker. And as such, he has, for many years, left his mark on the Governing Council of the ECB.
After all, of the remaining Governing Council members, only Yves Mersch and Mario Draghi can
lay claim to a longer membership. 
From the outset, the years on the Governing Council demanded his full commitment. Exactly two
weeks  after  he  took  up  office  as  governor  of  the  OeNB,  the  insolvency  of  investment  bank
Lehman Brothers left the financial community in a state of shock. The resolute monetary policy
response helped to prevent a worse outcome.
Similarly,  the  subsequent  sharp  economic  downturn  in  the  euro  area  forced  the  Governing
Council  of  the  ECB  to  take  unusual  decisions.  This  period  was  incomparably  challenging  for
central bankers – and instructive for us all.
Ewald Nowotny has always unhesitatingly shared his wealth of experience with me and others.
He has always been there to advise me and other colleagues if we had any questions. For that, I
would like to thank you once again most sincerely, dear Ewald.
In  all  these  years,  the  Governing  Council  has  been  able  to  count  on  your  competence  and
independent judgement. But why is an independent assessment so valuable, especially in bodies
such as the ECB’s Governing Council?
2 The Jury theorem
Back in the 18th century, the Marquis de Condorcet, a French mathematician and philosopher,
examined the question of what conditions had to be met for a jury to be more likely than a single
2
voter to arrive at the correct judgement when voting on two alternatives.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  his  important  contribution  to  probability  theory,  Condorcet  showed  that  if  each  individual
member has sufficient good judgement and decides completely independently, the group is more
likely to select the superior alternative.
The British mathematician Francis Galton was also surprised by the potential precision of a “vox
populi”, a voice of the people.  When he visited a livestock exhibition in 1906, competitors in a
quiz estimated the weight of one of the show’s oxen. It transpired that the competitors’ average
estimate corresponded to the ox’s actual weight of 1,197 pounds.
3
Condorcet’s  conditions  –  sufficient  expertise  and  independent  judgement  –  are  often  far  from
being fulfilled. In real decision-making situations, the information upon which members of a group
base their decisions is frequently the same, or at least similar. This alone means that their voices
are not independent of one another.
Where they are dependent, aggregation in itself no longer guarantees that the jury will tend to
select the better outcome. This is because its members may jointly succumb to the same error.
As a consequence, a wide range of ideas, experiences and views is essential if the judgement of
a group is to be, on balance, superior to that of an individual. Probability theory has meanwhile
shown that a jury is more likely to take a sound decision, even under more realistic assumptions,
4
if its members’ outlooks are sufficiently different.
What the Governing Council therefore needs is experience and independence of judgement, and
that is something Ewald Nowotny has always supplied in abundance.
3 Monetary policy
It  is  especially  important  to  look  at  data,  concepts  and  potential  viewpoints  as  holistically  as
possible where uncertainty about future developments is particularly high.
Looking at the global and the euro area economy, it is abundantly clear that we are in such a
period of uncertainty. The Governing Council of the ECB passed a very comprehensive package
of  measures  when  it  met  in  mid-September,  which,  looked  at  in  its  entirety,  I  believe  to  be
overdone.
The economic situation and the outlook in the euro area are not so bad, wages are rising clearly,
the  forecast  for  the  inflation  rate  two  years  ahead  was  lowered  only  slightly  and  there  is  no
evident danger of deflation, in other words a permanent drop in prices and wages.
ECB  President  Mario  Draghi  has  pointed  out  the  divided  opinions  on  the  current  package  of
measures within the Governing Council. I consider it not just normal, but absolutely imperative,
for far-reaching measures such as government bond purchases to spark intense debate.
The Austrian philosopher Karl Popper once stated that only critical discourse could give us the
5
maturity to consider an idea from more and more angles and to evaluate it properly.
And to my mind, the conditions under which the Eurosystem has been buying government bonds
since  2015,  for  example,  illustrate  how  this  kind  of  debate  can  in  fact  improve  our  decisions.
During our discussions back then, we drew boundaries in the purchase programme to mitigate
the risk of monetary policy being harnessed to fiscal policy.
With that in mind, I hope that the decisions that have now been made do not call into question
these restrictions, for example with regard to upper limits relative to a government’s total debt or
relative to the volume of a single issue, or the principle that purchases are distributed across
Member States’ bonds according to the ECB’s capital key and not according to the amount of
government debt. After all, nothing has changed when it comes to the validity and importance of
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the limits on government bond purchases decided by the Governing Council of the ECB.
Particularly in a monetary union where Member States enjoy fiscal autonomy, it is vital to ensure
that the line between monetary and fiscal policy does not become blurred.
The central banks’ response to the crisis also posed temptations with regard to the Eurosystem,
which it should not pursue. To quote Ewald Nowotny: “A lot is being asked of the ECB […]. Some
6
of it we can’t deliver – because our framework is different to that of the US Fed.”
This is of course all the more true of demands such as those espoused by Modern Monetary
Theory: transferring the objective of price stability to fiscal policy and making monetary policy, in
the role of an agent, subordinate to fiscal policy would be doing a disservice to society.
Even though economists in fact disagree about many issues, the notion that independent central
banks focused on price stability are good for a society’s prosperity is backed up by theory and
empirical evidence and enjoys broad consensus.
This  is  also  illustrated  by  the  OeNB’s  long  history. At  its  anniversary  three  years  ago,  Ewald
Nowotny stated: “Yet, irrespective of the challenges the Nationalbank faced at different moments
of its 200-year history, the overarching principles of its policy were always the same: the quest
for  stability,  built  on  trust  in  the  Nationalbank,  which  in  turn  is  fundamentally  linked  to  its
7
independence.”
It  is  also  the  shared  quest  for  price  stability  that  unites  the  members  of  the  ECB  Governing
Council. I was sorry to note the resignation of Sabine Lautenschläger last week. Her voice was
also an asset to the Council and will be missed. The diversity of opinions and perspectives on
the Council was always a strength, not a weakness. “United in diversity” is more than just the
motto of the European Union, which may seem abstract to many. It is also a firm mandate to
approach one another and bring people together.
4 Conclusion
Ladies  and  gentlemen, 
the
Bundesbank are many and varied. In the spirit of friendliness, we hold regular joint meetings of
our management bodies and discuss important matters relating to work in the Eurosystem.
the Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  and 
links  between 
the 
And  last  year,  for  example,  OeNB  and Bundesbank  experts  joined  together  to  study  whether
blockchain technology can aid in the exchange and distribution of information between clearing
houses  in  real  time.  The  extensive  IT  expertise  of  our  Austrian  colleagues  was  especially
valuable to the project.
I’d  like  to  thank  you,  Ewald,  for  the  trust  given  to  us  in  this  collaboration,  but  also  your  fellow
Governing Board members Andreas Ittner, Kurt Pribil and Peter Mooslechner.
And I’m quite certain that Professor Holzmann, too, will continue in the same manner. I wish him
and  his  colleagues  on  the  Governing  Board  –  Gottfried  Haber,  Eduard  Schock  and  Thomas
Steiner  –  every  success  and  look  forward  to  future  encounters  and  dialogue  within  the  ECB
Governing Council and beyond.
Ewald,  you  have  embodied  an  independent  monetary  policymaker  focused  on  stability.  Your
experience and clear focus will be a loss to the Governing Council.
Even if it’s no longer at official meetings, I look forward to hearing your voice in the future as well.
Not  long  ago,  you  yourself  quoted  Jean-Claude  Trichet’s  words  about  central  bankers:  “You
remain a member of the club.” We all look forward to it.
1
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Schumpeter, J. (1942). Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. Harper and Brothers, p. 243.
de Condorcet, M. Essai sur l’application de l’analyse à la probabilité des décisions rendues à la pluralité des
voix. Imprimerie Royale, 1785.
Surowiecki, J. (2004). The Wisdom of Crowds: Why the Many are Smarter than the Few and How Collective
Wisdom Shapes Business, Economies, Societies, and Nations. Doubleday, New York.
Ladha,  K.  (1992).  The  Condorcet  Jury  Theorem,  Free  Speech,  and  Correlated  Votes. American  Journal  of
Political Science, 36(3), 617–634.
Popper, K. (1999). All Life is Problem Solving. Routledge, New York.
Nowotny, E. (2012). Interview in “Profil”, 17 September 2012.
Nowotny, E. (2016). Central Bank Policies – Past Challenges and Future Perspectives, speech given on 2 June
2016.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
