  
SPEECH BY GOVERNOR LARS ROHDE AT THE 
ANNIVERSARY CONFERENCE ON BANKING & 
SUPERVISION 
 
  
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
   
 
3. October 2019 
  FROM NATIONAL REGULATION TO AN INTERNATIONAL LEVEL PLAYING 
FIELD 
Thank you for inviting me to speak today. I have been looking forward to 
this.  
What are the characteristics of banking?    
In the words of the historian Søren Mørch – loosely quoted – banking be-
longs in the department where rabbits are pulled out of top hats and la-
dies are sawn in half. This only works if the audience – the banks' cus-
tomers – behave as expected and do what they usually do.  
If the customers do not trust the bank, there will be a run on the bank. 
The trick will fall flat, and the money will vanish.  
We can try to regulate our way out of the risk that the trick will fall flat. 
But whatever we do, we can never guarantee that the banks will not ex-
perience problems. So does that mean that we should avoid regulation? 
The answer is "no". Regulation is a must. 
 Historically, the financial sector has been characterised by being regulat-
ed. The reason is that a breakdown would have major implications for 
society.  
Page 1 of 7 
  Typically, regulation has been introduced in response to financial crises – 
this applied to, for example, the first Danish Savings Bank Act from 1880 
and the first Danish Commercial Banking Act from 1919.  
The purpose of the 1919 Act was to prevent bank managements from los-
ing people's money and then applying to the government for help so 
that innocent depositors would not be ruined. With the Commercial 
Banking Act, the banking inspector was also introduced; this was the first 
supervision of commercial banks. Savings banks had been supervised 
since 1880. Today's banking supervision is undertaken by the Danish Fi-
nancial Supervisory Authority – and I would like to congratulate you on 
achieving the centenary that we are celebrating today. 
When supervision of savings banks was introduced, it was not believed 
that it was necessary to subject commercial banks to supervision. Their 
customers were, to a large extent, commercial enterprises that would be 
capable of assessing the creditworthiness of their bankers themselves! 
Well – what can I say?  
The Commercial Banking Act could not save the financial sector in the 
1920s. The Act came too late. Over a period of 13 years, numerous banks 
in Denmark experienced difficulties. The failure of Landmandsbanken is 
the best known episode from that period. This is because Landmands-
banken was Scandinavia'slargest bank, and Denmark's first banking in-
spector – Mr Green – wrote a diary from his inspections of the bank.  
Several of the banks' problems were attributable to management. As Pro-
fessor Per H. Hansen writes in his book on the 13-year banking crisis from 
1920 to 1933: "It is the individual bank management that, through day-to-
day operations and the strategy laid down for the bank, determines the 
structural conditions that are of significance to its risk exposure".  
That sounds familiar in relation to the most recent financial crisis. And – 
regrettably – it is topical in relation to the headings which the financial 
sector is attracting in the media.  
 At the time when the first commercial banking act was introduced, the 
banks' solvency ratio declined. Their solvency ratio in the original mean-
ing of the word – net worth as a fraction of total assets – was 11.8 per 
cent in 1919, only half the 1908 ratio. This development may challenge 
the conventional wisdom that regulation limits the banks' scope to oper-
ate.  
Page 2 of 7 
  In the current age of open economies, financial business is transacted 
across borders. That was not always the case. In fact, foreign banks were 
not able to set up business in Denmark until the 1970s. At first, their effect 
was very modest. After 11 years, foreign banks had a share of just 1 per 
cent of the aggregate banking balance sheet. It was simply too cumber-
some to enter the Danish market, partly because the banks would be 
subject to Danish supervision. 
The amendments to the Danish banking legislation were part of the har-
monisation of the financial sector in the European Community. The aim 
was to create a single market for financial services by ensuring a level 
playing field and uniform framework conditions. The single market for 
financial services was a means of reaching the actual goal – to enhance 
competition to the benefit of consumers and firms. 
The next phase of harmonisation followed in the 1980s, when it became 
easier to set up business in other EC member states. With a banking li-
cence from the home country, it was possible to conduct banking activi-
ties in all member states: the bank was subject to supervision by the 
home authorities only. At the same time, a European framework for equi-
ty and solvency was introduced. 
As a result, the Danish rules were amended so that the required solvency 
ratio for banks was calculated as a percentage of risk-weighted assets. 
Until then, the solvency ratio had been calculated relative to total debt 
and guarantee exposures. The view on solvency was changed from a 
buffer against a run on the bank to a cushion related to the quality of the 
loans. This amendment was part of the introduction of BIS solvency rules 
in the EC. The aim was to improve the solvency of the global banking sys-
tem. But the aim was also to ensure that the banks competed under more 
equal conditions. These rules were known as Basel I. 
The introduction of new capital adequacy rules led to substantial easing 
of the capital requirement for Danish banks. Denmark was less severely 
hit by the banking sector crisis in the early 1990s than the other Nordic 
countries. This was partly attributable to the high Danish capital require-
ments that applied before Basel I.  
From a current-day perspective, the first EC capital rules were very simple 
and comprised credit risk only. 
Since then, European regulation of the financial sector has evolved con-
siderably. Basel I was replaced by Basel II, which to a larger extent took 
modern risk management techniques into account. Another wave of 
Page 3 of 7 
  regulation followed in the wake of the financial crisis. This was based on 
the acknowledgement that one of the reasons for the depth of the finan-
cial crisis was that capital requirements had been eased too much under 
Basel II. 
To illustrate how much regulation has evolved, I would like to quote for-
mer Governor of Danmarks Nationalbank Richard Mikkelsen, who in 
Dansk Pengehistorie (Monetary history of Denmark) wrote as follows 
about Denmark's implementation of Basel I:  
"Actually, the Act and the resultant executive orders, etc. became so 
complex that it defied ordinary human perception. Whether the Act is 
complied with is for computers to determine." If only he had known what 
was to come!  
The EU rules regulating the financial sector are complex. The three large 
sets of rules alone run into more than 1,100 pages in Danish. The rules 
are so extensive because they need to regulate firms with very complex 
activities. Moreover, if something goes wrong, the costs to society are 
considerable. The legislation is also extensive because it must take into 
account the structures and traditions of many countries. The Danish 
mortgage credit sector, for one, has benefited from that.  
If you wish to be part of an international market, it is a huge advantage 
to operate under a single set of rules. This applies globally within trade, 
and it applies within the EU in the form of regulation of the financial sec-
tor. It is a particular advantage for a small country with a very interna-
tional economy, such as Denmark's. If we were outside, we would, for 
competitive reasons, still have to operate under the same rules – but 
without having any influence on their design. 
Common rules lead to closer cooperation and facilitate the exchange of 
goods and services. Developments in the last 40 years illustrate that. 
They create a level playing field and reduce the opportunities for rule ar-
bitrage. 
 In the wake of the financial crisis, the EU adopted the Bank Recovery and 
Resolution Directive, BRRD. Again, we have made considerable progress 
since the first savings bank act from 1880, which in very simple terms de-
scribes how to close a savings bank.  
Page 4 of 7 
  The BRRD requires institutions to draw up and maintain recovery plans, 
and the authorities must draw up resolution plans. In addition, a frame-
work has been laid down for the authorities' resolution of a failing finan-
cial institution. This could be, for example, the resolution tools to be used 
and who is to bear the losses. 
The strategy for resolution of systemically important financial institutions 
in Denmark is to restructure them and return them to the market with suf-
ficient capitalisation to ensure market confidence. They perform functions 
that are critical to society and essential to financial stability. If this is to be 
possible, the institutions must observe a minimum requirement for own 
funds and eligible liabilities. In other words, MREL. These funds are used 
to absorb losses and for recapitalisation if the institution is failing. So the 
taxpayers will no longer have to bear the costs of resolving a failing cred-
it institution. 
The BRRD is the most significant regulatory initiative in the financial area 
in Europe in recent times. The days when banks were rescued by the cen-
tral government are over.  
However, we still have an important outstanding issue in Denmark – 
whether or not we join the strengthened banking cooperation – and that 
is how we resolve the mortgage credit institutions. They are exempt from 
the MREL. As a result, we cannot be sure that there are sufficient funds to 
resolve failing mortgage credit institutions. And we cannot use the Reso-
lution Fund for loss absorption in the mortgage credit institutions, should 
this be necessary. We need to do away with this exemption in order to 
ensure credible resolution of mortgage credit institutions. At the same 
time, I would like to emphasise that mortgage bonds should not absorb 
losses. Instead, as I have already said a couple of times, there must be 
sufficient MREL funds.  
 The BRRD is a large step in the right direction.  
But, looking ahead, what is the main challenge for a financial supervisory 
authority and for financial stability? 
Seen from a Danish supervisory perspective, it must be the ever-
increasing complexity of the very large banking groups and the interna-
tionalisation of banking activities. Large banking groups are complex to 
operate. And they are complex to supervise. There is nothing new in that, 
but it is becoming increasingly evident.  
Page 5 of 7 
  Supervision of the largest banks means supervision of major international 
players with customers and a presence in multiple countries. That in itself 
is a challenge for the supervisory authority. In addition, risk management 
and the methods applied are becoming still more advanced. 
Naturally, there are also many other challenges. One of them is digitalisa-
tion, which entails a gradual change in the competitive situation of the 
banks. 
Developments require that the competences of the supervisory authori-
ties constantly evolve so that they are a match for the banks. This is more 
easily achieved by working together. As I see it, that is the single most 
important reason why Denmark naturally belongs within the strength-
ened banking cooperation – or the banking union, as it is also called. 
If Denmark joins the strengthened banking cooperation, the Danish Fi-
nancial Supervisory Authority will continue to play a significant role in re-
lation to supervising Danish banks. But it will be supplemented with the 
Single Supervisory Mechanism, SSM, which involves the ECB and all other 
national supervisory authorities within the banking cooperation. The SSM 
is headed by the Supervisory Board, of which the Danish Financial Super-
visory Authority will be a member. The single supervisory authority of the 
ECB leads the supervision of the largest and most complex banks within 
the cooperation.  
Danish participation in this cooperation will boost the competences of 
the authority which is to scrutinise the largest Danish credit institutions. 
The single supervisory authority in Frankfurt can attract experts from all 
over Europe. And it is currently building up considerable experience via 
its supervision of a number of very large banks.  
It is of paramount importance to financial stability that our supervisory 
authority has the competences to match the large banks. And it is equally 
important that we have a resolution authority with the necessary insight 
and resources to resolve the largest Danish banks. 
It is considerably easier to build up and maintain such supervisory pow-
ers if you have many "customers". The quality of the resolution also in-
creases if you gradually accumulate experience in resolving large banks. 
The strengthened banking cooperation is a further development of the 
single market for financial services, which Denmark is part of. It strength-
ens the overall European supervisory powers and creates a more level 
Page 6 of 7 
  playing field for credit institutions in Europe. We ought to be able to 
agree on opting in.  
Joining the strengthened banking cooperation will be a natural step on 
the journey that financial regulation has taken over the past many years. 
By joining the banking cooperation, we will become part of a supervisory 
structure that will be a match for the large banks. And it is necessary to 
match them – in the interests of society and of the banks themselves.  
 I started by talking about pulling rabbits out of top hats and sawing la-
dies in half. But don't get me wrong. Banking is no joking matter. Regula-
tion of the banks is necessary as they play a special role in society.  
Financial regulation and the financial supervisory function, which has now 
existed in Denmark for 100 years, are primarily there for the citizens and 
firms – not for the banks. 
Banking and rules undergo continuous change. Take for example pay-
ment services, where costs to society are almost halfed since 2009. In-
creased competition and innovation is something we should welcome.  
Future financial services and functions will perhaps be delivered by new 
actors. They may claim they are not banks and therefore should not be 
subject to supervision. However, the guiding principle should always be 
that it is the function which is regulated. 
The new challenges for the supervisory authority are best solved in close 
and binding cross-border cooperation, which is precisely what the 
strengthened banking cooperation is about. 
None of us know what tomorrow brings. But it is our duty to do our best 
to protect the fundamental financial functions of our society. 
Thank you. 
 Page 7 of 7 
