Benjamin E Diokno: Regulations and policies to empower financial
institutions and reach undeserved population through technology
and innovation
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the eCompareMo.com Finovation Event, Makati, 25 September 2019.
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  share  with  you  the  BSP’s  key  policy  issuances  and  initiatives  to
promote  financial  inclusion  in  the  Philippines  and  the  regulatory  framework  on  financial
technology.  This  year’s  theme  “Get  all  Pinoys  #AcceptED!”  is  aligned  with  the  BSP’s  policy
objective of building an inclusive financial system for the Filipinos.
Through financial inclusion, we aim to cater to the unserved and underserved markets such as
the low-income and marginalized, micro, small and medium enterprises, overseas Filipinos and
their  beneficiaries,  agriculture  and  agrarian  reform  sectors,  indigenous  peoples,  persons  with
disabilities, among others.
We, at the BSP, recognize the significant role that the fintech plays in driving the transformation
of  the  traditional  processes  in  the  financial  system  through  technology-driven  innovations  to
unlock financial inclusion barriers.
We aim to develop a digital finance ecosystem that supports the diverse needs of all users in a
manner that is secure, sustainable, convenient, and affordable. To support this goal, the BSP
established the National Retail Payment System (NRPS), our flagship program for digital finance.
NRPS is built on three core principles namely interoperability, inclusiveness and “coopetition”. 
Through  the  NRPS,  regulated  institutions  are  required  to  adopt  transparent  and  fair  market
pricing  of  electronic  payments,  transition  from  exclusive  bilateral  to  multi-party  clearinghouse
agreements and provide electronic fund transfer facilities in all available channels, among others.
It is a critical platform that will establish an interoperable ecosystem allowing seamless electronic
fund  transfers  and  payments  between  and  among  accounts.  It  aims  to  promote  a  “cash-lite”
economy and ultimately improve the country’s economic competitiveness.
The NRPS, and the payment ecosystem that is envisioned to arise from it, is positioned to be a
platform for fintech innovations. Industry players can utilize fintech solutions and provide services
within an organized, commercially-viable and efficient retail payment system.
Advances in technology have also enabled the development of solutions that enhance market
reach and expand delivery channels. Through technology, people from all walks of life, including
those in unbanked and underserved markets, can have access to formal financial services like
online bills payments and fund transfers.
We  cannot  discount  the  crucial  role  that  fintech  companies  play  in  this  modern  ecosystem.
Fintech  players  are  not  competitors  of  our  supervised  financial  institutions,  but  rather,  are
strategic partners to bring about greater efficiencies in the delivery of financial services.
Recognizing the benefits and opportunities from these technological innovations, the BSP aims
to  provide  a  regulatory  environment  that  allows  innovation  to  flourish,  while  at  the  same  time,
ensuring a safe and sound financial system that is beneficial to the general public.
The BSP’s regulatory approach is shaped by three principles:
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
One – We ensure that regulation is risk-based, proportionate and fair – This simply means
that regulation is calibrated according to the magnitude of risks identified in a defined activity, and
not on the type of entity that delivers it.
This  approach  promotes  a  level  playing  field  and  ensures  that  beneficial  innovations  are  not
hampered by unwarranted and excessive compliance requirements.
Two – We maintain active multi-stakeholder collaboration – This is necessary in view of the
multiplicity of players and multi-layered relationships among fintechs and varied financial sector
players.  It  represents  a  “whole-of-government  approach”,  ensuring  policy  consistency  and
preventing regulatory arbitrage. Continuing engagement with industry players is also crucial to
foster  a  shared  understanding  of  risks,  our  financial  inclusion  goals  and  market  conduct
expectations.
Three – We ensure consumer protection – By this we mean innovations must work for the
benefit  of  consumers,  especially  the  most  vulnerable  ones,  and  those  availing  of  financial
services for the first time.  Regulations must ensure that issues such as transparency, product
suitability,  security  and  confidentiality,  are  made  paramount  considerations  in  the  design  and
deployment of digital solutions.
Fintech has immensely contributed to the enhancement of a financial consumer’s experience by
transforming  the  delivery  of  financial  services  from  branch  banking  to  online  banking,  paper-
based  money  to  electronic  money,  and  face-to-face  customer  verification  to  technology-aided
know-your-customer process, among others.
In addition, Fintech transcends geographical barriers and enhances transparency, and reduces
the cost of financial transactions.
In line with this, the BSP has identified the responsible promotion of FinTech as a priority agenda,
thus,  the  establishment  of  a  fintech  roadmap  covering  three  key  areas,  namely:  Collaborative
Engagements, Commensurate Regulations and Capacity Building.
By  collaborative  engagements,  we  mean  maintenance  of  active  multi-stakeholder
collaboration  –  This  is  necessary  in  view  of  the  multiplicity  of  players  and  multi-layered
relationships  among  fintechs  innovators  and  varied  incumbent  financial  sector  players.  It
represents  a  “whole-of-government  approach”,  ensuring  policy  consistency  and  preventing
regulatory  arbitrage.  Continuing  engagement  with  industry  players  is  also  crucial  to  foster  a
shared understanding of risks, our financial inclusion goals and market conduct expectations.
In  crafting commensurate  regulations,  the  BSP  has  implemented  key  policy  changes
espousing  the  principle  of  “proportionality.  ”  This  approach  promotes  a  level  playing  field  and
ensures that beneficial innovations are not hampered by unwarranted and excessive compliance
requirements.
For capacity build-up, the BSP continues to provide training and learning opportunities to fast-
track the development process of our people to ensure that financial supervisors maintain the
necessary  knowledge,  proficiency  and  competence  to  keep  pace  with  the  fast-evolving
innovations.  We are also exploring regtech and suptech solutions, including the use of artificial
intelligence, machine learning, cloud computing and APIs, to enhance the timeliness and quality
of our risk-based decision-making.
As part of BSP’s fintech roadmap, I would like to share the BSP’s test-and-learn approach or the
regulatory  sandbox  as  part  of  our  supervisory  toolkit  in  dealing  with  new  and  innovative
technologies in the market. 
Through  the  so-called  regulatory  sandbox,  pioneering  solutions  and  technologies  can  be
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
deployed in a live but controlled setting.
I will not go into each one of the steps but on a very high level, our “test and learn” approach has
been  proven  to  be  useful  in  dealing  with  increasing  digital  innovations  in  the  market  and
promoting development and innovation within the financial services industry.
It provides an opportunity for innovators to connect to banks and other players with clear authority
from  the  regulators.  Such  an  approach  helps  the  regulators  assess  potential  risks  and
accordingly decide how to regulate the new market, if needed.
Recent examples of entities which approached BSP and devoted time and resources to conduct
controlled and calculated experiments of their products include: (i) a pioneering rural bank that
engaged a cloud service provider for its core banking system; (ii) a foreign bank which partnered
with an electronic money issuer to offer its mobile based deposit product; (iii) a universal bank
which explores potential use cases of a tokenized cash; and (iv) a universal bank which utilizes
the blockchain platform to push its financial inclusion initiatives.
Let me quickly walk you through the five key steps in BSP’s test and learn approach:
The first step is to allow for market to develop and innovations to take place.
After  engaging  with  fintech  players,  the  BSP  determines  if  the  proposed  innovation  presents
major regulatory concerns.  This is where the BSP checks the eligibility requirements such as
soundness  and  feasibility  of  the  business  model,  the  proposed  solution  is  innovative  and  not
covered by existing regulations and the proponent demonstrates sound track record as well as
resources/capability to successfully launch the pilot.
The next step is to proceed with flexibility yet with caution.
During this phase, the BSP set certain limits/parameters or safeguards before fintech players
fully  market  their  products  and  services.  We  allow  these  pilot  projects  to  run  within  clear
parameters  i.e.  specific  test  time  periods,  localized  markets  or  geography  and  limited  users. 
Likewise,  risk  management  controls  such  as  those  covering  cybersecurity  risks,  money
laundering, consumer protection and other operational risks should be in place.
The third step is to understand operating and business model.
As the product or service is being offered in the market, the BSP can have better understanding
of the operating/business models as well as technical considerations.
The fourth step is for the BSP to adopt appropriate regulatory approach.
Once the BSP fully understands the operating/business model as well as detailed mechanics of
the innovative product/service, appropriate regulations are then issued. 
Lastly, the BSP closely monitors developments and related issues.
We  continue  to  monitor  developments  and  introduce  supervisory  enhancements,  when
necessary, to address emerging issues and risks.
Similar with the BSP’s existing regulatory framework and supervisory approach covering banks
and other financial institutions, the BSP also applies the same framework and approach that is
commensurate to the FinTech’s risk profile and systemic importance. 
This framework incorporates the following policy considerations:
First is Prudential Objective – In determining how BSP should supervise FinTechs, the safety
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
and soundness of the individual institution, the stability of the financial system, the advancement
of financial inclusion, and the undue regulatory burden are all taken into consideration.
Second is the Landscape of the Financial System – In order to draw a holistic supervisory
approach,  BSP  needs  to  have  information  on  the  financial  ecosystem,  particularly  FinTechs.
These include: the asset size, business condition like liquidity, profitability, capitalization, among
others).
Next is the Risks Faced by FinTech – Considering their own business peculiarities, it is very
important  to  also  identify  the  risks  specific  to  FinTech  operations,  these  may  include
cybersecurity risk and AML risk, among others.
And  lastly  –  Once  we  have  identified  these  important  information,  we  will  now  employ
appropriate risk management standards based on the FinTech’s business model, risk profile and
degree of systemic importance.
The ongoing challenge for the BSP is how to stay ahead of the curve when it comes to emerging
financial technological innovations.
In  the  same  way  technology  is  changing  the  financial  industry,  the  BSP  is  also  adopting
innovations to enhance the way we regulate and supervise financial institutions. 
This  is  through  the  use  of  Regulatory  Technology  (RegTech)  solutions  aimed  at  enabling  the
BSP to have a more intensive, risk-focused and forward-looking supervision while easing BSFIs’
regulatory compliance burdens.
We  are  exploring  regtech  and  suptech  solutions,  including  the  use  of  artificial  intelligence,
machine learning, and APIs, to enhance the timeliness and quality of our risk-based decision-
making.
In fact, we are now in the final stages of pilot implementation of two RegTech solutions. The first
one is an automated complaint-handling system using a chatbot with the primary objective of
improving the way customers lodged complaints against financial institutions.
The second is an API system that automates the collection, processing and analysis of data
from  supervised  institutions.  Previously,  banks  were  burdened  by  an  extensive  and  time-
consuming validation process, involving more than 240 Excel-based data entry templates with
100,000  plus  data  points.  The  resulting  delays  and  the  scope  for  human  error  posed
complications on our data and statistical compilation operations. With this modern API system,
manual intervention is eliminated since data sorting, sanitation and validation processes are fully
automated  and  secured.    With  the  same  7,000  data  validation  rules  still  being  applied,
processing time of filed returns was cut from more than 30 minutes to just 10 seconds each,
thereby streamlining the entire end-to-end process of regulatory reporting and validation.
On the other hand, for the less sophisticated supervised entities that cannot immediately migrate
to the API-based reporting, we developed a central automated reporting environment referred to
as the FI Portal. The FI Portal provides a single electronic platform upon which FIs can submit
reports, receive feedback on its acceptability, and exchange correspondences with the BSP on
matters related to report submissions. It offers a more secure encrypted process of submission
through a web facility where supervised entities can upload their reports instead of sending them
via regular email.
We  are  also  undertaking  major  organizational  reforms  and  initiatives  for  a  more  proactive
supervisory stance. 
We have also recently set up a bigger, better and more agile Financial Technology Subsector to
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
ensure the operational as well as cyber-resilience of the financial system. 
The  new  subsector  in-charge  of  fostering  responsible  innovation  in  the  financial  services  and
payments industry is composed of two mission critical departments.  
One  is  the  Technology  Risk  and  Innovation  Supervision  Department,  which  is  primarily
responsible for conducting onsite and offsite IT supervision of regulated entities.
It  is  also  in  charge  of  cybersecurity  surveillance  and  promoting  digital  or  fintech  innovation
through the BSP’s regulatory sandbox.
The  other  department  is  the  Payment  Systems  Oversight  Department,  which  is  mainly
responsible for the payments oversight, licensing and policy development for a safe, efficient and
reliable national payment system.  PSOD  is  our  lead  in  enforcing  a  holistic  payment  oversight
framework, including the National Retail Payment System or the NRPS.
In conclusion, the BSP adopts an open and flexible approach to financial innovation, given its
crucial role in expanding our financial inclusion agenda. 
We  are  closely  engaging  with  fintech  stakeholders  to  gain  a  better  understanding  of  their
business models, processes and systems.
Our  main  challenge  is  to  strike  a  balance  between  promoting  and  enabling  a  policy  and
regulatory  environment  for  emerging  financial  innovations  and  ensuring  consumer  protection,
security, and financial stability.
We  aim  to  establish  a  forward-looking  approach  to  ensure  that  regulatory  and  supervisory
frameworks are in tune with emerging trends and developments. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we are in an era where the biggest challenge is to keep up with the rapid
pace of technological changes. To stay relevant is to remain proactive and vigilant in monitoring
the advancements in technology and develop corresponding innovative solutions that intersects
with traditional banking and other financial services and be agile.
We need to take full advantage of and effectively harness fintech innovations that can be  to used
to  unlock  financial  inclusion  barriers  and  facilitate  digital  financial  transactions  in  ways  never
imagined before. 
Finally,  the  BSP,  as  your  partner  in  promoting  financial  innovation  and  inclusion,  will  remain
committed in supporting beneficial fintech innovations through an enabling policy and regulatory
environment.
I hope that as we all do our part in this, we keep the convenience, safety, and well-being of the
Filipino people in mind.
Thank you and I wish everyone a fruitful conference.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
