Luis  de  Guindos:  Improving  macroeconomic  stabilisation  in  the
euro area
Remarks  by  Luis  de  Guindos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Global
Interdependence Center Central Banking Series conference, Madrid, 3 October 2019.
Introduction
 A decade after the global financial crisis, the level of economic activity in the euro area remains
disappointingly low. It took nine years for real per capita GDP to surpass its 2007 level. Likewise,
euro area inflation has stubbornly remained below the ECB’s aim for much of the past decade.
Throughout this period, the ECB has acted decisively to support euro area demand and raise
inflation onto a sustainable path towards our aim of below, but close to, 2% over the medium
term. This has included lowering the key ECB rates to record low levels and adopting a wide
range of non-standard monetary policy measures.
By contrast, the contribution from fiscal policy to macroeconomic stabilisation in the post-crisis
period has been muted at best. From 2010 to 2012, economies representing around one-third of
euro area GDP carried out procyclical fiscal tightening to restore confidence in their public debt,
which significantly contributed to the second recession in that period. Since then, fiscal policy
has been broadly neutral.
At our last meeting, the Governing Council responded to the continued shortfall of inflation with
respect to our aim. Recent economic data point to a more protracted weakness in the euro area
economy.  Prominent  downside  risks  remain  and  inflationary  pressures  are  muted.  We
introduced a package of measures designed to support the euro area expansion, the ongoing
build-up  of  domestic  price  pressures  and,  thus,  the  sustained  convergence  of  inflation  to  our
medium-term aim.
We also noted the need for countries with fiscal space to act in a timely and effective manner
and for all countries to reinforce their efforts to achieve a more growth-friendly composition of
public finances.
In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  focus  on  the  roles  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  in  supporting
macroeconomic stabilisation in the euro area. In particular, I will explain why now is a particularly
appropriate time for fiscal stimulus. I will also offer some thoughts on how to improve the current
fiscal framework.
Macroeconomic stabilisation in a monetary union
The literature on optimal currency areas points to the need to counter two types of shocks: those
that are common to all countries, and asymmetric ones that affect a subset of countries.
For common shocks, monetary policy can act to stabilise the economy.
But  for  idiosyncratic  shocks,  stabilisation  becomes  trickier.  Monetary  policy  cannot  target
individual countries, and those affected can no longer adjust their exchange rate to help cushion
the  effects  of  the  shock.  Hence  the  literature  emphasises  the  need  for  economic  cycles  to
converge,  so  that  common  shocks  generally  dominate.  For  asymmetric  shocks,  stabilisation
comes ex ante from greater cross-border risk-sharing to improve resilience, and ex post from
fiscal policy.
But in the light of recent experience, it is worth revisiting this classic separation between using
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
monetary policy for common shocks and fiscal policy for asymmetric shocks. Fiscal policy at a
national level in the euro area was unable to fully counter asymmetric shocks during the crisis.
And at an aggregate level, stabilisation may benefit from monetary and fiscal policy working in
tandem given the current environment of low interest rates.
Nominal  interest  rates  have  been  declining  in  advanced  economies  since  the  1980s.  In  large
part,  this  decline  is  attributable  to  the  decline  in  average  inflation  over  that  period.  Investors
require lower compensation for expected future inflation, and the fall in inflation volatility has also
reduced the inflation risk premium. The decline is also a result of a secular fall in the natural rate
of interest, which is the rate that balances desired saving and investment in the economy. While
the natural rate cannot be precisely measured, a range of estimates point to its decline.
There  are  a  number  of  contributing  factors  to  this  decline,  principal  among  which  is  lower
potential  growth.  Lower  potential  growth  reduces  the  expected  rate  of  return  on  capital,  so
reduces the rate at which firms are prepared to borrow to invest.
Other factors that are believed to have further weighed on the natural rate of interest include the
ageing  population  in  Europe,  the  role  of  income  distribution,  increased  saving  in  emerging
markets and a general rise in risk aversion.
This fall in the natural rate of interest has important implications for the optimal policy mix in the
euro area. The interest rate at which monetary policy becomes accommodative falls directly in
line with the natural rate, so the effective lower bound on nominal rates has become a much
greater consideration when setting policy. Before the crisis, it was estimated that interest rates in
the euro area would be likely to hit zero only once every 50 years.  At the current natural rate,
rates of zero or below are likely to be a much more frequent occurrence.
1
As  the  experience  of  the  past  decade  has  shown,  the  decline  of  the  natural  rate  is  not  an
impediment to monetary policy providing accommodation to the economy. But it does mean that
monetary  policy  has  to  remain  accommodative  for  longer  and  make  greater  use  of
unconventional  measures.  Those  factors  carry  with  them  an  increased  risk  of  undesired  side
effects.
In  such  a  situation,  economic  theory  tells  us  that  fiscal  policy  should  play  a  much  more
substantive  role  in  business  cycle  stabilisation  than  it  usually  would.   The  reason  for  this  is
straightforward.
2
In normal times, when output is close to potential and inflation is close to its objective, a fiscal
expansion threatens to push inflation above the central bank’s aim. Central banks respond by
raising  their  policy  rates,  and  the  increase  in  interest  rates  partially  crowds  out  private  sector
demand. However, when the economy operates below potential the central bank has no reason
to fight a fiscal expansion. Policy rates would not increase and private sector demand would be
crowded in, leading to a much larger positive effect on aggregate demand and inflation.
In  other  words,  when  policy  rates  are  close  to  the  lower  bound,  fiscal  policy  becomes  more
3
effective in stimulating aggregate demand.
Moreover, while monetary policy must take the natural rate of interest as given, fiscal policy – if
enacted appropriately – can help raise it, in turn making monetary policy more powerful. Policies
to encourage more people, especially older workers, to participate in the labour force can help
raise rates. Increasing spending on education and public investment can support productivity and
4
lift both potential growth and private investment.
Every  policy  implies  trade-offs,  of  course.  The  side  effects  of  very  accommodative  monetary
policy may become unduly tangible when the economy operates below potential for a long time.
In  fact,  while  we  believe  that,  overall,  the  benefits  outweigh  the  costs,  we  acknowledge  the
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
challenges that a sustained low interest rate environment poses for banks.
Reforming the fiscal framework
So there is a role for fiscal policy to play in helping to counter common shocks at the European
level. To the extent that Member States have created fiscal space, it would therefore be desirable
for fiscal policy in the euro area to support business cycle stabilisation more actively. Our current
assessment is that the fiscal stance is only mildly expansionary at the aggregate level.
But the current institutional framework is insufficient to deliver that required stimulus.
5
Fiscal  policy  remains  a  national  responsibility  in  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU),  with
some common rules applicable to individual countries. In its first incarnation, the Stability and
Growth  Pact  focused  almost  exclusively  on  fiscal  sustainability,  with  little  emphasis  on  fiscal
stabilisation.  In recent years it has undergone several reforms, some of them with the explicit
aim of providing greater prominence to stabilisation considerations, both at the country level and
at the euro area level. The result has been rules which are now viewed as complex and opaque,
with little evidence that they have delivered a more countercyclical fiscal policy stance in the euro
6
area.
The Stability and Growth Pact has limited flexibility and does not lend itself to incorporating area-
wide  stabilisation  elements.  National  fiscal  rules,  with  a  focus  on  domestic  issues,  tend  to
neglect positive cross-border spillovers. They fail to recognise the benefits of cross-country risk-
sharing and the vital role played by the public sector in underpinning it.
In other words, rules based purely at a national level, or even rules that coordinate a fiscal stance
across  countries,  are  not  enough  by  themselves.  Empirical  evidence  suggests  that  spillovers
from a fiscal expansion in one euro area country to others are positive, but small. So while it is
important for those countries with available fiscal space to use it domestically to support overall
stabilisation,  a  central  fiscal  capacity  with  the  ability  to  allocate  expenditure  across  countries
would be more powerful.
A dedicated centralised fiscal capacity would not interfere with domestic policy. By focusing on
common  area-wide  stabilisation  it  need  not  affect  national  fiscal  space  but  rather  provide  an
additional  layer.  This  focus  would  also  help  ensure  that  areas  of  expenditure  that  are  vital  for
long-run  growth  are  not  cut  during  a  downturn,  helping  to  preserve  future  fiscal  space  and
support real interest rates over the long term.
A central fiscal capacity of this sort would clearly need to be carefully designed to mitigate any
risk of moral hazard. But, crucially, it should have sufficient firepower to effectively contribute to
macroeconomic  stabilisation.  It  needs  to  be  sizeable  and  agile  enough  to  react  rapidly  to
emerging threats.
But macroeconomic stabilisation in  the  euro  area  can  only  function  properly  when  other  EMU
features and institutions are adequately designed and operational.
First,  the  banking  union  needs  to  be  completed.  Unified  banking  supervision  and  the  Single
Resolution Fund (SRF) have provided greater confidence that banks operating in other euro area
countries face the same conditions as in their home market. But the banking union will remain
incomplete  until  a  common  deposit  insurance  scheme  has  been  introduced  and  the  fiscal
backstop for the SRF has increased in size. While there is political agreement about the SRF
backstop  and  its  terms  of  reference,  there  is  not  yet  agreement  on  the  European  deposit
insurance scheme.
Second, it is imperative to accelerate progress on the capital markets union. This is ambitious. It
entails streamlining core aspects of national policies, such as taxation and insolvency regimes,
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
which  are  essential  for  integrating  the  legal  underpinnings  of  cross-border  markets.  Capital
markets can smooth country-specific shocks by providing a larger pool of financial assets that
can  be  shared  across  borders.  This  helps  to  decouple  wealth  and  income  –  and  hence
consumption – from output.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
The euro area risk outlook is again tilted to the downside. This is a conjunctural concern. The
global decline in the natural rate of interest over the past quarter of a century, however, poses
structural challenges. Policy rates will likely remain low, by historical standards, and may hit their
lower bounds more frequently than in the past.  We have learned from the experience in Japan
that it is possible to get caught in a vicious cycle of declining inflation expectations, falling inflation
and a binding lower bound on nominal interest rates from which it is difficult to escape.
7
It is thus of utmost importance that we enhance the firepower of euro area stabilisation policy by
means of a policy mix that, while continuing to make full use of monetary policy, assigns a more
substantive role to fiscal stabilisation policy. Laying the institutional foundations for a European
fiscal capacity would be an important step in this direction.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
See Coenen, G. (2003), “Zero lower bound: is it a problem in the euro area?”, Working Paper Series, No 269,
ECB, September.
Schmidt, S. (2013), “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy with a Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates”, Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 45, No 7, pp. 1335–1350; and Werning, I. (2012), “Managing a Liquidity Trap:
Monetary and Fiscal Policy”, NBER Working Paper Series, No 17344, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Eggertsson, G. (2011), “What Fiscal Policy Is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?”, in Acemoglu, D. and Woodford,
M.  (eds.), NBER  Macroeconomics  Annual  2010,  Vol.  25,  University  of  Chicago  Press,  pp.  59–112;  and
Christiano, L., Eichenbaum, M. and Rebelo, S. (2011), “When Is the Government Spending Multiplier Large?”,
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 119, No 1, pp. 78–121.
De Jong, J., Ferdinandusse, M., Funda, J. and Vetlov, I. (2017), “The effect of public investment in Europe: a
model-based assessment”, Working Paper Series, No 2021, ECB, February.
There was an exemption clause for the deficit limits in the event of a severe recession.
European Fiscal Board (2019), Assessment of EU fiscal rules with a focus on the six and two-pack legislation, 11
September.
Kiley, M. and Roberts, J. (2017), “Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World”, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
