 
Remarks by 
 Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile 
Governor, Bank of Uganda 
 International Association of Deposit Insurers – 
Africa Regional Committee Conference 
 Serena Lake Victoria Hotel & Spa, Kigo 
 September 16 – 19, 2019 
 Hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic 
Development 
The Board Chairman and Members of the Board of the 
Deposit Protection Fund of Uganda 
The Secretary General of the International Association of 
Deposit Insurers 
The Auditor General 
Board Members and Chief Executive Officers of Deposit 
Insurance Agencies  
Board Members and Chief Executive Officers of 
Financial Institutions 
Chief Executive Officers of Financial Sector Safety 
Players 
Distinguished delegates 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Good morning to you all. 
I wish you all a very warm welcome; especially to the 
participants who have travelled from abroad to Uganda, 
and to this splendid resort at Kigo right next to Lake 
Victoria. Thank you all for honouring our invitation to 
the first conference by the Africa Regional Committee of 
the International Association of Deposit Insurers, 
hosted in Uganda.  
 Page 2 of 8 
 I must say that the theme of this conference, ‘Why 
Deposit Insurance’, was very well chosen as it points 
attention to a key component of the financial system 
safety net that is meant to promote financial stability.  
Fundamentally, deposit insurance exists to protect the 
banking system against the risk of bank “runs”, that is, 
unrestrained demand for cash by savers, which can 
cripple the financial intermediation process, disrupt the 
payments system, and constrain the performance of the 
Financial Sector. 
In the normal course of events, healthy banks are 
encouraged to lend the deposits that are entrusted to 
them in a process called financial intermediation, where 
banks make savings available for investment and 
economic development. However, when banks face 
difficulties and become unable to service their 
obligations as they fall due, their creditors, including 
depositors, risk suffering ruinous losses. 
By relying on customer deposits that can be withdrawn 
at little or no notice, banks are exposed to the risk of a 
run on deposits as panic-stricken customers take out 
their funds quickly before the Bank becomes insolvent. 
   Page 3 of 8 
 In order to mitigate the risk of bank runs as well as to 
protect the interests of depositors, deposit insurance 
systems are established to guarantee the nominal value 
and liquidity of deposits up to a certain size, funded 
with premiums paid by the institutions whose deposits 
are insured. Deposit insurance protects depositors, gives 
them comfort that their funds are not too much at risk, 
and ensures the viability of banking system.  
In Uganda, the need for effective deposit insurance was 
exposed during the resolution of several local banks that 
failed during the late 1990s and early 2000s. Indeed, the 
Bank of Uganda (BoU) has recently been the subject of a 
Parliamentary probe seeking final closure of the 
numerous issues and contested claims that arose out of 
the associated receivership and liquidation processes. 
Notably, the depositors of those failed banks were fully 
compensated, for the most part, using taxpayers’ funds 
as the Government sought to preserve public confidence 
in the banking system.  
Needless to say that such implicit deposit insurance by 
the Government imposed an unanticipated financial 
burden on the limited fiscal space.  
 Page 4 of 8 
 Seeking to foster financial sector soundness, several 
reforms were undertaken in the banking system. These 
reforms included but were not limited to:  
  tightening banking laws and regulations designed to 
constrain undue bank risk-taking and inappropriate 
insider dealings;  
  upgrading bank supervision and examination 
systems;  
  providing liquidity through the central bank to 
prevent bank illiquidity problems from turning into 
insolvencies; and  
  intervening to resolve failing banks. 
Of specific relevance was the introduction of a deposit 
insurance scheme that was initially operated within the 
BoU. An effective deposit insurance system is expected 
to yield faster, smoother, and more predictable 
resolutions of failing banks, not least because it follows 
predetermined “rules of the game,” rather than being 
discretionary and ad hoc.  
And it stands to reason to say that a more rules-based 
deposit insurance scheme operates best when it is 
autonomous.  Therefore, in 2016 the Financial 
Institutions Act 2004 was amended to provide for the 
establishment of an autonomous Deposit Protection 
Fund of Uganda, among other reforms.  
 Page 5 of 8 
 Another vital reform, worth highlighting here, is the 
recent increase of the deposit insurance threshold to USh 
10 million from only USh 3 million previously.  
The higher threshold is likely to enhance public 
confidence and encourage greater customer deposits, 
thereby expanding the funds available for financial 
intermediation by the banking sector. Larger pools of 
deposits would reduce the cost of loanable funds for 
banks, spur credit expansion, and ultimately support 
faster economic growth.  
At this point, it is necessary to address any concerns 
about the safety of the deposits that exceed the insurance 
threshold of USh 10 million.   
The protection of large uninsured depositors of failing 
banks, will continue to take place through various forms 
including: a purchase and assumption transaction, in which 
all of the deposits (insured and uninsured alike) of the 
failing bank are transferred to another bank; a financially 
assisted merger of the failing bank with another bank; or 
the provision of financial assistance to the failing bank to 
avert its failure as happens during statutory takeover by 
the regulator. 
  Page 6 of 8 
 Mindful of the risk that deposit insurance would stoke 
moral hazard through encouraging banks to take greater 
risks, I want to assure you that the BoU is committed to 
effective supervision of bank risk-taking, with particular 
attention to the quality and types of assets that banks 
acquire as well as the amount of capital that banks hold 
relative to the risks they take. 
In addition to the risk-based micro-prudential 
supervision, the BoU also undertakes macroprudential 
regulation and supervision to ensure the stability of the 
entire system, including stress testing to ensure that the 
sector is resilient to various shocks.  
Effective deposit insurance can contribute to financial 
stability, only with strong bank regulation and 
supervision in place. Deposit insurance is no substitute 
for effective regulation and supervision of banks. 
Through a risk-based supervision framework, the BoU is 
committed to spotting problems well before insolvency 
occurs and compelling banks to take prompt and pre-
emptive corrective action. 
As I come to the end of my remarks, I must stress the 
need for the nascent Deposit Protection Fund (DPF) of 
Uganda as an autonomous institution to prove its 
credibility and fitness for purpose before it gets tested in 
a period of difficulty.  
 Page 7 of 8 
 The DPF must be well funded, capably staffed, and 
should maintain the support of the central bank as well 
as that of the Government as partners in ensuring the 
stability of the financial system.  
The DPF must also maintain strong links with regional 
and international peers so as to learn from the diversity 
of experiences and to maintain best practices.  
I look forward to working with the DFP as it plays its 
role within the Africa Regional Committee of the 
International Association of Deposit Insurers by 
contributing to the stability of financial systems through 
international cooperation and maintaining such a 
virtuous network as has gathered here for this 
conference.  
It is now my distinct privilege to invite the Honourable 
Minister of Finance to address this audience. 
I thank you all for listening to me.  
 Page 8 of 8 
 