SPEECH 
    DATE: 
SPEAKER: 
VENUE: 
  7 April 2017 
Deputy Governor Henry Ohlsson 
Swedish Trade Union Confederation, Stockholm 
 SVERIGES  RIKSBANK 
SE-103  37 Stockholm 
(Brunkebergst org  11) 
 
Tel  +46  8 787  00 00 
Fax  +46  8  21 05 31 
registratorn @ riks ban k .se 
www.riksb ank .s e 
The distributional effects of monetary 
policy  
“Price stability is a prerequisite for sustained economic growth as well as full 
employment and it prevents an arbitrary redistribution of income and wealth.” 
This is how the Riksbank concluded its press release on 15 January 1993,  when the 
inflation target was announced. The link between monetary policy, growth and 
employment has been very much in focus over the almost 25 years that have 
passed since then. The distributional effects of monetary policy, on the other 
hand, have been more or less overlooked, until the question came into the 
spotlight again in recent years.  
When the Riksbank decided in early 1993 to begin steering its policy towards an 
inflation target, it was starting from a period when the major problem had been a 
high rate of inflation and also a rate of inflation that fluctuated substantially from 
one year to the next. Having a high inflation rate is as we know a problem i n itself, 
but it also becomes more difficult for households and companies to make 
financial decisions, as the real value of savings, investments and debt is affected 
by large fluctuations in inflation. If inflation is higher than expected, borrowers 
benefit from the value of the debts being eroded, while lenders and those with 
large savings are correspondingly disadvantaged. This type of arbitrary 
distribution between lenders and borrowers was common during the 1970s and 
1980s. 
The inflation target, together with the reforms of the fiscal policy framework and 
the changes in wage formation in the 1990s, has contributed to inflation in 
Sweden both coming down to a lower level and becoming more stable than 
before. The same has happened to inflation rates around the world. It is therefore 
not surprising that the question of the distributional effects of inflation and 
monetary policy disappeared from the economic policy debate.  
  I would like to thank in particular Björn Andersson, who has helped me produce this speech. Carl Andreas 
Claussen, Charlotta Edler, Cecilia Roos-Isaksson, Stefan Laséen, Tomas Lundberg, Marianne Sterner, Ulf 
Söderström and Anders Vredin have contributed with valuable comments. 
  1 [14] 
   Distributional effects topical again 
However, in recent years the question has become topical again. One reason for 
this is a growing insight that the distribution of income and wealth may have 
considerable significance for the effects of monetary policy on the economy as a 
whole. And it is therefore important to understand the relationships better. 
Another reason why this has become topical again is the rising asset prices and 
the effect that monetary policy has on the distribution of income and wealth.  
We have gone through a long period where inflation has been low and central 
banks around the world have struggled to bring inflation back up to their 
respective target levels. One might therefore think that the question of monetary 
policy’s distributional effects has become topical because inflation has been 
higher than expected, which has benefitted some groups at the cost of others. But 
this is not actually the main reason; instead it is the efforts the central banks have 
made to increase activity in the economy and to bring up inflation.  
Low interest rates have contributed to a rapid rise in prices of shares and other 
assets, both financial assets and real assets. This effect in itself should be 
inconspicuous. Asset prices normally rise when interest rates fall, which occurs in 
periods when monetary policy stimulates the economy. However, recent years 
have been special in many ways. Apart from policy rates being low for an 
unusually long time, the Riksbank and other central banks have also used other 
methods to further push down the general interest rate level, for instance 
purchases of government bonds. The monetary policy measures have affected 
asset prices in a more direct and visible manner than the conventional policy of 
interest-rate cuts. This has contributed to more discussion of the distributional 
effects of monetary policy.  
The distributional effects of the central banks’ asset purchases have been in focus 
in, for instance, the United States, the United Kingdom and in Germany, where 
there has been considerable discussion of the effects of low interest rates for 
savers.1 In Sweden, the Riksdag Committee on Finance has included distributional 
effects in the questions that are to be included in the ongoing review of the 
monetary policy framework and the Sveriges Riksbank Act – in the terms of 
reference for the review it says that the committee making the review shall 
consider in particular whether the Riksbank should give consideration to the 
consequences that conventional and unconventional monetary policy may have 
on, for instance, the distribution of income in the economy.2 
Explaining why the distribution of income and wealth changes is a challenge that 
is not made easier by the fact that the statistics in some cases lag behind and in 
other cases have large gaps. Those of you who have read Piketty's best-seller 
Capital in the Twenty-First Century also know that one can give the question of 
distributional effects much greater room than I have scope for today. What I want 
to say with these reservations is that those of you who are expecting to hear 
exactly how great the distributional effects of monetary policy have been will 
 1 See, for instance, the Bank of England (2012), OECD (2015), Bindseil et al. (2015), Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), 
European Parliament (2016), Domanski et al. (2016) and Amaral (2017).  
2 Dir.2016:114 
  2 [14] 
   unfortunately be disappointed. My somewhat more modest aim is to make a 
contribution to the discussion by examining the distributional effects of the policy 
and adding shades of meaning to these effects.  
What I hope to convince you of today is that monetary policy also affects 
household income and wealth in ways that are more indirect, but probably more 
meaningful, than via asset prices. While an expansionary monetary policy entails 
rising asset prices in the short term, this is compensated by lower unemployment, 
higher employment and stronger growth. A monetary policy that succeeds in the 
task of attaining price stability also counteracts the negative distributional effects 
of inflation. 
An expansionary monetary policy to defend 
the inflation target  
But, as I said, rising asset prices have been an element of the economic upturn in 
recent years. And during periods when stock prices are rising, the income 
distribution is more uneven between households – this can be seen from standard 
measures of dispersion of the income distribution, such as the so-called Gini 
coefficient (see Figure 1).  
Figure 1. Gini coefficient for disposable income and stock market movements 
Note. The Gini coefficient is a measure of statistical dispersion of, for instance, incomes. The Gini coefficient can 
be between 0 and 1, where a higher value entails greater inequality. The figures are from Statistics Sweden’s 
surveys Household finances 1995-2011 and Income and tax statistics 2011-2015.  
Sources: Macrobond and Statistics Sweden 
 
As I mentioned earlier, there is nothing unusual in asset prices rising during 
periods when monetary policy is stimulating the economy. On the other hand, it is 
   3 [14] 
   of course unusual that monetary policy has stimulated the economy to this extent 
and that the Riksbank has not eased up on the accelerator as economic activity 
has continued to increase and asset prices have risen. So a natural first question 
is: why has monetary policy been this way?  
The short answer is: because the inflation target is worth defending. You have 
heard my colleagues on the Executive Board and I say it many times before, but it 
is worth repeating. From my perspective, the inflation target of 2 per cent has 
played a central role in the Swedish economy – and I am sure I share this opinion 
with many of you here today. We have had considerable benefit of households 
and companies, savers and investors, expecting a future rate of inflation that is on 
a reasonably low level and that their expectations are more or less consistent with 
one another. This has contributed to a completely different stability in price -
setting and wage formation over the past two decades than in the two decades 
prior to this, which has in turn contributed to inflation falling at the same time as 
we have had more stable and much higher real wages on average. That high and 
fluctuating inflation has disappeared as a disturbing factor should also have meant 
that financial decisions by households and companies have in general become 
simpler and better.   
But the key to this type of development is a joint anchoring of inflation 
expectations and a condition for this is that the inflation target of 2 per cent is 
perceived as credible. This is the problem that has marked the Riksbank's 
monetary policy in recent years. In January 2015,  when I became a member of the 
Executive Board, we were in an unfortunate situation where inflation 
expectations in the longer run were losing their anchorage around the 2 per cent 
target. Monetary policy had been expansionary for a long time and further 
measures were needed to strengthen confidence in the target and to send very 
clear signals about the Riksbank’s intentions to bring inflation back to 2 per ce nt. 
But how can this be done in an environment where interest rates are already very 
low to start with? It is important to remember that there has long been a trend 
with falling interest rates around the world – a trend that has nothing to do with 
monetary policy, but rather concerns ageing populations and other structural 
factors that have pushed up savings in relation to willingness to invest. In the 
midst of this the central banks have also had to manage the effects of the 
financial crisis and a protracted economic slump. Many of them, including the 
large central banks like the ECB and the Federal Reserve in the United States, have 
conducted an expansionary monetary policy to support the recovery and bring up 
inflation, both via very low policy rates and via more unconventional measures 
such as various asset purchase programmes. Monetary policy in Sweden has also 
needed to take this into account.  
So to safeguard the upturn in economic activity and inflation in Sweden and to 
turn around the negative trend in inflation expectations, we have cut the repo 
rate down to a negative level, and with effect from the beginning of 2015 we have 
implemented an asset purchase programme to make our monetary policy even 
more expansionary. Our assessment is that this monetary policy has by and larger 
been successful. Market rates have followed our cuts in the repo rate and become 
negative. And the bond purchases seem to have pushed down interest rates more 
or less in the way we expected.  
  4 [14] 
   Monetary policy also seems to have had the desired effect on inflation and 
inflation expectations. The upturn in inflation that began in 2014  has continued, 
and the downward trend in long-term expectations has turned into an upward 
trend since the beginning of 2015. Another sign that the expansionary monetary 
policy has had an effect is that we have had strong economic activity in Sweden. 
Growth has been high and employment has increased.  
Monetary policy's distribution effects are 
difficult to disentangle  
At the same time as the expansionary monetary policy has contributed to the 
economic upturn, asset prices have risen. They can be affected by monetary 
policy through several different channels. Lower policy rates mean that bond 
yields become lower, at the same time as prices of bonds rise. If the central bank 
also purchases bonds, this puts further downward pressure on yields and further 
upward pressure on prices. Those selling the bonds to the central bank may also 
wish to adapt their portfolios and buy other assets, which means that the prices 
of these assets will in turn rise. The central bank can also, by means of various 
types of communication on monetary policy, make it clear that the expansionary 
policy will continue for a longer period of time, which can contribute to a more 
positive view of activity in the economy. This can in turn contribute to asset prices 
rising.  
The Riksbank and other central banks are well aware of all of these channels. 
Expansionary monetary policy affecting asset prices in this way is actually a part of 
the transmission mechanism for monetary policy, that is, the way that monetary 
policy spreads through the economy. But the effect on asset prices is not the 
objective of the policy. The objective is that the expansionary policy – through the 
effects on interest rates, asset prices, exchange rate, access to credit, 
expectations and so on – will in a couple of years contribute to increasing activity 
in the economy and bringing up employment and inflation. It is important not to 
lose this perspective in discussions of the distributional effects of monetary policy, 
as it broadens the spectrum of effects to more than just those coming through 
asset prices. Moreover, it points to the difficulties in determining the size of the 
distributional effects of monetary policy.  
One such difficulty is assessing what should actually be considered an effect of 
monetary policy and what is rather an effect of the conditions for monetary policy 
having changed. In a system like the national economy, it is not an easy task to 
distinguish between cause and effect. The Riksbank does not operate in a 
vacuum; it adapts its monetary policy to changing circumstances. 3 Moreover, if 
monetary policy were not adapted to new circumstances, this would also have 
distributional effects. It is therefore not entirely correct to compare the income 
 3 In the research literature, one often tries to distinguish the independent, “pure” effect of monetary policy from 
the effect of the monetary policy that systematically reacts to changed circumstances. This is done by identifying 
monetary policy “shocks”, that is, changes in monetary policy that are unexpected, given how the central bank 
normally reacts to changed circumstances. The size of the monetary policy effect will thus depend on, among 
other things, the assumption of how monetary policy normally reacts.  
  5 [14] 
   and wealth distribution after a period of expansionary monetary policy with the 
distribution prior to these measures being taken. The point of comparison should 
rather be how the distribution would have looked without the expansionary 
monetary policy.   
Another difficulty is what time perspective one should have to determine the 
effects of monetary policy. I have argued that it is important to take into account 
the total effect of monetary policy on the economy. Asset prices are affected 
relatively rapidly, but it takes time before the total effect of monetary policy has 
an impact on the real economy and ultimately inflation. Moreover, a common 
starting point when discussing the effects of monetary policy is that in the long 
term it is neutral with regard to real economic quantities such as growth, 
unemployment and income distribution. In this perspective, one can therefore 
argue that monetary policy should only have minor distributional effects, if any at 
all. The effects of an expansionary monetary policy during economic slumps 
should be counterbalanced by the opposite effects of a tight monetary policy 
during booms.  
It may of course be reasonable to take as a starting point that monetary policy is 
neutral in the long run. But there are factors that may point to a need to 
modulate this starting point. Some research results indicate that the effects of 
expansionary and contractionary monetary policy are not necessarily 
symmetrical.4 There are also mechanisms that make the risk of staying 
unemployed increase the longer one is unemployed. Add to this that the income 
profile over the life cycle improves considerably if one has a job. This could mean 
that there are motives for conducting a relatively more offensive monetary policy 
in economic recessions. But here more research is needed to gain a deeper insight 
into the causes and scope of this type of persistence effects on unemployment 
and what these effects mean for monetary policy.  
Monetary policy affects incomes from 
different sources  
The effects of monetary policy on income and wealth distribution are in other 
words rather difficult to disentangle. But let us look at some different ways in 
which the expansionary monetary policy conducted in recent years may have 
affected the income distribution. An appropriate starting point could be the 
functional income distribution of GDP. As we know, GDP can be measured from 
different sides, for instance as the total of all factor income. Somewhat simplified, 
the income comes from two main sources: remuneration to the labour force in 
the form of wages and other benefits and remuneration to capital in the form of 
yield and profits. Both of these types of remuneration have increased over the 
past three years, and GDP has increased by a good three per cent on average in 
 4 See, for instance, OECD (2015) and Furceri et al. (2016). 
  6 [14] 
   real terms. 5 But the question is how the growing incomes have been distributed 
among households. 
Households differ with regard to the size of the income they receive from 
different sources. In general, labour income is in relative terms the most 
important source of income for households in the lower and middle parts of the 
income distribution, while capital income has the most significance for those at 
the top – particularly the very top – of the distribution. As monetary policy affects 
wages and capital income in different ways, the overall effect may differ from one 
household to the next. It is this channel from monetary policy via the composition 
of household income on which the debate has focused the most – rising asset 
prices should have benefitted households at the top of the income distribution to 
a relatively large degree and thus contributed to a greater income dispersion.  
Higher asset prices, lower yield and cheaper 
loans 
However, households do not only differ with regard to the composition of labour 
and capital income. There are also relatively large variations between households 
with regard to the distribution of capital income from capital gains, yield and 
interest on different types of asset and liability. The effect of an expansionary 
monetary policy on income and wealth distribution can thus vary for this reason, 
too.  
Households’ capital incomes may, for instance, differ in their sensitivity to 
changes in interest rates. All else being equal, low interest rates benefit 
household with relatively large debts as interest payments become lower. 
Households with bank savings are correspondingly disadvantaged and households 
with relatively large interest-bearing assets thus have a lower yield. Here the 
maturity of the different assets and liabilities also plays a role. If, for instance, 
mortgages are mainly at fixed interest rates, the effect of interest-rate cuts will be 
less than if the loans are primarily at variable rates. A comparison between 
different income groups shows that liabilities as a percentage of disposable 
income are more than 250  per cent in all groups in Sweden (see Figure 2). With 
the exception of the group with the lowest income, however, there is generally 
little difference in the debt-to-income ratio between the groups.  
   5 A related question is how income from these two sources develop in relation to one another over time. See, for 
instance, Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) who find that the share of labour income has fallen in many 
countries and many sectors. 
  7 [14] 
  Figure 2. Debt-to-income ratio in different income groups 2016 
Percentage of disposable income 
 
 Note. The columns show the median in each decile group. Data for July 2016. The high debt ratio in the lowest 
income group should be interpreted with a certain amount of caution, as this group includes, among others, 
households with highly varied incomes, for example households with negative income. 
 Source: The Riksbank 
 
In addition to households having different sizes of assets and liabilities that are 
affected by interest rates to different degrees, there may also be other 
dimensions that play a role in how the distribution of income and wealth is 
affected by a period of very expansionary monetary policy. For instance, one can 
imagine that household that are used to managing their assets and liabilities have 
better conditions for safeguarding themselves against or benefitting from the 
effects of monetary policy on interest rates and asset prices. 
However, the distributional effects of monetary policy do not come solely through 
changes in nominal interest rates and asset prices. Ultimately, it is the effect when 
consideration is given to inflation that is important. And the composition of 
household wealth is also significant in this context. To begin with, households are 
more negatively affected by an expansionary monetary policy that increases 
inflation if they have a relatively large share of assets that have poor or little 
protection against inflation. Cash is of course the most obvious example, even if it 
may in this context be of less significance for the wealth distribution, given how 
the use of cash has declined in Sweden.  
The real value of all assets and liabilities is of course affected by how high inflation 
is and I have earlier mentioned the redistribution between borrowers and lenders 
as an effect of an unexpectedly high or low inflation rate. An unexpected increase 
in inflation, for instance, that monetary policy has become more e xpansionary 
than expected, reduces the real value of assets and liabilities. This can, for 
instance, benefit households with relatively large debts on houses and 
  8 [14] 
   apartments, but disadvantage low income households who rent their homes. 
Households with large financial assets are also disadvantaged, but they are 
perhaps more used to, and better able to, adapting their assets to avoid the 
inflation risk. 
Hence, to study the distributional effects linked to increased capital income, it 
would be interesting to see how assets and liabilities are distributed between 
households. When it comes to liabilities, there are relatively good statistics 
available, but with regard to the distribution of various assets, we are 
unfortunately fumbling in the dark to some extent.  
The collection of data on financial assets and liabilities at household level ceased 
with the abolition of the wealth tax in 2007. The financial and national accounts 
do provide some information on how households’ various financial and real assets 
have changed on aggregate. But when it comes to wealth developments for 
individuals, we do not have much to go on, as the statistics in principle came to a 
stop in 2007.  There have been admirable attempts to estimate developments 
since then via the capitalisation of incomes and expenditure s, but the quality 
cannot of course be compared with register data. 6 Several commissions in recent 
times have noted that there is a substantial need for up-to-date wealth statistics 
at individual level to be able to analyse specific questions such as financial stability 
risks and over-indebtedness, but also to gain a deeper insight into the income 
distribution in general.7  
Distributional effect of reduced 
unemployment and higher employment 
important  
So far we have discussed the different channels by which an expansionary 
monetary policy can affect income distribution via capital gains, yield and interest 
rates. As you will note, however, I have avoided saying anything specific about the 
size of the distributional effects. As I mentioned earlier, it is difficult to determine 
exactly how large these effects are and not even their direction is always evident. 
But rising stock prices and thereby larger profits when selling these assets will 
tend, all else being equal, to lead to a more unequal income distribution. The 
effect of the expansionary monetary policy on capital incomes, via rising equity 
prices, should therefore have led to a more unequal income distribution. 
However, capital income is only one part of households’ total income; the largest 
part is comprised of labour income.  
As with capital income an expansionary monetary policy can affect the labour 
income of different households in different ways. For some households the hourly 
wage may be what primarily determines their income development, while for 
others the number of hours worked is the most important thing – and above all 
 6 Lundberg and Waldenström (2016). See also Waldenström (2016). 
7 Sveriges Riksbank (2011), Swedish Fiscal Policy Council (2013) and SoU 2013:78. 
  9 [14] 
   whether or not one actually has a job. As monetary policy affects these quantities 
in different ways, income distribution will also be affected.  
In Sweden, it is primarily the differences between the income of those who have a 
job and those who do not that is important to the income distribution, rather than 
the wage differences between those who work.8 This is clearly visible in the 
dispersion of disposable income, that is, income including work and capital 
income, as well as various transfers and after taxes are deducted. The higher the 
disposable income, the less common it is that one’s main source of support is 
from something other than labour and capital. People who receive 
unemployment benefit are mainly found in the lower part of the distribution, as 
are those with sickness benefit and other benefits such as activity compensation 
and financial support.9 It is also clear that the group with the lowest income 
includes people who according to the Swedish Public Employment Service have a 
vulnerable position on the labour market, for instance, those born outside of 
Europe.  
The strong economic activity in recent years has meant that demand for labour 
has increased, which has meant that employment has shown a rising trend. 
Unemployment has also fallen, which is impressive given that the number of 
people in the labour force has at the same time increased. This development has 
reasonably, all else being equal, had a levelling effect on the distribution of 
income. An observation supporting this argument is that employment among 
those born outside of Europe has actually also begun to increase, albeit from a 
much lower level than for the other groups. Of course, it is not possible to ascribe 
the whole of this distributional effect to monetary policy – in the same way as it 
cannot account for the whole distributional effect of rising asset prices. But it is 
quite clear that the expansionary monetary policy has contributed to the strong 
development of the labour market in recent years.  
 Another aspect of the improvements in the labour market that is relevant here is 
the link to future pensions. The focus is often on individual pension savings, but 
households’ total pension wealth also contains savings in collective funds, for 
instance, in systems for occupational pension schemes and premium pensions. 
The fact is that this form of saving currently comprises around half of total 
financial assets (see Figure 3). Moreover, we all have pension assets linked to the 
general income-based pension, which are not in funds but are linked to the 
pension rights we earn until we retire. Whether or not one has a job does play a 
major role for the size of the collective saving and the general income-based 
pension. It determines whether or not one receives an occupational pension and 
is also important for one’s income profile during the working life. Lower 
unemployment and higher employment should therefore have a levelling 
distributional effect for this reason, too.  
   8 The employment perspective on the income distribution in Sweden is described by, for instance, Bengtsson, 
Edin and Holmlund (2014) and SNS (2017). 
9 See, for instance, Government Bill 2011/12:100. 
  10 [14] 
  Figure 3. Collective financial assets as a proportion of total financial assets 
Per cent 
  Source: Hasselberg and Ohlsson (2016) 
 
With regard to the funded pension savings, the period with low interest rates has 
been a strain. Yield has been low and this has put pressure on the pension funds 
to meet the guarantees in their insurance plans. This has sometimes been raised 
as a negative effect of the expansionary monetary policy, but the problem – to the 
extent that it is a problem – is rather connected to the global falling trend in long-
term real interest rates.10 In light of this, economic agents need to adjust to 
interest rates probably not returning to the levels we previously considered 
normal. But at the same time, it is important to remember that interest rates in 
the long term will nevertheless be much higher than they are now.  
Price stability creates good conditions for 
economic growth and high employment  
If I am to summarise my presentation today, let me first say that I think it is a 
good thing that distributional effects are once again being discussed with regard 
to monetary policy. I believe that we can learn a lot about the impact of monetary 
policy on the economy by studying how monetary policy interacts with the 
distribution of income and wealth.  
Today I have focused primarily on the question of what distributional effects the 
expansionary monetary policy conducted by the Riksbank and other central banks 
 10 I have discussed the factors behind this downturn, what it means for households and companies and the 
consequences for monetary policy in an earlier speech, see Ohlsson (2016).  
 
  11 [14] 
   may have had. The debate has so far mainly focused on the effect of rising asset 
prices. I have tried to nuance this picture and pointed out the importance of 
actually looking at the total effect of monetary policy on the economy, as well as 
using the correct point of comparison. My point can be summarised roughly as: 
without the expansionary monetary policy, growth and employment would have 
been lower and unemployment would have been higher. This would hardly have 
benefitted any group in society, and especially not those with the lowest incomes. 
Assessments of the distributional effects of the expansionary monetary policy 
should be regarded in the light of this.  
It is also important to note that no group would have benefitted from a decline in 
confidence in the inflation target. The whole idea behind the inflation target was 
that stable prices create good conditions for economic growth and high 
employment, as it was formulated in the Riksbank's press release in 1993. This is 
also a perspective that needs to be included in the discussion of distributional 
effects and monetary policy. 
Finally, my view is that overall resource utilisation in the Swedish economy has 
now passed normal levels and can be expected to rise even higher in the coming 
years. At the same time, we see ahead of us that inflation will rise towards the 
target. It is therefore probable that the Riksbank sooner or later will first ease up 
on the accelerator and then begin using the brake. In my opinion, it is wise to start 
thinking now about how such a scenario will play out. Monetary policy will then 
be unable to stimulate activity and the labour market in the same way as in recent 
years and this will of course also have distributional effects. It is important that 
focus is then aimed at other policy areas, where the responsibility for 
distributional issues is more natural.    
    12 [14] 
   References 
Amaral, Pedro (2017), Monetary Policy and Inequality. Economic Commentary, 
2017-01,  Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. 
Bank of England (2012), The distributional effects of asset purchases. Quarterly 
Bulletin 2012Q3. 
Bengtsson, Niklas, Edin, Per-Anders and Holmlund, Bertil (2014), Löner, 
sysselsättning och inkomster – ökar klyftorna i Sverige? (Wages, employment and 
income – are the gaps increasing in Sweden?) Report to the Swedish Fiscal Policy 
Council 2014/1. 
Dir.2016:114,  Review of the monetary policy framework and the Sveriges 
Riksbank Act, committee terms of reference. Ministry of Finance.  
Domanski, Dietrich, Scatigna, Michela and Zabai, Anna (2016), Wealth inequality 
and monetary policy. BIS Quarterly Review, March 2016. 
European Parliament (2016), ECB Quantitative Easing (QE): What are the side 
effects? Monetary Dialogue 15 June 2015. IP/A/ECON/NT/2015-02. 
Swedish Fiscal Policy Council (2013), Swedish Fiscal Policy. Report of the Fiscal 
Policy Council 2013. 
Furceri, Davide, Loungani, Prakash and Zdzienicka, Aleksandra (2016), The Effects 
of Monetary Policy Shocks on Inequality. IMF Working Paper 16/245, International 
Monetary Fund. 
Government Bill 2011/12:100,  Appendix 3 Distribution policy account, 2012 Spring 
Fiscal Policy Bill. 
Hasselberg, Ylva and Ohlsson, Henry (2016), Collective wealth formation: Conflict 
and compromise in Sweden, 1950–2000.  In P. Hudson and K. Tribe (ed), The 
contradictions of capital in the twenty-first century. The Piketty opportunity. 
Agenda Publishing, Newcastle. 
Karabarbounis, Loukas and Neiman, Brent (2014), The Global Decline of the Labor 
Share. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(1), pp. 61-103. 
Lundberg, Jacob and Waldenström, Daniel (2016), Wealth inequality in Sweden: 
What can we learn from capitalized income tax data? Under publication in Review 
of Income and Wealth. 
OECD (2015), Income and Wealth Inequality and Monetary Policy. 
ECO/CPE/WP3(2016)3, Economics Department, Economic Policy Committee. 
Ohlsson, Henry (2016), Decision today, consequences far into the future, Speech 
on 18 March, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Piketty, Thomas (2015), Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Belknap Press. 
SNS, Centre for Business and Policy Studies (2017), Report of the Economic Policy 
Group 2017. 
  13 [14] 
   SoU 2013:78,  Överskuldsättning i kreditsamhället? (Over-indebtedness in a credit 
society?) Report from the commission on over-indebtedness. Swedish 
Government Official Reports.  
Sveriges Riksbank (2011), The Riksbank's inquiry into the risks on the Swedish 
housing market.  
Waldenström, Daniel (2016), The National Wealth of Sweden, 1810–2014, 
Scandinavian Economic History Review 64(1), pp. 36–54, 
  14 [14] 
