Philip  R  Lane:  The  role  of  financial  regulation  in  protecting
consumers
Speech by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the University College
Cork, Cork, 23 February 2017.
Introduction
 It is pleasure to visit University College Cork and I thank the Financial Services Innovation Centre
for hosting this talk. Today, I aim to outline the Central Bank’s approach to fulfilling its consumer
protection mandate. I will first discuss the underlying theoretical case for regulatory interventions
to protect consumers. Next, I will describe the institutional framework for consumer protection at
domestic  and  international  levels.  I  will  then  explain  our  vision  for  how  the  Central  Bank  can
contribute to consumer protection and the methods by which we implement this agenda.  I will
then turn to laying the current priorities in our consumer protection work. Finally, I will discuss
some  developments  that  will  influence  the  nature  of  consumer  protection  regulation  in  the
coming years.
The Case for Consumer Protection
A vast empirical literature shows that consumers tend to make poor financial choices, taking on
too much debt, misunderstanding investment risk and choosing financial products that do not
match  their  needs.  Over  recent  decades,  the  formal  economic  theory  to  rationalise  these
patterns  has  been  developed,  with  insights  from  economics  and  psychology  blended  in  the
1
vibrant fields of behavioural economics and behavioural finance.
The  fast  pace  of  financial  innovation  has  created  a  complex  world  for  consumers,  where  the
range  of  available  financial  products  is  broad,  and  the  consequences  of  financial  choices  are
significant. Coupled with this, the typical household tends to have a limited personal track record
in making financial decisions, since the purchase of financial products happens only infrequently.
This is problematic, since the demands for financial sophistication and knowledge are sizeable if
a  consumer  is  to  navigate  safely  through  the  options  put  forward  by  providers  of  financial
services.  Financial  decisions  often  require  consumers  to  assess  risk  and  uncertainty,  for
example, and to consider trade-offs between the near term and the long term. A growing body of
academic literature shows that, among the general population, the level of financial knowledge,
2
skills and ability to consider such complexities is low.
There  is  also  a  growing  body  of  evidence  from  the  field  of  behavioural  economics  that
consumers are subject to behavioural biases when making decisions. In other words, decisions
are affected by emotions and psychological experiences, by rules of thumb and accepted norms.
For example, consumers can exhibit present-biased behaviour, which leads them to over-value
payoffs today relative to payoffs in the future, a bias which can be associated with self-control
problems.  In addition, households can be overly attached to the status quo and suffer inertia
bias, taking default options in financial contracts, failing to switch product or provider even when
there  are  clear  benefits  to  switching.   Retail  investors  also  tend  to  follow  naïve  investment
strategies rather than identifying superior options.   Consumers  can  also  exhibit  loss  aversion
6
bias, meaning that they care more about potential losses than making equivalent gains.
3
5
4
The design of financial products and services can serve to ease or exacerbate these biases.  In
this context, behavioural economics shows that framing matters – put simply, firms can present
the same information in different ways and this can lead to different choices by consumers.  A
key  insight  from  the  recent  experience  with  financial  crisis  and  from  the  growing  literature  on
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
behavioural  economics,  is  that  consumers  do  not  always  act  in  their  own  best  interest.  In
addition, market forces do not always act to reduce consumer mistakes. Firms face their own
incentives when designing and  framing  products,  and  these  incentives  may  not  align  with  the
best interests of the consumer. For example, analysis by the Office of Fair Trading in the UK
shows that firms can frame prices in a way that plays on consumer biases.  Empirical research
also suggests that firms can choose to market the salient features of products that appeal to
consumer  biases,  while  shrouding  the  less  favourable  aspects  that  could  alter  a  consumer’s
choice  to  purchase  that  product.   The  interactions  between  misaligned  incentives  and
behavioural  biases  can  adversely  affect  consumer  welfare,  and  there  are  many  examples  of
9
analytical work that highlight such costs.
7
8
In summary, there is abundant empirical and theoretical research to show that consumers do not
always  act  in  their  own  best  interest  in  making  financial  decisions  and  that  biases  can  be
exacerbated  by  the  design  of  financial  products.  In  this  context,  financial  regulation  to  protect
consumers  can  play  a  critical  role  and  I  would  now  like  to  talk  to  you  about  the  institutional
arrangements for the protection of consumers across the globe, and the vision for consumer
protection at the Central Bank of Ireland.
Consumer Protection: Institutional Setup
Around the world, institutional arrangements in place to protect consumers vary from stand-alone
consumer protection agencies to bodies with dual regulation and consumer protection mandates
and  bodies  like  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  with  financial  stability,  prudential  regulation  and
consumer protection mandates.
  Measures applied to protect consumers range from working
to ensure financial stability, through prudential and macro prudential regulation, supervision and
enforcement  to  personal  financial  information  and  education.    Whatever  the  institutional
architecture,  achieving  effective  outcomes  for  the  consumers  of  financial  services  requires
collaboration between all the parts of the system.
10
Here in Ireland, a number of agencies are charged with the protection of consumers of financial
products.    Our  prudential,  supervision  and  consumer  protection  roles  include  the  setting  of
statutory codes of conduct for financial services firms, such as codes on how products should
be sold, the information that should be provided and how complaints should be dealt with.   The
role of the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission includes the provision of personal
finance  information  and  education,  including  a  web  helpline  and  comparisons  of  financial
products.
    The  Financial  Services  Ombudsman  assesses  the  complaints  of  individual
consumers  against  their  financial  services  providers  and  can  direct  redress  where  he  finds
against a firm.
 We work co-operatively for the protection of consumers.  A consumer can also
take  action  through  the  courts  against  a  financial  services  provider,  although  there  is  no
legislative provision in Ireland for class actions by a group of consumers.
11
12
Following the global financial crisis, there is consensus on the need for greater international and
European  convergence  and  cooperation  on  how  financial  institutions  are  regulated  and
supervised.  Within  Europe,  this  has  resulted  in  the  setting  up  of  the  Single  Supervisory
Mechanism (SSM) for bank regulation (although it has no consumer protection mandate), as well
as regulatory initiatives such as Solvency II which has the twin goals of enhancing consumer
protection and maintaining financial stability in the insurance sector, the Capital Markets Union
project and the growth and influence of the European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs).  In addition,
investor protection is being enhanced through the MIFID II Directive.
The  three  Supervisory  Authorities,  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA),  the  European
Securities  and  Markets  Authority  (ESMA)  and  the  European  Insurance  and  Occupational
Pensions Authority (EIOPA) are working to shape the consumer protection framework across
Europe.
  EIOPA, for example, is focused on promoting transparency, simplicity and fairness in
the market for retail insurance and pension products.  Its guidelines on product oversight and
13
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
governance  for  insurers  aim  to  minimise  the  risk  of  consumer  detriment  and  mis-selling  of
insurance products and underpin new regulatory requirements under the Insurance Distribution
Directive which must be transposed into national law by member states by 23 February 2018. 
The introduction of EU directives into national legislation plays an important role in the ongoing
strengthening of protection for consumers within the regulatory framework.
15
14
In the international arena, bodies such as the OECD, the G20 countries and FinCoNet are active
in promoting the protection of consumers of financial services.
  In October 2011, a set of ten
high-level  principles  on  Financial  Consumer  Protection  was  endorsed  by  the  G20  Finance
Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors.
    These  non-binding  principles  include  that:  financial
consumer  protection  should  be  an  integral  part  of  the  legal,  regulatory  and  supervisory
framework; there should be oversight bodies explicitly responsible for consumer protection; all
financial  consumers  should  be  treated  equitably;  honestly  and  fairly  at  all  stages  of  their
relationship  with  financial  services  providers;  and  financial  services  providers  and  their
authorised agents should aim to work in the best interests of their customers and be responsible
for upholding financial consumer protection. Promotion of financial education and awareness by
all relevant stakeholders as well as easily-accessible clear information on consumer protection,
rights and responsibilities and the disclosure to consumers of key information informing them of
the fundamental benefits, risks and terms are also among the high-level G20 principles.    
Our Vision
the  Central  Bank  our  mission  statement 
At 
is “Safeguarding  Stability,  Protecting
Consumers”.    Our  vision  is  of  a  well-functioning,  well-managed  and  well-regulated  financial
services system that is underpinned by a strong culture of compliance, with firms and individuals
within firms acting in the best interests of their customers, backed up by comprehensive and
enforceable  legislation,  rigorous  supervision,  a  credible  threat  of  enforcement  and  powers  of
redress when consumers have suffered detriment.  
A fundamental protection for consumers lies in ensuring that the financial system is stable and
the firms that operate within it are financially safe and sound.  This means, inter alia, that investor
assets  are  safe  and  available  and  that  an  insurer’s  promise  to  pay  out  in  the  event  of  an
unforeseen future loss will be honoured. 
Our aims are articulated in our 5 C’s framework. In order for regulated firms to act in the best
interests of Consumers, all regulated firms should embed and demonstrate a positive consumer-
focused Culture which will allow consumers to have Confidence in the financial decisions they
are making and the firms they are dealing with.  We Challenge firms where their focus is not on
positive consumer outcomes and we take appropriate regulatory action to ensure that firms meet
their statutory Compliance standards. 
As well as working to develop a positive consumer focused culture within firms, we continue to
develop and review our consumer protection framework to enhance the protections in place.  In
this regard we participate actively in the European and International bodies, including the three
European  Supervisory  Authorities  and  FinCoNet,  to  influence  the  future  shape  of  consumer
protection. 
Our Methods
Let  me  explain  our  working  methods.    As  an  integrated  organisation,  we  work  to  deliver
consumer protection through a continuum of functions ranging from financial stability, through
authorisation, prudential regulation, supervision and inspections to enforcement and redress.
As I said earlier, ensuring that the financial system is stable and the firms that operate within it
are financially safe and sound is a basic level of protection for consumers. A recent example is
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  introduction  of  the  macro-prudential  mortgage  lending  rules  aimed  at  reducing  the  risk  of
overheating in the housing market and reducing the risk of consumers over-borrowing.
In  our  role  of  authorising  financial  services  firms  to  operate  in  the  Irish  market,  we  act  as  a
gatekeeper  to  protect  consumers.    We  are  rigorous  and  challenging  in  our  application  of  the
requirements and standards so that the firms we authorise can be expected to meet the best
interests of consumers.  Our criteria include: the fitness and probity of individual directors and
senior  management;  the  adequacy  of  firm  capital;  the  adequacy  of  internal  controls  and  risk
management systems; and the level of resources and expertise of staff.   We can and do refuse
applications  from  financial  services  providers  and  we  can  and  do  withdraw  or  revoke
authorisations.  We can investigate individuals performing specific functions where we suspect
an individual’s fitness and probity.  We can issue a suspension notice and/or a prohibition notice
potentially prohibiting the individual from performing all such functions indefinitely.
As  prudential  regulator,  we  have  regular  supervisory  engagement  with  firms.    During  this
engagement, we may identify an issue or process that is not necessarily consistent with the best
interests of consumers.  In such cases, we can seek additional information, request the firm to
perform a task, cease a practice or modify a process.  In the first instance, we may require the
firm to mitigate the risk but we can also use our regulatory powers to issue a direction to the
firm. 
We use the Probability Risk and Impact SysteM (PRISM) as our framework for the supervision of
regulated firms.  We developed this risk-based framework so that we could prioritise our work
and target our finite resources on the highest level risks.  It allows supervisors to judge the risks
a  firm  poses  to  the  economy  and  the  consumer  and  mitigate  those  risks  we  consider
unacceptable.    To  identify  high-  level  risk  issues,  we  build  business  intelligence  through  the
analysis  of,  for  example,  data  on  sales,  complaints  about  products  and  services,  advertising
spends, new business and product development, issues arising from queries and social media,
horizon scanning and feedback from supervisors, enforcement and authorisation officers.  This
helps  us  to  detect  and  understand  where  potential  consumer  detriment  can  arise  and  helps
supervisors compile conduct risk reports on which our actions to mitigate risk will be based. 
We  use  themed  inspections  to  focus  on  a  specific  issue,  topic  or  product  rather  than  on  a
specific institution.  We identify the themes to pursue in a number of ways, including consumer
queries,  complaints,  issues  arising  from  previous  inspections,  market  intelligence  and  annual
sectoral  risk  assessments,  as  well  as  advice  from  the  Consumer  Advisory  Group  on  our
consumer  protection  strategy  and  policy  initiatives.
    Themed  inspections  are  conducted  by
survey or by a combination of survey and on-site inspections.  Following a themed inspection, we
issue firm-specific letters, an industry-wide letter and a press release and publish our findings on
the Central Bank website. Where we identify a specific compliance issue in an individual firm, we
address this directly with the firm.
16
A  credible  threat  of  enforcement  underscores  our  powers  to  protect  consumers  of  financial
services.    We  take  robust  enforcement  action  aimed  at  promoting  principled  and  ethical
behaviour  by  and  within  regulated  entities.    Transparent  and  strong  action  where  entities  or
individuals fall short of required standards helps to deter poor practices, achieve compliance and
encourage the behaviour we expect.  We take action where firms or individuals have breached
provisions in prescribed legislation, a code, or a condition, requirement or obligation imposed by
the Central Bank.  In 2013, legislation provided the Bank with formal redress powers to direct
regulated financial services firms to make appropriate redress to customers where they have
suffered or will suffer a loss as a result of widespread or regular relevant defaults by a regulated
financial services provider. Where consumers suffered detriment prior to 2013, we have used
our influence to obtain redress for consumers on a range of issues including payment protection
insurance  and  credit  card  protection  insurance,  as  well  as  part  of  the  tracker  mortgage
examination. 
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Current Priorities
17
We set out what we see as the key risks now facing consumers in our Consumer Protection
Outlook  Report,  which  was  published  last  week.
      These  range  from  the  absence  of  a
consumer-focused  culture  in  financial  services  firms,  through  the  ongoing  problems  of  high
levels of indebtedness and mortgage arrears, to the implications for consumers of the significant
increases in the cost of health and motor insurance.  There are risks to consumers from poor
product design and marketing especially where products are complex and terms and conditions
may be difficult to understand.  There are risks, as well as advantages, for consumers from the
greater use of technology to deliver financial products and services and from the pace and scale
of  technological  innovation  in  the  financial  services  sector.   And  there  are  potential  risks  for
consumers from the changing international economic and political landscape from Brexit to the
post-Trump reform of regulation in the United States.
In a recovering economy, there are also risks for consumers.  We see an increase in the level of
new lending in all areas which needs to be managed by lenders to ensure that new debt is both
affordable and suitable for the borrower.  Lenders are aware that they are required under our
Consumer Protection Code to assess affordability and to lend responsibly on a case by case
basis.  In a low interest environment earning a return on savings or providing for retirement is
more difficult and firms need to make their customers aware of the increased risks involved in
products that offer higher rewards.  Again, regulated firms know that they are required to ensure
that  the  products  they  sell  to  their  customers  are  properly  explained  and  understood  and
appropriate to that customer’s risk appetite. 
Having identified these and other risks, what is the Central Bank doing to address these risks and
to enhance its protection of consumers? First, we continuously assess our consumer protection
regulatory framework to ensure it is fit for purpose and working for consumers.  To do this we
use  market  intelligence,  our  supervisory  experience,  consumer  research  and  insights  into
consumer  behaviour  as  well  as  feedback  from  key  consumer  protection  bodies  such  as  the
Competition  and  Consumer  Protection  Commission  and  the  Financial  Services  Ombudsman.
European  legislation,  including  new  directives,  as  well  as  wider  international  developments
continue to shape our framework.  We are active participants in the three European Supervisory
Authorities as well as in FinCoNet. Ongoing developments in the consumer protection framework
include  the  implementation  of  EU  Directives  in  Insurance,  Payments  Services  and  Markets  in
Financial Instruments and reviews of our Codes, including the Minimum Competency Code and
the Consumer Protection Code for Licensed Moneylenders.
I referred earlier to the risk to consumers from the absence of a consumer-focused culture within
financial  services  firms.    What  do  I  mean  by  such  a  culture?  We  see  a  positive  consumer-
focused  culture  as  one  in  which  financial  services  firms  communicate  clearly  with  their
customers, help customers to understand the financial products and options available to them
and  to  make  the  financial  decisions  that  best  meet  their  needs.      It  is  a  culture  in  which
consumers can be confident that firms are acting in their best interests.  It is a culture in which
boards  and  senior  management  set  the  tone  through  their  commitment  to  achieving  good
outcomes  for  their  customers.    It  is  a  culture  where  a  firm  engages  constructively  with
customers who have queries or complaints and which rectifies its errors or mistakes.  It is a
culture  where  staff  are  incentivised  to  build  good  customer  relationships  and  to  aim  to  sell
appropriate products rather than large numbers of products.
Our  work  to  promote  the  development  of  a  consumer-focused  culture  includes  directing  all
banking, insurance and investment firms to review and restructure their incentive payments for
sales staff in light of guidelines we issued to ensure that employees, individually and collectively,
act in the best interests of their customers and provide products suitable to their needs. We are
currently  examining  additional  measures  to  ensure  that  firms  remuneration  structures  for
intermediaries  encourage  responsible  business  conduct,  fair  treatment  of  consumers  and  to
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
avoid conflicts of interest.
There has been progress by some firms towards this type of culture but there is a long way to
go.   Firms need to put internal consumer risk management frameworks in place to help make
the  shift  to  a  consumer  focused  culture.    Recognising  the  fundamental  importance  of  risk
management in achieving this cultural shift, we have enhanced our on-site Consumer Protection
Risk Assessment model (CPRA), which provides us with a robust framework to assess how
consumer risks are being identified and managed by firms. The new model equips us to assess
how firms’ risk management frameworks are designed and governed, but also how effective they
are in practice at delivering fair consumer outcomes.
Following the successful pilot-testing of the model in 2016, we will conduct a series of targeted
CPRAs across the different  retail  sectors  throughout  2017,  with  a  particular  focus  on  culture,
performance  management,  sales  incentives  and  product  governance.    The  CPRAs  will  be  in
addition  to  and  support  our  regular  programme  of  consumer-focused  thematic  inspections,
which examine how firms are selling their products and services in practice.  And we continue to
engage with the boards and senior management of regulated firms to ensure there is a very clear
focus from the top on embedding and measuring the firms cultural change programme. 
Looking to the Future
In determining the appropriate scope of the Central Bank’s work to protect consumers, I would
like to sound a note of caution.  The Central Bank is committed to working effectively to protect
consumers of financial services but it is important we do not over-promise on the outcomes we
can  achieve.  The  goal  is  to  secure  an  appropriate  degree  of  protection  of  consumers  while
recognising that expectations of what can be achieved through regulatory mechanisms need to
be reasonable.
It is inevitable that consumer protection issues will arise that could not have reasonably been
foreseen or may be the result of fraud, criminal conduct or human error.  What is important is
that where these issues arise, we take corrective action swiftly and work to redress the detriment
to consumers.  The Central Bank played a leadership role in this area with the development of
the Consumer Protection Code and we continue to pursue a strong consumer protection agenda
through our involvement in European and international bodies. 
It  is  important  to  appreciate  that  much  of  the  consumer  protection  work  undertaken  by  the
Central Bank is not publicly visible, such as when we take action to address potential problems
at the outset and thus avoid consumer detriment.  Examples would include where we refuse to
authorise firms to offer financial services here, where we identify issues through supervision or
themed inspections and take action to mitigate before consumer detriment arises.  Restitution of
over  €19  million  was  paid  to  consumers  in  2015  on  foot  of  issues  identified  through  our
supervisory  activity.  We  have  also  taken  strong  enforcement  action  –  since  2010  we  have
concluded  some  80  enforcement  cases,  half  of  which  dealt  with  consumer  issues.  We  have
imposed  fines  totalling  over  €46  million  and  have  removed  individuals  for  the  management  of
firms.
But this is a challenging area and sometimes our best efforts will not achieve our desired targets
or may not progress as quickly as we would wish.  In tackling the issue of the fair treatment of
tracker  mortgage  customers,  for  example,  we  have  initiated  the  largest  and  most  complex
consumer protection investigation we have even undertaken.  To ensure that a fair outcome is
achieved for consumers this review will some take time.  We have required each lender to carry
out a thorough, comprehensive and robust review which is independently overseen.  Some two
million  mortgage  accounts  are  being  reviewed  and  lenders  will  have  to  pay  redress  and
compensation to affected customers and are facing enforcement action by the Central Bank. 
We  have  fined  one  lender  €4.5  million  and  directed  that  its  customers  receive  appropriate
redress and compensation – by November 2016, this had amounted to €5.8 million.  Two other
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
enforcement cases are currently ongoing. 
As we strive to protect the consumers of financial services, I believe that more needs to be done
to empower consumers in their dealings with financial services firms.  Improving financial literacy
is  an  integral  part  of  the  consumer  protection  agenda.    International  financial  literacy  studies
indicate that a majority of the world population do not have sufficient knowledge to understand
even basic financial products and fail to make effective decisions to manage their finances and
the  risk  associated  with  them.    The  OECD  and  G20  have  advised  that  this  needs  to  be
undertaken through nationally coordinated and tailored approaches.
18
At the Central Bank, we know we need to deliver effective protection for consumers of financial
products and services in a rapidly evolving financial services landscape. It is our responsibility to
respond  to  emerging  threats,  to  be  vigilant  to  evolving  potential  threats  and  to  be  proactive  in
tackling risks to consumers. Looking ahead, consumers would benefit from simpler products for
example in the areas of pensions and health insurance.  In the insurance sector, work needs to
be done to attain the goal of consistent supervisory standards across Europe and to coordinate
the various national protection schemes for policyholders. 
Finally,  the  technological  innovations  that  bring  the  potential  benefits  of  lower  costs,  speed,
automation and convenience for consumers also pose some challenges for regulators in relation
to consumer protection.  Our focus is on ensuring that the appropriate frameworks are in place
so that firms must take the best interests of consumers into account in their design, operation
and  monitoring  of  online  distribution  and  automated  advice  channels.    Furthermore,  given  the
scope  for  online  distribution  channels  to  foster  cross-border  trade  in  financial  services,  it  is
essential  that  the  legislative  framework  fosters  internationalisation  without  compromising
consumer protection.
Acknowledgements:  I  thank  Mary  Canniffe,  Yvonne  McCarthy  and  Helena  Mitchell  for  their
inputs into this speech.
References
Badarinza, C., Campbell, J. Y. and Ramadorai, T. (2016). International comparative household
finance, Annual Review of Economics, 8, pp. 111–144.
Benartzi,  S.,  and  Thaler,  R.H.  (2001).  Naive  Diversification  Strategies  in  Defined  Contribution
Savings Plans. American Economic Review, 91(1), 79–98.
Campbell, John Y., Howell E. Jackson, Brigitte C. Madrian and Peter Tufano (2016), “Consumer
Financial Protection,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(1), 91–114.
Campbell,  John  Y.  (2016),  “Restoring  Rational  Choice:  The  Challenge  of  Consumer  Financial
Regulation,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 106(5), 1-30.
Choi,  J.J.,  Laibson,  D.,  Madrian,  B.  C.  and  Metrick,  A.  (2005).  Optimal  defaults  and  active
decisions.  NBER  Working  Paper  no.  11074.  Cambridge,  MA:  National  Bureau  of  Economic
Research.
DellaVigna,  S.  and  Malmendier,  U.  (2004).  Contract  Design  and  Self-Control:  Theory  and
Evidence. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2), 353–402.
Gabaix,  X.,  and  Laibson,  D.  (2006).  Shrouded Attributes,  Consumer  Myopia,  and  Information
Suppression in Competitive Markets. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2), 505–40.
Heidhues, P., and Kőszegi, B. (2010). Exploiting Naïvete about Self-Control in the Credit Market.
American Economic Review, 100(5), 2279–2303.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Loewenstein,  G.,  O’Donoghue,  T.,  and  Rabin,  M.  (2003).  Projection  Bias  in  Predicting  Future
Utility. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1209–1248.
Lusardi, A.  and  Mitchell,  O.S.  (2007).  Baby  boomer  retirement  security:  the  roles  of  planning,
financial literacy and housing wealth, Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(1), pp. 205–224.
Lusardi, A.,  Mitchell  and  Curto,  V.  (2010).  Financial  literacy  among  the  young,  The  Journal  of
Consumer Affairs, 44(2), pp. 358–80.
Lusardi, A. and Mitchell, O.S. (2011). Financial literacy around the world: an overview, Journal of
Pension Economics and Finance, 10(4), October.
Lusardi A.  and  Tufano,  P.  (2009).  Debt  literacy,  financial  experiences  and  overindebtedness,
NBER Working Paper No. 14808.
Madrian, B., and Shea, D.F. (2001). The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation and
Savings Behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4), 1149–1187.
Office  of  Fair  Trading  (2010).  The  Impact  of  Price  Frames  on  Consumer  Decision  Making.
London: Office of Fair Trading.
Henderson, B.J. and Pearson, N.D. (2011). The Dark Side of Financial Innovation: A Case Study
of the Pricing of a Retail Financial Product. Journal of Financial Economics, 100(2), 227–247.
Lusardi A.  and  Tufano,  P.  (2009).  Debt  literacy,  financial  experiences  and  overindebtedness,
NBER Working Paper No. 14808.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
See Campbell et al. (2011), Campbell (2015), Badarinza et al. (2016) for surveys of the literature.
See Lusardi and Mitchell (2007, 2011), Lusardi et al. (2010) and Lusardi and Tufano (2009).
See Loewenstein et al. (2003), Della Vigna and Malmedier (2006) and Gabaix and Laibson (2006).
Madrian and Shea (2001) and Carroll  et al. (2009).
Benartzi and Thaler (2001).
Heidhues and Kőszegi (2010).
Office of Fair Trading (2010).
Henderson and Pearson (2011).
May et al. (2014) and Lusardi and Tufano (2009).
Consumer Protection agencies such as the Financial Conduct Authority in the UK, the Netherlands Authority for
the Financial Markets, and the Financial Consumer Agency of Canada do not have a prudential regulation role. 
Agencies  with  dual  regulation  and  consumer  protection  mandates  include  the  German  Federal  Financial
Supervisory Authority  (BaFin),  the  Financial  Supervisory Authority  in  Denmark  and  the  Financial  Supervisory
Authority  of  Norway.    The  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Portugal  have  financial  stability,
prudential regulation and consumer protection mandates.
 ccpc.ie/.
 www.financialombudsman.ie/ .
 www.eba.europa.eu/ , www.esma.europa.eu/ , eiopa.europa.eu/ .
FinCoNet 
authorities. www.finconet.org/
the 
is 
international  organisation  of 
financial 
consumer  protection 
supervisory
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
15
16
17
18
G20 High-Level Principles on Financial Consumer Protection.  Published by OECD October 2011. Followed by
“Effective Approaches  to  Support  the  Implementation  of  the  remaining  G20/OECD  High-Level  Principles  on
Financial Consumer Protection”.  Published by OECD September 2014. 
The Consumer Advisory Group was set up under the Central Bank Reform Act 2010 to advise the Central Bank
on  the  performance  of  our  functions  and  the  exercise  of  our  powers  in  relation  to  consumers  of  financial
services.
 www.centralbank.ie/press-area/press-releases/Pages/CPOR2017.aspx
Advancing National Strategies for Financial Education:  OECD  2013 message from Anton Siluanov Minister of
Finance Russian Federation.  P 6
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
