Karnit Flug: Recent economic and financial developments in Israel
Remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Press Conference presenting
the Bank of Israel 2016 Annual Report, Tel Aviv, 29 March 2017.
 In 2016, GDP grew strongly by 4 percent—higher than growth in most advanced economies.
Private consumption led growth, while export growth was relatively moderate, similar to the
moderate growth of world trade.
The  labor  market  is  robust.  The  economy  is  close  to  full  employment  and  real  wages
increased, supporting the increase in private consumption.
Inflation remained low despite the increase in demand, and was affected by the low inflation
worldwide  and  by  the  appreciation  of  the  shekel,  which  were  reflected  in  lower-priced
imported goods, and by a change in consumption patterns and the transition to imports via
the  Internet,  which  led  to  increased  competition  among  consumer  products  and  reduced
prices.
Despite inflation remaining lower than the target range, long-term inflation expectations are
anchored around the center of the target range. This means that market players continue to
maintain confidence in the inflation target regime.
Monetary policy remained accommodative and supported growth. The interest rate remained
at 0.1 percent, and the Bank of Israel continued to purchase foreign exchange in order to
reduce overappreciation.
Expansionary fiscal policy also supported growth. The budget deficit was about 2 percent of
GDP,  similar  to  its  level  in  the  previous  year,  and  lower  than  the  ceiling.  However,  the
cyclically-adjusted deficit increased.
The debt to GDP ratio continued to decline, to 62 percent, due to the growth and the level of
the deficit, and also due to transitory factors including the rapid increase of the GDP deflator
alongside  declining  consumer  prices,  and  an  exceptional  increase  in  tax  revenues  from
vehicle imports and real estate transactions.
Government  expenditure  on  investment  in  human  capital  (expenditure  per  student)  and
physical  capital,  despite  increasing  in  the  past  two  years,  remains  low  by  international
comparison, and the low level of basic skills and of infrastructure impairs potential growth in
the economy.
Economic policy measures with long-term results are necessary. A significant and efficient
investment in improving education and infrastructure will make it possible to increase labor
productivity and the economy’s growth potential, thereby contributing to an increase in the
standard of living of all Israelis. Such investment is the key to sustainable inclusive growth.
The good state of the economy is precisely the opportunity to adopt such a policy.
In 2016, the economy grew strongly, by 4 percent—higher than most other advanced economies
(even net of the exceptionally high purchases of vehicles). Growth was led again this year by
private  consumption,  while  export  growth  was  relatively  moderate—similar  to  the  increase  in
world trade, after exports grew less than world trade in the past two years. The weakness of
exports, particularly goods exports that were lower than world trade in goods, reflects the effect
of the appreciation of the shekel. According to updated estimates presented in the Bank of Israel
Annual Report, the pass-through from the real exchange rate to exports ranges from 0.3 to 0.6
over about 2 years.
The  labor  market  continued  its  solid  performance  this  year  as  well,  and  is  close  to  full
employment, as shown by the low unemployment rate (3.7 percent among those aged 25–64),
the  continued  increase  in  the  employment  rates  to  a  record  level  of  77  percent—high  both
historically and by international comparison—the high job vacancy rate, and the increase in real
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
wages—2.9 percent in the past year—which is led by the business sector.
Against  this  background,  monetary  policy  acted  to  return  inflation  to  the  target  range  and
supported the good results seen in economic activity and employment. Inflation remained lower
than the target range, even after some increase, but it is important to note that long-term (5–10
years) inflation expectations consistently remain anchored around the center of the target range,
as market players maintain their confidence in the inflation target regime.
It is important to examine the factors impacting on inflation: in view of the performance of the
economy and the labor market, it is clear that the low inflation does not derive from moderate
domestic  demand.  In  the  past  3  years  there  were  several  factors  acting  to  reduce  inflation,
and some of them are near to being exhausted; in the past year factors began acting toward
increasing inflation, and we assess that their continuation is expected to support an increase in
inflation to within the target range.
The low inflation worldwide until the past several months, and in particular in G4 countries (US,
eurozone,  Japan  and  the  UK)  acted  to  moderate  inflation  in  Israel.  At  the  same  time,  the
appreciation also acted toward marked reducing prices of imported goods, as well as of goods
that are produced in Israel but compete with imported goods. Thus, the price index of tradable
goods declined by 1.7 percent last year after a decline of 3.3 percent in the previous year. An
examination of prices, in shekels, of imports to Israel indicates a decline in the past two years,
both because the composition of our imports included groups of goods that declined in price, and
because  a  marked  share  of  imports  are  from  countries  using  the  euro,  which  as  known
weakened markedly against the shekel. Another factor acting in recent years to moderate price
increases is a change in Israeli consumption patterns, reflected in, for example, an increase in
consumer  purchases  from  abroad  primarily  via  the  Internet.  This  became  stronger  with  the
expansion of the customs exemption on personal imports in 2012 and again at the end of 2014.
Beyond  its  direct  impact,  personal  imports  act  to  increase  competition  among  domestic
manufacturers and marketers of many consumer goods. Although price reductions initiated by
the  government  diminished  in  2016,  they  still  contributed  to  a  decline  of  approximately  0.2
percent in the 2016 CPI.
Despite the labor market being near to full employment, in recent years the decline in inflation
expectations was reflected in an only moderate increase in nominal wages, which together with
the decline in the CPI essentially became an increase in real wages at a solid pace. This was
reflected in a marked increase in consumers’ purchasing power, and supported the continued
growth in private consumption. From the perspective of its impact on inflation, producer prices
increasing while consumer prices decreased were reflected in—until recently—unit labor cost
which did not increase, so that labor costs did not create pressure for increasing prices, while at
the  same  time  the  increase  in  purchasing  power  as  a  result  of  the  increase  in  real  wages
supported growth of private consumption.
Fiscal policy
In the past two years the deficit in actuality was about 2 percent of GDP, considerably lower than
the deficit ceiling. With that, it is important to look at the estimate of the cyclically adjusted deficit
—an estimate that takes into account the effect—on tax revenues and on some components of
expenditure—of where the economy stands in the business cycle. From this viewpoint, the deficit
increased in 2016, as a result of a real increase of 5.6 percent in expenditure while reducing tax
rates, and it is high by international comparison. That is, budget policy also supported, alongside
monetary policy, the expansion of economic activity.
The share of debt in GDP continued to decline in 2016 as well, in contrast to the trend in most
OECD countries, and this welcome trend acted to continue providing sources in the budget due
to the decline in interest payments on the debt. In recent years, various factors acted to reduce
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the share of debt in GDP: along with the impact of growth and the moderate level of the deficit,
the  repayment  of  long  term  mortgages  granted  to  eligible  people  (which  reduces  gross  debt,
even  if  not  net  debt),  the  large  increase  in  the  GDP  deflator  (which  increases  tax  revenues)
alongside  very  low  inflation  (which  erodes  CPI-indexed  debt)  in  the  past  two  years,  and
extraordinary  tax  revenues  on  vehicle  imports  and  real  estate  in  the  past  year.  These  three
factors above are transitory by their nature, and thus the decline in the share of debt to GDP
derived from them is near to being exhausted.
The  share  of  public  expenditure  in  GDP  has  declined  persistently  since  the  beginning  of  the
previous decade, due mainly to a decline in the share of defense expenditures and expenditures
on interest on the public debt. However, the decline in these expenditures was not directed to an
increase  in  civilian  expenditure,  which  after  declining  until  the  middle  of  the  previous  decade,
remained  stable  at  about  30  percent  of  GDP,  very  low  in  international  comparison.  The
distribution of resources among the civilian budget items has remained quite stable in the past
two decades, and does not indicate material changes in priorities of various governments. The
expenditure on education declined slightly in the first of those two decades and then increased
slightly in the past decade.
Two components in the government’s roles are particularly important to supporting the potential
future growth of the economy—investments in physical and in human capital. An examination of
government activity in these two areas indicates a troubling picture:
Government  investment  in  infrastructures  (land  transport,  sea  and  air  ports,  communication,
electricity/energy, and water) increased at a solid pace beginning in 2007, but declined sharply
after  the  deficit  increase  in  2012,  which  obligated  the  government  to  markedly  tighten
expenditures. The need to reduce short term expenditures generally leads to a cut in investment
plans, despite such cuts’ harm to future growth. In the past year there was in fact an increase in
investment in infrastructure but it is still far from the level before the cut. In any case, investment
in  infrastructures  is  low  in  Israel  compared  internationally,  despite  that,  as  we  have  shown  in
previous reports, the level of infrastructures in Israel is markedly below that of most advanced
economies.  The  low  level  of  infrastructures  also  reduces  the  worthwhileness  of  private
investment, and thus negatively impacts on the economy’s growth potential.
In terms of human capital, the level of expenditure per student relative to expenditure per student
in the OECD, for all levels of schooling, declined consistently up to recent years, reaching 70
percent in 2009. Since then, there has been some increase and the share was about 75 percent
in 2013. We do not have comparative data with OECD countries for the past 3 years, and in
Israel there was an increase in expenditure per student in most levels of education during those
years. However, even if we make the extreme assumption that in the comparison countries the
level  of  expenditure  per  student  did  not  change  at  all  in  these  years,  expenditure  per  student
would have reached 82 percent of the OECD average in 2016. Against this background, the poor
results of the Israeli population on the PIAAC tests of basic skills—numeracy, literacy and writing,
and problem solving in a digital environment—are not surprising (nor are the results of the PISA
tests,  which  I  have  shown  on  other  occasions).  Likewise,  the  gaps  in  achievements,  as
measured by the Gini Index of results, are almost the highest in the entire OECD.
The connection between level of workers’ wages in various countries, and the level of basic skills
as  measured  by  the  PIAAC  tests,  are  documented  in  the  report,  and  present  Israel  in  an
unflattering position, with a low average score, and accordingly a low wage level. Wage inequality
is also high for us, similar to the inequality in human capital level—both in the quantity of human
capital  as  measured  by  years  of  schooling  and  even  more  so  the  inequality  in  the  quality  of
human capital, as measured by gaps on basic skills tests.
These findings with regard to the scope of civilian expenditure in Israel, particularly related to the
insufficient scope of investment in physical capital and human capital, are reflected in a low level
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
of infrastructures and of skills relevant to the 21st century labor market. Significant and efficient
investment in these areas is required in order to increase the productivity of all Israeli citizens
and is the key to increasing the potential growth of the economy and the standard of living of all of
Israel’s citizens, and the key to sustainable and inclusive growth. The robust macroeconomic
situation presents precisely the opportunity to adopt such a policy.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
