Carl-Ludwig  Thiele:  Welcome  remarks 
Conference 2017
Welcome remarks by Mr Carl-Ludwig Thiele, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the International Cash Conference 2017, Island of Mainau, 24 April 2017.
International  Cash
 Ladies and gentlemen
 I would like to extend to you a very warm welcome to our third international cash conference here
on beautiful Island of Mainau. I am delighted that all of you have come, some from very far away,
to  attend  and  shape  this  exciting  conference.  I  hope  that  you  all  had  a  pleasant  trip  to  Lake
Constance.
As the Bundesbank Executive Board member responsible for cash and cashless payments, I am
pleased to see the great interest with which the topic of cash is apparently being greeted.
I recall some of you from the previous conferences or from other events, and it is nice to see you
back here again. But those of you who are attending our cash conference for the first time are
equally deserving of a warm welcome. I am looking forward to fruitful and animated discussions
of highly topical issues relating to cash.
Academic  interest  in  cash  seems  to  be  mounting,  as  is  being  evidenced  by  the  increasing
attendance at this conference or also the number of research papers that will be presented here.
The  format  of  this  conference,  designed  to  promote  exchange  not  only  between  researchers
specialising in cash but also between academics and central banks, appears to be becoming
increasingly established in academic circles and is growing ever more popular.
Following  the  2014  cash  conference,  the  main  theme  of  which  was  “The  usage,  costs  and
benefits of cash", for this year’s conference we would like to focus on the “War on Cash” and, in
the process, discuss the question of whether cash has a future. The “War on Cash” has gone
from being a purely academic matter some years ago to a topic of general public debate. In the
debate, cash, a topic with many facets which is, to some degree, highly emotionally charged, is
coming under repeated criticism. Its detractors refer to it as inefficient, expensive and a tool for
facilitating  illicit  transactions.  They  also  see  cash  as  impairing  the  effect  of  certain  monetary
policy measures since it prevents extremely negative interest rates from being simply enforced
at the drop of a hat. Some opponents of cash – including heavyweights in the field – are calling
for limits on cash payments or even for cash to be abolished altogether. It is certainly no secret
that we, the Deutsche Bundesbank, are critical of many of the demands currently being voiced.
In  this  context,  it  is  a  great  honour  for  us  to  be  able  to  present  to  you  Mr  Peter  Sands  and
Professor  Friedrich  Schneider  as  the  keynote  speakers  at  this  year’s  conference.  Whereas
Mr Sands’ main areas of research are banks and financial markets, Professor Schneider has
made  a  name  for  himself  as  an  expert  on  the  shadow  economy.  Mr  Sands  will  kick  off  the
conference by discussing “The dark side of cash". Professor Schneider will follow by taking a
critical  look  at  the  question  of  whether  abolishing  cash  is  an  efficient  instrument  in  the  war
against  the  shadow  economy,  crime  and  terrorism.  Following  these  two  speeches,  our  two
keynote  speakers  will  take  part  in  a  panel  debate  on  the  future  of  cash.  I  am  already  eagerly
looking forward to the clash of views and opinions we will be likely to hear.
Even after this morning’s proceedings, which will already be very exciting and informative, the
rest of our programme for this year’s conference will once again rest on a broad basis. This year,
we received so many high-quality papers that we have decided to conduct the conference in two
parallel  sessions.  This  enables  us  to  look  not  only  at  the  components  and  motives  of  cash
demand but also payment behaviour. In addition, cash experts will speak on restrictions on cash
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
payments and on the theme of our conference, the “War on Cash".
I would additionally like to welcome the delegates from Austria, our guest of honour at this year’s
conference. At this juncture, I would like to thank you for your willingness to contribute talks on
trends  in  cash  usage  and  on  technical  innovations  in  cash  processing  to  our  third  cash
conference. 
It  is  precisely  in  questions  concerning  cash  usage  patterns  or  also  the  motives  behind  the
demand for cash where, in my opinion, cultural differences are especially important. This is why I
am pleased once again to be able to present you with a large number of speakers from a wide
array of countries. These talks on cash-related themes will be delivered by leading experts from
Japan, India and Europe, but also the United States and Canada. This international variety is a
hallmark of our research conference.
I don’t want to keep you on tenterhooks so I will now hand over to the Head of the Bundesbank’s
Directorate General Cash Management and the chair of the first session, Stefan Hardt. I hope we
all  have  a  fruitful  conference  from  which  everyone  will  hopefully  come  away  having  learned
something new, and I am looking forward to the many interesting speeches. Mr Hardt, the floor is
yours.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
