François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  Franco-German 
experiences and challenges in the euro era
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Europadialog,
organized by the Investitions- und Strukturbank Rheinland-Pfalz (ISB), Mainz, 21 March 2017.
relations 
  Madam Minister-President [Ms Dreyer], Madam Finance Minister [Ms Ahnen],
Mr Spokesperson [M. Dexheimer], Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am delighted to be here with you today in Mainz, and I sincerely thank you for inviting me. On a
more  personal  note,  I  am  here  as  a  committed  European  and  a  friend  of  Germany.  I  am
particularly  attached  to  the  Franco-German  friendship:  I  am  French  and  live  in  Paris,  but  my
family’s roots are in a neighbouring Land, Saarland, where my family has lived since the end of
the 18th century and where its porcelain manufacturing company Villeroy & Boch forms part of
the German “Mittelstand”. When I spend my holidays in Saarland and I go north, I admire Trier; or
east,  Neustadt  an  der  Weinstraße.  And  when  I  come  fortnightly  to  participate  in  the  ECB
Governing Council, I am very close to your beautiful town of Mainz.
There is no doubt in my mind that “we, the citizens of the European Union, have united for the
better”, as stated in the Berlin declaration of 25 March 2007. This was for the 50th anniversary of
the  Treaty  of  Rome,  and  this  is  still  just  as  true  four  days  before  we  celebrate  its
60th anniversary. And yet, our unity may appear threatened today: euroscepticism is on the rise,
driven by populism throughout Europe; Brexit triumphed in the United Kingdom last June; and the
new American government freely expresses its reservations about the European Union. In these
times of turmoil, we mustn’t lower the European flag. Let us remember the formidable progress
that we have made since our two countries decided to share their destinies by signing the Treaty
of  Rome,  along  with  Belgium,  Italy,  Luxembourg  and  the  Netherlands.  Today,  in  Europe,  we
share  three  major  economic  assets:  the  single  currency,  the  single  market  and  our  common
social model.  We have built them together and we can be proud of them. This will be my first
point.  For  the  future,  European  unity  continues  to  be,  in  my  view,  the  best  answer  to  all  the
questions. And for that, the remarkable friendship between our two countries must continue to
inspire us. As Chancellor Konrad Adenauer already stated in 1963: “Imagine, if this friendship
[between France and Germany] didn’t exist, any attempt to create Europe would be doomed to
1
fail from the outset.”
This will be my second point.
I. What we currently share in Europe: our three economic strengths.
Let me start by our shared successes. Today, in Europe, we have three major economic assets:
the single currency, the single market and our common social model.
First asset: the euro. It is a solid currency that is recognised worldwide. The great majority of
euro area citizens are attached to it: 70% according to the latest Eurobarometer Survey . And
contrary to certain claims, our monetary policy is not some Latin flight of fancy. It is very much in
line  with  the  German  values  that  I  fully  share:  independence,  respect  of  the  Treaties,  price
stability  and  a  long-term  approach.  Monetary  policy  is  decided  collectively  by  the  Governing
Council,  and  we  take  the  task  entrusted  to  us  of  ensuring  price  stability  very  seriously.  This
means making sure that inflation is neither too high nor too low: our target is below, but close to
2% over the medium term. Our monetary policy has enabled us to prevent the mortal danger of
deflation that has been threatening the euro area in recent times. Today, inflation is rising again in
the euro area, as we had announced: we have moved from a fall of 0.2% in April 2016 to a rise of
2
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
2%  last  month,  due  somewhat  exceptionally  to  energy  prices.  Beyond  these  short-term
fluctuations, inflation is expected to stand at 1.7% in 2017, 1.6% in 2018 and 1.7% in 2019.
Second asset: we share a large single market that belongs collectively to the Member States of
the European Union. This is a major step forward for European trade. It is no coincidence that
single market access is at the centre of the Brexit debate. Naturally, we cannot anticipate the
results  of  the  forthcoming  negotiations,  but  one  principle  of  consistency  must  be  observed:
access to the single market must continue to be contingent on the strict observance of all of its
rules.  There  can  be  no  cherry picking  or  free-riding.  And  we  must  obviously  maintain  our
common European trade policy if we wish to retain our clout in future trade negotiations at the
global level.
Third  asset:  our  common social model  in  Europe.  It  is  less  widely  discussed,  but  it  is  what
fundamentally defines continental Europe, and it is what German and French society and public
opinion share. Our social model combines a high level of public service, relatively low levels of
inequality – much lower than in the United States – and a good intensity of social dialogue. And
this has been achieved in a market economy. I would like to stress the extent to which this social
market economy (Soziale Marktwirtschaft) is a response to the questions raised in the Anglo-
Saxon world, rather than protectionism: Germany, like many other European countries, proves
that economic success can go hand in hand with social welfare, and less inequality.
We can be proud of these three assets that we have built together. But for the future, while some
no longer seem to believe in the benefits of the European project, we can no longer afford to be
complacent; we cannot simply rest on our laurels.
II. In order to control our common destiny we need to build a better Europe.
3
How should we react? Not by less Europe. This would be a mistake if we want to take collective
control of our destiny in this new world. But by a “better” Europe, less caught up in the detail,
more  focused  on  a  few  key  priorities,  and  more  efficient.  To  achieve  this,  Europe  needs  the
energy  of  Germany  and  France,  and  of  their  remarkable  friendship.  I  will  now  cite  Chancellor
Helmut Kohl: “The Germans and French must together build the hard core of the European Union
– a union that sees itself not merely as a common market, but as a  community  of  values,  a
democracy  based  on  freedom,  the  rule  of  law  and  the  social  responsibility  of  the
State”.  Naturally I won’t talk to you this evening about the French election debate: I will simply
say that as friends of France, you must not underestimate the strength of its institutions. I will talk
to  you  even  less  about  the  German  election  debate.  But  I  strongly  believe  that  after  these
democratic elections, whatever the outcome, the governments of our two countries will have to
confer  to  decide  on  a  number  of  shared  bilateral  projects,  and  above  all  prepare  a  common
initiative for Europe. Because for Germany and for France, the other country is certainly the best
possible partner: there is no serious alternative, neither in the east nor the west for Germany, nor
in  the  south  for  France.  And  because  if  our  common  initiative  is  not  sufficient  to  reach  a
European decision – indeed there are other countries and the Commission around the table –, it
is nonetheless a prerequisite: without the Franco-German engine, the European car will remain
at a stand-still.
The projects for a better Europe must be chosen with care and prioritised; and we mustn’t just
talk about them. We must ensure that we have the actual means, through efficient governance,
to achieve concrete results. To put it briefly: little, well, until the end. There are naturally some
non-economic areas such as defence, border security, climate change and youth education and
training – an Erasmus-pro programme should be a priority to put an end to the tragedy of the
unqualified and unemployed youth. But, as regards economic matters, much also remains to be
done.  As  Helmut  Schmidt  repeated  frequently,  we  must  build  economic  union  as  well  as
monetary union. To my mind, we need to make headway on two projects.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  first  project,  to  be  started  immediately,  is a  “Financing  Union  for  Investment  and
Innovation”.  The  European  Commission  launched  the  Juncker  investment  Plan  and  Capital
Markets  Union,  and  Banking  Union  is  now  underway.  But  it  is  now  necessary  to  make  these
initiatives converge, in the interest of European savers and firms. Europe needs a better sharing
of  private  sector  risk,  in  order  to  channel  its  abundant  savings  more  effectively  towards
productive  investment.  As  Jens  Weidmann  and  I  wrote  last  year,  the  equity  financing  of
businesses, across European borders, must be a priority. Europe is lagging far behind in this
area: such financing only represents 67% of GDP in the euro area compared with 125% in the
United States. Thus, innovation, which is inherently more risky, is less well financed in Europe.
The second project, on which we could make progress after the elections that will take place this
year,  is a collective economic strategy in the euro area. I know that when the French talk
about coordination in Europe, the Germans sometimes think that it may be a new way to wriggle
out of reforms. This deadlock must be broken: we need both national reforms and a European
coordination. Growth and employment would be stronger in Europe with more structural reforms
where  they  are  a  priority,  such  as  in  France  and  Italy,  and  more  fiscal  or  wage  support  in
countries with room for manoeuvre, such as Germany. Regarding reforms, like you, I would like
France to pick up the pace; I say it frequently in my own country. But you must not consider that
your French neighbour is “unreformable”. France has not been immobile over the past few years:
pensions  have  been  reformed,  corporate  charges  have  been  cut  considerably,  and  deficit
reduction targets have been met. In practice, in order for this European coordination to exist, the
euro area needs an institution that inspires confidence between countries. This is why I have
proposed,  as  have  others,  the  creation  of  a  euro  area  finance  minister.  This  person  would
embody and bring to fruition the shared commitment of our Member States. Conversely, to my
mind, the priority is not to create a “transfer union” and a common fiscal capacity.
 Hans-Dietrich Genscher said during a previous European crisis in the the 1980s: “scepticism
and pessimism are just as poor advisers as national egoism”.  Yes, we all love our country, our
Nation. But the Franco-German friendship can be the defence that we need today against the
reigning scepticism and pessimism. Friendship is more than a polite end-of-meal platitude, it is a
sometimes  demanding  requirement,  but  always  concrete  as  it  is  embodied  in  the  projects.  It
must continue to inspire the European project, this singular collective will of which we should be
proud. As a central banker, it is naturally not my decision. My responsibility, together with the
other  euro  area  governors,  is  to  conduct  a  monetary  policy  that  is  in  line  with  the  mandate
assigned to us, and to make proposals to render other economic policies more efficient.
4
This  is  what  I  have  outlined  before  you  with  my  commitment  to  Europe.  Thank  you  for  your
attention.
1
2
3
4
After-dinner speech in honour of the President of the French Republic, Charles de Gaulle in Bonn – 4 July 1963.
Eurobarometer Survey, December 2016. 81% in Germany and 68% in France.
Speech made on 22 January 1988 during the celebration of the anniversary of the signature of the Elysée Treaty.
Speech assessing the German Presidency, before the European parliament – 29 June 1983.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
