  Address by Daniel Mminele,  
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the networking lunch co-hosted  
by the South African German Chamber of Commerce and Industry,  
the Eastern Cape Economic Development Corporation  
and the East London Industrial Development Zone 
 East London, South Africa 
24 February 2017  
  Economic prospects for 2017 
 1. 
Introduction 
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.  
 And  to  the  co-hosts  of  this  networking  lunch,  allow  me  to  express  my  gratitude  for 
creating the opportunity for us to interact today. It is not often that I find myself in the 
Eastern Cape, addressing a business gathering such as this one.  
 I was intrigued to learn a few things about this city, such as the fact that it is home to 
the only dodo egg in existence and that a remarkable number of our national sports 
heroes  hail  from  here.  The  German  influence  is  also  quite  evident,  as  reflected  by 
some of the names given to the suburbs and surrounding towns, such as Berlin and 
Hamburg.  
 Today I would like to engage you on economic developments and some of the main 
themes  which  I  believe  will  shape  the  year  ahead  for  the  global  and  domestic 
economy.  But  before  I  do  that,  I  would  like  to  briefly  touch  on  conditions  in  this 
region. 
   1 
  2.  Economic situation and developments in the Eastern Cape 
 The  Eastern  Cape,  also  known  as  the  Adventure  Province  and  the  Province  of 
Possibilities,  is  an  important  contributor  to  South  Africa’s  economic  fortunes.  The 
province is home to around 12 per cent of South Africa’s population  and makes up 
around 8 per cent of South Africa’s GDP1, making it the fourth-largest contributor to 
GDP.2  The  Eastern  Cape  economy  is  characterised  by  the  dominance  of  the 
secondary and tertiary sectors, with the manufacturing industry accounting for almost 
14 per cent of the province’s GDP, while trade and finance contribute approximately 
20  per  cent  each.  The  automotive  sector 
is  an 
important  contributor 
to 
manufacturing, accounting for 30 per cent of manufacturing employment and 32 per 
cent  of  manufacturing  gross  value  added,  generating  51  per  cent  of  the  country’s 
motor exports and producing half of South Africa’s passenger vehicles.3  
 Unfortunately,  the  latest  growth  statistics  for  the  province  are  disappointing.  On  a 
quarter-on-quarter  basis,  the  national  economy  expanded  by  an  annualised  rate  of 
0,2 per cent in the third quarter while the Eastern Cape economy contracted by 0,3 
per cent. On a year-on-year basis, the South African economy grew by 0,7 per cent 
while the Eastern Cape economy grew by 0,6 per cent.4  
 Comparing the Eastern Cape to other regions, the province has experienced one of 
the  lowest  growth  rates  in  recent  years.  The  decline  in  its  economic  activity  can 
mainly  be  attributed  to  the  manufacturing  and  trade  sectors.  This  slowdown  has 
mimicked  the  trend  in  the  national  economy,  which  witnessed  a  contraction  in  the 
manufacturing sector of 3,2 per cent quarter  on quarter in  the third quarter of  2016 
compared to the 8,1 per cent quarter-on-quarter expansion in the previous quarter.  
                                                            
1 gross domestic product 
2 Eastern Cape Department of Economic Development, Environmental Affairs and Tourism 
3 Province of the Eastern Cape website, www.dedea.gov.za 
4 Eastern Cape Socio Economic Consultative Council, Provincial economic growth, December 2016  
 2 
The  latest  unemployment  statistics  from  the  Quarterly  Labour  Force  Survey  show 
that  the  number  of  people  employed  in  the  Eastern  Cape  grew  by  5  000  over  the 
fourth quarter of 2016. At the same time, the number of job seekers grew by 9 000, 
thus  resulting  in  a  slight  increase  in  the  unemployment  rate:  it  rose  by  0,2  of  a 
percentage point to 28,4 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2016 from the third quarter 
of  2016.  Unemployment 
in 
the  Eastern  Cape 
is 
thus  above 
the  national 
unemployment  rate  of  26,5  per  cent,  which  in  itself  is  unacceptably  high.  Youth 
unemployment  is  even  higher,  with  the  national  figure  at  35,6  per  cent.  And 
considering that the Eastern Cape is said to have the  lowest absorption rate of just 
over 30 per cent, this means that the challenges in finding a job for the youth  in the 
province are even more daunting. I was, however, very interested to read about the 
success of the East London industrial zone, which has grown rapidly in the past two 
years to now account for almost 3 500 direct manufacturing and services jobs, at a 
time  when  the  manufacturing  sector  has  been  struggling  considerably.  We  need 
more initiatives of this nature to address the unemployment problem in this province. 
 Of  promise  are  the  processes  put  in  place  by  national  government  to  revive  rural 
economies.  Here,  for  example,  I  refer  to  the  investment  programmes  in  Special 
Economic  Zones  and  Agri-Parks  as  well  as  the  training  initiatives  underway  for  the 
youth  in  the  Eastern  Cape.  The  province  has  also  been  a  strong  beneficiary  of 
investment  in  renewable  projects.  The  Coega  Development  Corporation  has  an 
optimistic  outlook  for  the  province  in  terms  of  investment,  with  investment  growth 
expected 
to  reach  an  estimated  R44,6  billion 
in  2020.  Furthermore, 
the 
establishment  of  the  Beijing  Automobile  International  Corporation  automobile 
manufacturing plant and other major investment projects within the Coega Industrial 
Development Zone bodes well for the province.  
 However, much more needs to be done to sustainably raise growth in the Province 
of  Possibilities.  The  Coega  Development  Corporation  predicts  that  the  province’s 
economy  should  perform  better  going  forward,  but  it  is  expected  to  reach  a  rate  of 
only 2,3 per cent by 20205.  
 
                                                           
5 The Eastern Cape socio-economic analysis and forecast 2016, A Coega Development Corporation 
Publication 
 3 
 3. 
Themes that shaped the global economy in 2016 
 At the beginning of 2016, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) forecast that global 
economic  activity  would  increase  by  3,4  per  cent  for  the  year,  with  advanced 
economies  projected to grow by  2,1 per cent and emerging market and developing 
economies  (EMDEs)  by  4,3  per  cent.6  Fast-forward  to  a  year  later  and  the  actual 
outcomes have been weaker, with the projection for 2016 global growth now lowered 
to 3,1 per cent, advanced economies downgraded to 1,6 per cent and EMDEs to 4,1 
per cent.  
 A  number  of  themes  and  events  shaped  the  economic  and  financial  market 
landscape during 2016, and I would like to briefly touch on a few of these. 
 At  the  start  of  the  year,  one  of  the  key  risks  was  that  of a  possible  hard  landing  in 
China.  There  were  concerns  around  whether  China  would  achieve  an  orderly 
rebalancing  of  its  economy  towards  domestic  consumption  and  away  from  export-
driven  growth  while  at  the  same  time  dealing  with  rising  financial  imbalances  and 
concerns  about  a  potential  property  bubble  bursting.  While  these  risks  have  not 
disappeared,  they  did  not  materialise  as  feared  and,  thus  far,  Chinese  authorities 
seem to have managed to continue supporting economic activity while navigating the 
complex  transition.  China’s  economy  has  undergone  a  structural  shift,  where 
consumption’s share of GDP has increased to over 50 per cent from just over 35 per 
cent  in  2012.  Although  China’s  rebalancing  has  been  negative  for  commodity 
exporters, one cannot deny that, in the long term, it could open a path towards more 
sustainable  and  balanced  growth,  and  if  successful  in  dealing  with  domestic 
challenges,  China  could  contribute  to  reviving  global  optimism.  It  is  interesting  to 
note that, in January 2016, the IMF forecast for China’s growth for 2016 was 6,3 per 
cent; this number has since been revised to 6,7 per cent.  
                                                            
6 International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook Update: Subdued Growth, Diminished 
Prospects, Action Needed, January 2016 
 4 
The  UK7 referendum was the next major event, where the outcome  was  somewhat 
of  a  surprise.  The  decision  to  leave  the  European  Union  (also  known  as  Brexit) 
prompted  a  strong  negative  reaction  from  UK  financial  markets,  at  least  initially.  In 
other  parts  of  the  world,  financial  markets  took  the  news  in  their  stride,  bar  a  few 
knee-jerk reactions. I would agree with the sentiments that this muted global reaction 
to Brexit is testament to the much-strengthened financial systems in the aftermath of 
the  latest  global  financial  crisis,  although  one  cannot  discount  the  actions  of  the 
advanced  economy  central  banks  who  stepped  in  and  offered  liquidity  support  to 
financial  markets  at  the  time.  Although  the  initial  fallout  from  Brexit  was  relatively 
well-contained, going forward, as the rules of engagement are defined and the terms 
of  the  divorce  are  hammered  out,  not  only  will  the  implications  for  the  UK  become 
clearer, but Brexit will also be a key factor moulding Europe’s economic, financial as 
well as political landscape.   
 
The  final  major  event  of  2016  was  the  outcome  of  the  US8  presidential  elections, 
once again largely unexpected. Many consider this outcome to be a reflection of the 
backlash against globalisation, and there is a concern that, over the course of 2017, 
elections in some of the  key advanced countries could move in the same direction. 
Popular opinion has shifted towards a negative narrative, where globalisation is said 
to  be  creating  unfair  competition  from  foreign  firms  and  labour,  with  the  result  that 
countries are increasingly turning inward.  
 Nonetheless,  financial  markets  have  shown  resilience  against  a  weak  global 
backdrop.  In  2016,  we  witnessed  a  historic  rally  in  bonds,  in  the  process  raising 
some  concerns  over  frothy  valuations.  Corporate  bonds  also  benefitted  from  the 
decline  in  sovereign  bond  yields.  And  while  it  was  a  mixed  bag  with  regard  to 
currencies,  the  uncertainty  and  downside  risks  from  the  Brexit  decision  were 
certainly reflected in the exchange rate of the British pound. In general, however, the 
US  dollar  gained  ground  on  expectations  of  a  higher  policy  rate.  EMDEs  regained 
their allure as  emerging market currencies were among the best performers across 
foreign exchange markets. Commodity prices also recovered from their lows. Finally, 
                                                           
7 United Kingdom 
8 United States of America 
 5 
concerns  around  the  risk  of  US  policy  normalisation  possibly  causing  some 
dislocation in financial markets also turned out to be misplaced. 
 All in all, 2016 was a tough year, but one that was better than most of us had feared 
it would be. 
 
4.  A global economy that is expected to turn the corner in 20179 
 
The  latest  IMF  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO)10  projects  a  pickup  in  economic 
activity over the next two years, driven by EMDEs which are growing at  well above 
the world average. Global growth for 2016 has been estimated at 3,1 per cent and is 
projected to increase to 3,4 per cent and 3,6 per cent in 2017 and 2018 respectively.  
 It  is  expected  that  advanced  economies  will  experience  a  lift  in  activity  from  an 
estimated  1,6  per  cent  in  2016  to  2,0  per  cent  in  2018.  The  US  in  particular  is 
projected  to  grow  by  2,3  per  cent  in  2017  and  2,5  per  cent  in  2018,  from  an 
estimated  1,6  per  cent  in  2016.  Much  of  this  pickup  in  growth  is  premised  on 
expectations  of  fiscal  stimulus,  tax  reforms  as  well  as  cuts  in  both  personal  and 
corporate  marginal  tax  rates.  Incentives  to  repatriate  corporate  profits  held  abroad 
are also likely. However, the timing as well as the actual size and mechanics of the 
fiscal stimulus are highly uncertain at this stage and implementation may take time. It 
is  largely  expected that  the  net  stimulus  will  only  take  effect by  2018.  On the  other 
hand,  trade  policies  and  immigration  reforms  could  offset  these  effects  while  there 
could also be a potential drag from a stronger dollar and higher longer-term interest 
rates.  
 Euro area growth is set to remain steady at 1,6 per cent in both 2017 and 2018. The 
European Central Bank will be slowing its purchases of bonds from April, and while 
monetary  policy  is  set  to  remain  accommodative,  the  decision  to  slow  quantitative 
easing has already seen the trend towards increasing negative yielding debt reverse, 
such that more recent numbers point to a deceleration from around US$13 trillion in 
                                                           
9 Unless indicated otherwise, all the forecasts in this section are taken from the International Monetary 
Fund World Economic Outlook Update of January 2017.  
10 International Monetary Fund, A shifting global economic landscape, January 2017 
 6 
2016 to US$9 trillion more recently. Fiscal authorities appear to be increasingly open 
to  providing  fiscal  support  and  implementing  structural  reforms.  However,  the 
potential  banking  problems  in  Italy  and  the  rising  political  risks  associated  with  a 
number of upcoming elections, including in Germany and France, will likely weigh in. 
In the UK, the economy has so far proved relatively resilient against Brexit risks, but 
this is unlikely to be the case going forward; indeed growth is projected to slow from 
2,0 per cent in 2016 to 1,4 per cent in 2018.  The  UK growth  forecast for 2017 was 
revised up by 0,4 per cent in the latest WEO Update, to 1,5 per cent.  
 By  all  accounts,  the  deflation  fears  which  once  gripped  the  advanced  world,  apart 
from  Japan,  seem  to  be  abating.  This  is  partly  due  to  the  increase  in  oil  prices 
following  the  agreement  among  OPEC11  members  and  several  other  major 
producers to limit supply.  
 Emerging markets are set to accelerate from an estimated growth of 4,1 per cent in 
2016 to 4,8 per cent in 2018. As the IMF points out, this projection largely reflects a 
gradual normalization of conditions in a number of large economies that are currently 
experiencing  macroeconomic  strains.  China  is  expected  to  grow  by  6,5  per  cent  in 
2017,  as  a  policy  bias  of  easy  fiscal  policy  and  accommodative  monetary  policy  is 
expected to remain in place. However, the rapid expansion of credit, combined with 
insufficient  progress  in  addressing  corporate  debt,  raises  the  risk  of  a  sharper 
slowdown  or  a  disruptive  adjustment.  India  is  forecast  to  grow  by  7,2  per  cent  in 
2017,  although  this  forecast  was  trimmed  somewhat  due  to  the  government’s 
decision to demonetise almost 90 per cent of the currency in circulation. This move 
induced  a  temporary  negative  consumption  shock  owing  to  cash  shortages  and 
payment  disruptions.  Both  Brazil  and  Russia  are  expected  to  return  to  positive 
growth in 2017.  
 So  while  the  global  economy  is  expected  to  turn  the  corner  this  year,  there  are  a 
number  of  risks  that  warrant  attention.  These  include  the  possible  shift  towards 
inward-looking  policies,  the  continued  threat  of  a  potentially  severe  slowdown  in 
China,  greater  protectionism,  a  sharper-than-expected  tightening  in  global  financial 
                                                           
11 Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries  
 7 
conditions  (as  monetary  policy  in  advanced  economies  is  expected  to  be  less 
accommodative  going  forward),  and  increased  geopolitical  tensions  related  to  the 
rise  of  populism;  and  Brexit,  amongst  others.  As  much  as  a  fiscal  stimulus  from 
advanced  economies  should  be  positive,  the  change  to  a  less  accommodative 
monetary policy stance in advanced economies, in particular the US, combined with 
a  stronger  US  dollar,  can  have  adverse  consequences  for  emerging  markets, 
including  accelerating  capital  outflows  and  putting  the  rebound  in  emerging  market 
economies  in  jeopardy.  However,  having  said  this,  it  is  also  true  that  emerging 
markets  are  more  resilient  than  before  as  macroeconomic  fundamentals  have 
improved considerably and vulnerabilities have declined.  
 5.  A domestic economy that is expected to recover in 2017 
 The  domestic  economy  recovered  from  negative  growth  in  2009  to  grow  at  3,0  per 
cent in 2010 but slowed to 1,3 per cent in 2015. The challenges mounted such that, 
at  the  beginning  of  2016,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  projected  growth  of  1,5 
per cent for 2016. Some months later, the forecast was lowered to no growth at all. 
This more  pessimistic outlook  came  on  the back  of  continued  disappointing  growth 
outcomes as a result of a severe drought affecting the agricultural and manufacturing 
sectors,  negative  growth  in  the  mining  sector  and  a  weaker-than-expected  global 
backdrop,  combined  with  political  developments  affecting  business  and  consumer 
confidence. Subsequently, however, growth forecasts were revised higher to 0,4 per 
cent  as  the  second  quarter  of  2016  delivered  a  positive  growth  surprise.  This 
acceleration  in  growth  was  short-lived,  however,  as  the  third  quarter  witnessed  a 
slowdown to 0,2 per cent.  
 The primary sector, which had experienced sustained contractions since the second 
quarter of 2015, saw a real production  increase in the second and third quarters of 
2016,  although  this  recovery  lost  momentum  in  the  third  quarter.  Agricultural 
production  logged  seven  consecutive  quarters  of  contraction  as  it  continues  to 
recover from a historically severe drought. The manufacturing sector has been very 
volatile, contracting by 3,2 per cent in the third quarter after growing by 8,1 per cent 
in  the  second  quarter.  The  contraction  was  broad-based  as  this  sector  has  been 
hampered by weak global and domestic demand, rising input costs and low business 
 8 
confidence. The construction sector is also under stress, while both retail trade sales 
and domestic new vehicle sales have continued their negative trend.  
 The  employment  outlook  remains  bleak  –  not  surprising  given  the  poor  economic 
situation. The official unemployment rate stood at 26,5 per cent in the fourth quarter 
of  2016  –  down  from  27,3  per  cent  in  the  third  quarter  but  still  about  2  percentage 
points higher than a year ago.  
 Recent  data  suggest  some  downside  risks  to  the  2016  economic  growth  forecast, 
such  as  a  continued  decline  in  business  and  consumer  confidence  as  well  as  the 
contraction  in  mining  output  during  both  October  and  November.  And  while  the 
Barclays Purchasing Managers’ Index increased to just above 50 in January 2017, it 
had been in negative territory for five consecutive months. 
 Looking ahead, the most recent growth forecasts of the South African Reserve Bank 
suggest growth of 1,1 per cent in 2017 and 1,6 per cent in 2018. However, it should 
be noted that the recent monthly data for the fourth quarter suggest that there may 
be a downside risk to these forecasts.  
 It  is  clear  that  the  deceleration  in  the  South  African  economy  has  underlying 
structural causes. The economy’s estimated potential growth rate has  been revised 
downwards  to  approximately  1,4  per  cent.  Restoring  growth  rates  to  historical 
averages  will  require  structural  reforms,  without  which  the  economy  is  expected  to 
expand  at  rates  of  between  1,0  and  2,0  per  cent  for  the  foreseeable  future, 
generating  little  or  no  improvement  in  either  employment  or  individual  living 
standards  –  particularly  when  considered  in  the  context  of  the  1,5  per  cent  annual 
population growth over the past decade.  What is required is an increased focus on 
reforms  in  product  and  labour  markets,  an  environment  more  conducive  to 
increasing  investment  levels  (particularly  in  the  private  sector),  and  better-quality 
education  outcomes  which  are  more  consistent  with  the  future  needs  of  the 
economy.  Ensuring  better  delivery  by  state-owned  enterprises  is  also  critical  given 
the  important  role  that  these  entities  play  in  providing  the  infrastructure  to  support 
growth in the economy.  
  9 
It is well known that South Africa has endured an environment of high inflation and 
low  growth,  a  situation  presenting  a  challenge  to  monetary  policy  authorities.  The 
main  priority  for  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  is  price  stability  in  the  interest  of 
balanced  and  sustainable  growth.  Faced  with  this  situation,  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee (MPC) has increased the repurchase rate gradually since January 2014, 
by a total of 200 basis points, to the current level of  7,0 per cent. This hiking cycle 
was more  gradual  when compared to previous  hiking cycles, responding to a more 
uncertain  and  volatile  policy  environment  which,  given  the  weakening  growth 
outcomes, at times required the MPC to pause and carefully evaluate incoming data 
to inform future monetary policy moves.  
 During  2016,  there  was  some  upward  pressure  on  consumer  prices  as  these 
generally  remained  above  the  upper  end  of  the  3-6  per  cent  inflation  target  range 
throughout  the  year.  These  upward  pressures  emanated  from  food  price  inflation, 
which  increased  by  close  to  12,0  per  cent  in  the  final  quarter  of  2016,  the  highest 
increase  since  2009  when  prices  increased  in  excess  of  15  per  cent.  The  upward 
pressure on food inflation was mainly as a result of the severe drought experienced. 
The exchange rate of the rand also recorded substantial depreciations at times, such 
as  that  which  occurred  in  December  2015  and  January 2016,  exacerbating  the 
inflation outlook. Underlying inflation, as measured by core inflation (which excludes 
food, fuel and electricity), is at seven-year highs, which reflects some pass-through 
from  a  prolonged  period  of  currency  depreciation  and  pricing  behaviour  in  product 
and labour markets.  
 The  near-term  outlook  for  inflation  shows  that  prices  are  likely  to  remain  elevated. 
The latest inflation forecast of the South African Reserve Bank shows that headline 
inflation  may  only  return  to  within  the  target  range  during  the  final  quarter  of  2017, 
average  6,2  per  cent  for  this  year,  and  decelerate  to  5,5  per  cent  in  2018.  This 
forecast  represents  a  deterioration  from  the  previous  MPC  forecast  of  November 
2016 and is mainly based on the assumption for higher international oil prices which 
impact  on  the  domestic  fuel  prices  and  more  than  offset  the  more  favourable 
exchange  rate  assumption.  By  contrast,  the  forecast  for  core  inflation  remains 
unchanged, averaging 5,5 per cent and 5,2 per cent in 2017 and 2018 respectively. 
  10 
In the most recent MPC statement, published last month, we noted that the inflation 
forecast  is  a  cause  for  concern  but  that  the  main  drivers  of  this  deterioration  are 
supply-side shocks, in particular oil and food prices. As the MPC has noted time and 
again, its approach is to look through the first-round effects of exogenous shocks but 
at the same time to exercise  vigilance on the possible emergence of second-round 
effects which could require a policy response. 
 In this regard,  while oil prices have  now  risen from their low levels, various supply-
side  factors  are  expected  to  constrain  these  prices.  Assuming  normal  weather 
patterns, food inflation is likely to have peaked at 12,0 per cent towards the end of 
2016  and  should  decline  following  good  rainfall  and  subsequent  declines  in  spot 
wheat  and  maize  prices.  However,  some  upward  pressure  will  remain,  originating 
from the lagged response of meat prices to drought conditions. The more favourable 
rand exchange rate bodes well and, barring any significant depreciation pressures, it 
should  help  to  offset  some  of  the  inflationary  pressures  in  the  forecast  horizon. 
Indeed,  the  rand  has been  resilient and  has  strengthened  considerably,  at  times  to 
levels below R13,00 to the US dollar more recently.  
 It  is  against  this  background  that  the  most  recent  MPC  deliberations  retained  the 
view that we may be near the end of the hiking cycle. However, should risks emerge 
of second-round effects that undermine the longer-term inflation outlook, there may 
be a reassessment of this view.  
 Before I conclude, allow me to make a few remarks about a topic that has generated 
much  interest  during  the  last  week,  namely  the  outcome  of  the  Competition 
Commission’s investigation into  unlawful collusive practices among certain financial 
institutions 
in 
foreign  exchange 
trading 
involving 
the  South  African 
rand, 
predominantly  in  major  international  financial  centres.  The  South  African  Reserve 
Bank  views  the  allegations  that  have  been  referred  to  the  Competition  Tribunal  for 
prosecution in a very serious light and is of the view that those found to have violated 
the  law  should  accept  full  responsibility  for  their  actions  and  be  held  accountable, 
and corrective measures should be implemented. It is also important, however, that 
we  do  not  jump  to  conclusions  and  allow  the  steps  now  initiated  to  be  completed 
following due process. A resolution of this matter, without undue delay or prolonged 
 11 
uncertainty,  is  in  the  interest  of  our  financial  markets  and  banking  system,  as  the 
allegations also involve a number of large and systemically important South African 
banks. 
 6.  Conclusion  
 In conclusion, we are hopeful that the global economy has reached a turning point, 
that  growth  will  now  accelerate  on  a  more  sustainable  basis, and that  the  threat  of 
deflation in advanced economies will subside. It is important that the levers of fiscal 
policy, structural reforms and monetary policy are engaged in the appropriate mix so 
as  to  underpin  the  recovery  and  make  it  sustainable.  The  current  geopolitical  risks 
will need to be managed carefully so as to not undermine the recovery.  
 No doubt, 2017 will have its own set of challenges. Top of mind here is the impact of 
the  rising  anti-globalisation  and  trade-protectionist  rhetoric,  the  changing  monetary-
fiscal  mix  which  may  present  some  challenges  as  the  markets  adjust  to  tighter 
monetary  policy  in  the  US,  uncertainty  regarding  the  Brexit  negotiations,  and  the 
actual  reforms  and  stimulus  to  be  implemented  by  the  new  US  administration.  The 
IMF  also  highlights  that  underlying  vulnerabilities  remain  among  some  large 
emerging market economies, including high levels of  foreign currency denominated 
corporate debt, declining profitability, weak balance sheets, and thin policy buffers.  
 Domestically, a more favourable global backdrop will certainly help. Having reached 
the  lower  turning  point  in  terms  of  growth  and  medium-term  inflation  prospects 
having  improved  overall  in  recent  times,  it  will  be  important  for  us  to  capitalise  on 
these encouraging developments and complement them with confidence-enhancing 
measures while being mindful of the risks and addressing them in a systematic and 
structured manner. 
 South Africa is a small and open economy, exposed to many risks beyond its control. 
This makes it imperative that, through a collaborative national effort,  we do not get 
wrong that which is well within our control.  
 Thank you for your attention.  
 12 
