François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  Technological 
payments and beyond
Opening speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Bank
of France and CNPS (French Payments Committee) conference "Technological innovations in
payments and beyond", Paris, 6 January 2017.
innovations 
in
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 I am very pleased to welcome you all to Paris, for this conference on technological innovations in
payments and, more generally, in the financial system. Representatives from a wide range of
stakeholders, from market to regulatory spheres, are here today and I have no doubt that this
variety of backgrounds will make the discussions fruitful. Before leaving the floor to the speakers
and  panellists,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  a  few  thoughts  on  three  challenges  raised  by
digitalisation, from the perspective of a central banker.
1. Technological innovations are opening up new opportunities for payments, which can
provide benefits to the whole economy
Payments are often viewed as a very technical and incidental activity, and sometimes even just
as a matter of “plumbing”. And yet they are crucial for our economy and for central banks. For the
Banque de France, payments are of the essence in all our three missions – what we call the “3
Ss”: monetary strategy, financial stability and economic services.
First,  monetary  strategy:  what  is  at  stake  with  payments  is  the  future  of  money.  Central
banks were born with the inception of fiat money – banknotes – and they have been pivotal
for the take-up of non-cash payment instruments. Among the latter, a growing trend in the
last few years has been the preponderance of electronic payments versus traditional paper-
based  ones  –  such  as  cheques  –  even  if  this  trend  varies  across  regions.  This  physical
dematerialisation is actually ongoing, with the slow move away from dedicated form factors
– such as plastic cards – towards entirely digitalised ones, for example solutions embedded
in  smartphones  or  other  consumer  devices.  So,  regarding  money  issuance,  we  have  to
monitor  closely  the  latest  technological  innovations.  Several  central  banks,  including  the
oldest one – the Riksbank in Sweden –, have started to study the possibility of a digitally-
issued  central  bank  currency  which  could  allow  not  only  commercial  banks  but  also  the
general public to access central bank money.
Second,  financial  stability:  payments  are  a  key  vector  for  trust  and  confidence  in  the
adequate  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  This  requires  both  secure  and  efficient
payments and financial infrastructures. Therefore regulators attach importance to supporting
technological innovations, including via the potential development of more efficient regulation
or  “Regtechs”,  as  long  as  they  go  hand  in  hand  with  low  operational  risks  and  high
transaction safety.
Third,  economic  services:  payments  are  the  nexus  where  a  new  ecosystem  based  on
technological innovation and entrepreneurship is blooming. These developments are for the
benefit of the real economy – and more particularly the corporate sector – in France and in
Europe:  a  myriad  of  so  called  “Fintechs”  are  now  emerging.  They  are  competing  with
incumbents, notably in the United States, and are proposing not only new ways of paying but
also new services related to payments (such as account aggregation). So there are high
industrial stakes involved, and we must foster active competition, which is far preferable to
monopolies, even technological ones.
Given the importance of payments in many aspects of our economy, we need a comprehensive
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
strategy.  Most  importantly,  innovation  should  be  spurred,  whether  it  comes  from  start-ups  or
incumbents.  This  is  exactly  the  purpose  of  the  French  national  strategy  for  retail  payments  –
consistent with the European framework. This French strategy was developed last year through
a cooperative process: it aims at modernizing payments, by relying on the dematerialization of
processes  in  different  fields,  such  as  e-invoicing,  e-mandates  for  SEPA  Direct  debits,  virtual
wallets, etc. The implementation of this strategy has been entrusted to the National Committee
for Payments (CNPS), your co-host for this conference, which gathers representatives from both
the supply and the demand side and is chaired by the Banque de France.
Going  beyond  the  sole  payments  sphere,  innovation  in  the  financial  sector  can  generate
significant benefits that have to be reaped. It has the potential to foster financial inclusion all over
the world, as long as people are provided with internet access. It also prompts incumbents to
adapt, pushing them to develop new business models and new activities that ultimately benefit
the customers. In this regard, let me highlight the initiatives to develop instant payments in the
SEPA area, to facilitate market-based funding and equity financing in the European Union. I would
like  also  to  mention  that  the  Banque  de  France  is  conducting  its  own  experiments,  with  the
recent  creation  of  a  Lab  and  the  appointment  a  Chief  Digital  Officer,  Thierry  Bedoin,  who  will
moderate the first panel of this afternoon’s session.
2.  Technological  innovation  is  to  be  welcomed  but  the  risks  should  not  be
underestimated
Innovation brings new threats for the financial system that have to be carefully dealt with:
First, it raises challenges in terms of fraud and security, given the multiplication of actors
involved in payment and financial processes, the higher circulation of personal data as well
as  the  multiplication  of  potential  “points  of  failure”.  These  new  “cyber”  risks  are  an  acute
concern  for  the  whole  industry,  including  for  a  mature  technology  such  as  internet  card
payments which accounts for more than two thirds of all fraud losses on card payments in
France.  Thus  “younger”  technologies  that  may  not  have  been  tested  yet,  such  as  the
blockchain, and might generate new security risks, deserve early and extended scrutiny.
Second, it could endanger financial stability over the longer term, as a result of the process
of increased automation that we have seen during the last few years. The development of
High  Frequency  Trading  for  instance  –  whose  economic  utility  is  by  the  way  also
questionable  –  could  hamper  the  resilience  of  financial  markets  in  times  of  stress.  New
services  such  as  smart  contracts  embedded  on  a  blockchain  could  create  new  shock
transmission mechanisms or result in new forms of interconnectedness or pro-cyclicality
that could be the sources of financial instability.
Third, it could threaten market integration, especially in Europe after a decade of tremendous
efforts to foster harmonization between financial markets. Such efforts are evidenced in the
securities markets area, by the recent launch of the Target2 Securities platform in 2015, in
the  payments  area,  by  the  completion  in  2016  of  the  second  round  of  the  SEPA  project
which  now  allows  for  fully  harmonized  credit  transfers  and  direct  debits  denominated  in
euros,  throughout  the  European  Union.  By  contrast,  the  current  profusion  of  new
technologies, standards and protocols that are not fully interoperable, at least at this stage,
constitutes  a  potential  risk  of  market  fragmentation. Additionally,  they  could  lead  to  some
kind of social fragmentation, if the new payment means are less accessible to the less well-
off.
3. Against this background, public authorities play a key role in helping to reap the full
benefits of innovation while preventing the threats it brings
This implies first rethinking the regulation so as to strike the right balance between innovation and
security.  Several  objectives  have  indeed  to  be  met:  maximizing  the  spillover  effects  of
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
innovations, protecting the consumer and addressing financial stability issues, and ensuring that
innovation is beneficial to all parties, in particular in the form of new services and costs reduction.
Such a balance can only be reached through adequate and proportionate rules, based on the risk
profile  of  the  service  provided  and  not  on  the  nature  or  the  legal  status  of  the  provider.  This
principle has guided European authorities in the review of the payment services directive, which
will be thoroughly discussed during this afternoon’s session.
On  top  of  these  regulatory  changes,  technological  innovations  reinforce  the  need  for  fruitful
dialogue and cooperation between all parties concerned. At the French level for instance, this is
the  purpose  of  the  “Fintech  Forum”  launched  in  July  last  year  by  the  French  prudential
supervision and resolution authority, the ACPR, in coordination with the French Financial Markets
Authority. The continuous dialogue between regulators, supervisors and companies will ensure
that innovations are properly understood, that the necessary changes in regulation are identified
in a timely manner and that information flows appropriately between stakeholders. We have also
committed the Banque de France and the ACPR to a gradualist and proportionate approach in
the regulation and supervision of Fintechs. We think it is still more appropriate than a “sandbox”,
which  could  create  threshold  effects.  At  the  European  level,  cooperation  between  all
stakeholders has been enhanced in the field of payments, so as to prevent market fragmentation.
This is the central role assigned to the Euro Retail Payments Board. Later on this morning, Yves
Mersch will give us further insights into the work of the ERPB.
Allow me now to conclude briefly by expressing again my gratitude to all the speakers, panellists
and participants who are present today to share their thoughts on a wide variety of subjects of
topical interest. I wish you extremely fruitful discussions throughout the whole day. Thank you for
your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
