Yannis Stournaras: Proportionality in European banking regulation
Keynote remarks by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the Conference
on "Proportionality in European Banking Regulation", organised by the Bank of Greece and the
University of Piraeus, Athens, 13 February 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 It is with pleasure that I welcome you to this conference on the principle of proportionality and its
relevance for banking regulation, supervision and resolution. 
Of course, proportionality is a well-established general principle of European law. As a standard
of public law, it has a long pedigree in both national and European law. And in more philosophical
debates, it has always served as a point of reference for theories of justice. Indeed, the original
formulations relating to proportional justice can be found in the writings of Plato and Aristotle.
This  arguably  makes  Athens  an  apt  location  for  carrying  on  the  debate  in  a  contemporary
context. 
But why should proportionality be discussed in specific relation to banking regulation? And why
has this particular debate only recently flared up? 
The answer lies in the wide concept of proportionality, which informs the banking debate. The
demand for proportional banking regulation goes beyond the technical legal use of proportionality
as a standard of judicial review! 
Regarding the narrower legal use of the concept, it is quite clear that lack of proportionality can
be  invoked  as  a  ground  for  impugning  particular  legislative  or  administrative  measures  of  the
European Union, or national measures of the Member States which implement European law.
However, the intensity of judicial review on this basis will typically be low, since for measures
which  entail  policy  decisions  or  involve  complex  assessments  of  the  technical  and  economic
situation,  the  courts  will  recognize  a  wide  margin  of  appreciation  to  the  legislative  or
administrative  authorities  and  only  overturn  a  measure  if  they  consider  that  this  is  ‘manifestly
inappropriate’. Now, the elaboration of prudential standards in the banking field is likely to entail
precisely such complex technical evaluations on the part of the Union’s legislative and regulatory
decision-makers; the same applies to a very large extent to the making of individual supervisory
decisions. For this reason, the actual decisions of banking regulators are likely to be overturned
by the courts only in rare and exceptional circumstances. And rightly so! A cautious and rather
sparing  judicial  interference  in  the  practical  working  of  the  banking  regulatory  and  supervisory
system, is fully justified by the comparative advantages of administrative, as opposed to judicial,
decision-making in this field.
  However,  there  is  another,  wider  concept  of  proportionality  that  we  should  consider:  that  is,
proportionality  in  the  sense,  not  merely  of  a  technical  standard  of  administrative  law,  but  of  a
broad constitutional ideal, which should guide all official actions in the Union. 
This  wider  notion,  which  is  more  congenial  to  the  thinking  of  economists  like  me,  is  explicitly
entrenched in the text of the Treaty on European Union. Indeed, article 5 of the Treaty states
clearly  that  “[t]he  use  of  Union  competences  is  governed  by  the  principles  of  subsidiarity  and
proportionality”. The same provision further clarifies that, “[u]nder the principle of proportionality,
the  content  and  form  of  Union  action  shall  not  exceed  what  is  necessary  to  achieve  the
objectives of the Treaties.” The provision was inserted in the Treaty primarily with the intention to
regulate  the  Union’s  legislative  and  general  policy-making  measures,  rather 
the
administrative decisions, through which the European rules, standards or policies are applied to
individual cases at the supranational and national levels. 
than 
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  wider  concept  of  proportionality  as  a  regulative  principle  of  European  standard-setting,
requires  careful  and  responsive  policy-  and  rule-making.  More  to  the  point,  it  requires  the
selection  of  the  least  burdensome  or  restrictive  approach  in  order  to  achieve  our  regulatory
objectives. This can only be achieved through a careful balancing of interests –the promotion of
public objectives versus the rights and legitimate interests of private individuals and enterprises;
the exercise of European competencies versus the preservation of the policy autonomy of the
Member States– and the weighting of the potential costs against the benefits of particular policies
and tools. To put it differently, proportionality requires properly calibrated European responses to
well-identified problems and is inimical to heavy-handed, blanket, one-size-fit-all approaches to
legislation and regulation. In this demanding but valuable sense, proportionality is closely linked to
notions of equality and equity, also including the notion of proportional equality, which requires us
to treat similar cases in the same manner, but to differentiate between dissimilar ones. It is also
linked to the need for respect for fundamental rights and Treaty freedoms, including the right to
property and the freedom of economic activity. 
Proportionality, then, stands here as a short form for a constellation of closely related principles
and  values,  which,  we,  as  regulators  and  supervisors,  have  a  duty  to  serve:  equality,  legal
certainty, individual rights, and good administration. This concept of proportionality has recently
become  a  major  theme  in  pan-European  discussions  of  banking  regulation  –  and  for  good
reason. It subsumes more specific discussions on better regulation, simplification and the need
for differentiation. And it provides a framework for the evaluation of existing rules and practices,
and a compass for their elaboration and improvement. 
Why  has  this  debate  gained  traction  now,  and  not  in  the  past?  I  believe  that  three  specific
aspects  of  the  post-crisis  regulatory  architecture  explain,  and  also  justify,  the  emergence  of
proportionality as a core concern in European banking regulation. 
These three aspects of the post-crisis European regulatory architecture have greatly increased
the significance of the matter: 
First,  the  shift  from  the  old  approach  to  prudential  standard-setting  for  credit  institutions,
which was based on no more than a minimum harmonization at the European level, to a
new system of almost full Europeanization of the applicable norms. The intensive legislative
activity  which  followed  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  culminating  in  the  enactment  of  the
Capital Requirements Directive IV and the Capital Requirements Regulation, has resulted in
much  greater  uniformity,  verging  to  full  harmonization,  of  the  regulatory  norms.  The  new
state  of  things  is  epitomized  in  the  construction  of  a  Single  Rulebook  of  pan-European
applicability, with the EBA acting as the Rulebook’s custodian and key developer. 
Second,  the  considerable  expansion  of  the  prudential  regime  to  cover  new  aspects  of  a
bank’s  organization  and  business  activity.  This  thematic  extension  is  evident  both  in  the
Basel regime, which, beyond the usual capital adequacy requirements, now encompasses
global  standards  for  liquidity  and  leverage,  as  well  as  in  the  host  of  European  legislative
initiatives of recent years. As a result, the net of supervisory controls over the activities of
credit institutions and other financial intermediaries has become much denser than what it
used to be. This makes the question of proportionality of the regulatory requirements all the
more pressing. 
Third, the move from a system of national responsibility for supervision to the streamlined,
and largely centralized, new supervisory architecture of the Banking Union. 
Under the pre-existing system, the European norms, such as they were, could be individuated
and amplified at the  national  level,  thus  leaving  the  question  of  diversification  and  proportional
implementation  largely  within  the  responsibility  and  discretion  of  national  legislatures  and
competent  authorities.  In  contrast,  in  the  new  environment  of  maximum  harmonization,
comprehensive  prudential  controls  and  centralized  supervision,  these  concerns  need  to  be
addressed primarily at the European level. 
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
For this reason, the proportionality of the Single Rulebook’s primary directives and regulations
and numerous delegated and implementing acts, has rapidly emerged as a key concern of the
banking industry. In this context, a number of specific issues have come to the forefront over the
past two years, concerning, for instance, the implementation of Basel III in Europe, the detail and
frequency of the new reporting requirements, the timeframe and pace of the transition to the fully-
fledged  regime,  the  treatment  of  small  banks  with  simple  business  models,  the  treatment  of
cooperative banks, and so on. It is a sign of the responsiveness of the new European regulatory
structures that these concerns have gained the full attention of the EBA, which has examined the
issue in two special supervisors’ workshops and a significant report of the Banking Stakeholder
Group. The influence of the debate is also evident in the EBA’s consultation papers and RTSs. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In  its  dual  capacity  as  central  bank  and  national  competent  authority,  the  Bank  of  Greece  is
naturally  fully  cognizant  of  the  financial  industry’s  strong  and  persistent  demand  for  less
burdensome,  more  proportionate  and  more  fit-for-purpose,  prudential  requirements.  And  we
recognize  the  justice  of  certain  arguments  concerning  the  difficulties  and  heavy  costs  of
compliance  with  the  new  regime,  especially  for  smaller  institutions,  characterised  by  simple
business models, modest scale of business and non-complex systems and controls. 
Of course, our primary consideration is the safety and soundness of the banking system, both
domestically and at the European level. The Bank of Greece is strongly committed to robust and
effective prudential standards, which can deliver systemic safety, market discipline and proper
incentives for banks’ internal decision-makers. For this purpose, it has been fully supportive of
the post-crisis efforts to reregulate the banking sector and has sought unflinching commitment to
the  faithful  and  complete  national  implementation  of  the  new  standards,  despite  the  acute
difficulties presented by our country’s economic predicament and the need to support and repair
the banking system, which has been gravely affected by the crisis. 
But  at  the  same  time  we  share  with  the  banking  industry  the  concern  for  proportionality.  We
consider  excessive  complexity  to  be  part  of  the  problem,  not  of  the  solution,  in  so  far  as  it
increases  costs  and  uncertainty  for  the  regulated  institutions,  without  thereby  generating
additional benefits in terms of systemic or individual safety. We support regulatory approaches
that  allow  for  differentiation  where  appropriate,  and  apply  criteria  of  materiality  in  order  to
determine the applicability or otherwise of particular rules to different classes of institutions. And
we  recognize  the  need  for  consistency  across  the  various  components  of  the  prudential,
resolution planning and reporting regimes, to avoid conflicts and duplication. 
More  generally,  we  have  all  along  expressed  scepticism  with  regard  the  one-size-fits-all
approach to regulation – an approach whereby uniform prudential standards are set at the same
level for all credit institutions, as well as for other financial institutions such as investment firms.
In particular, we have been sceptical of a uniform model-based approach to financial risk, based
on the generic risks faced by a notional universal banking group, of unspecified (but probably
large) size, carrying on mixed activities, including extensive securities and derivatives exposures,
and displaying a relatively high degree of interconnectedness with other participants in financial
markets. 
In  all  these  respects,  we  consider  that  proportionality  can  enhance  the  effectiveness  and
efficiency  of  the  prudential  regime.  We  do  not  see  it  as  a  step  back  from  the  post-crisis
commitment  to  high  standards  of  prudence,  or  relaxation  of  the  new  regime.  This  is  not  a
question of trade-offs between safety and market-friendliness, but a matter of optimal institutional
design for safety and soundness.
 Last but not least, we consider that the further development of the prudential regime should take
into consideration the implications of regulatory requirements –including the phasing in of their
implementation– for the real economy. Especially in the euro area, with its largely bank-based
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial  system,  the  ability  of  credit  institutions  to  extend  credit  is  critical  for  the  vigorous
performance  and  growth  of  the  real  economy.  The  need  to  sustain  bank  financing  to  the  real
economy acquires added importance in the present environment, when the European recovery is
still fragile and the banking systems of several Member States are still struggling with the legacy
of the crisis. 
Moreover, even the capital market depends on the profitability and competitiveness of the banking
sector  for  its  smooth  operation  and  deepening,  because  banks  are  involved  as  both  service
providers and users at various stages of the securities and derivative intermediation chain. In this
sense, the Capital Markets Union should be seen, not as an alternative, but as a complement, to
a well-functioning Banking Union. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
This  conference  was  conceived  from  the  very  start  as  a  forum  for  discussing  in  depth  these
issues. As things have turned out, the discussion now takes place in the context of the European
Commission’s banking reform package, which was made public on November 23. This includes
proposals for the revision of the main (Level 1) instruments of the Union’s Single Rulebook, that
is, the Capital Requirements Directive IV, the Capital Requirements Regulation and, in so far as
the  resolution  regime  and,  especially,  the  resolvability  and  loss-absorbing  capacity  of  credit
institutions is concerned, the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive and the SRB Regulation.
The Commission’s package enhances and brings up-to-date the post-crisis prudential regime by
transposing into European law those elements of the global Basel III standards which have been
fully  specified  after  the  enactment  of  the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation  in  2013.  It  thus
includes  substantial  new  rules  on  a  binding  3%  leverage  ratio,  detailed  provisions  on  credit
institutions’ liquidity requirements, and provisions, requiring institutions that trade in securities in
derivatives  to  maintain  more  risk-sensitive  own  funds.  Moreover,  it  implements  the  Financial
Stability  Board’s  new  Total  Loss-Absorbing  Capacity  (TLAC)  standard  for  the  30  global
systemically important institutions, almost half of which are European. 
In  a  very  promising  development,  the  Commission  used  this  opportunity  in  order  to  introduce
significant  elements  of  proportionality  in  the  Single  Rulebook.  Based  on  extensive  public
consultation  and  impact  assessments  relating  to  the  CRD/CRR  regime,  it  has  included  in  its
package a set of important proposals that are explicitly intended to make the prudential regime
more  proportionate  and  to  reduce  the  burden  faced  by  smaller  and  less  complex  credit
institutions. The proposed amendments affect, in particular, the disclosure, reporting and trading-
book-related  capital  requirements.  Furthermore,  they  differentiate  the  treatment  of  certain
financial instruments, such as covered bonds, high quality securitization instruments, sovereign
debt instruments and derivatives used for hedging, with a view to reducing the costs of issuing or
holding  such  instruments,  thus  enabling  the  continuing  participation  of  banks  in  the  relevant
securities  markets.  In  this  manner,  the  regulatory  regime  is  differentiated  to  facilitate  the
deepening of European capital markets and the creation of the Capital Markets Union. 
One could argue that the inclusion of strong elements of proportionality in the banking reform
package marks a move away for the traditional tendency of European law to regulate financial
institutions  through  uniformly  applicable  rules,  in  the  name  of  competitive  equality.  The
Commission explicitly and forcefully asserts the relevance and significance of proportionality as a
regulative  consideration  that  informs  its  proposals.  This  is  most  welcome,  and  we  should  all
work to bring the review of the Single Rulebook to rapid and successful conclusion. 
This, of course, will not exhaust the quest for more sophisticated, proportionate and cost-efficient
regulatory  solutions.  Our  regulatory  job  is  to  pursue  simultaneously  a  variety  of  objectives  –
systemic  stability  and  bank-level  safety,  equivalent  and  consistent  treatment  of  the  credit
institutions  and  other  regulated  persons,  appropriate  differentiation  and  diversification  of  the
regulatory and supervisory regime, and a financial environment conducive to economic growth.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
This is a demanding task – in fact, a permanent task, requiring continuous effort and adaptation.
In all cases, it must be pursued under the light of the principle of proportionality, which should be
incorporated  into  our  forward-looking  thinking  and  turned  into  a  necessary  consideration
informing the design of all regulatory norms and policies in the future. 
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
