Peter Praet: Maintaining price stability in the euro area
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the 15. Handelsblatt Jahrestagung "Zukunftstrategien für Sparkassen und Landesbanken", Berlin,
2 February 2017.
Introduction
 The euro area recovery is progressing at a moderate, but firming pace.  The economy has now
posted positive real GDP growth for 14 consecutive quarters. The unemployment rate is back to
a single-digit figure. Economic sentiment is at the highest level recorded in almost 6 years. The
monetary  policy  measures  the  ECB  has  taken  over  the  past  few  years  have  contributed
decisively to these positive developments.
1
After having hovered at levels well below 1% for three years, euro area HICP inflation has edged
up towards the end of last year and, according to preliminary data, reached 1.8%, in January.
The  recent  upward  movement  of  inflation  mainly  reflects  temporary  factors,  most  notably  the
increases  in  energy  and  food  prices.  By  contrast,  underlying  inflationary  pressures  have
remained subdued and inflation excluding food and energy has mostly remained below 1% since
late 2013.
The current environment still falls short of a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation to levels
closer  to  2%  over  the  medium  term.  It  will  take  time  for  inflation  to  stabilise  around  levels
consistent with our price stability objective.
Recent developments show the role monetary policy plays in driving the economic recovery and,
further down the road, in ensuring a durable return of inflation to levels close to 2%. By supporting
highly  accommodative  financial  and  credit  conditions,  our  current  monetary  policy  stance  is
underpinning  the  recovery  of  the  euro  area  economy.  The  gradual  reabsorption  of  economic
slack is working its way through to underlying inflation.
Continued monetary policy support is necessary to ensure a sustained convergence of inflation
towards levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. This assessment was the motive
for the Governing Council’s decision of December last year to extend the asset purchases until
the end of 2017 – or beyond, if necessary. It is conditional on the continuing support from these
and past measures that we expect to see a return of inflation to levels closer to 2% over the
medium term.
In  providing  the  necessary  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  going  forward,  the  ECB  will
continue  to  adhere  to  its  monetary  policy  strategy,  that  is  look  through  transitory  changes  in
inflation and remain focused on underlying inflation dynamics. The ups and downs of monthly
data are not relevant if they are temporary and have no implications for the medium term outlook
for price stability.
I  will  focus  my  remarks  today  on  the  relationship  between  economic  activity  and  inflation.
Eurosystem staff analysis has identified a large degree of economic slack as an important factor
behind subdued inflation dynamics in the wake of the sovereign debt crisis. Despite the ensuing
economic recovery, other – mainly cyclical – forces have been exerting disinflationary pressures.
These  forces,  which  are  partly  external  and  partly  domestic,  have  masked  the  relationship
between  economic  slack  and  inflation,  and  have  been  reinforced  by  a  weakening  of  inflation
expectations.
 1 / 5
2
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
Forces slowing down inflation in the euro area economy
The euro area recovery has been characterised by a disconnect between economic activity and
inflation – which some have referred to as a “missing inflation puzzle”. This disconnect becomes
visible, for instance, when comparing actual growth and inflation outcomes for 2016 with those
anticipated in the ECB staff macroeconomic projections of March 2014. The real GDP growth
rate,  which  stood  at  1.7%  in  2016,  essentially  confirmed  the  March  2014  projection.  HICP
inflation, by contrast, turned out to be more than 1 percentage point below the rate projected in
March 2014; and measures of core inflation, which strip out the direct disinflationary impact of the
collapse  of  commodity  prices  over  this  period,  have  remained  at  0.9%,  about  half  the  rate
projected earlier.
This  picture  points  to  pronounced  disinflationary  forces  that  have  confounded  attempts  to
forecast the impact of improved economic conditions on inflation. Where do these forces come
from?  Do  they  pertain  to  cyclical  influences  that  monetary  policy  can  offset?  Do  they  reflect
broader structural shifts in the economy that the central bank is forced to watch as a bystander?
When answering these questions, it is useful to subdivide the inflation process into three factors,
comprising: first, economic slack, measured by the output or unemployment gaps, for instance;
second,  a  range  of  other  domestic  and  global  macroeconomic  shocks  that  drive  a  wedge
between that relationship, affecting either production costs or price mark-ups; and, third, inflation
expectations, which feature as the – possibly time-varying – trend in this statistical relationship.
Following this logic, summarised by the well-known Phillips curve, recent research has explored
whether the disconnect between inflation and the economic recovery may have derived from a
genuine  change  in  the  causal  relationship  between  economic  slack  and  inflation,  or  from  a
prevalence of disinflationary pressures originating from other sources, including potential shocks
and  a  downward  shift  of  inflation  expectations,  which  could  have  more  than  offset  the  typical
impact of slack on inflation.
The relationship between inflation and economic slack
With  regard  to  the  first  dimension,  the  bulk  of  the  evidence  confirms  that  domestic  cyclical
conditions have played an important role in explaining disinflationary pressures. Domestic factors
have been found to be the main driver of disinflation between 2012 and 2014, and have continued
to  weigh  on  inflation  thereafter.  Measures  of  economic  slack,  in  particular,  have  proven
informative  in  forecasting  inflation  outcomes.  Moreover,  Eurosystem  staff  calculations,  using
various combinations of economic activity indicators and inflation expectation measures, have
found  that  more  than  80%  of  the  standard  estimated  Phillips-curve  specifications  confirm  a
significant  relationship  also  during  the  more  recent  period  of  disinflation.  These  observations
confirm that the relationship between economic activity and inflation, as postulated by the Phillips
3
curve, has continued to play a role at the euro area level.
The  link  between  inflation  and  economic  slack  is  complicated  by  several  factors.  On  the  one
hand,  the  degree  to  which  prices  respond  to  slack  may  depend  on  the  state  of  the  business
cycle  and  could  change,  in  particular,  in  severe  and  protracted  recessions.  The  empirical
evidence on such non-linearities, however, is not conclusive.
On  the  other  hand,  secular  shifts  in  the  economy  may  have  altered  the  relationship  between
inflation and economic slack. For instance, the trend towards a deeper integration of the global
economy over the last decades is likely to have increased the importance of global relative to
local  conditions  in  shaping  domestic  cost  and  price  pressures. A  further  often-cited  factor  is
demographics – and especially the trend towards greater longevity – which may have interacted
with  cyclical  conditions  by  inducing  households  to  save  more  and,  ultimately,  put  downward
pressure on inflation.  Empirical evidence on this issue is inconclusive and demographics would
4
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
only have lasting effects on the economy if left unattended by monetary policy.
Overall,  these  observations  have  three  important  implications  for  monetary  policy.  First,  the
evidence confirms that the core Phillips curve connection linking inflation formation to resource
utilisation remains a key ingredient in explaining the prevailing disinflationary pressures. Second,
this  finding  implies  that  monetary  policy,  which  typically  affects  the  level  of  slack  by  steering
financing  and  credit  conditions  in  the  economy,  also  retains  significant  influence  on  inflation
outcomes. Third, domestic slack has not been the only disinflationary factor. To understand the
drivers of low inflation, we thus need to look further afield – for instance, at shocks that have
driven  a  wedge  between  the  underlying  relationship  between  inflation  and  economic  slack  in
recent years.
Cost and mark-up shocks
Cost  and  mark-up  shocks  are  forces  that  may  have  reinforced  the  disinflationary  pressures
exerted by economic slack during the crisis, while offsetting the inflationary pressures generated
by  the  gradual  reabsorption  of  slack  thereafter.  In  the  Phillips  curve  framework,  such  shocks
would materialise as downward shifts of the curve that counteract upward movements along the
curve on account of the compression of slack.
One such force is a shock to the cost structure of firms, deriving, for instance, from fluctuations
in  import  prices.  The  fall  in  oil  prices  to  historically  low  levels  between  2014  and  2015  is  a
prominent  example  of  this  type  of  shock  as  it  directly  reduces  firms’  production  costs,  as
confirmed by ECB staff analysis.  According to the same analysis, the drag of global factors on
inflation has, indeed, more than compensated for the improvements in domestic drivers.
5
Changes in firms’ ability to charge mark-ups over their own production costs can further blur the
observed relationship between inflation and economic slack. Technological advancements, while
also reducing distribution costs, can limit firms’ pricing power by facilitating price discovery by
customers.  For  example,  the  advent  of  online  retail  platforms  has  greatly  increased  price
transparency  among  consumers  as  the  share  of  people  searching  for  information  online  has
risen continuously in the euro area. The downward pressure on mark-ups and, hence, prices
associated with the spread of e-commerce is consistent with an erosion of euro area firms’ profit
margins, which did not return to their pre-crisis levels until late 2014.
Empirical analysis does not, however, find robust evidence that mark-up shocks have been a
particularly dominant determinant of disinflationary tendencies since the crisis. In any case, these
forces  are  only  temporary:  they  can  move  inflation  away  from  its  long-run  trend,  even  for  a
protracted  period  of  time,  but  cannot  affect  trend  inflation  itself,  unless  they  infiltrate  inflation
expectations.
It  is  through  inflation  expectations  that  shocks  to  the  inflation  formation  process  which  would
otherwise have no relevance for a central bank can become a monetary policy problem. This
brings  me  to  the  third  element  in  the  Phillips  curve  –  its  intercept  –  which  is  determined  by
inflation expectations.
Inflation expectations
In  normal  conditions,  longer-term  inflation  expectations  should  be  unaffected  by  transitory
shocks, which typically dissipate over the medium term. However, recurrent shocks leading to a
protracted period of low inflation can be misinterpreted as a lasting decline in trend inflation, and
could jeopardise public faith in the central bank’s commitment or ability to deliver on its objective.
As a consequence, the shocks can become entrenched in expectations. In such cases, firms
and  households  become  more  attentive  to  past  inflation  outcomes  and  less  attentive  to  the
inflation norm or central bank inflation target when forming their expectations about future price
developments. To the extent that these expectations enter wage and price-setting decisions in
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the economy, low inflation may become self-reinforcing: observed disinflation translates into a
downgrade of inflation expectations, which in turn feeds back into lasting disinflation.
Evidence on the evolution of inflation expectations during the crisis indicates that this scenario
was  a  concrete  risk  that  the  euro  area  was  facing  in  mid-2014.  For  instance,  staff  estimates
suggest that market-based longer-term inflation expectations became more than 1.5 times more
sensitive to macroeconomic surprises than they had been in pre-crisis times.
By  contrast,  if  longer-term  inflation  expectations  are  well-anchored,  they  do  not  respond  to
shorter-term  macroeconomic  developments.  Instead,  they  remain  entirely  determined  by  the
inflation objective that the central bank has committed to attain. But, especially after the oil price
shocks in the second half of 2014, most measures for the sensitivity of inflation expectations
6
have edged up.
It  might 
interpretations. 
reflect  doubts  either  with 
The observation of a weaker anchoring of inflation expectations, in principle, is consistent with
different 
the  central
bank’s commitment to pursue its objective, or with regard to the central bank’s ability to achieve
its  aim.  Available  evidence  tends  to  favour  the  latter  interpretation:  the  sensitivity  of  inflation
expectations has increased more at shorter maturities, which is indicative of agents expecting
that  it  will  take  longer  for  the  central  bank  to  bring  inflation  back  to  levels  consistent  with  its
objective; at very long maturities, by contrast, the increase in sensitivity was contained, which
may reveal that agents have never quite lost faith in the intention of the central bank to respect its
mandate.
regard 
to 
This evidence has crucial implications for monetary policy: many forces have combined to bring
strong downward pressures to bear on the euro area economy and are slowing down the return
of inflation to levels closer to our objective. But, importantly, these disinflationary forces are not
beyond  the  remit  of  monetary  policy. And  it  is  precisely  these  underlying  drivers  behind  trend
inflation  in  recent  years  –  rather  than  transient  price  dynamics  with  no  implications  for  the
medium-term  inflation  outlook  –  that  have  triggered  the  comprehensive  package  of  monetary
policy measures we have adopted since mid-2014.
Maintaining price stability over the medium term
Headline inflation had started its decline already in late 2011, and has been falling short of the
ECB’s price stability objective – a medium-term inflation rate below, but close to 2% – since early
2013.
Initially, in line with the strategic prescription of avoiding an over-reaction to short-term factors
driving inflation, the ECB looked through short-term developments. In the summer of 2014, the
persistence  of  disinflationary  forces  could  be  clearly  identified:  first,  measures  of  underlying
inflation had been drifting down in synch with headline inflation for more than a year, and had
reached historical lows.  Second, for the first time since the inception of Monetary Union, longer-
term inflation expectations had started to fall as well.
7
Such  fundamental  risks  to  price  stability  required  a  forceful  monetary  policy  response.
Accordingly, the ECB deployed a series of unconventional monetary policy measures to ensure
price  stability.  The  comprehensive  package  of  June  2014  comprised  targeted  long-term
refinancing  operations  (TLTROs)  and  a  cut  of  the  deposit  facility  rate,  moving  it  into  negative
territory.  This  package  was  combined  with  a,  to  start  with,  small  asset  purchase  programme
initially involving only private sector securities, which was later expanded to include public sector
securities (becoming known as the public sector purchase programme – PSPP) and then scaled
up over time. These measures were accompanied by further cuts in the deposit facility rate and
further TLTROs; moreover, they have been complemented by our forward guidance.
This package has delivered a broad-based easing of euro area financial conditions since June
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
2014: money market conditions have improved substantially; long-term government bond yields,
corporate and bank bond yields, as well as bank lending rates to firms and households, have
8
declined markedly; and positive credit growth has returned to the euro area.
The  exceptionally  favourable  financial  conditions  have  helped  the  economy  recover  from  the
shock waves of the financial and sovereign debt crises. They have insulated the recovery from
global headwinds that have engulfed the euro area over the last two years, such as the tensions
in global financial markets in August 2015 and the slowdown of global demand since the first half
of 2015. More recently, the firming recovery has also broadened across countries and sectors.
As regards inflation dynamics, our determined policy actions have been material in warding off
deflation.  They  have  also  contributed  to  a  re-anchoring  of  long-term  inflation  expectations.
Market-based  measures  of  inflation  expectations,  however,  have  not  yet  returned  to  their  pre-
crisis  levels.  Underlying  inflation  dynamics  remain  subdued,  and  risks  and  uncertainties  still
prevail, especially those related to the geopolitical environment.
To sum up, the ongoing economic recovery is still predicated to a large extent on very favourable
financing  conditions  that,  in  turn,  depend  on  continued  monetary  policy  support.  The  firming
recovery is not yet sufficiently robust to ensure a self-sustained convergence of inflation rates to
levels  closer  to  2%.  Overall,  our  monetary  policy  measures  are  effective,  and  are  gradually
bringing inflation back to a path that is consistent with price stability over the medium term. This
takes time, and it requires determination and patience.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
I would like to thank Sören Radde and Fédéric Holm-Hadulla for their contributions to this speech.
See Ciccarelli, M. and Osbat, C. (eds.), “Low inflation in the euro area: Causes and consequences”, Occasional
Paper Series,  No  181,  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  January  2017,  and  the  references  cited
therein.
At the level of individual euro area countries, a large proportion of specifications also displays a significant
Phillips curve slope, albeit with the exception of some euro area countries, probably on account of confounding
factors  related  to  global  exposures  and  persistent  structural  changes.  However,  the  finding  that  domestic
cyclical conditions were an important driver of the disinflationary period from 2012 to 2014 is common to all
countries.
Theoretically, the impact of population ageing on inflation may go both ways, but the bulk of the literature points
to  a  negative  effect.  See  e.g.  Bullard,  J.,  Garriga,  C.,  and  Waller,  C.J.,  “Demographics,  Redistribution,  and
Optimal Inflation”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, Vol. 94, No 6, 2012; Shirakawa, M., “Demographic
Changes  and  Macroeconomic  Performance:  Japanese  Experiences”,  Opening  Remark  at  BOJ-IMES
Conference, Bank of Japan, 2012; Carvalho, C., Ferrero, A. and Nechio, F., “Demographics and Real Interest
Rates: Inspecting the Mechanism”, European Economic Review, North-Holland, April 2016.
See Bobeica, E and Jarocinski, M., “Missing disinflation and missing inflation: the puzzles that aren’t”, Working
Paper Series, European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, forthcoming.
See e.g. Lyziak, T. and Paloviita, M., “Anchoring of inflation expectations in the euro area: recent evidence based
on survey data”, Working Paper Series, No1945, European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, August 2016; and
Speck, C., “Inflation anchoring in the euro area”, Working Paper Series, European Central Bank, Frankfurt am
Main, forthcoming.
See  Box  7  “The  relationship  between  HICP  inflation  and  HICP  inflation  excluding  energy  and  food”,  ECB
Economic Bulletin, Issue 2, 2016.
For a more detailed assessment of the pass-through of our non-standard measures to financial conditions see,
e.g.,  P.  Praet,  “The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  response  to  disinflationary  pressures”,  speech  at  ECB  and  Its
Watchers XVII conference, Frankfurt, 7 April 2016; M. Draghi, “The state and prospects of the euro area recovery”,
speech at the European Banking Congress, Frankfurt, 18 November 2016.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
