Yves  Mersch:  The  European  Central  Bank's  monetary  policy
stance
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at an
MNI connect event, Singapore, 25 July 2017.
 The global recovery is firming and broadening. And the ongoing economic expansion in the euro
area provides confidence.
But while inflation will gradually head to levels in line with our definition of price stability in the mid-
term, it has yet to translate into stronger inflation dynamics. Headline inflation is dampened by the
weakness in energy prices. Moreover, measures of underlying inflation remain overall at subdued
levels. Therefore, as I pointed out yesterday in my oral presentation at the Bank Negara Malaysia
Monetary  Policy  Conference,  a  very  substantial  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  is  still
needed  for  underlying  inflation  pressures  to  gradually  build  up  and  support  headline  inflation
developments in the medium term.
Let me provide you with some details of the ongoing recovery. Euro area real GDP increased by
0.6%,  quarter  on  quarter,  in  the  first  quarter  of  2017,  after  0.5%  in  the  last  quarter  of  2016.
Incoming data, notably survey results, continue to point to solid, broad-based growth in the period
ahead. The pass-through of our monetary policy measures is supporting domestic demand and
has facilitated the deleveraging process. The recovery in investment continues to benefit from
very  favourable  financing  conditions  and  improvements  in  corporate  profitability.  Private
consumption  is  supported  by  employment  gains,  which  are  also  benefiting  from  past  labour
market  reforms,  and  by  increasing  household  wealth.  Moreover,  the  global  recovery  should
increasingly lend support to trade and euro area exports. However, economic growth prospects
continue to be dampened by a slow pace of implementation of structural reforms, particularly in
product  markets,  and  by  remaining  balance  sheet  adjustment  needs  in  a  number  of  sectors,
notwithstanding ongoing improvements.
The risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook might be upward in the short term, but are
overall broadly balanced. On the one hand, the current positive cyclical momentum increases the
chances  of  a  stronger  than  expected  economic  upswing.  On  the  other  hand,  downside  risks
primarily relating to global factors continue to exist.
The thread of deflation is gone and reflationary forces are at play. Prices pressures in the early
stages of the pricing chain remain strong but have still not transmitted to the later stages. Euro
area annual HICP inflation was 1.3% in June, down slightly from 1.4% in May, mainly due to lower
energy  price  inflation.  Looking  ahead,  on  the  basis  of  current  futures  prices  for  oil,  headline
inflation is likely to remain around current levels in the coming months. In these conditions, we
can be more assured about the return of inflation to our objective than we were a few years ago.
At the same time, measures of underlying inflation remain low and have yet to show convincing
signs  of  a  pick-up,  as  domestic  cost  pressures,  including  wage  growth,  are  still  subdued:
although compensation per hour worked is rising, compensation per employee remains flat. This
divergence goes back, at least in part, to the increased fragmentation of labour time. In the labour
market technological advance, in particular the use of the internet allows for more services being
offered with less intermediation at lower prices.
Underlying  inflation  in  the  euro  area  is  expected  to  rise  only  gradually  over  the  medium  term,
supported  by  our  monetary  policy  measures,  the  continuing  economic  expansion  and  the
corresponding gradual absorption of economic slack.
Also broad money (M3) continues to expand at a robust pace, with an annual rate of growth of
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
5.0% in May 2017, after 4.9% in April. As in previous months, annual growth in M3 was mainly
supported by its most liquid components, with the narrow monetary aggregate M1 expanding at
an annual rate of 9.3% in May 2017, unchanged from April.
The recovery in the growth of loans to the private sector observed since the beginning of 2014 is
proceeding.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  remained  stable  at
2.4% in May 2017, while the annual growth rate of loans to households increased to 2.6%, from
2.4% in April. The euro area bank lending survey for the second quarter of 2017 indicates that
credit  standards  for  loans  to  enterprises  and  loans  to  households  for  house  purchase  have
further eased and that loan growth continues to be supported by increasing demand. The pass-
through of the monetary policy measures put in place since June 2014 continues to significantly
support borrowing conditions for firms and households and credit flows across the euro area.
The  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  the  signals  coming  from  the
monetary  analysis  confirmed  the  need  for  a  continued  very  substantial  degree  of  monetary
accommodation to secure a sustained return of inflation rates towards levels that are below, but
close to, 2%.
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute  decisively 
longer-term  growth  potential  and  reducing
vulnerabilities.  Political  winds  are  becoming  tailwinds.  There  is  newfound  confidence  in  the
reform process, and newfound support for European cohesion, which could help unleash pent-
up demand and investment, if confirmed by decisive action.
to  strengthening 
the 
Still, the implementation of structural reforms needs to be substantially stepped up to increase
resilience,  reduce  structural  unemployment  and  boost  productivity  growth.  Regarding  fiscal
policies, all countries would benefit from intensifying efforts towards achieving a more growth-
friendly composition of public finances. A full, transparent and consistent implementation of the
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  of  the  macroeconomic  imbalances  procedure  over  time  and
across countries remains essential to bolster the resilience of the euro area economy.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
