François Villeroy de Galhau: Productivity - a collective enigma?
Speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Bank  of
France - France Stratégie Conference, Paris, 1 February 2017.
 Welcome to all of you. It gives me great pleasure to be able to open this conference on French
productivity,  organised  in  conjunction  with  France  Stratégie.  The  subject  is  one  that  is  both
topical and of great importance to central banks: productivity is one of the principal drivers of
growth, and its dynamics are a strong determinant of potential growth, that which is compatible
with  price  stability.  As  you  can  see  [slide],  after  the  major  wave  of  expansion  witnessed
during Les Trente Glorieuses, which was particularly marked in the case of France, productivity
growth in advanced countries has slowed in successive stages since the 1970s. Today, it has
fallen  back  to  a  pace  that  is  historically  weak.  What  are  the  common  factors  behind  this
slowdown in productivity? And is there anything specific to France? I don’t believe so: if there is
one thing that is specific to France, it is the high level of hourly productivity – one of the highest in
the  world,  alongside  that  of  the  United  States  and  Germany.  So,  rather  than  being  a  French
enigma,  the  enigma  we  are  looking  at  this  morning  seems  to  me  to  be  more  of  a  collective
phenomenon.  By  way  of  introduction,  I  would  just  like  to  go  back  over  the  three  collective
hypotheses at the heart of today’s debate, before nonetheless going on to examine a few factors
that are indeed specific to France.
1. Does the problem lie in the measurement of growth?
 1
The first theory is that there is in fact no slowdown, as we are not measuring growth properly due
to  the  rise  of  the  digital  economy.  On  16  January  this  year,  the  Banque  de  France  held  a
conference  that notably discussed this issue in relation to the US economy. The main sources
of measurement errors were: first, the estimation of quality-adjusted prices for new technology,
as falls in prices tend to be underestimated in US national accounts; and second, product entry
and exit, which makes it difficult to estimate changes in prices over time. This could lead to a
significant upward revision to US productivity since 1983: by 1.1 percentage points per year at
the top end of estimates, according to Philippe Aghion and his co-authors. Nevertheless, even
allowing for these corrections, there has still been a slowdown since the mid-2000s. Indeed, the
measurement errors were just as significant before this period. That said, this work does provide
some  grounds  for  optimism.  First,  growth  in  hi-tech  sectors,  and  therefore  technological
progress, is stronger than we previously thought. Second, some of the gains in well-being linked
to  new  technologies  fall  outside  the  scope  of  the  market  economy  and,  as  a  result,  are  not
recognised in national accounts. The digital economy has delivered huge gains in leisure time,
for  example,  by  simplifying  certain  administrative  tasks,  and  led  to  the  development  of  free
services, without any of these benefits appearing in conventional measures of output. It has also
prompted  the  rise  of  the  informal  economy  (C  to  C  services),  which  is  particularly  tricky  to
recognise in the accounts. Our conference today will provide an opportunity to look specifically at
the case of France, thanks to a presentation by INSEE.
1. Are we witnessing a permanent slowdown in the contribution of technical progress to
productivity growth?
Assuming that there has been a slowdown in productivity, the second hypothesis is that it stems
from  a  slowdown  in  innovation  and  in  its  contribution  to  productivity.  The  great  wave  of
productivity growth during Les Trente Glorieuses in France was fuelled by advances in a large
number of domains: technical progress with electricity, the combustion engine, chemicals and
telecommunications, but also the emergence of new methods of labour organisation and new
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
management practices. Today, what potential contribution can information and communication
technologies  (ICTs)  make  to  growth?  The  first  ICT  wave  has  been  limited  in  duration  and  in
scale, and has only been felt to a small extent in many countries, including France. This has
prompted  some  economists,  such  as  Robert  Gordon,  to  doubt  that  technology  can  make  a
significant contribution in the future. But in a country such as France, which already enjoys a high
productivity level, there is still plenty of room for progress in the diffusion of ICTs, both in terms of
the speed and quantity [slide]. The share of ICT capital stock in GDP is markedly lower in France
than in the United States and the United Kingdom. Getting rid of this lag would deliver substantial
gains in growth for France.
1. Third hypothesis, a dearth of investment?
Catching up to the technological frontier will require investment in ICTs as well as in research
and  development.  This  investment  is  vital  in  order  to  incorporate  innovation  into  production
processes. Yet it is also a lot riskier than other types of investment, for example in construction.
Indeed,  it  notably  combines  a  low  or  non-existent  resale  value  with  uncertain  future  revenue
flows.  Like  the  rest  of  the  innovation  economy,  therefore,  it  needs  an  appropriate  form  of
financing  –  one  that  relies  more  on  equity  as  opposed  to  debt.  However,  the  cost  of  capital
remains  high  despite  the  sharp  drop  in  interest  rates  over  the  past  20  years.  According  to
Banque de France calculations, the nominal cost of capital for France’s major listed companies
is still between 8% and 9%, whereas the risk-free rate is currently around 0%. This particularly
high cost places a drag on investment, and hence on innovation and productivity growth.
1. Are there any factors that are specific to France?
There are nonetheless a number of French specificities that could be playing a part in slowing
productivity. Let me just cite three:
First, failings in our system of initial and lifelong training, as highlighted by the OECD’s PISA
and PIAAC surveys [slide]. France stands out as scoring only average overall among OECD
countries, and, most importantly, as having high levels of inequality linked to parents’ social
background.
Second,  corporate  investment  tends  to  be  weighted  more  towards  construction  at  the
expense of equipment machinery and intangible assets. And while we’re on that subject, it is
essential that French banks finance intangible assets better than they do today.
Lastly,  the  specific  features  of  the  French  labour  market  and  the  associated  policies. A
number  of  studies  have  highlighted  factors  such  as  the  shortening  of  the  duration  of
temporary contracts. Questions have also been raised as to the impact of labour policies.
How can we strike the right balance between supporting productivity and supporting jobs?
Policies  aimed  at  reducing  the  cost  of  low-skilled  labour  –  be  they  targeted  cuts  in
employers’ social charges or the CICE – all have a positive effect on GDP per capita via an
increase in the employment rate; but they can also have a detrimental effect on productivity,
especially when targeted at sectors with low productivity. Put another way, these policies
make it all the more necessary that we improve our system of initial and lifelong learning –
failing this, we risk fuelling a downwards spiral in labour skills and productivity.
 These questions aside, one thing is clear in the case of France – and 2016’s too-feeble growth of
1.1%, as published yesterday, confirms it: estimates from national and international institutions
all point to low levels of potential growth, at around 1.2%, and relatively high levels of structural
unemployment  (the  equivalent  of  the  NAIRU  in  English-speaking  countries),  at  around  9%.
Clearly, we cannot be content with these levels. All of which brings us back, overwhelmingly, to
our four key focuses for reform: Enterprise, Education, Employment and Expenditure reduction
(public sector). Our northern European neighbours have shown by example that these reforms
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
are not incompatible with our shared European social model. Studies by the Banque de France
show in particular that reforms to the goods and services market could boost the productivity of
the French economy by between 3% and 5% in the long-term. Without further ado then, let me
pass the floor to Fabrice Lenglart, and I wish you all a fruitful and enjoyable conference.
1
www.banque-france.fr/en/secular-stagnation-and-growth-measurement-conference-organised-banque-de-
france-and-college-de
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
