Andreas  Dombret:  The  other  side  of  the  coin  –  why  European
supervision needs international regulation
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the Annual Conference on the Banking Union, organised by Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer
LLP and the Institute for Law and Finance (ILF), Frankfurt am Main, 15 May 2017.
 1. Introduction
Dear Danièle Nouy, dear Adam Farkas,
Ladies and gentlemen
Do you feel uncomfortable whenever a speaker spends most of his time off-topic? Then please
be forewarned – this just might be one of those speeches. I am pleased to have been invited
today to talk about the current state of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, the SSM. But I want to
broaden the topic to some extent and speak about the other side of the coin – which is regulation.
But  let’s  take  a  step  back:  The  banking  union  was  established  as  a  consequence  of  the
European  debt  crises.  We  wanted  banking  supervision  in  the  euro  area  to  achieve  greater
transparency, neutrality and fitness. Amongst other objectives, the banking union was designed
to counter the close ties between member states and their banks – which proved to be one of the
main problems of the European debt crisis.
But a European supervisor is not a universal remedy – it is not the only way to cope with these
issues. The other side of the coin is regulation. And in fact, if we do not fill the existing regulatory
gaps,  the  effectiveness  of  the  SSM  might  very  well  be  weakened.  This  is  because  there  are
various channels through which the national state-bank relationship thrives.
That’s why I believe it is important to address regulation as the other side of the coin. If we want
an effective prudential architecture for the European financial sector, we will need to address the
regulatory gaps that still persist.
In my speech this morning, let me begin by reviewing the functioning of the SSM and discussing
its  challenges.  Then  I  will  focus  on  the  regulatory  treatment  of  sovereign  exposures  as  one
example of a regulatory gap that still needs to be addressed.
2. Still being minted: European supervision
I remember well being a participant at the ILF and Freshfields conference in May 2015, when the
Single Supervisory Mechanism was still in its infancy. Back then, we were mainly concerned with
the workings of the new system.
Today, the focus has  shifted.  Structural  challenges  abound  in  the  European  banking  sector  –
such as the high volumes of non-performing loans, low profitability, and IT and cyber security.
For European supervisors, preserving the “tough but fair” character is to a large extent a matter
of day-to-day supervisory practice. Danièle will surely stress this point when she addresses you
later.
And there are external events such as Brexit which demand our attention. I consider Brexit to be
manageable  for  banks,  but  it  requires  timely,  thorough  and  comprehensive  preparations. And
because  of  the  uncertainty  it  involves,  supervisors  have  their  own  part  to  play  in  ensuring  a
smooth  transition  to  a  post-Brexit  era.  It  requires  us  to  be  responsive  and  pragmatic  as  well.
Therefore, I strongly welcome the commitment shown by SSM supervisors to cooperation and
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
open exchange.
There is no need for me to go into detail on these subjects. As I mentioned just now, these are
topics I very much imagine Danièle will touch upon.
Instead, I wish to review the set-up of the European Single Supervisory Mechanism and offer
some ideas as to how it can be developed further. But for that purpose, I find it helpful to remind
ourselves  of  the  organisational  principle  of  the  SSM.  It  was  not  intended  to  be  a  single,
hierarchical organisation, but rather a supervisory network. There are still many misperceptions
on that matter.
Without  doubt,  the  ECB  has  key  competences  regarding  the  SSM.  The  ECB  assumes
responsibility  for  the  overall  functioning  of  the  project. And  apart  from  directly  supervising  the
large,  “significant”  credit  institutions,  it  has  also  taken  over  various  powers  from  the  national
competent authorities, the NCAs – one such important power being licensing.
But  that  does  not  make  it  a  hierarchical  undertaking.  Instead,  different  modes  of  cooperation
were  installed.  For  example,  joint  supervisory  teams  include  personnel  from  NCAs  that  now
receive their instructions from the ECB, while inspectors from NCAs continue to be directed by
their employer. Other NCA staff again are on secondment at the ECB.
The different modes of cooperation also become visible with respect to competences. NCAs still
have  major  tasks  and  competences  beyond  directly  supervising  the  3,200  smaller,  “less
significant” institutions in the euro area. Think of the roughly 1,500 written procedures from last
year: every single decision is approved by the Supervisory Board, which includes members from
19  NCAs,  thus  boosting  the  transfer  of  knowledge  from  NCAs  to  the  ECB  and  ensuring  that
decisions are subject to multiple levels of protection, not just dual control.
Also,  the  NCAs  are  the  source  of  the  vast  majority  of  supervisory  staff.  For  example,  the
Bundesbank has staff members in 33 out of 127 joint supervisory teams. And NCAs contribute
the vast majority of staffing in the SSM’s overall workforce. This means that national authorities
still – and for good reason – play an essential role in the operational functioning of the SSM.
Today,  and  given  the  huge  number  of  challenges  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  SSM  is  very  much
reliant on the full and vigorous support of the national competent authorities. NCAs thus need to
adhere to their staffing commitments.
The network character of the SSM also demands fostering a common supervisory culture. We
should strengthen our aim of promoting a common supervisory culture, which we have labelled a
“one-team” approach. For that purpose, we should remove the boundaries between supervisors
in their daily routines and interactions whenever we see them.
Another issue we still need to work on in this respect is language. Among the elements of cultural
diversity in Europe, language is among the most deeply-rooted. Here at this conference, we do
manage to communicate in a common language, even though there are speakers from several
nationalities. But when it comes to the legal details of banking regulation and supervision, the
meaning of words becomes crucial. In fact, even the points you are listening to right now have
been  checked  linguistically  by  our  language  specialists  at  the  Bundesbank.  It  is  therefore
understandable that bank representatives will want to stick to their home language when they
interact with authorities.
And even if top managers feel confident enough to engage with our supervisors in English, our
inspections  regularly  look  in-depth  at  departments  where  the  home  language  prevails,  for
example when we look at documentation. This gives domestic inspectors a natural advantage in
their jobs. If we want to further reduce potential instances of “home bias", we therefore need to
target those language barriers for foreign inspectors and supervisors. For the SSM, this means
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
we need to strengthen our efforts to boost the language skills of our supervisory staff.
Having spoken about challenges both outside and inside the SSM, let me now turn to the more
general topic of my speech. How has the SSM performed overall so far? I guess it is fair to say
that supervision has benefited in many ways: Supervisory quality has improved, cooperation has
been extended, and the SSM has contributed positively to financial stability. Constrained by the
given regulatory environment, the ECB has been persistently undertaking measures to address
various structural issues. For example, it has originated guidelines for institutions on dealing with
NPLs. Also,  it  had  launched  a  project  targeting  options  and  discretions  in  European  banking
regulation that may well be a source of national bias.
Thus, the SSM has already made important contributions to enhancing financial stability and to
reducing “home bias".
But reliable supervision is not the only road that leads to a sustainable financial order in the euro
area. Just remember the multiple ties binding member states and their national credit institutions
together. On the one hand, a sovereign solvency crisis risks triggering a solvency crisis at banks.
On the other hand, struggling financial institutions were able to force governments to bail them
out,  thus  endangering  state  solvency.  This  doom  loop  –  an  ever-worsening  nexus  between
banks,  governments  and  the  entire  national  economy  –  showed  up  quite  clearly  during  the
European debt crisis. Today, strong ties between banks and states continue to exist. A survey
conducted  by  the  EBA  in  2016  found  that  the  share  of  home  sovereign  exposures  is
disproportionately high. In some member states, it is very close to 100 per cent. Germany is no
exception  here:  The  sample  of  German  banks  revealed  that  74  per  cent  of  their  sovereign
exposures was to German general government.
Just as with the monetary policy of the Eurosystem, the SSM and the banking union may not iron
out all the deficiencies and negative impact channels surrounding the ties between banks and
states. Supervisory authorities need to reject the role of a universal remedy. Banking supervision
can only be as effective as the reach of the rules. If regulatory gaps still exist in the euro area, we
will only be able to achieve a well-balanced political and financial order if we plug those gaps.
3. The other side of the coin: Adequate regulation
Let me demonstrate this reasoning with respect to the regulatory treatment of sovereign bonds,
which plays a key role in strengthening the overall architecture.
There is not much dissent, in fact, over the question as to whether sovereign debt is subject to
economic risk. Puerto Rico declared bankruptcy just a few days ago. In Europe we have been
witnessing debt haircuts and other symptoms of sovereign overburden. By and large, the risk of
sovereign default may be low, and sometimes very low, but it is not zero.
If we want regulation to be risk-adequate, economic risks will need to find their way into the rules
for banking. Our existing regulatory set-up is quite well-developed in this respect. The standard
requirements  for  credit  risk  already  comprise  eight  risk  weight  categories.  The  specific  risk
weights applied to each credit category were substantiated by historical evidence on credit risks.
Yet historical evidence is not taken into account where sovereign bonds are concerned. Euro-
area credit institutions do not need to hold any capital against the default risk of their member
states. This is remarkable, since sovereign bonds account for a significant part of bank assets in
the euro area. 
For sure, the leverage ratio – which was introduced as part of Basel III – may, in principle, set a
ceiling for sovereign bond holdings at credit institutions once it becomes legally binding. This is
because the leverage ratio caps indebtedness at a certain level. A bank which barely meets this
limit will not be able to buy any further sovereign bonds without first acquiring additional capital.
But the leverage ratio is designed only to be a backstop for the minimum capitalisation at banks.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thus, it is not an instrument that directly addresses sovereign risk.
This  regulatory  gap  has  numerous  consequences.  Most  prominently,  it  creates  inadequate
incentives for banks and feeds into the doom loop I mentioned earlier on.
So what about our new supervisory regime in the euro area? Couldn’t our supervisors counteract
this aspect of the unhealthy relationship between member states and their national banks, given
that  the  SSM  is  intended  to  be  more  independent  and  less  negligent  regarding  the  close  ties
between  banks  and  states?  The  uncomfortable  answer  is:  You  cannot  expect  European
supervisors to fill a regulatory gap like this in a fully satisfactory manner.
In  theory,  supervisors  may  target  sovereign  risks  as  part  of  their  supervisory  actions  –  the
buzzword  here  is  pillar  2.  Indeed,  when  institutions  are  asked  to  calculate  their  idiosyncratic
risks, these also include their sovereign exposure. This risk calculation feeds into the supervisory
evaluation process, which may result in additional capital requirements. But of course, sovereign
exposure is only one element of what turns out to be a complex evaluation process for every
supervised entity. Heterogeneous treatment of this risk category at different institutions across
the euro zone is a phenomenon that cannot be ruled out. Also, interactive risk assessment is
most beneficial only for those risks that are indeed idiosyncratic. By contrast, sovereign risk is
predestined for standardised treatment.
The damage caused by inadequate rules is not confined to banks. Artificial additional demand for
sovereign debt may lead to distorted price signals and, as a consequence, to private investment
being  crowded  out. And  of  course,  it  gives  governments  the  wrong  incentives.  Even  central
banks are affected, because they accept sovereign bonds as collateral when lending money to
banks.
Thus, neglecting sovereign risk is not only inconsistent both from an economic and a regulatory
view; it also produces sizeable side-effects in other domains. The European debt crisis is the
best evidence there is on the detrimental linkages between states and domestic banks. We can
only  contain  these  unhealthy  relationships  if  we  target  the  root  causes,  such  as  the  lack  of
regulatory treatment of sovereign risk.
What could be the therapy? It would consist of two components: Non-zero risk weights as well
as  concentration  limits  for  sovereign  exposures.  Concentration  limits  directly  relate  to  a
fundamental principle of banking: Never put too many eggs in one basket. In the status quo, euro-
area  sovereign  bonds  are  exempt  not  only  from  non-zero  risk  weighting,  but  also  from  the
existing concentration limits.
4. The road ahead
Of course, simply believing that the euro-area architecture contains structural flaws will not, in
itself,  invoke  change.  Transitioning  towards  a  more  desirable  order  may  get  tough  for  those
affected.
Banks do not only make some of their money with sovereign bonds; they also use this paper as
collateral  in  interbank  markets  and  for  their  borrowing  from  central  banks.  Also,  increased
holdings  in  sovereign  bonds  have  helped  banks  comply  with  stricter  capital  requirements  and
newly  enacted  liquidity  requirements.  For  example,  German  banks  were  able  to  improve  their
capital  ratios  partly  by  increasing  their  holdings  of  euro-area  sovereign  bonds  relative  to
investments, which lowered their RWAs. Amending the regulation of sovereign risk gives rise to
a number of tasks in the management of banks.
A similar storyline can be told about states that are highly indebted. Putting an end to subsidised
lending will often be onerous. Some may also be worried about cliff effects.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
We need to take those temporary burdens into account. Whatever path the European financial
architecture is taking, we need to ensure that it is not only viable, but also feasible in the first
place.
But the fact that resistance to reforms happens for a reason does not mean that it is a superior
reason.  This  is  evident  in  the  field  of  government  financing.  Markets  have  not  been  able  to
discipline  governments.  But  who  else,  if  not  creditors,  would  be  more  suited  to  pushing
governments to take a sustainable financial path? Why should we expect states to leave the well-
trodden  path  of  least  resistance  –  which  is  expanding  debt  instead  of  committing  to  painful
reforms – when there are no regulatory restrictions such as a non-zero capital requirement for
sovereign bonds in place that provide actual incentives to do so?
So  whatever  transitional  challenges  there  may  be,  they  don’t  make  the  idea  of  a  more  risk-
adequate treatment of sovereign bonds less of a desirable ultimate aim. Also, framing the reform
as  a  mere  distribution  battle  between  member  states  is  deceptive.  In  the  long  run,  everyone
stands to benefit from a sustainable order.
Instead, we need to focus on change management. How do we smooth the transition toward a
sustainable financial order? In my view, just as nobody should want a drug addict to die from
going “cold turkey", we should take into account the challenges facing those who will be worst
affected by a change in regulation – and offer demanding, but feasible transition schedules.
Of  course,  regulation  of  sovereign  risk  is  also  a  global  issue. Any  framework  of  rules  for  the
financial  sector  these  days  needs  to  be  comprehensive  and  consistent.  There  is  a
straightforward and sobering reason for this: You can count on the global financial industry to
quickly locate regulatory gaps. The Basel Committee has put sovereign risk on its agenda for
2017 and 2018. I strongly welcome this step, and call upon all parties to work together to find a
good solution.
For  the  euro  area,  reforming  the  regulation  of  sovereign  risk  will  be  even  more  vital.  This  is
because a currency union is particularly vulnerable to national distress in case that market forces
break  down. A  common  currency,  for  example,  does  not  allow  currency  depreciation  as  an
automated correction mechanism. Therefore, achieving reform towards better self-governance in
the  banking  sector,  markets  and  state  finance  will  be  an  indispensable  step  towards  a  more
sustainable euro area.
5. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
I have listed several organisational challenges which the SSM will need to come to terms with, if
it is to live up to its character as a network.
1.  National  authorities  need  to  honour  their  staffing  commitments,  because  these  are  what
drives the operational functioning of the SSM.
2.  We need to remove boundaries between supervisors in their daily routines with a view to
nurturing a “one-team” culture.
3.  We need to enhance our language skills to account for the cultural diversity that is part and
parcel of life in Europe.
But the SSM – whether it runs smoothly or is still in need of improvement – is not a universal
remedy for home bias and the nexus between banks and their home sovereigns in the euro area.
Only if they are flanked by a coherent set of rules for the banking sector will the SSM and the
banking union as a whole be in a position to perform to our fullest satisfaction.
Putting an end to the privileges afforded to sovereign risk at banks will be a milestone. It is one
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
thing to agree on all the components of a consistent regulatory framework – how quickly that aim
can be achieved in the face of political pressure, is another. Let us find answers to both these
questions.
Thank you for your attention.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
