Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Harnessing human capital investment and
forward looking leadership
Remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara
Malaysia), at the launch of the Asian Banking School's Cambridge Summer School Programme,
Kuala Lumpur, 18 April 2017.
 I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Asian Banking School on the launch of the
Cambridge  Summer  School  programme.  This  is  an  exciting  collaboration  with  Cambridge
University,  an  institution  synonymous  with  academic  excellence  and  thought  leadership.  The
advent  of  this  programme  represents  yet  another  important  milestone  in  the  transformation
journey  on  which  we  have  collectively  embarked,  for  both  the  Asian  Institute  of  Chartered
Bankers and the Asian Banking School.
Participants of this programme can look forward to being part of a landmark initiative that will
provide vast opportunities to expand knowledge, experience and networks. Cambridge University
is truly prestigious. Many ideas by scholars from this great institution have transformed entire
professions, understanding and thinking.
Some  of  the  ideas  resonate  to  this  day.  Over  300  years  ago,  Isaac  Newton,  a  Cambridge
University alumnus and one of the most brilliant scientists in generations, first introduced the law
of inertia – “The tendency of an object to resist change”. While Newton’s principles referred to
physical  objects  in  motion,  it  is  equally  thought  provoking  when  considered  in  other  contexts,
including the pace of change in the banking sector.
Today,  we  find  ourselves  at  the  centre  of  a  digital  revolution,  perhaps  the  most  significant
breakthrough  in  financial  services  of  our  time.  Change  is  upon  us.  The  tsunami  of  digital
technology will forever change our banking landscape. Yet, like Newton’s observation centuries
ago, the path of embracing change is fraught with resistance – or, as Newton elegantly called it,
inertia. In the words of the renowned scientist, this power of resisting is one in which every object
endeavours  to  “preserve  its  present  state”.  At  its  core  is  a  realisation  that,  individually  and
institutionally, we are not inherently calibrated for change. In fact, we instinctively resist change,
whether  intentionally  or  passively.  Change  doesn’t  feel  natural,  even  when  it  is  positive  or
unavoidable.
While  the  expectation  of  disruption  is  not  new  to  us,  the  greater  issue  of  interest  to  banking
leaders  today  relates  to  our  readiness  in  navigating  changes.  We  must  learn  to  break  down
inertia within our institutions.
I will elaborate. Let me contextualise this subject from two sources of corporate inertia, which I
think are critical to the future of the banking system:
i.  Human capital investment; and
ii.  Forward looking leadership.
Human capital investment requires a new model: Learning that adapts and is continuous
The  approach  towards  talent  development  and  career  learning  is  rapidly  shifting.  Traditional
learning systems are no longer sufficient. Data from a recent study revealed that the “ability to
learn and progress” is the principal driver of a company’s employment brand among Millennials
today. Yet, only one-third of Millennials believe employees are using their skills well, and 42% say
they  are  likely  to  leave  because  they  are  not  learning  fast  enough.  We  must  reinvent  and
modernise the existing model of human capital investment if we are to recruit, develop and retain
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
the very best of talent.
Prioritising and channelling greater resources to the talent development function are important
first steps. Currently, the average annual training expenditure for the banking industry is around
3% of employee payroll, in contrast with international comparisons of around 4% to 4.5%. The
Malaysian  banking  industry’s  allocation  for  training  and  development  is  still  below  global
benchmarks.
It is, however, not enough to solely focus on outright spending. Equally important is the quality of
training investments.
In  my  mind,  this  begins  with  transforming  existing  corporate  learning  systems  to  enable
continuous lifelong learning and ongoing skill acquisition. The banking sector ought to have an
“on  demand,  ever  ready”  learning  system  that  empowers  talent  to  take  ownership  of  self-
development. This means diversifying from the traditional form of structured learning that only
takes place at rigid fixed intervals. Aspiring talent ought to be empowered to personalise learning
content according to individual preference and pace. Indeed, knowledge should be accessible to
all who seek learning. Learning should take place at any time. Learning should be democratised.
The  rise  of  innovative  digital  content  providers  such  as  Coursera,  Codecademy  and  edX  has
further increased the viability and attractiveness of an “on demand, ever ready” learning system.
edX,  for  example,  includes  over  130  economics  and  finance  courses  offered  by  prestigious
providers such as Harvard, MIT and IMF.
In short, both the quantity and quality of human capital investment matter. Agility is also a key
aspect. Human capital investment must adapt and evolve with its operating environment. The
fintech  wave  has  taught  us  an  important  lesson;  opportunity  favours  the  bold  and  the  well-
prepared. More so in times of change. Experience has shown that it is not easy to change even a
single function, let alone an entire organisation. That brings me back to another observation of
Newton: “The larger the mass, the larger the inertia”.
While Newton’s law holds true in physics, bankers can yet defy this axiom by thinking innovatively
and  being  prepared  well  in  advance.  The  next  wave  of  innovation,  growth  and  emerging
industries is primed for release from its current state of inertia. At the moment, financing remains
concentrated  in  traditional  economic  sectors.  Less  than  1%  of  SME  financing  approvals  are
directed to new growth areas. While up to 74% of financial sector talent is high-skilled, financing
future industries for long term economic growth requires us to think ahead, with new and fresh
perspectives.  We need talent that can identify and distil the needs and risks of these new growth
areas. For a bank, this may mean recruiting and developing not only conventional bankers, but
also software engineers, data scientists and technology strategists.
Professional and transformational leadership: Leading beyond your institution
Human  capital  development  is  of  course  incomplete  without  the  presence  of  leadership.
Leadership is a force like no other. Leadership drives organisations to new levels of performance
and  achievement  together.  But  leadership  can  also  be  a  source  of  inertia.  As  innovation
continues to draw deeper lines of interconnectivity, successful future leaders are no longer those
who only steer their institution, but those who can influence and collaborate with others to drive
the growth of the industry towards brighter prospects. The future of banking lies very much in the
collective vision of its leaders.
Much  of  our  developments  in  the  past  have  been  regulatory-driven.  This  approach  is  not
sustainable. Drastic change is required. Collectively, industry leaders need to be more involved in
playing  a  pivotal  role  to  shape  the  future  banking  ecosystem.  While  it  is  natural  to  strive  for
individual or institutional success, the industry must break away from the tendency of working in
isolation, or worse, waiting for others to lead. Instead, collective responsibility is needed in areas
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
where common solutions are required for the betterment of the banking sector.
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  already  identified  several  priority  areas,  particularly  in  the  fintech
space, which will benefit from greater joint participation by the industry. While this is a start, it
should  not  limit  the  possibility  of  industry  leaders  coming  together  to  address  other  areas  of
shared interest. I certainly hope to see this becoming a norm in the near future. Only through a
collaborative  approach  in  the  banking  industry  can  “the  whole  be  greater  than  the  sum  of  its
parts”, if I may echo the wise words of Aristotle.
Transcending individual and institutional results for the collective good demands a special sort of
person. A person who can surmount extreme inertia. A transformational leader. The foremost
quality  that  distinguishes  a  transformational  leader  from  others  is  the  drive  for  more  than  just
results. It is a leadership that is driven by virtue, with professionalism at the core. We should
never forget that investment in human capital also means investment in future social capital. We
should recognise that investments in social capital have long term consequences. The banking
industry  today  stands  strong  and  resilient  because  the  generations  before  us  had  built  a
foundation of trust, nurtured over many years. Indeed, it takes many generations to build what we
have today, but mere moments for this to crumble.  It is now our turn to continue this legacy.
Professionalism to my mind ought not to be a competitive advantage. Rather, it is the minimum
expectation  that  should  define  the  banking  sector.  Professionalism  and  trust  are  especially
critical in an industry that is becoming highly complex. Exercising the right judgment calls and
demonstrating  the  right  behavioural  traits,  at  all  levels,  demand  more  than  just  a  competent
banker. It needs the combination of competency, integrity and an unwavering sense of mission.
In short, true professionalism.
Closing remarks
The presence of inertia in our lives is just one piece of the story. In fact, Newton has left us with
more  than  one  insight.  Newton  surmised  that  once  inertia  is  overcome,  an  object  achieves
momentum and acceleration, but not without force being applied first. In a similar way, the same
areas of corporate inertia today can be harnessed to drive the momentum of tomorrow. But only
through a combined force of action and leadership can we truly achieve this.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
