Norman  T  L  Chan:  Bond  Connect  –  enhancing  Hong  Kong  as  an
international financial centre
Remarks by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the
Bond Connect Launch Ceremony, Hong Kong, 3 July 2017.
 The Honourable Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet-ngor, Deputy Director Huang Liuquan, Deputy Director
Qiu  Hong,  Financial  Secretary  Paul  Chan,  Deputy  Governor  Pan  Gongsheng,  Mr  CK  Chow,
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
1.  Good Morning.
2.  I am very pleased to join you today for the launch of Bond Connect.  Bond Connect marks
another  milestone  of  mutual  access  of  capital  markets  between  the  Mainland  and  Hong
Kong,  following  the  Shanghai-Hong  Kong  Stock  Connect  and  the  Shenzhen-Hong  Kong
Stock Connect.  It is also another important measure of the Central Government to support
Hong Kong’s development as an international financial centre.
3.  A key function of Hong Kong as an international financial centre is financial intermediation,
providing  efficient  and  safe  conduits  for  fund  flows.    The  establishment  and  smooth
operation  of  these  conduits  shall  be  underpinned  by  suitable  and  sound  financial
infrastructures.    Over  the  years,  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  (HKMA)  has
endeavoured  to  build  our  financial  infrastructures,  from  the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement
system to the Central Moneymarkets Unit (CMU) for debt securities settlement, which have
laid a solid foundation for Hong Kong’s development as an international financial centre.
4.  Bond Connect is a new financial infrastructure established through the connection between
HKMA’s  CMU  and  the  relevant  central  securities  depositories  (CSDs)  on  the  Mainland. 
Under Bond Connect, eligible overseas investors can settle and hold their Mainland bonds
through CMU using nominee holding arrangement.  Nominee holding arrangement is widely
used  by  investors  in  international  capital  markets  as  it  provides  greater  convenience  and
flexibility  to  investors  and  market  participants.    CMU  also  adopts  nominee  holding
arrangement  and  provides  nominee  holding  services  for  more  than  200  local  and
international  banks,  trust  companies  and  custodians  through  its  linkages  with  Euroclear,
Clearstream and other regional CSDs.  The continued liberalisation of the Mainland’s capital
account  and  RMB  internationalisation  will  progressively  raise  demand  from  overseas
investors  for  RMB  asset  allocation,  while  the  Mainland  has  been  proactively  rolling  out
measures to facilitate overseas investors’ access to its bond market.  We believe that Bond
Connect would enhance overseas investors’ participation in the Mainland bond market.
5.  I wish Bond Connect a great success.  Thank you.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
