Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Building on the past, investing in the future
Remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara
Malaysia), at Invest Malaysia Kuala Lumpur 2017 "Building on the Past, Investing in the Future",
Kuala Lumpur, 25 July 2017.
 Thank you for the opportunity to speak here today at Invest Malaysia Kuala Lumpur. It gives me a
chance to share a few words on the Malaysian economy and financial markets.
Malaysia  as  a  nation  has  forged  strong  ties  with  investors  over  a  century.  In  fact,  Malaysia’s
relationship with foreign investors is older than the inception of the country. For example, HSBC,
Shell and Nestlé have been in Malaysia for more than a hundred years.
This  year  marks  the  tenth  year  since  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  which  should  more
appropriately be called the Trans-Atlantic Financial Crisis since it did not directly impact Asia at
the  time.  Closer  to  home,  around  10  years  ago,  we  created  the  Northern  Corridor  Economic
Region. Today, the Northern Corridor is a success story, with the highest number of approvals
for manufacturing investments.
Let  me  share  10  facts  on  Malaysia  to  showcase  our  ever-thriving  symbiotic  relationship  with
investors. Three key things on the Malaysian economy:
i.  Malaysia’s openness to foreign investment and trade,
ii.  The country’s bright growth prospects; and
iii.  Our drive and agility for change to always remain relevant and competitive
Malaysia has always been open, friendly and fair to foreign investors.
Malaysia  has  always  been  open,  friendly  and  fair  to  foreign  investors.  Foreign  investment  in
Malaysia  dates  back  to  more  than  a  hundred  years  ago.  In  fact,  foreign  investors  have  been
major partners of our economic growth. Foreign investment had contributed significantly towards
the expansion of the country’s manufacturing sector, the creation of employment and the birth of
economic hubs.
Today, foreign investors remain key allies in our quest to become a high income nation. Periodic
reviews and dismantling of burdensome regulations have been our ethos. In 2009, we reduced
barriers for partnership with local companies and liberalised 27 service subsectors. Since then,
at least 15 more subsectors have been liberalised. These measures have boosted investments
in many corridors around Malaysia.
Malaysia  is  a  profit  centre  with  no  restriction  in  repatriation  of  profits  even  during
difficult times.
Foreign investments have indeed yielded significant returns for investors. Returns on FDI have
grown by an average of 13% per annum, higher than Malaysia’s nominal GDP growth of 7.7%
and  one  of  the  highest  in  Asia.  Clearly,  Malaysia  is  a  regional  profit  centre  where  foreign
investments are protected and is allowed to operate in a conducive environment.
More  importantly,  profits  by  investors  are  freely  movable.  Malaysia  does  not  impose  any
restriction on the repatriation of profits, even during difficult times. A fact sometimes missed by
analysts. Even during the 1997 crisis, we did not restrict the movement of profits from Malaysia.
Our compass in attracting investment has always been guided by seeking quality, rather than
quantity, of investments. Our rules and treatment are fair to all genuine investors. Any incentives
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
granted  to  both  foreign  and  domestic  investors  are  subject  to  stringent  performance
requirements.  This  ensures  adequate  safeguards  for  the  goals  of  the  incentives  and
underscores our fair treatment to all.
This would also create a relationship built on the principle of mutual reinforcement, beneficial to
both Malaysia and its partners.  
A growing economy which parallel global development and growth.
The Malaysian economy has always been very well run. It has bright growth prospects, in the
immediate future and in the longer term. We have been one of the fastest growing economy in
the last decade. Our economic growth has consistently outpaced global growth since the Trans-
Atlantic Financial Crisis. Comparing average growth rates since then, Malaysia’s growth rate has
been 170 basis points higher than the global economy, growing faster by 38% to be exact. In the
region, we are among the fastest-growing middle-income economy. I am quite confident that this
trend is set to continue as we move forward.
In the first quarter of the year, Malaysia grew by 5.6%, surpassing market expectations. Growth
has  been  lifted  by  the  stronger  domestic  demand  with  additional  impetus  from  exports.  Our
export performance is generating greater positive spillovers to the domestic economy. Judging
by these, the economy is poised to register stronger growth in 2017.
Many factors account for the sustained economic performance. A key reason is our economic
diversification. While we were once an export-driven economy, our resilient domestic demand
has  served  as  a  strong  anchor  of  growth  when  external  demand  became  challenging  in  the
aftermath of the Trans-Atlantic Financial Crisis.
We have a long track record of sound macroeconomic planning and management. Today, let me
focus on international reserves. Malaysia’s management of its international reserves has always
been  undertaken  with  integrity  and  prudence.  Under  meticulous  management,  the  size  of  our
foreign exchange reserves has grown substantially in the last two decades.
The development of Malaysia’s international reserves has been under the media spotlight lately. It
is  important  to  note  that  speculation  on  the  country’s  international  reserves,  if  not  managed
properly,  can  affect  trust  and  confidence  in  the  economy,  financial  system  as  well  as  its
currency.
The main purpose of international reserves is to serve as a buffer against external shocks. This
reduces the likelihood of a balance of payments crisis, thereby preserving monetary and financial
stability and orderly market conditions. The sheer magnitude of funds flowing between financial
markets is now staggering.
This is further complicated by the rapid pace at which these transactions may occur because of
technological advancements. In such periods, changes in international reserves should respond
accordingly. 
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
But  one  area  we  should  be  mindful  of  is  that  reserves  should  increase  and  fall  in  an  open
financial market, serving as a buffer against potentially disruptive volatile financial flows. A decline
in  reserves  during  periods  of  capital  reversal  is  not  a  new  phenomenon.  In  contrast,  during
periods of capital inflows, it is natural for reserves to be accumulated. Reserves play a role in
both circumstances to manage adjustments in the financial markets. This includes ensuring the
stability of the exchange rate is preserved. This is how we maintain orderly market conditions. 
Malaysia’s  level  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  is  adequate  for  our  stage  of  economic
development, domestic market structure and external position. Malaysia’s reserves is well-within
the adequacy range, placing us in a comfortable position relative to regional peers and fulfilling
recognised global standards.
Malaysia’s  long-term  growth  prospects  also  remain  favourable.  These  are  reinforced  by  both
naturally occurring domestic economic trends and policy consideration, deliberation and action.
Malaysia  will  also  continue  to  reap  its  demographic  dividends  and  benefit  from  a  young  and
productive population for the foreseeable future. As education and income levels continue to rise,
an  increasingly  affluent  and  informed  consumer  group  would  emerge  –  providing  additional
impetus for economic growth. 
Time  and  again,  Malaysian  policymakers  have  continuously  supported  growth  by  removing
structural impediments and promoting an enabling environment for new growth areas to flourish.
Strong banking sector and financial market that intermediate business needs.
Malaysia’s  diversified  and  well-developed  financial  sector  can  intermediate  the  business  and
economic needs of the country, enabling businesses to flourish.
Malaysia’s banking sector is one of the strongest and most developed in Asia. Banks are well-
capitalised, with capital in excess of the minimum regulatory requirement of Basel III.
Malaysian  banks,  with  their  vast  network  of  presence  across  the  region  could  also  serve  as
investors’ gateway to East Asia.
Malaysia has been innovative in developing its financial system. This is very much evident in the
rise of Islamic finance that offers investors a wider range of financial and insurance products.
Prior to 2000, we had only two Islamic banks and two takaful operators.
Today,  Islamic  banking  assets  account  for  more  than  a  quarter  of  the  total  banking  system.
There are more than 100 financial products beyond the basic financial services offered. These
include  wealth  management  products,  corporate  financial  solutions  and  investment  banking
services. Indeed, Islamic finance has arrived. From being a novelty to mainstream – it is able to
meet the needs of the economy.
At the same time, our capital market also stands at par with Asia’s best. We currently have one
of the largest bond market in East Asia. We do not restrict any form of foreign participation in our
bond and equity markets. This allows for natural deepening and widening of the financial system
in  Malaysia.  Importantly,  it  allows  investors  like  yourselves  a  diversified  source  of  funds  to
manage your financial needs.
Sovereign implied rating is at times, better than assigned ratings by the Credit Rating
Agencies.
Currently, all three of the major rating agencies, namely Moody’s, S&P and Fitch  rate Malaysia at
‘A-‘ and on a stable outlook. The last time Malaysia’s long-term foreign currency ratings were
upgraded by these agencies was more than 10 years ago. Our per capita income was then at
RM17,600 (2004) per annum compared to RM37,800 in 2016. And yet, our rating remains the
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
same at ‘A-‘.
Rating agencies assess sovereign credit risks based on a long term outlook and at most times
are reactionary to certain events. This may result in the credit ratings falling behind the curve and
not  incorporating  the  latest  market  developments.  For  example,  Indonesia  was  only  recently
upgraded  to  investment  grade  by  S&P,  more  than  5  years  after  Moody’s  and  Fitch’s  gave  a
similar rating.
Market-implied ratings may be a better gauge of a country’s latest credit profile and is already
widely used by the market. In the past 3 years, based on bond market yields, Malaysia’s market-
implied rating has at times reached levels that indicate a better rating than that assigned by the
rating agencies.
Throughout the first half of this year alone, yields for the 10-year Malaysian government securities
have swiftly recovered to 3.9% from a peak of 4.5% last November, post-US elections, reflecting
higher confidence in the Malaysian bond market.
We  are  currently  the  largest  bond  market  in ASEAN  in  terms  of  percentage  over  GDP.  The
Malaysian bond market continues to be resilient and well-functioning. Non-resident holdings of
Malaysian bonds have settled at a lower level of 26% compared to its peak of 34.7%. However,
we  have  observed  a  more  diversified  and  well-balanced  non-resident  investor  base  in  recent
months and our surveillance indicates that composition of medium to long-term investors is now
much higher. The participation of a diverse spectrum of non-residents, including central banks
and sovereign funds, is pivotal in providing a more stable and balanced two-way flows.
Malaysia is constantly in top 20 global competitiveness index.
Malaysia is the world’s 34  largest economy. We are also consistently ranked among the world’s
most  competitive  economies.  These  are  externally  driven  indexes  and  are  independently
researched.
th
In the World Bank Doing Business report, Malaysia scored better than the average OECD high
income nations in terms of legal rights and credit information. Our protection of businesses are
also stronger with faster and higher recovery rate in cases of insolvency.
In terms of talent development, attraction and retention, Malaysia has consistently ranked in the
top 20 of the IMD World Talent report. Within the region, Malaysian talents stand out due to our
diversity.  A  key  attraction  for  investors  in  Malaysia  remains  the  English  proficiency  of  our
workforce. We have maintained a top 15 ranking in the EF English proficiency index for the last 6
years.
Many multinational companies based in Malaysia have taken note of this cultural diversity. The
familiarity of our people with the numerous languages spoken within Asia, including Mandarin,
Arabic, Tamil, Urdu and Malay allows for Malaysia to be a natural choice for regional business
operations. The flourishing of our Global Business Services industry illustrates this point. Google
has established its Center of Excellence in Cyberjaya. This centre would showcase a range of
Google for Work products such as Google Apps for Work and Google Cloud Platform.
Malaysia always subscribes to global best practice and standards.
From national statistics to macroeconomic management, international organisations like the IMF
and World Bank have long acknowledged Malaysia’s adherence to international best standards.
A  quick  word  on  the  impact  of  global  standards  on  the  real  economy.  Our  adherence  to
international  standards  has  extended 
the  quality  of  our  products.  From  precision
semiconductors  to  commodities,  a  wide  array  of  Malaysia’s  exports  have  gained  international
to 
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
recognition.
A recent case in point is the palm oil industry, which also marks its 100th year of industrialisation
this year. Since the introduction of the Roundtable Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO) standards, our
major palm oil players have redesigned their plantation strategies to comply with the strict RSPO
standards. We have also gone a step further by introducing the Malaysian Sustainable Palm Oil
(MSPO) certification to elevate the standards of smallholders.
Malaysia’s economic and business policies are agile and pragmatic.
Our world is increasingly fast-paced, with ever changing challenges. To remain competitive and
relevant,  policies  must  be  agile  and  efficient.  Malaysia’s  policies  have  been  flexible  and
pragmatic. Time and again, we have demonstrated the courage to take bold and unconventional
measures to protect the economy and the interests of genuine investors. Time and again, our
policies  have  become  even  more  liberalised  than  before,  as  we  move  forward  to  make  the
market more competitive, more transparent and more dynamic.
Seven months ago, we took swift and pragmatic actions to implement foreign exchange market
development  measures  to  stabilise  the  foreign  exchange  market.  I  am  pleased  to  report  that
these  measures  are  successful,  where  the  1-month  implied  volatility  has  halved.  Onshore
foreign exchange have recovered to a stable daily average volume of USD10 billion, an increase
of 1.25 times before the measures. Daily foreign exchange turnover remains 5 times higher than
equity trades.
Another policy that merits attention is the global phenomenon of rising inequality. Markets are not
always the best arbitrator for the distribution of jobs, wealth and income.
In the era of rapid globalisation, advancement in technology and consequently, the creation of a
new economy, there are  many  winners  and  losers. As  responsible  policymakers,  we  need  to
reconcile the benefactors of the new economy with those who have been excluded or dislocated
during this era of transformation.
Cognisant  of  the  urgent  need  to  improve  our  social  safety  net,  the  minimum  wage  was
implemented in 2013. Many have benefitted from this, including migrant workers. The B40 group
was  also  given  cash  assistance  to  cope  with  the  rising  cost  of  living.  In  the  near  future,  the
protection and wellbeing of workers will be enhanced through the introduction of unemployment
insurance. I urge businesses to take a broader view of these policies and not purely from a cost
perspective.  These  measures  are  necessary  to  secure  long  term  sustainable  prosperity  and
modernisation of the country as we move forward. Lest we forget, a well-compensated labour
force also makes for good consumers as well.
Devising policy to be part of the future.
We are constantly crafting policies to secure a stronger foothold in the future. Businesses and
policymakers need to be proactive and agile. To embrace and facilitate, not to deter or hinder.
This is the Bank’s modus operandi in embracing financial technology, or FinTech for short.
We  were  one  of  the  pioneers  to  implement  a  Regulatory  Sandbox,  which  allows  for  the  safe
experimentation  of  FinTech  innovations.  We  shall  facilitate  and  make  the  hard  decisions
necessary if the innovations benefit the economy, even if it means changing the status quo.
In meeting demands of the future economy, Malaysia welcomes innovators to develop the ‘next
big  thing’.  This  year,  the  Government  launched  the  world’s  first  Digital  Free  Trade  Zone  in
collaboration with e-commerce giant, Alibaba Group. The hub will be Alibaba’s first e-hub foray
out of China.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The sharing economy is another new source of growth that promises to increase efficiency in an
inclusive manner. Unlike the conventional work structure, it is accessible to anyone who has idle
or under-utilised assets, skills or time to spare. Recognising its vast potential, the Government
has  partnered  with  the  industry  to  promote  sharing  economy,  while  safeguarding  against  its
risks. The measures include ensuring adequate worker and consumer protection, and creating a
level playing field.
Population that is used to change, reform and transformation.
Malaysia is no stranger to change and reform. Our people are very adaptable. We used to be a
primary  commodity  producing  economy  in  the  1960s  and  1970s,  before  embarking  on  import
substitution  and  then  manufacturing.  In  merely  two  decades,  we  have  transformed  from  an
agricultural economy to a manufacturing powerhouse. Since the Asian Financial Crisis, we have
metamorphosed the economy from an export dependent to a domestic driven economy.  And
now,  Malaysia  embarks  on  a  journey  into  high-value  growth  activities.  We  are  confident  in
achieving our quest to be a high income nation with equity.
Today, Amazon has steadily nudged out physical retailers, rendering them almost-obsolete at
retail  outlets.  Soon,  checkout  counters  would  seem  as  foreign  as  cassette  tapes  to  our
millennials.
While driverless cars seems to be the “in” thing now, it is quite possibly, just the start to many
more changes that we cannot even fathom now. Against these changes, the ability to learn, un-
learn and re-learn would be an indispensable requirement.
There are many lessons to be learnt. One of these lessons is that we need to prepare society for
jobs that do not yet exist. Students of today can expect to hold more than 11 jobs between the
ages of 18 and 42. That is more jobs than most of us have ever. With automation and artificial
intelligence on the verge unleashing many possibilities, our value proposition is not knowledge,
but cognitive skills. Essentially, we need to teach our young on how to learn and adapt, not how
to work. I am confident that Malaysians as a whole are able to adapt to these changes, as we
have proven on numerous times over the course of our short history.
Conclusion
Let me conclude. Malaysia has evolved significantly in the last 60 years. Our history has shown
how  Malaysia  has  been  an  economy  that  is  able  to  adapt  to  an  evolving  environment.  We
welcome business, we provide an opportunity to profit, and we are pragmatic and agile in our
policies  to  protect  the  interest  of  all.  With  more  than  a  hundred  years  of  history  between  us,
Malaysia  looks  forward  to  a  mutually  beneficial  relationship  with  both  foreign  and  domestic
investors alike.
Thank you.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
