Sabine  Lautenschläger:  Harmonisation  paves  the  way  for  a
European banking market
Statement  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, at
the Federal Financial Supervisory Authority 15th anniversary event, Bonn, 28 June 2017.
 There are two questions on the future of European regulation that we have to answer.
First, will regulation continue to be shaped by global standards?
Second, how “European” must regulation in Europe be?
Regarding the first question, I am still a firm supporter of global regulation. The financial crisis of
2008  showed  us  the  interconnections  of  the  global  banking  system.  If  a  bank  fails,  it  can
destabilise markets worldwide and nationally. The stability of the system can only be ensured by
global rules, and that’s exactly what the Basel Committee is working on. So once the Committee
has concluded its work on Basel III this year, all the major financial markets should implement the
new standards – in Europe and elsewhere.
And  in  that  context  I  find  the  most  recent  proposals  by  the  US  Department  of  the  Treasury
worrying.  It  looks  as  if  elements  of  the  global  reform  might  be  postponed  or  not  even
implemented. This involves important areas such as the new rules on the trading book. In my
view,  purely  national  initiatives  will  not  improve  the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  quite  the
opposite.
It is all the more important that the EU implements the Basel standards. The rules should be
harmonised as far as possible for Europe’s banking market.
And this brings us to the second question: how “European” must regulation in Europe be?
The single market is a key element of a united Europe, and we also need a single European
market for banks. This involves harmonising the rules for banks – wherever it makes sense. But
we should not forget that the European banking sector is characterised by diversity, not least as
a result of national specificities, because this diversity contributes to the stability of the financial
system. What we need, then, is a balance between harmonisation and diversity.
There are some areas that require greater harmonisation and other areas that require less. For
example, small banks in the euro area need somewhat less harmonisation. Taken in isolation, a
small  bank  poses  a  limited  risk  to  the  financial  system.  It  only  becomes  problematic  if  many
small banks run into trouble at the same time, and for this eventuality we need sound institutional
protection schemes that are ready to be activated.
Overall, though, the rules for small banks can be less strict than for big banks. And this is already
the case: in many respects smaller banks have an easier life than the large ones – for example,
in  financial  reporting  and  supervision.  Should  a  further  easing  of  the  rules  be  discussed,  this
would however throw up a difficult question: how big, or rather how small, should a bank be to be
considered for this easing? What are the right thresholds?
In other areas, we need greater harmonisation. That becomes apparent when you take a closer
look at the European rules – they are neither uniform nor complete. Certain areas of supervision
which  would  benefit  from  a  single  European  rule  continue  to  be  determined  by  national
regulations.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let’s take the example of a British bank. In the event of a “hard Brexit” the bank could lose its EU
passport, which gives it access to the internal market. In order to continue to do business in the
internal market, it would need to establish a base in the EU. Ideally, the country in which it sets up
its business should be an unimportant factor. But it is not. Despite the banking union, location still
plays an important role in a bank’s life.
If a British bank conducts its business via a branch in the euro area, then it is subject to national
supervision  and  national  rules.  This  results  in  the  bank  having  different  capital  and  liquidity
requirements, depending on the country where the bank has set up its branch.
Of  course,  the  bank  will  also  look  closely  at  the  different  national  recovery  and  resolution
conditions. And they have only been marginally harmonised, so there is no uniform toolset for
crises. For instance, I have sorely missed the opportunity to declare a moratorium recently.
The examples I have mentioned show how many national barriers are still blocking the way to a
European banking market. In Europe too the principle for banks should be: same business, same
risks, same rules. This ensures fair competition and prevents banks from exploiting regulatory
differences. Ultimately, harmonised rules pave the way for a stable banking market.
Thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
