Elvira Nabiullina: Competition as the key driver for growth
Statement  by  Ms  Elvira  Nabiullina,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Russia,  at  the  meeting  of  the
Association of Russian Banks, Moscow, 28 March 2017.
Good afternoon, distinguished colleagues!
 The Association has chosen the right title for today’s discussion - Competition as the Key Driver
for Growth.
A  comprehensive  look  at  what  the  Bank  of  Russia  does  in  the  banking  sectors  -  both  as  a
regulator  and  a  supervisor  -  suggests  that  it  is  engaged  in  shaping  a  healthy  competitive
environment  and  fair  competition.  The  competitive  environment  is  key  to  the  sustainable
development of the banking industry.
Supervision objectives are often contrasted with market development goals. However, this is a
serious mistake. I believe there is no need to remind you that removing fraudulent, unstable and -
unfortunately - often criminal actors from the banking sector is the Bank of Russia’s top priority.
We  resort  to  licence  revocation  when  we  see  that  the  bank’s  management  and  owners  act
against  the  interests  of  its  depositors  and  creditors,  that  the  bank  is  unable  to  regain  stability
because it is facing capital shortages.
If we fail to revoke the licence from such a bank, it will continue to produce falsified statements
and take money from depositors – openly stealing from them and diverting their assets – or lend
to inefficient projects of parties affiliated with the bank, etc. In short, such a bank will continue to
mismanage and misuse other people’s money.
What  implications  does  this  have  for  the  competitive  environment?  There  are  banks  on  the
market which operate fairly, comply with regulations, do not accumulate risks, act prudently, and
develop business with the target of long-term sustainability. This is the principle governing what
they offer to their customers.
At  the  same  time,  nothing  restricts  a  fraudulent  bank  unconcerned  about  risk  management,
instead  simply  ‘hoovering  up’  depositors’  money.  Certainly,  to  customers  looking  in  from  the
outside it will seem like the bank with the most appealing offer. If we fail to expose such banks
and withdraw them from the market promptly, decent and fair banks will continue to lose in terms
of competitiveness.
Therefore,  I  find  it  strange  that  the ARB  consistently  urges  the  Bank  of  Russia  not  to  revoke
licences.  We  believe  it  to  be  totally  against  the  interests  of  responsible  banks,  which  -  I  am
convinced - constitute the majority in the Association and in this room.
 We are very much concerned that the ARB, though emphasising the importance of competition,
nevertheless  tolerates  misreporting,  fraud  and  the  violation  of  laws.  The  Association  neither
condemns dubious operations nor seeks to develop good standards of practice. Furthermore,
they demand that we turn a blind eye to problems arising in banks. This is exactly what the ARB
means when it insists that we ‘not revoke so many licences’. However, we abide by the law and
take measures stipulated by the law.
Managers of those banks from whom licences were revoked used to be members of the ARB
Board, i.e. in the best case these people were not particularly gifted or responsible bankers, and
as a result they triggered the collapse of their credit institutions.
Here we are faced with a question about which objectives and targets the Association can deliver
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
on. Should it set standards (including ethical ones) for the banking sector; should it be the voice
of the banking community in dialogue with the regulator or should it stand up for ‘bad’ banks?
I  would  like  to  place  special  emphasis  on  the  fact  that  when  the  Bank  of  Russia  withdraws
unstable  or  fraudulent  credit  institutions  from  the  market,  it  first,  protects  the  interests  of
depositors  and  creditors,  and  only  thereafter  is  interested  in  protecting  the  interests  of
scrupulous banks.
The clearing of the banking sector is yet to be completed, therefore corporate customers will not
just choose from banks offering products and services they need, but seek to mitigate the risk of 
losing money. In particular, it also manifests itself in the authorities’ efforts to determine specific
criteria for banks, or a list of banks, which can be entrusted with budget funds and the funds of
public companies. The ARB raised the point that these criteria restrict competition.
Let me repeat, competition is undermined by fraudulent banks which remain on the market, while
attempts to limit risk by means of registers and criteria are just a corollary.
By and large, we would like to avoid a situation in which competition for the benefit of a customer
in the form of the state or a public company, is undermined by such lists or unreasonable criteria.
Therefore  we  suggest  a  course  of  action  wherein  only  limited  supervisory  information  is
disclosed to a potential customer, with the bank’s consent, if that customer is seeking to raise
public funds. We believe that this approach may help to ensure a competitive environment for
banks  of  different  size.  I  am  certain  that  banks  convinced  of  their  own  stability  will  give  us
permission for such a disclosure. We suggested this approach to the government for the funding
of agricultural companies, among other things, and the Chairman gave the  command to do so.
Therefore, I hope we will be able to work on this, bearing in mind large customers’ concerns
about  the  possibility  of  money  loss.  Coming  back  to  the  banking  resolution,  I  would  like  to
emphasise  that  we  intend  to  complete  clearing  in  the  upcoming  years.  We  estimate  that  this
process  will  take  two  to  three  years.  I  hope  that  a  bank’s  financial  fragility  leading  to  the
revocation of its licence will have become an extraordinary event by that time.
However, it does not mean that today we should not try to keep a troubled credit institution afloat.
If  a  bank  does  not  conceal  difficulties  or  produce  inaccurate  reports,  we  let  it  remedy  the
situation. Unfortunately, the ratio between the resolved and withdrawn banks does not favour the
first ones, but this situation should be reversed.
We  expect  that  the  ongoing  reform  of  supervision  in  the  Bank  of  Russia  will  lead  to  a  shift
towards  consulting  supervision,  wherein  the  Bank  of  Russia  will  be  able  to  offer  banks
reasonable measures to remedy a problematic situation at an early stage. Certainly, consulting
supervision is feasible only if a commercial bank is honest with the Central Bank and does not try
to conceal real problems. Despite the problems I have mentioned, the revocation of licences has
affected  4.3%  of  banks’  assets  -  over  the  past  four  years  we  have  revoked  more  than  300
licences, or one third of all licences. The impact on the banking system at large is clearly able to
be seen. On the whole, we estimate that the banking sector experiences no systemic risks, but
remains resilient and capable of building up lending.
Now we can say that a new economic cycle has begun: the economic downturn is over, some
industries are growing at an outstripping pace, real wages have begun to grow, and demand is
recovering.
We believe it to be important that the banking system has now recovered from the shocks of
2014-2015. This is evidenced by return, profit and capital stock figures, as well as other data.
Banks are well-positioned to develop their business and build up lending.
The aggregate capital adequacy ratio sits at a comfortable level slightly above 13% (the minimum
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
value is 8%). We estimate that current capital stock is worth 1.8 trillion rubles, which is sufficient
to  boost  lending.  Banks’  nominal  profits  have  recovered  to  the  pre-crisis  level  of  roughly  one
trillion rubles, though real profits are still below the pre-crisis readings. In relation to 2013 prices,
profits are still 30% lower.
We expect banks to use their profits to boost growth in the banking business, and to step up
lending.  To  do  so,  they  should  convert  the  bulk  of  their  profits  into  capital.  Currently,  financial
statements suggest that 88% of profits will be converted into capital.
I hope that the final figure, after profit allocation between shareholders has occurred, will not differ
greatly.  Furthermore,  banks’  profits  increased  by  212  billion  rubles  in  the  first  two  months  of
2017, a growth rate 2.5 times that of the same period of the previous year.
Despite the fact that the current situation in the banking system is quite good, we believe that
changes  are  brewing,  which  will  allow  the  banking  system  to  more  efficiently  meet  citizens’
demand and economic development objectives.
Both bills which we consider to be pivotal - the proportional banking regulation bill and the new
resolution mechanism bill - have passed the first reading at the State Duma. We have already
discussed  these  in  detail  on  many  occasions,  therefore  today  I  will  dwell  only  on  the
amendments introduced to the bills to be considered by the State Duma in the second reading.
As regards proportional regulation, I would like to return to the promotion of competition. When
we first proposed the concept, many small banks voiced concerns that they might face tougher
competition. We took this concern very seriously and have held many discussions on the matter.
However, we do not think that the three-tier system disrupts competition. Instead, it will boost the
stability of banks - irrespective of their size - and result in more realistic business models in the
future. In addition, the system not only imposes restrictions on operations, but also considerably
eases regulatory burden for banks holding basic licences.
Banks holding basic licences will have to comply with only five required ratios and will not have to
meet new highly technical standards. Along with two capital adequacy ratios, one current liquidity
ratio and two credit concentration ratios will be applied.
The current version of the bill, though aiming to focus small banks on servicing small businesses
and individuals, provides a more flexible mechanism and allows lending to larger borrowers if
they  comply  with  both  a  more  strictly  concentrated  ratio  of  credit  risk  per  borrower  and  the
related party risk ratio. We took these comments into account after the dialogue and discussion
with the banking community. We believe that the niche we are establishing for banking will be
popular among investors. This will make possible clearer, more transparent and, consequently,
more interesting banking business for new private investors. No less important is the fact that we
are creating a system which will help banks chose their development strategy as to how to turn a
small banking business into a large one, while avoiding risks to its stability.
A few words about the development of a new resolution mechanism.
The existing credit resolution mechanism is not only more expensive and time-consuming than
that which has been proposed, but it also hampers the competitive environment. Today, a bank
operating under this resolution may not comply with the ratios, but nevertheless carry out the
same  operations  as  a  normally  operating  bank,  meanwhile  a  turnaround  manager  obtains
access to almost free benefits. Turnaround managers fiercely competed for this credit resource
exactly because it gave them a considerable competitive advantage. We do not think that the
new  mechanism  will  trigger  significant  growth  in  resolutions.  Resolution  means  that  the  state
takes up losses incurred by previous bank owners, thus this mechanism should be applied with
caution.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  call  the  new  instrument  the  Banking  Sector  Consolidation  Fund,  because  we  expect  that
banks  under  resolution  will  be  able  to  be  united  into  banks  with  larger  capital,  which  will  then
attract more investors. We consider it important to encourage growth in the number of banks
with large capital to avoid excessive concentration in any one level of the banking system.
Finally,  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  another  topic.  It  concerns  the  future,  -  the
development  of  financial  technologies  -  and  it  is  a  topic  today  beingdiscussed  widely.  The
development  of  financial  technologies  has  become  a  point  of  regular  discussion  in  the
partnership of financial institutions and banks with the regulator. We are aware that growth of
such technologies allows banks and other financial institutions to improve their efficiency, enter
new market segments, and develop customer products and services. However, there is another
reason  to  take  a  closer  look  at  fintech  -  for  it  is  these  technologies  that  may  rapidly  alter  the
banking  environment  and  all  of  you  need  to  take  it  into  account  that  new  technologies  are
developing very quickly and may impact on your business. We should be prepared for such an
alteration. Otherwise new actors may oust conventional banks from the market.
We are interested in developing financial technologies because they are convenient for people
and for businesses, but at the same time we do not want the explosive growth in technologies to
result  in  an  increase  in  cyberattacks  and  cyberfraud.  The  Bank  of  Russia  is  focused  on  this
issue.  We  have  established  both  a  centre  for  the  development  of  financial  technology  and  a
centre for monitoring and response to cyberattacks in the financial sector. We believe that this
work should be continued in cooperation with the banking community and businesses so that
such shifts in the market become predictable and smooth and everybody is able to reap benefits
from innovation and technology.
In  conclusion  I  would  like  to  emphasise  once  again  that  we  hope  the  Central  Bank  and  the
banking community will continue to cooperate constructively. We are open to dialogue and the
exchanging of views. Although banks may sometimes be sensitive to our measures we do our
best for healthy, responsible and fair banks to retain stability, develop their business and meet
the economy’s demand.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
