Sabine  Lautenschläger:  100  years  of  women’s  suffrage  -  gender
equality, freedom and democracy
Speech by Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB and Vice-Chair of
the  Supervisory  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  an  event  marking  the  run-up  to  the
centenary of women’s suffrage, Berlin, 26 July 2017.
 “What  we  don’t  want  and  what  we’re  not  aiming  for,  never,  not  even  centuries  from  now,  is
political emancipation and equality for women.”
Of course, these aren’t my words. They were written in 1866 by Adolf Lette, a politician. They are
very  revealing  as  Lette  was  the  founder  of  an  association  with  a  very  specific  objective  –  to
promote the “employment of women”. To a certain extent therefore, Lette was an advocate of
gender equality – for that day and age.
His  general  opposition  to  gender  equality,  however,  was  unsuccessful:  next  year  we  are
celebrating 100 years of women’s suffrage. Giving women the vote was a crucial step towards
greater gender equality. For if you cannot vote, you have no political voice and, without that, your
concerns cannot be addressed.
But the right to vote was only the first step. It was the first step on a journey which then took
place at a rather leisurely pace.
It took until 1949 and Germany’s Basic Law, which explicitly stated that women and men were
equal. And until 1977 for the legal concept of “stay-at-home” wives to be dropped. Only since
then have women been able to go to work without their husband’s permission.
Do you find that as shocking as I do? Just think: we are not talking about something back in the
mists of time; this is only 40 years ago!
It’s a good thing that we are shocked. Because it shows how self-evident gender equality has
become for us, especially for young people.
But is it really so self-evident?
There’s no doubt that access to education and training no longer depends on gender. In terms of
school-leaving qualifications and university degrees, women are even slightly ahead.
It’s not until later that things get difficult.
Only after they embark on a career do young women notice that equality does not extend as far
as they thought. Although they started out on the same conditions as their male colleagues, they
have to overcome higher barriers on their career path.
Often they earn less than their male colleagues even if they are just as qualified. They bump into
the famous glass ceiling when they want to forge a career. And, above all, it is they who have to
combine family and career – not the men. Usually it’s the women who take parental leave, and
usually it’s the women who take part-time work afterwards and who don’t progress so far career-
wise as their husbands and colleagues.
My impression is that many women see these matters as personal problems. They are that, of
course, but they are more than that. They concern all women and the whole of society. And the
situation  will  only  change  when  we  all  expand  our  personal  horizons  and  push  for  wholesale
gender equality.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
So my appeal to all young women is: don’t take gender equality for granted! Be pro-active! Stand
up for your rights and the rights of others! The issue of equality is far from resolved.
And by the way, equality is of course not only a matter for women themselves. Why should it only
be an issue for women to combine children and a career? Where are the men, where are the
fathers?
I  sometimes  have  the  feeling  that,  despite  all  the  progress,  certain  traditional  roles  are
entrenched in people’s heads. And this applies not only to men but also to us women. We too are
receptive to stereotypes. Studies show that women, just like men, unconsciously discriminate
according to sex – also in the workplace.
What we need is a change of culture. And the starting point for that is to call into question not
only the behaviour of others, but also our own. This is an important step which is often neglected.
So it’s up to all of us to ensure greater gender equality. But politicians can help too. For example,
they can improve the conditions under which women – or men – combine career and family.
And  then  there  are  employment  practices.  Employers  should  not  only  use  equality  as  a
recruitment  tool;  they  must  also  make  equality  possible  in  practice.  That  could  be  done,  for
example, with more flexible working hours; employees should have greater freedom to allocate
their time. Why not pick up the children from school in the afternoon and then go back to your
desk again in the evening? Consider Sweden. There it’s good form not to organise meetings after
4 p.m. So we can learn something if we only look around a little.
Gender equality has many facets, and I have touched upon several. Generally speaking, there
are three things which, for me, are inseparably linked to this issue:
First, equality doesn’t only mean rights. For every right there is an obligation. Therefore, having
the same rights means having the same obligations. It’s not just about cherry-picking, if I can put
it  like  that.  Women  who  demand  complete  gender  equality  must  also  be  ready  to  take  on
responsibility.
Second, gender equality doesn’t only concern a career-minded elite. It concerns everyone. So it’s
not  just  about  female  quotas  for  supervisory  boards  and  executive  boards.  It’s  not  just  about
gender-neutral phrasing in legal texts. All that is of relatively little benefit to most women. For the
majority it must mean more flexible working hours, respectful treatment, appropriate pay, better
child care – just to mention a few things.
Third, equality ultimately concerns one thing: freedom. Every individual should live exactly how
she or he wants to.
That also means we have to be tolerant of different lifestyles. We have to be tolerant of women
(and men) who see being at home with the family as a calling; we have to be tolerant of women
who  see  a  career  as  a  calling;  and  we  have  to  be  tolerant  of  women  who  claim  both  for
themselves: family and career.
And tolerance isn’t the whole story: women with different lifestyles should display solidarity. They
should never let themselves make comments like “she’s only a housewife” or “she neglected her
children for her career”.
Despite all this, there’s one point we should put on record: basically it’s a good sign for us in
Germany that, when it comes to gender equality, the discussion is usually, though not always,
about careers. It means that in other areas we have evidently come a long way.
To realise that, it’s enough just to look at other countries – in Africa, for instance. There are areas
where women live in terrible conditions – Adolf Lette would still be a progressive reformer there
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
today.  We  must  therefore  not  only  look  beyond  our  personal  horizons  but  also  beyond  our
national horizons. From a global perspective, the issue of gender equality has quite a different
meaning.
Nevertheless, gender equality is also making progress at a global level. For instance, the World
Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Report covers the whole world. It measures the gaps in a
number of areas, including the economy, education and politics. It reports that, if current trends
continue, the global gender gap could be closed in 83 years. Girls born now would be on an equal
footing at the end of their lives.
There are, of course, enormous regional differences. The World Economic Forum estimates that
in eastern Europe and central Asia it will take almost 150 years to achieve full gender equality; in
the Middle East and north Africa almost 130 years. At least by comparison, western Europe is
doing quite well: only 61 years. In my view, however, that’s not praise – far from it – but rather a
reminder to progress more quickly.
We are celebrating 100 years of women’s suffrage in Germany next year. It’s about equality, but
it’s also about democracy. For if half the population is economically dependent and not allowed to
vote, then there is no democracy. It’s all the more alarming if parts of the political spectrum are
still – or perhaps again – apparently propagating an image of women that is outdated. Whoever
does that is also trying to undermine democracy.
To  put  it  another  way,  if  you  fight  for  equality,  you  also  fight  for  democracy. Alas,  today  that
seems to be becoming ever more necessary.
Thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
