Encik Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour: Revolutionising Microfinance
Welcoming  remarks  by Mr Encik  Abdul  Rasheed  Ghaffour,  Deputy  Governor  of the Central 
Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Global Symposium on Microfinance, Kuala 
Lumpur, 22 May 2017.
 In  biology,  the  transformation  of  a  species  is  said  to  happen  in  rapid  bursts.  Imagine  an
ecosystem  of  marine  life  along  a  shoreline.  For  millions  of  years,  it  can  remain  relatively
unchanged.  But  an  extraordinary  event  –  such  as  a  sudden  move  in  sea  levels  –  can  alter
everything quickly. Within decades, fishes, mollusks and plants alike can dramatically change in
size and shape. Ultimately, those that adapt emerge as the stronger species in the ecosystem.
We are gathered here today in the very different context of microfinance. Nonetheless, parallels
can be drawn with the theme of this event, ”Revolutionising Microfinance”. Think of the incredible
pace of technological change in recent years. In 2016 alone, machine prevailed over man in the
world’s hardest board game. Reusable rockets became a reality. Twitter helped a nation elect
their president. For microfinance, that rapid burst of change is already upon us.
It is therefore a great honour for Bank Negara Malaysia to partner with the World Bank in hosting
this Global Symposium on Microfinance. We are privileged to have so many learned speakers
here with us to share their invaluable insights.
Led  by  innovation  across  the  globe  from  Bangladesh  to  Brazil,  microfinance  has  allowed
previously excluded segments of society to grow incomes, build assets and ultimately improve
their standards of living. With poverty eradication taking centre stage in the global public policy
agenda,  such  in  the  United  Nation’s  Millennium  Development  Goals,  these  developments  are
welcome.
Here in Malaysia, microfinance has been an important part of the development agenda. In 2006,
the  Bank  introduced  a  comprehensive  microfinance  institutional  framework  to  promote  the
development of a sustainable microfinance industry. This facilitated greater access to financing
by micro-entrepreneurs with no collateral, supported by simple application procedures, minimal
documentation and quick turnaround times. The microfinance landscape in Malaysia has evolved
from being Government-driven into one with vibrant private sector participation. At the turn of the
century, total financing outstanding of the sector stood at USD35 million (RM151 million). Since
then, it has multiplied by more than 30 times to USD1.2 billion (RM5.2 billion) in 2016, collectively
benefitting more than a million micro enterprises.
Despite significant strides taken since the 1970s to develop more inclusive financial systems,
including in the countries represented here today, our work in microfinance is far from complete.
The  full  potential  of  microfinance  is  not  realised  until  we  observe  direct  linkages  to  welfare
improvements  in  the  micro  segment  and  ultimately,  sustainable  growth.  At  the  same  time,
microfinance is also evolving in an era of unprecedented technological change. Adaptability is key
for microfinance to thrive and further propel itself forward. The focus of this Symposium – on
insights, inclusion and innovation – underpins this adaptability.
Insights – identifying with microentreprenurs
As effective policymakers and practitioners, we need to have deep insights of our clients on-the-
ground:  the  microentrepreneurs.  This  obligation  begins  with  the  awareness  that  the  needs,
tradeoffs and circumstances of microentrepreneurs are unique. They face very different financial
constraints  and  in  turn,  very  different  choice  sets.  Hence,  effective  microfinance  design  that
appeals  to  microentrepreneurs’  needs  will  not  only  require  a  rooted  understanding  of  whether
they have been good paymasters, who their other financiers are and how they conduct business;
1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
but also their specific background, problems and values.
As  we  speak,  predictive  credit  analytics  are  being  developed  using  alternative  data,  such  as
psychometric assessments and other non-financial information. This may be particularly useful
in  the  microsegment,  where  traditional  data  on  creditworthiness  are  usually  scarce.  These
insights can also be leveraged to design products that are tailored towards the distinct needs of
microentrepreneurs.
Improving  user  experience  and  confidence  is  equally  important. Application  procedures,  user
interfaces  and  operational  processes  should  be  simple  and  seamless.  Most  importantly,  they
should be appropriate to the circumstances of microborrowers for whom a loan may well be the
first experience with a formal financial institution. How they perceive this experience can have
longer  term  effects  on  the  level  of  trust  they  place  in  financial  institutions,  and  reinforce
behaviours  that  will  either  encourage  them  to  use  financial  services,  or  further  distance  them
from the formal financial system. 
Inclusion – expanding the reach of microfinance
One  of  the  key  challenges  for  microfinance  has  been  providing  access  to  financial  services
where  it  is  unavailable,  but  needed  the  most.  Expanding  the  reach  of  financial  services,  and
finding new ways to do so cost efficiently, lie at the very heart of efforts to increase inclusion.
The right channels can also create emotional connections, not just geographical ones. Making it
easier for borrowers to connect with financial institutions in ways that they feel comfortable with,
can  build  affinities  with  financial  institutions  which  in  turn,  encourages  participation  and  timely
repayments.
Mobile  banking  is  an  excellent  example.  The  portability,  affordability  and  ubiquity  of  mobile
gadgets  effectively  put  a  bank  in  everyone’s  pockets  today.  The  numbers  are  telling.  Half  the
global population use mobile internet. We spend 4 hours on the phone and use 12 apps in a
single  day.  The  tremendous  success  of  mobile  banking  in  Africa  has  been  hailed  as  a
transformative platform for greater financial inclusion. If providers leverage digital platforms well,
finance can literally be at the fingertips of the unbanked.
Leveraging  on  digital  platforms  can  also  create  a  virtuous  cycle.  Over  time,  such  platform
providers will accumulate a wealth of data on customer preferences and behaviour. This can in
turn drive drive analysis for new product offerings in the future.
This  is  of  course,  highly  contextual  and  an  effective  delivery  strategy  will  likely  differ  across
countries, communities and cultures.
Innovation – serving real needs while managing associated risks
Whether we like it or not, the world of finance is rapidly moving into uncharted waters. There are
in innovations  that  can  be  tapped  to  develop  and  expand
tremendous  opportunities 
microfinance,  but  also  real  risks  to  be  appreciated.  This  includes  risks  associated  with  the
disintermediation of finance, a borderless society and cyber threats to name a few. It is important
that we understand and manage these risks as we steer microfinance forward, to ensure we are
doing so boldly but not blindly.
There will be many lessons we can learn from those who are here at this Symposium. These are
individuals with rich experience in the microfinance industry, whose successes and failures in
developing unique product offerings and new business models will be equally instructive. 
The global financial crisis may be a decade past, but one of its key lessons remain true – finance
and  its  innovation  must  exist  to  serve  real  needs.  The  costs  of  financial  failures  are
disproportionately  higher  for  the  poor  and  for  this  reason,  there  should  be  a  higher  burden  to
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
ensure that experiments in microfinance are careful and purposeful. Over the next few days, we
will be exploring these themes in greater depth.
As we look forward to these discussions, it is worth recalling why we are here. The words of Mr.
Kofi Annan, the former UN Secretary General, come to mind. He said this:
“Where once the poor were commonly seen as passive victims, microfinance recognizes that
poor people are remarkable reservoirs of energy and knowledge. And while the lack of financial
services is a sign of poverty, today it is also understood as an untapped opportunity to create
markets,  bring  people  in  from  the  margins  and  give  them  the  tools  with  which  to  help
themselves.”
I believe we will continue to see massive changes in rapid bursts. In the process, the goal should
be to help as many people as we can emerge stronger and more productive members of the
human ecosystem. 
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
