Guy Debelle: Recent trends in Australian capital flows
Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the Australian
Financial Review Banking and Wealth Summit, Sydney, 6 April 2017.
 Thanks to Sue Black, Blair Chapman and Callan Windsor for their help in preparing this talk. 
Introduction
Thanks to the AFR for inviting me to speak here today. I’m not going to talk about housing, I’m
going to talk about something a bit more slow moving and lower frequency and that is capital
flows to and from Australia and how the country funds its level of investment, which exceeds its
level  of  aggregate  saving.  Though  in  saying  that,  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  aggregate  level  of
saving in Australia is actually pretty high compared to other countries, it is just that investment is
even higher.
For  more  than  a  century,  Australia’s  high  level  of  investment  relative  to  saving  has  been
supported by capital inflows from the rest of the world.  These net capital inflows are the financial
counterpart to Australia’s current account deficit. Foreign investment has been instrumental in
expanding  our  domestic  productive  capacity  and  has  been  attracted  by  the  favourable  risk-
adjusted returns on offer here.
1
Although net capital inflows have been a consistent feature of Australia’s balance of payments,
the composition of both the inflows, as well as the outflows when Australians invest offshore, has
varied substantially over time.
When I spoke about capital flows a few years ago, I discussed the significant changes in the
composition of capital flows that had taken place since 2007.  At that time, I highlighted three
noteworthy developments: a marked increase in foreign direct investment in the mining sector
associated with the mining investment boom; the significant change in flows to the Australian
banking  sector  from  sizeable  inflows  pre-crisis  to  around  zero;  and  a  substantial  increase  in
foreigners’ purchases of Australian government debt (Graph 1).
2
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
To a large degree, these trends have continued over the past three years (Table 1). But under
the  surface,  there  have  been  some  significant  changes  in  the  composition  of  these  flows  in
recent years. Today I would like to highlight some of these. A forthcoming RBA  Bulletin article will
discuss these trends in more detail.
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Mining Sector
From  2008,  a  significant  share  of  mining  investment  expenditure  was  funded  through  foreign
direct  investment  in  the  form  of  reinvested  earnings  during  a  period  when  profitability  in  the
mining  sector  was  particularly  high.  In  the  balance  of  payments,  these  reinvested  earnings  –
essentially  calculated  as  profits  less  dividends  –  are  generally  treated  as  being  notionally
distributed to foreign owners in the net income component of the current account. The foreign
owners are then deemed to notionally reinvest back into the firm. These notional capital flows are
recorded  in  the  financial  account.   The  money  does  not  necessarily  flow  in  and  out  of  the
country, it is just recorded as such in the balance of payments. The net capital inflows to the
mining sector during the investment phase reflected the combined effect of the mining sector’s
high  profitability  (and  low  dividend  payout  ratio),  its  tendency  to  fund  investment  from  internal
4
sources and the very high degree of foreign ownership.
3
In recent years the net inflows to the mining sector have continued to be large despite the large
decline in mining investment spending from 9½ per cent of GDP in 2012 to around 3½ per cent
of GDP currently. The inflows have continued, even as mining profits have declined with the fall in
commodity  prices  (until  very  recently).   The  continued  strength  of  capital  inflows  has  been
supported  by  ongoing  investment  related  to  large  liquefied  natural  gas  (LNG)  projects.  LNG
projects have made up a larger share of resource investment during this period than previously
and many of these projects have an even higher foreign ownership share than the overall sector.
These LNG projects have typically involved new joint ventures, where the majority of participants
are foreign entities and are likely to have limited existing domestic operations with which to fund
investment  through  profits. Accordingly,  these  inflows  have  mostly  been  in  the  form  of  direct
funding from offshore rather than reinvested earnings.
5
In this context, it seems reasonable to expect net capital inflows to the mining sector to moderate
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
in the future, with capital flows to the mining sector in recent quarters already starting to taper.
This follows the transition of a number of large LNG projects from the investment phase into the
production and export phase. While the increase in exports will support profits and, therefore,
notional capital inflows to the mining sector, some of these profits are likely to be paid out to
offshore  owners  as  dividends  rather  than  reinvested,  an  issue  I  will  return  to  later  when
discussing the net income deficit.
Public Sector
Turning  to  the  public  sector,  foreigners  have  remained  ongoing  purchasers  of  Australian
government debt, with the level of holdings continuing to rise over the past couple of years. Flows
into government bonds have nonetheless moderated, and have not kept pace with the increase
in net issuance. At face value, the headline statistics show that the foreign ownership share of
government bonds has declined by around 20 percentage points since its peak in 2012.
However, the extent of the decline is overstated. Part of this decline is a reflection of foreigners
becoming  considerably  more  active  in  the  management  of  their  government  bond  holdings,
rather than a decreased appetite to hold Australian government bonds. In particular, part of the
decline in the foreign ownership share reflects an increase in collateralised lending of Australian
Government Securities (AGS) to Australian repo dealers.   Such  lending  activity  –  which  grew
particularly strongly over 2013–14 – is captured in the statistics as a sale of AGS by a foreigner
to their domestic counterparty. This is despite economic ownership remaining with the foreign
lender  (who  has  the  obligation  to  buy  back  similar  securities  at  some  stage  in  the  future).
Adjusting the level of foreign ownership to account for this collateralised lending shows that the
decline  in  the  foreign  ownership  share  of AGS  has  been  around  5  percentage  points  smaller
(Graph 2).
6
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Banking Sector
The aggregate pattern of capital flows to the banking sector has not changed materially since I
last spoke on this topic. Since 2014 – and indeed over the period since the financial crisis – there
have been minimal net capital flows to or from the banking sector. Following the shift away from
offshore  wholesale  debt  towards  domestic  deposits  that  took  place  in  the  wake  of  the  global
financial  crisis,  the  funding  composition  of  banks  has  remained  relatively  stable.  But
notwithstanding this stability, recently there have been two noteworthy developments relating to
short-term debt, both stemming from regulatory reforms.
Firstly, over the past year or so, Australian banks have reduced their short-term debt issuance in
preparation for the introduction of the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) next year (Graph 3). The
NSFR provides an incentive for banks to shift to sources of funding considered to be more stable
and away from sources such as short-term wholesale liabilities.
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Secondly,  the  composition  of Australian  banks’  short-term  offshore  funding  has  also  changed
following  the  implementation  of  US  Money  Market  Fund  (MMF)  reforms  by  the  Securities  and
Exchange Commission in October 2016. As a result of these reforms, the value of assets under
management  of  prime  MMFs  (those  that  lend  to  banks)  has  fallen  by  US$1  trillion  or  around
70  per  cent  over  the  past  couple  of  years.  Some  prime  funds  have  switched  to  become
government-only funds, that is, funds that invest only in US government debt. At the same time,
investors have allocated away from prime funds to government-only funds. Although prime MMFs
have  maintained  their  exposure  to  Australian  banks  relative  to  banks  globally  (at  around
8 per cent of total MMF exposures to banks), their holdings of Australian bank debt have declined
from around US$100 billion to under US$30 billion currently.
However,  in  aggregate, Australian  banks  have  continued  to  raise  almost  as  much  short-term
funding from US commercial paper markets, despite the decline in MMFs. They have been able
to tap other investors, in particular US corporates with large cash holdings, such as those in the
technology sector.
Australia’s Net Foreign Liability Position
Having talked about capital flows, I will now turn to the stocks, which are the accumulation of all
these  flows  (plus  valuation  effects). Australia’s  net  foreign  liability  position  has  been  relatively
stable as a share of GDP for more than a decade, before increasing a little recently to be around
60 per cent of GDP (Graph 4). Slightly more than all of Australia’s net liabilities are in the form of
debt as the country has had a small net equity position in recent years. That is, since 2013, the
level of Australian investment in foreign equity has exceeded the level of foreign investment in
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Australian  equity.  This  reflects  the  sizeable  offshore  equity  investment  of  the  Australian
superannuation sector as well as foreign exchange valuation effects, with the depreciation of the
Australian  dollar  since  2013  increasing  the  Australian  dollar  value  of  our  foreign  equity
investments.
Today the majority of Australia’s debt liabilities are long-term, which is a significant change from
a decade ago. Long-term debt liabilities are currently around 50–55 per cent of GDP, up from
around 30 per cent prior to the financial crisis. The post-crisis shift towards longer-term debt was
a result of two factors: banks lengthening the tenor of their debt on issue as well as the shift from
bank debt towards government debt, which tends to have a relatively longer tenor.  Short-term
debt liabilities are around their lowest share of GDP in two decades.
Net Income Deficit
7
I will finish by looking at the cost of servicing those liabilities. Over recent years, one of the more
interesting trends has been the decline in the net income deficit. The net income deficit reflects
the returns on foreign holdings of Australian assets compared with Australian holdings of foreign
assets, be it in the form of interest, dividends or reinvested earnings. Australia has had a net
income deficit since at least 1960 – a direct consequence of the net foreign liability position.
Since late 2010, Australia’s net income deficit, as a per cent of GDP, has narrowed to be around
its lowest level since the Australian dollar was floated (Graph 5). This has been associated with a
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
narrowing of the current account deficit to its lowest share of GDP since the early 1980s. There
are two distinct periods with different drivers behind this.
The narrowing in the net income deficit from late 2010 to late 2013 mostly reflected a decline in
income payments on Australians’ foreign debt and equity liabilities The lower average yield paid
on Australian foreign debt was due to a combination of declines in Australian interest rates and
an  increase  in  the  share  of Australia’s  foreign  debt  attributable  to  the Australian  Government,
which pays a lower rate of interest than private sector borrowers. The decline in the payments on
equity liabilities was a result of lower profitability of the mining sector. Because Australia’s mining
sector is majority foreign owned, a reduction in the profitability of that sector gives rise to smaller
payments to the foreign owners, either in the form of dividend payments or reinvested earnings,
thereby reducing the net income deficit.
Since 2013, the reduction in the net income deficit has instead reflected an increase in returns on
Australian residents’ offshore equity holdings. These increased returns are directly related to the
determinants  of  the  shift  towards  a  net  equity  asset  position  that  I  just  touched  on:  namely,
continued flows into offshore equity by Australian superannuation funds and the depreciation of
the exchange rate, which increases the Australian dollar value of dividend receipts.
In  the  most  recent  national  accounts,  profits  of  private  corporations  rose  by  more  than
15 per cent – the second largest increase in the history of the accounts – driven by a huge rise in
profitability in the mining sector, in turn a reflection of the recent sharp rise in the prices of coal
and  iron  ore.  Based  on  company  announcements,  some  of  these  profits  are  likely  to  be
distributed  to  foreign  owners  as  dividends.  Moreover,  to  the  extent  that  mining  sector  profits
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
remain high over the next quarter or so, we could expect to see income outflows as these profits
are distributed to foreign owners, all other things being equal. This is likely to increase the net
income deficit in coming quarters, but not contribute to gross capital inflows to the mining sector,
in contrast to previous periods of high profitability, when profits were reinvested to fund increased
investment spending.
Concluding Remarks
To conclude, the main purpose of my speech today has been to highlight some trends in capital
flows  that  have  taken  place  over  the  past  few  years.  By  and  large  these  trends  have,  on  the
surface, continued the patterns of previous years, but disaggregating a little further reveals some
noteworthy trends. Firstly, sizeable capital inflows have continued to fund mining investment, in
particular large LNG projects. Whereas these (notional) flows during the mining investment boom
mostly reflected reinvested earnings, much of the more recent flows have been (actual) transfers
from offshore affiliates. As these LNG projects transition into the production and export phase,
we would expect to see these inflows moderate. Moreover, some of these profits are likely to be
paid  out  to  offshore  owners  as  dividends  rather  than  reinvested.  Secondly,  there  has  been
continued appetite from foreign investors for Australian government debt, but this needs to be
measured  carefully  given  the  increased  participation  of  foreign  investors  in  the  domestic  repo
market. The third development has been the continuation of little net capital flows either to or
from  the  banking  sector,  but,  within  that,  a  notable  change  in  the  composition  of  the  investor
base, particularly for short-term debt. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
See Belkar R, L Cockerell and C Kent (2007), ‘Current Account Deficits: The Australian Debate’, RBA Research
Discussion Paper No 2007–02.
See Debelle G (2014), ‘Capital Flows and the Australian Dollar’, Address to the Financial Services Institute of
Australia, 20 May.
See  RBA  (2011),  ‘Box  B: The  Mining  Sector  and  the  External  Accounts’,  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy,
November, pp 42–44.
I have discussed this previously. See Debelle G (2013), ‘Funding the Resources Investment Boom’, Address to
the Melbourne Institute Public Economic Forum, Canberra, 16 April. 
The fall in commodity prices led to lower mining sector profits (after dividends). For a more detailed discussion,
see Bergmann M (2016), ‘The Rise in Dividend Payments’, RBA Bulletin, March, pp 47–56.
See  Becker  C, A  Fang  and  JC  Wang  (2016), 'Developments  in  the Australian  Repo  Market',  RBA  Bulletin,
September, pp 41–46. 
See Stewart C, B Robertson and A Heath (2013), ‘ Trends in the Funding and Lending Behaviour of Australian
Banks’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2013–15.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
