  Keynote address by Daniel Mminele,  
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the T-20 Africa Conference 
 Crowne Plaza Hotel, Johannesburg 
1 February 2017 
 Africa and the G-20: some implications for the work of the T-20  
 1. 
Introduction 
 Good evening, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
 I would like to thank the South African Institute of International Affairs (SAIIA) and 
the  Germany  co-chairs  of  the  T-201,  namely  the  German  Development  Institute 
and the Kiel Institute for the World Economy (IFW Kiel), for the kind invitation to 
address you this evening.  
 
The  Think  Tank  20  was  initiated  during  the  Mexican  presidency  of  the  G-202  in 
2012 as a collaborative network of premier think tanks from the G-20 economies 
and other high-level experts. The aim of the T-20 is to provide analytical depth to 
G-20  discussions  so  as  to  assist  in  developing  concrete  and  sustainable 
research based policy measures.  
 Think tanks and academics from the G-20 countries have indeed made important 
contributions in the past to the G-20 dialogue via the T-20 forum. Events such as 
this  conference  serve  to  reinforce  this  view  and  showcase  the  work  being 
undertaken by the T-20. Dennis Snower, President of the IFW Kiel, summarised 
the work of the T-20 for this year aptly when he said: “In 2017, the T-20 aims to 
                                                           
1 The ‘T-20’ is the Think Tank 20, the ‘ideas bank’ of the Group of Twenty (G-20). 
2 Group of Twenty 
 Page 1 of 10 
support  the  German  G-20  presidency  in  rising  to  the  diverse  but  interconnected 
global challenges that the G-20 faces.”  
 Judging  by  the  impressive  conference  programme,  you  must  have  had  a  fruitful 
day. It is especially  encouraging to see the involvement of experts from the  African 
continent as well as from other emerging economies in this conference. 
 In my remarks this evening, I would like to first make a few general observations 
about Africa and the G-20 before making some specific comments on two of the 
issues that feature on the conference programme and which are topical in central 
banking circles at the moment.  
 2.  Africa and the G-20 
 As a group, the G-20 consists of only 19 countries, which means that it is made up of 
only 10 per cent of world’s nations. However, these 19 countries account for about 80 
per cent of global trade and approximately 90 per cent of global GDP3. The G-20 is 
therefore representative, more so since it  includes both major advanced economies 
and systemically important emerging market economies.  
 The G-20 has an impact on policies relevant to Africa’s economic development, with 
the agenda focusing on issues ranging from financial inclusion through infrastructure 
investment  to  illicit  financial  flows.  Africa  too  is  important  to  the  G-20,  as  the 
continent, while accounting for only 5 per cent of the world’s GDP, makes up 17 per 
cent of the world’s population.  
 As the only African member country of the G-20, South Africa seeks to advance both 
regional  and  continental  interests  when  participating  in  G-20  deliberations,  albeit 
without  a  formal  mandate  to  do  so.  South  Africa  consults  with  a  number  of 
stakeholders  and,  regionally,  the  Committee  of  Ten  African  Countries4  (C-10)  was 
formed  in 2009  in  order  to  help  solicit  views  from  countries  across  the  continent  on 
                                                           
3 gross domestic product 
4 The C-10 comprises Algeria, Botswana, Cameroon, Egypt, Kenya, Nigeria, South Africa, Tanzania, 
the Central Bank of Central African States and the Central Bank of West African States.   
 Page 2 of 10 
how the G-20 could address their concerns. The C-10 seeks to provide support and 
input  to  enable  South  Africa,  or  any  other  African  country  involved  in  deliberations 
related to international finance, to act more effectively in the interest of the continent 
as  a  whole.  It  has  to  be  admitted,  however,  that  the  consultation  process  could  be 
more effective, and that more needs to be done to strengthen these initiatives and to 
ensure that they work as intended. These efforts are also complemented by the chair 
of  the  African  Union  (AU)  and  a  representative  of  the  New  Partnership  for  Africa’s 
Development  (NEPAD)  being  invited  to  attend  G-20  meetings  as  observers. 
Unfortunately,  due  to  the  fact  that  the  AU  and  NEPAD  representatives  are  often 
rotated, there is insufficient continuity which, at times, adversely affects effectiveness 
and  impact.  Furthermore,  the  AU  has  only  an  observer  status,  in  contrast  to  the 
European Commission, which is a fully fledged G-20 member.  
 The role of both the AU and NEPAD could be strengthened to allow them to play a 
more  meaningful  part  in  coordinating  the  preparation  of  African  positions.  As  SAIIA 
has  noted  in  one  of  its  policy  briefs,  what  is  required  is  a  concrete,  sustainable 
mechanism  through  which  Africa’s  participation  can  be  coordinated.5  It  has  been 
suggested  that  this  could  include  a  designated  secretariat  or  a  coordinating  unit 
within  the  AU  Commission  that  would  conduct  outreach,  consult  with  a  range  of 
stakeholders,  and  put  forward  African  positions  at  the  G-20.6  SAIIA  has  provided 
some  recommendations  on  how  the  capacity  constraints  on  the  continent  could  be 
addressed, which would entail, among others, the following:   
   collecting  information  about  relevant  issues  on  the  G-20  agenda  and 
preparing  clear  African  positions 
in 
line  with 
the  continent’s  overall 
development  objectives,  possibly  also  coordinating  African  delegations 
participating in G-20 events, as was done at the time of the Cannes Summit 
in 2011;  
                                                            
5 E Nnadozie and C G Makokera, Development: ensuring greater African participation,  Policy Briefing 
117, Economic Diplomacy Programme, November 2014.  
6 P Fabricius, Institute for Security Studies, Africa should take advantage of the opportunities 
presented by its seat at the G-20 table, 9 April 2015.  
 Page 3 of 10 
  supporting African representatives during the negotiating processes of the G-
20  in  order  to  promote  their  greater  involvement  in  agenda-setting  and 
therefore greater influence on the final outcomes in areas of priority interest; 
and 
 continuously  monitoring  the  implementation  of  key  G-20  commitments 
directly relevant to Africa in order to ensure that their impact is assessed and 
to maintain pressure to achieve tangible results. 
  However,  while  these  recommendations  are  laudable,  they  require  dedicated 
resources, which may be difficult to mobilise.   
 I would now like to turn to the opportunities for Africa under Germany’s presidency of 
the G-20. Let me first note that we welcome Germany’s focus on Africa, which builds 
on efforts by the Chinese  presidency last year. We believe that this is a step in the 
right  direction  in  both  highlighting  and  confronting  the  challenges  that  the  continent 
faces.  As  you  know,  the  German  Federal  Ministry  for  Economic  Cooperation  and 
Development released a document titled The Marshall plan for Africa two weeks ago, 
which  proposes  a  partnership  between  Europe  and  Africa  to  find  solutions  to  the 
challenges the continent confronts. The Marshall plan for Africa acknowledges that ‘in 
the long term and as neighbours, we can either prosper together or suffer together’. I 
will not say too much about The Marshall plan for Africa at this stage given that it still 
requires consultation. Indeed, it has been met with great optimism in some quarters 
but also with scepticism in others.  
 Let  me  rather  take  this  opportunity  to  focus  on  one  of  the  components  of  The 
Marshall plan for Africa, namely the G-20 Compact with Africa, an initiative in which 
South Africa, through the G-20, is more closely involved. The idea of a Compact with 
Africa  should  be  welcomed  based  on  what  it  could  achieve  given  its  focus  on 
encouraging  private-sector  investment,  including  in  infrastructure.  By  so  doing,  it  is 
hoped  that  employment  will  increase  and  that  sustainable,  inclusive  growth  and 
development on the continent can be fostered. As we know, the investment financing 
gap in Africa is huge, and closing this gap is a top priority in order to put the continent 
 Page 4 of 10 
on  a  path  of  higher  and  more  sustainable  growth  and  development.  Under  this 
initiative, African countries are being encouraged  to discuss and agree on individual 
compacts, and to match commitments from G-20 countries with commitments of their 
own  in  respect  of  concrete  actions  to  enhance  investment  opportunities,  such  as 
further enhancing governance standards and creating investor-friendly environments.  
 The  G-20  is  taking  the  initiative  very  seriously  and  we  should  expect  it  to  gain 
momentum in the coming months and beyond. However, we also have to stress that 
the  Compact  should 
take  cognisance  of  existing 
initiatives  by  Pan-African 
organisations such as the AU and NEPAD, as much of the groundwork has already 
been  laid  and  there  is  a  need  to  ensure  economies  of  scale  by  bringing  all  these 
initiatives together, fill the existing gaps, and drive implementation in such a way that 
there is concrete action and tangible results. It is therefore encouraging that both The 
Marshall plan for Africa and the Compact acknowledge that the starting point will be 
the  AU’s  Agenda  2063  and  its  key  pillars  around  industrialisation,  infrastructure 
development, intra-African trade and combatting illicit flows. 
 Given  that  the  Compact  is  still  in  its  infancy,  that  it  will  take  some  time  for  it  to 
become entrenched and for there to be visible outcomes, it will be important that the 
Compact does not end with the German presidency. We hope that the Compact will 
be carried forward into Argentina’s presidency in 2018 and beyond, into future G-20 
presidencies.  We  will  therefore  need  to  develop  mechanisms  for  hold  each  other 
accountable for the commitments we make. 
 3.  Some observations on the T-20 topics under discussion 
 Allow  me  to  now  make  some  comments  on  two  issues  that  are  in  the  domain  of 
central banking but relate quite closely to some of the topics that you are discussing 
at  this  conference.  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  issue  of  de-risking  as  it  relates  to 
correspondent banking and, secondly, on some developments in the digital economy. 
 Much  of  the  work  in  the  G-20  has  focussed  on  improving  the  resilience  of  the 
financial  system.  The global  financial  system  is  stronger  and  safer  now  than  before 
the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  and  regulatory  reforms  to  future-proof  the  financial 
 Page 5 of 10 
system  are  well  under  way.  However,  we  have  to  admit  that  some  of  the  reforms 
have had unintended consequences and have led to a number of global systemically 
important financial institutions reassessing the sustainability of their business models 
following  the  Global  Financial  Crisis;  de-risking  has  consequently  taken  the  form  of 
reducing or withdrawing entirely from certain activities in some emerging market and 
developing economies.  
 A  case  in  point  is  the  decline  in  correspondent  banking  services  on  the  African 
continent.  Research  conducted  by  the  BIS7  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market 
Infrastructures (CPMI) Working Group on Correspondent Banking in 2016 highlighted 
the  pronounced  declines  in  correspondent  banking  relationships  in  Northern  Africa 
and partly in Southern Africa.8 The International Monetary Fund has similarly pointed 
out a decline in correspondent banking relationships in banks’ operations in countries 
such  as  Angola,  Guinea  and  Liberia  where  some  international  banks  have  either 
restricted or exited correspondent banking relations.9 Continued efforts by regulators, 
national  authorities  and  institutions  such  as  the  T-20  are  crucial  in  identifying 
solutions and encouraging concrete and swift actions to mitigate financial exclusion in 
affected countries while still prioritising efforts to ensure compliance with anti-money 
laundering and combating the financing of terrorism regulations.  
 Markets  in  all  jurisdictions  must  have  access  to  a  well-functioning  global  financial 
system in order to develop and prosper. De-risking and deglobalisation contribute to 
global financial market fragmentation and uncertainty, and could fatally compromise 
the open and integrated structure we are all striving for. On the other hand, this trend 
poses an opportunity for Pan-African banks to fill the gap in services left by European 
and US10 banks subject to having appropriate access to reserve currencies. 
                                                            
7 Bank for International Settlements 
8 BIS CPMI, Correspondent Banking, July 2016. Available at http://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d147.htm   
9 Erbenová, M., Y. Liu, N. Kyriakos-Saad, A. López-Mejίa, G. Gasha, E. Mathias, M. Norat, F. 
Fernando and Y. Almeida, “The Wishdrawal of Correspondent Banking Relationships: A Case for 
Policy Action”, June 2016, IMF Staff Discussion Note series, SDN/16/06. Available at 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2016/sdn1606.pdf   
10 United States (of America) 
 Page 6 of 10 
The  second  issue  I  would  like  to  touch  on  has  to  do  with  innovations  in  the  digital 
economy.  Africa  in  particular  shows  enormous  potential  in  this  area  as  the  broader 
population  gains  increasingly  more  access  to  the  Internet.  Developments  such  as 
mobile  money  and  e-wallets,  P2P  lending,  alternative  credit  scoring,  cross-border 
remittances as well as payment technologies leveraging digital platforms support real 
economic activity and contribute towards the common goal of financial inclusion.  
 Quite  rightly,  the  T-20  Summit  in  Beijing  last  year  highlighted  the  importance  of 
innovation as a key driver of sustained economic growth. The G-20 has emphasised 
the potential  role  of digital  finance  in promoting  financial  inclusion in  the  G-20  high-
level  principles  for  digital  financial  inclusion,  released  in  September 2016.  There  is 
widespread  recognition  that  the  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution  is  evolving  at  an 
exponential pace, touching almost every fabric of society, with potentially significant 
implications  for  almost  every  sector  and  industry.  This  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution 
and  developments  in  digital  finance  hold  huge  potential  for  job  creation  and  the 
promotion  of  small  business  development  in  emerging  market  and  developing 
economies. According to the Global Information Technology Report 2016, the future 
of countries, businesses and indeed individuals will depend more than ever on digital 
technologies. This would apply equally to African countries and businesses, with the 
added  challenge  that  many  of  those  who  stand  to  gain  the  most  are  not  yet 
connected to the web. If we consider that Africa is expected to have a population of 2 
billion  by  2050,  with  a  significant  proportion  being  young  people  who  will  need 
employment,  it  is  important  that  we  reap  the  economic  and  social  benefits  that  the 
digital economy can provide.11 
 The  latest  Networked  Readiness  Index,  which  assesses  countries’  preparedness  to 
reap  the  benefits  of  emerging  technologies  and  to  capitalise  thereon,  reports  that 
seven  countries  stand  out  in  terms  of  economic  and  digital  innovation  impact: 
Finland,  Israel,  the  Netherlands,  Singapore,  Sweden,  Switzerland  and  the  United 
States. Compared to 2015, South Africa’s digital economy has jumped ten places to 
65th  out  of  139  countries  surveyed.  This  makes  South  Africa  one  of  the  ten  most-
                                                           
11 Baller, S., S. Dutta and B. Lavin (Eds.) (2016),Global Information Technology Report 2016: 
Innovating in the Digital Economy. Geneva: World Economic Forum   
 Page 7 of 10 
improved  countries,  alongside  Italy  and  Slovakia.  But  South  Africa  is  not  the  only 
African  country  to  improve  in  the  last  year; Ethiopia  and  the  Ivory  Coast  also made 
significant jumps in the rankings.  
 Africa offers enormous potential for e-commerce growth given that online shopping is 
in  its  infancy  on  the  continent.  It  was  mentioned  at  the  e-commerce  Africa  Confex 
that,  in  2016,  e-commerce  sales  globally  would  reach  almost  US$2 trillion,  of  which 
Africa’s  stake  in  the  pie  would  be  just  2  per  cent.  However,  despite  infrastructure 
challenges across the continent, e-commerce in Africa is expected to see 40 per cent 
annual growth for the next ten years. Internet penetration jumped from very low levels 
in  2009 to 16 per  cent  of  individuals  in 2013  and  over  20  per  cent  in  2015.  But  the 
proportion of people online is still far behind the global average  of 50,1 per cent12 – 
only  17,4  per  cent  of  Africans  have  access  to  mobile  broadband,  while  fixed 
broadband connections remain very low.13  
 Nonetheless,  the  prospects  for  Africa  look  promising,  with  50  per  cent  of  the 
continent expected  to have  access  to  the  Internet by  2025  compared  to  the  current 
28,7  per  cent14  while  online  shopping  could  account  for  as  much  as  10  per  cent  of 
retail  sales,  or  US$75  billion,  according  to  a  2013  McKinsey  report.15  With  the 
magnified  impact  of  mobile  phones  in  emerging  economies  and  broader  Internet 
penetration,  McKinsey  project  that  the  Internet  could  contribute  as  much  as  10  per 
cent  of  GDP  to  the  African  economy  by  2025,  from  levels  of  around  1 per  cent 
currently.  For  these  projections  to  be  realised,  there  needs  to  be  increased 
investment  in  infrastructure,  such  as  expanded  access  to  mobile  broadband,  fibre-
optic  cable  connections  to  households,  and  power-supply  expansion.  Infrastructure 
challenges are wider than just ‘bricks and mortar’ – for example, the lack of a formal 
delivery address complicates the logistics and is costly for online retailers.  
                                                            
12 http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm   
13 https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2015.pdf   
14 http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm   
15 Manyika, J., A. Cabral, L. Moodley, S. Moraje, S. Yeboah-Amankwah, M. Chui and J. Anthonyrajah, 
Lions go digital: The Internet’s transformative potential in Africa, November 2013. McKinsey Global 
Institute. Available at http://www.mckinsey.com/industries/high-tech/our-insights/lions-go-digital-the-
internets-transformative-potential-in-africa   
 Page 8 of 10 
Although  digital  opportunities  are  encouraging,  especially  in  the  financial  sector, 
numerous  regulatory  challenges  need  to  be  addressed,  relating  specifically  to  the 
development  of  an  innovative  and  enabling  policy  environment  for  financial 
technology while at the same time managing the risks to consumers and the financial 
systems.  These  regulatory  challenges  would  include  keeping  pace  with  innovations 
while crafting smart and appropriate regulations that meet the overarching objectives 
of  financial  stability,  prudential  soundness,  consumer  protection  and  competition. 
Furthermore,  we  need  harmonised  rules  and  consistency  among  regulators  and 
central banks, both domestically and internationally, and a level playing field between 
existing regulated entities and new financial technology firms competing for the same 
business. The emphasis placed by the G-20 and other international standard-setting 
bodies on sharing cross-border experiences on the regulation of innovative financial 
technologies is very much supported by South Africa. 
 4.  Conclusion 
 Globalisation,  innovation  and  for  that  matter  increasing  vulnerabilities  force  us  to 
appreciate  our  interconnectedness  and  the  need  for  strengthening  cooperative 
relations.  In  this  regard,  the  T-20  can  make  a  meaningful  contribution  towards 
addressing  the  key  challenges  on  the  G-20  agenda,  of  both  the  Sherpa  and  the 
Finance  tracks.  I  am  convinced  that,  in  the  coming  years,  we  will  collectively  make 
further  strides  towards  the  accomplishment  of  the  global  objective  of  strong, 
sustainable  and  balanced  growth.  In  doing  so,  the  T-20  can  reach  out  on  a 
continuous basis to non-G-20 think tanks to ensure a more inclusive approach to the 
initiatives we pursue. 
 Let me conclude by wishing you all the very best in your deliberations on developing 
recommendations  on  how  African  voices  could  be  better  integrated  into  the  G-20 
agenda  and,  in  so  doing,  how  they  could  positively  contribute  towards  the  ‘Africa 
rising’ narrative.  
    Page 9 of 10 
Allow me to close with a quote from our other T-20 co-chair, Dirk Messner from the 
German  Development  Institute:  “The  world  urgently  needs  a  G-20  solving  global 
problems  and  investing  in  a  global  culture  of  cooperation.  ‘Our  country  first’ 
movements are threatening stability, wealth and peace in our interdependent world.” 
 Thank you. 
 Page 10 of 10 
