Andreas Dombret: Statement at the workshop on "Digital finance -
regulatory challenges"
Statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the G20 conference "Digitising finance, financial inclusion and financial literacy",
Wiesbaden, 26 January 2017.
 Mr von Weizsäcker,
Ladies and gentlemen,
For a first approach when talking about regulatory challenges in the age if digitalisation in finance,
I would like to consider three aspects of financial technology and regulation:
First, I perceive no general need for separate regulation; to me it seems even detrimental to
treat comparable businesses with equal risks in a different way,
second, regulators have to stand ready to propose solutions for emerging risks. We should
initially concentrate on the basics, such as setting the right incentives, but – beyond that –
should  refrain  from  regulating  “theoretical  risks".  We  should  closely  monitor  Fintech
evolution to be able to act swiftly, once risks become relevant in practice,
third,  international  exchange  about  experience  with  Fintechs  is  very  fertile  to  set  the  right
course for future regulation from the outset.
The  way  we  perceive  financial  technology  has  transformed  over  the  last  years.  When  the
buzzword  “Fintech”  emerged  a  few  years  ago,  everybody  was  excited:  Is  there  a  better  way
ahead for doing finance – maybe even without banks? I also remember regulators in a state of
anxiety: Is traditional financial regulation unsuitable for high-tech financial innovations? Today and
up to now, we have a far more relaxed view about business disruption and regulatory challenges.
In Germany, Fintechs have not forced us to overhaul existing financial regulation or to consider a
new framework. The reason for this lies in the setup of German financial regulation: The rules
apply  to  specific  business  models  and  their  associated  risks  –  technology  is,  by  and  large,
treated neutrally.
This becomes apparent in our financial services landscape. Some digital innovators that actually
accept  deposits  or  lend  money  need  to  be  licensed  as  credit  institutions.  For  some  other
business models, the rules for financial services institutions apply. Other innovative businesses
remain unregulated, but this is for a good reason: they are non-financial in character and only
provide auxiliary services complementary to financial services.
By  treating  financial  innovations  equally  under  the  regulatory  framework,  German  regulators
follow  the  maxim  of  “same  business,  same  risk,  same  rules".  But  the  important  strategic
question is: does this principle offer enough orientation for the future – given that no one knows
how financial innovations and emerging risks may develop in the future?
At the Bundesbank, we have identified some potentially risky Fintech activities that may warrant
different regulation at a later stage. For example, various business models have not yet been
tested in a downturn. And we cannot predict which of these start-ups is going to evolve into a
major player that may end up even becoming too big to fail or too interconnected to fail some
time.
But rules that target a mere theoretical risk might result in overregulation. On the other hand: If
we wait too long for financial innovations to settle, risks could increase and adjustments to the
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
existing regime will be more difficult, as vested interests become increasingly powerful. To strike
the  right  balance,  a  general  approach  could  be  to  initially  concentrate  on  two  aspects:  One,
setting the right incentives through regulation and two, monitoring Fintech evolution closely.
Uncertainty about regulation is surely a common ground for all of us. Exchanging knowledge and
experiences should be to our mutual benefit. Some may raise the different circumstances in our
countries as an obstacle. It is true that digitisation has not spread with the same speed across
the globe. Also, regulations differ. My response is that we need this exchange precisely because
of our divergent experiences. Given that digital innovations may be “black boxes", learning from
each other might help to contain threats from the outset. That way, regulation will not lag one
step behind financial innovation. Best practices could be a valuable output.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
