Jessica Chew Cheng Lian: Advancing environmental goals through
sustainable finance initiatives in Malaysia
Speech by Ms Jessica Chew Cheng Lian, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Launch of "Nature Nurtured/Pameran Lestari Alam" Exhibition,
Kuala Lumpur, 19 January 2017.
 Malaysia  attracts  millions  of  tourists  each  year,  many  who  come  for  the  beautiful  and  unique
attractions that nature has to offer in our country. Today, we celebrate this through art, and by
bringing art and nature together, we hope to draw more attention to both. This exhibition, ‘Nature
Nurtured’, continues Bank Negara Malaysia’s efforts to preserve our natural heritage, and follows
closely on the heels of steps that we took in 2016 to restore the natural habitat of the grounds in
Shah Alam where the Bank’s brand new Automated Cash Centre now stands.
The region’s natural treasures have been a magnet for merchants and travelers for centuries.
Spices were what brought the European powers to Southeast Asia six hundred years ago, while
the Chinese came in search of fine food and medicine.
Almost  exactly  200  years  ago,  General  Farquhar,  the  Resident  of  Malacca,  commissioned  a
team  of  artists  to  paint  every  aspect  of  the  Peninsula’s  wildlife.  Efforts  to  document  nature
through art had, however, existed long before. I should mention that women, too, counted among
the talented observers of life forms who went on to capture nature in vivid artistic creations that
have informed and inspired generations.
Maria  Merian,  one  such  famous  artist  from  the  17th  century,  was  recently  celebrated  for  her
works at an exhibition at Buckingham Palace last October. Merian’s work which featured detailed
drawings of plants and insects are preserved to this day in private and academic collections all
over the world. 
I  confess  I  knew  nothing  about  Maria  before  this  week.  Having  now  seen  specimens  of  her
incredible body of work, I can only imagine the sensation she would have created in her time with
the quality and eye for detail that brought her drawings to life – and on a subject like insects, of all
things, which were her passion. They are immensely, strikingly beautiful.
We hope the artists of ‘Nature Nurtured’ will receive the same appreciation. The artists in this
exhibition do much more than record what anybody with a handphone can manage these days.
They immerse us in the natural wonders that surround us, from the bustling cities to the more
distant  hinterlands.  Whatever  the  setting,  every  one  of  the  artists  has  a  visual  story  to  tell,
informed by research and many hours spent to observe and understand the subjects of their
artistic creations. These are not just snapshots, in many ways they tell us as much about the
artist as they do their subjects.
If  people  centuries  ago  could  be  thrilled  by  pictures  of  insects,  then  surely  these  artists  can
reignite a deeper appreciation in all of us of our environment. A bombardment of high definition
images of nature in photographs and film, may have numbed some of us to nature’s wonders.
For example, I am not sure how many of us are still captivated or awed anymore by the sight on
television of yet another leopard pursuing its lunch.
The human hand makes for a much more intimate experience of nature. Back in the days of
Maria Merian and General Farquhar, there was no other way of recording the world around us.
Now we are seeing a return to paint and other traditional art forms.
I  am  told  that  painting  in  general  is  the  art  medium  that  has  shown  the  biggest  resurgence
recently. Some of the paintings in this exhibition look like photographs, which is a mark of the skill
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
of contemporary artists. Malaysian painters are as good as any in this category, and they have no
shortage  of  nature  at  their  disposal  to  paint,  compared  with  their  counterparts  in  New  York,
London or Shanghai.
We  should  all  be  celebrating  the  world  around  us,  not  just  as  artists  or  eco-tourists,  but  as
inhabitants of Planet Earth. These paintings bring us up close and personal with nature, as it
should  be.  The  skilled  precision  of  the  work  featured  by  the  artists  does  not  diminish  the
connection and passion that the artists have with and for their subjects. Indeed, it enhances our
experience viewing these beautifully executed pieces. Please also do take some time to read the
statements by the artists. Artists usually do visuals better than words, but some of those present
today have effectively combined both to capture our natural treasures.
Bank Negara Malaysia has a long history of encouraging local artists. For almost as long as the
Bank has existed — 58 years — we have been building up an art collection. This asset is both an
incentive to artists and a mirror to the nation’s development. We can trace our society’s evolution
through the collection. We are honoured to have among us in the audience today, those who
have worked and committed their lives to the preservation of our environment and wildlife, so that
future generations can continue to experience the richness of life, and not only in a natural history
museum. This exhibition hopes to inspire more of us to take up this important cause. No matter
in small or big ways, we all can – and must – do our part.
Dato’ Dino has brought home today the urgency of the environmental challenges that we face –
not in the distant future, but today. Just this morning, the news carried reports of Earth reaching
its highest temperature on record in 2016. This is the third successive year that temperatures
have exceeded past record levels. We have long passed the point where global warming is a
problem for tomorrow.
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  welcomes  the  opportunity  to  work  with  organisations  like  the  WWF  to
increase the impact of financial institutions in advancing environmental goals through sustainable
finance initiatives. An area of focus has been in green finance, with over RM2.5 billion in financing
extended from the financial sector to companies that promote clean and efficient energy from
sustainable sources.
There  are  many  ways  in  which  we  can  better  protect  our  environment. Art  provides  a  sober
reminder of this, as depicted in one painting from the Bank’s collection which captures the KL
Banjir of 1971, by Mohd Hoessein Enas, showing the iconic Merdeka Square under several feet
of  water,  just  a  stone’s  throw  away  from  the  location  of  the  Bank’s  headquarters  which  had
moved only shortly before the event.
Another exhibit at the BNM Museum and Art Gallery depicts the two major Asian tsunamis of the
past 13 years. This piece of installation art by Malaysian artist Oi Nuen Sprunt was displayed
here in 2014, bringing home the message of nature’s power and unpredictability, but also the
healing power of human compassion and kindness.
Today,  we  bring  you  a  more  hopeful  exhibition,  with  works  that  remind  us  of  what  exists  just
beyond our doorsteps, to be preserved and nurtured. The artists featured here today have all
created their imagery direct from the source, which says a great deal about their passion and
commitment to their craft. Few of us would take the time or trouble to observe nature at such an
intimate level. These works allow us to do so in some measure. I am deeply encouraged by our
own Bank staff who have also submitted works for the exhibition. They are wonderfully talented
and represent the diversity in interests and perspectives of the team that we have here at the
Bank.
Celebrating the beauty and diversity of nature is as good a reason as any for an art exhibition.
This is the first time that I have had the distinct pleasure of launching an exhibition here at the
Gallery, and I am thrilled and honoured for it to be on this particular theme. 
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
I am grateful to all who have taken the time to be here today – to share an appreciation of not just
the  artistic  works  exhibited,  but  also  their  message.  I  would  like  to  thank  in  particular  all  the
artists, Dato’ Dino of the WWF and the team from the Bank Negara Malaysia Museum and Art
Gallery who worked to put this exhibition together.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
