Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: BSP and BAIPHIL moving mountains - new
heights in banking excellence
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Induction  Ceremony  and  General  Membership  Meeting  of  the
Bankers Institute of the Philippines (BAIPHIL), Makati City, 14 July 2017.
 Distinguished Monetary Board Colleagues, Juan de Zuniga and Tony Abacan, BAIPHIL President
Irene  Arroyo,  immediate  past  President,  Liza  Ortiz,  other  BAIPHIL  past  presidents,  BAIPHIL
directors,  officers  and  members,  BAP  President  Nestor  V.  Tan,  bank  CEOs,  my  PDIC
colleagues, esteemed guests, friends, fellow BSPers past and present, ladies and gentlemen,
good afternoon!
It is an honor and pleasure to carry on the tradition of inducting the new board members and
officers of BAIPHIL.  As new BSP Governor…   [I assumed the post eleven (11) days ago]… it is
auspicious that I now address the new leadership of BAIPHIL …On behalf of my colleagues in
BSP and the Monetary Board, let me extend our congratulations. 
As new leaders, it is natural for us to aspire greater achievements for the teams we lead.  This is
why I find your theme: “Scaling New Heights in Banking Excellence” very engaging.  The theme is
both timely and relevant as we come into our fresh roles and as the financial system evolves.
The  theme  mentions  heights.  To  add  imagery  to  this  message,  let  me  take  Mt.  Everest  as  a
starting point. Everest, known as the roof of the world stands twenty-nine thousand and thirty-five
(29,035)  feet  above  sea  level.  This  is  the  ultimate  goal  of  hard-core  mountain  climbers,  the
highest of heights. 
On  29  May  1953,  a  New  Zealander,  Sir  Edmund  Hillary  and  a  Sherpa,  Tenzing  Norgay,
successfully climbed Mt. Everest in the face of great risk.
As documented, they were the very first mountain climbers to reach the summit. Now, sixty-four
(64) years later, the peak of Everest is decidedly less lonely and more than 3,500 climbers have
already reached the top or “summitted”.
A myriad of things have changed since then. But from the time it was first done to the present
day,  scaling  Everest  or  any  mountain,  consistently  demands:  First:    intense  training  and
preparation;  Second:   sensitivity to the environment and possible changes to climate;  Third:  
possession  of  well-maintained  equipment;    Fourth:    a  team  of  highly  trusted  and  reliable
individuals;  Fifth:    leadership  of  competent  guides;  and  Finally:  tenacity  and  courage  to  keep
going amidst challenges.
Training and Preparation
In  mountain  climbing,  each  team  member  has  to  be  skilled,  fit,  and  prepared  physically  and
mentally. This takes years of conditioning if one is to take on the tasks involved.
As  the  banking  industry’s  premier  training  arm,  BAIPHIL  plays  an  important  role  in  providing
required  skill  sets  and  competencies  for  modern  banking.  BSP  commends  BAIPHIL  for
continually being proactive in responding to the training gaps and emerging requirements of the
banking industry in line with on-going developments in the regulatory and operating environment.
With its expertise, synergy and collaborative partnership with the BSP, BAIPHIL is in the best
position  to  design  a  comprehensive  training  program  to  foster  and  strengthen  expertise,
excellence and integrity among banking professionals. 
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Environmental Sensitivity
The conditions for climbing higher look good!  The Philippine economy remains in a position of
strength. It continues to expand, despite challenges in the external environment. This expansion
is increasingly broad-based with notable rebound in agriculture and exports sectors.
The  sustained  strength  of  the  economy  in  the  first  quarter  of  2017  was  underpinned  by
manageable inflation,  more than adequate gross international reserves and a steady stream of
inflows  from  overseas  Filipino  remittances,  revenue  from  the  business  process  outsourcing
sector  and tourism income, all contributing to higher consumption spending.
Moreover, the Philippine banking system continues to be a stable anchor for the economy with
key  performance  indicators  showing  double-digit  growth  in  resources,  expansion  in  lending,
adequate capitalization, improved asset quality, and profitable operations.
These gains driven by our common vision will fuel us to pursue greater heights.
Well-Maintained Equipment and Gear
As Central Monetary Authority, the BSP has a well-articulated policy framework and an enhanced
policy tool kit.  Like good and ready mountain climbers, our gear is ready and we have improved
surveillance methods.
Assessing the mountain, we are thoughtful about weather shifts. For instance, the increasingly
clear signal for policy normalization in advanced western economies points to a rise in global
interest rates, just a question of timing and pace. 
Mindful  of  these,  BSP  continually  strengthens  its  framework  for  financial  risk  surveillance,
sharpening assessment of market conditions. We consider the interconnectedness of economic
agents, credit concentration and liquidity, and the evaluation and pricing of risks. 
Our approach is pre-emptive to mitigate any undue risk build-up in the financial system, but we
have also built up solid macroeconomic fundamentals that serve as buffers to weather potential
external  shocks.  These  safeguards  notwithstanding,  BSP  continues  to  refine  existing  early
warning systems, distress indices  and stress tests. BSP is constantly developing financial and
economic models that improve our understanding of how relevant variables move.
Trusted and Dedicated Team
To be successful in mountain climbing  (like facing the challenges of the banking industry) one
cannot go up alone. It is not a solitary undertaking. Climbers must learn the basics from other
climbers, as well as help each other up from time to time.
In  our  industry,  this  means  we  must  develop  close  collaborations  and  relationships  and
encourage communication.
I am fortunate that I have inherited a very capable and competent team BSP  where each public
servant contributes to the fulfilment of our mandates. We can also depend on the collaboration
and synergies among valued stakeholders like BAIPHIL.  Indeed we cannot do it alone.
Competent Leadership
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  possessing  close  familiarity  with  “the  mountain  and  mountains”  of
banking, we could consider the Bangko Sentral and BAIPHIL as the industry’s ‘sherpas’. 
We provide guidance and direction to others in the industry as we walk the same path.  We guide
towards  the  shared  vision  of  upholding  a  stable  and  inclusive  banking  system.  Under  my
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
stewardship, this will be pursued with fervour.  
As our fellow Sherpa, the BSP counts on BAIPHIL to take on even greater significance in this age
of global convergence.
Together, we have to prepare the banking community by anticipating harder but more fulfilling
climbs ahead. Through continuous training and education, the banking profession will be better
equipped and prepared to keep pace with the ever evolving financial services industry.
Tenacity and Courage
In  the  book,  “The  Last  Step:    The American Ascent  of  K2”  /  it  is  said  that,  “the  courage  of
mountain climbers is not blind, inexplicable, meaningless; it is courage with ability, brains, and
tenacity of purpose.”
In this industry, this is the same brand of courage we must have to achieve our goal of banking
and financial stability.
Our courage is not based on a false sense of security. But we are motivated to always raise the
bar of professional excellence and business integrity for banks. We have the determination and
passion to excel in our current craft, of pursuing excellence and constantly improving our work 
so that we could deliver the best financial services to the Filipino consumer and our country.
Moving Mountains
That I used Mt. Everest in an analogy to illustrate our present and on-going journey together is
perhaps ambitious enough…  And while I have built parallelisms between the two endeavours,   I
dare say that in our industry the mountains are not static.
Banking is not unmoving like the formidable Everest. There is no final peak to overcome. 
The Bangko Sentral celebrated its twenty-fourth (24) anniversary last week. I have been a Central
Banker for the last thirty-six (36) years. BAIPHIL marked its seventy-sixth (76th) year this June.
As veterans in this field, we know that in banking and in central banking, the process of scaling
new heights is an active and continuing endeavour. 
Friends: banking products, financial services and needs, technology and consumer preferences
are always levelling up. We have to keep pace. We do this with training and education. We do
this with updated and relevant regulations. 
We  do  this  with  partnership  as  we  are  confronted  with  an  evolving  market  landscape  of
international  standards  and  prudential  regulations.  Our  shared  strategy  necessitates  taking  a
more holistic view of these developments. 
 We  do  this  too  by  strengthening  corporate  governance  standards  and  risk  management
practices.  We at the BSP have raised the bar of prudential standards  to promote resilience in
the banking system and market discipline for risk-taking activities.
Because  of  growing  regional  financial  integration  and  the  entry  of  foreign  banks,  competition
pressures  have  increased.  New  sophisticated  players  such  as  financial  technology  solution
providers  have  entered  the  market.    This  is  a  good  thing  as  these  bring  about  a  notable  and
gradual  unbundling  of  the  traditional  value  chain  in  the  Philippines  and  intimately  links  banks
closer to customers.
While  FinTech  provides  interconnectivity,  convenience,  and  efficiency  in  delivery  of  financial
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
products and services, we must also be vigilant as it also ushers in cyber-security concerns. In
this regard, the BSP has been laying the groundwork on promoting cyber-security and related
regulation on technology. 
But  there  is  still  much  to  be  done.    Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  know  from  science  that  the
mountains are moving due to continental drift and that we, BSP and BAIPHIL,  must therefore
continue to move with the mountains even as we scale the one in front of us. 
In Closing: Inclusion as We Climb
I’d like to think also that there are several summits in banking and central banking… That as one
reaches a vantage point, more and more of the surrounds are taken into perspective…  As one
climbs, one’s view becomes wider.
I have heard from mountain climbers that when you reach the top, it is actually quite a humbling
experience. I certainly felt that way when I climbed Mt. Fuji as a millennial graduate student in
Japan in 1988.  At higher heights, one sees the bigger picture more clearly and wishes for others
to experience the same.  
The same holds true as we experience more economic gains and successes. We want more
and more people  – our countrymen  – to be included in the experience.  Our goal is for more of
our  countrymen  to  save  and  borrow  for  productive  uses,  avail  of  investment  and  insurance
products, and send and  receive  payments  securely  and  efficiently.  We  firmly  believe  that  this
financial empowerment is the only way for economic growth to be truly meaningful.
We trust in BAIPHIL to help us move this vision forward.  BAIPHIL can in turn count on the full
support of the BSP for its future endeavours.
Mabuhay ang BAIPHIL at BSP!
Maraming salamat po!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
