  WELCOME ADDRESS DELIVERED 
BY  
                                DR ERNEST ADDISON  
GOVERNOR, BANK OF GHANA 
AT 
BANK OF GHANA 60TH ANNIVERSARY LECTURES AND EXHIBITION 
AT 
KEMPINSKI HOTEL, ACCRA  
 ON 
 AUGUST 18, 2017 
     Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Ghana, 
Your Excellency, the Vice President of the Republic of Ghana, 
Distinguished Invited Guests 
Board of Directors 
Colleagues and Staff  
Ladies and Gentlemen 
   1.  I  deem  it  a  great  pleasure  and  honour  to  welcome  you  all  to  this  important 
ceremony  which  climaxes  the  celebration  of  60th  Anniversary  of  the  Bank  of 
Ghana—a  significant  milestone  which  is  intertwined  with  the  rich  history  of 
Ghana’s  independence.  This  indeed  calls  for  both  celebration  and  sober 
introspection. Before I proceed any further, let me say that we are privileged to 
have H.E. President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo to grace the occasion. Your 
Excellency, we very much appreciate taking time off your busy schedule to come. 
We  also  recognize  the  presence  of  H.E  Vice  President  Alhaji  Dr.  Mahamudu 
Bawumia,  The  Speaker  of  Parliament,  Rt.  Honorable Prof. Aaron  Mike Ocquaye, 
and the Chief Justice, Her Ladyship Sophia Akuffo. 
2.  I  would  also  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  recognize  Governors  from  sister 
institutions on this continent: Governors from BCEAO, Kenya, Lesotho, Mauritius, 
Guinea,  Mozambique,  and  Deputy  Governors  from  South  Africa,  Botswana, 
Nigeria, Sierra Leone, and Zambia. And finally, I also acknowledge the presence 
of  former  Governors  and  Deputy  Governors,  who  in  various  ways  provided 
invaluable  services  to  the  Bank  of  Ghana  and  shaped  this  unique  course  of 
history.  
3.  Your Excellency, the chosen theme for this anniversary celebrations, “Celebrating 
60 Years of Central Banking: Achievements, Challenges & Prospects”,  creates  a 
platform for sober reflection on our past and what was achieved, and where we 
are heading as a central bank.  
We have a series of planned events which chronicles the evolution of the Bank of 
Ghana, including a high-level symposium on emerging issues that directly affect 
the Bank’s operations. We have also put in place an exhibition of old currencies, 
documentation and pictures to capture the Bank’s nostalgic memories.  
4.  Your  Excellency,  in  line  with  the  theme  for  the  Anniversary,  we  highlight  some 
achievements  as  well  as  challenges  faced  in  the  execution  of  our  mandate  of 
price stability. 
5.  The  historical  roles  of  central  banks  in  most  developing  countries,  including 
Ghana,  have  been  shaped  by  development  strategies  adopted  over  the  period. 
Bank  of  Ghana  is  no  exception  and  the  Bank’s  policies  and  activities  have  been 
shaped  by  changing  political  and  economic  conditions  over  the  years.  In  the 
foundational  years,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  Ordinance  (No.  34)  of  1957  clearly 
defined  the  role  of  the  Bank  to  suit  the  prevailing  circumstances  which 
characterized optimism and aspirations associated with the country’s attainment 
of independence. Consequently, the Bank of Ghana pursued proactive policies to 
foster  the  credit  system,  creating  financial  institutions  as  growth-promoting 
vehicles,  while  exercising 
the 
fundamental 
responsibilities  of  currency 
management and  acting as the Government’s banker. Since then, the Bank has 
epitomized  and  embraced  new  thinking  on  monetary  policy  formulation,  driven 
by  those  privileged  to  serve  the  Bank  at  the  highest  level—some  of  whom  are 
with us here now.  
 6.  Ladies and Gentlemen, it has been sixty years and the Bank is now operating in 
a  different  statutory  and  macroeconomic  context.  To  respond  to  changing 
domestic  conditions  and  developments  in  central  banking  and  monetary  policy 
globally,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  Act  2002,  Act  612,  which  was  passed  to  bestow 
operational independence on the central bank, was amended in 2016 to further 
reinforce  and  re-focus  its  policies  and  mandate  on  price  and  financial  stability. 
These two pieces of legislation marked a paradigm shift in the Bank’s operations 
and would continue to define the role of the Bank of Ghana going forward.  
7.  On monetary policy formulation and implementation, the Bank officially adopted 
inflation targeting framework a decade ago, with the Monetary Policy Rate as the 
main policy tool. Over the past decade, the framework has helped lower inflation 
volatility.  Prior  to  the  implementation  of  the  framework,  inflation  was  highly 
volatile  and  hovered  above  40  percent,  but  has  since  declined  significantly  and 
edging  closer  to  the  medium-term  target  of  8±2  percent.  The  IT  framework 
introduced  some  clarity  and  transparency  into  the  monetary  policy  formulation 
and helped anchor inflation expectations. 
8.  This  aside,  Ghana  is  a  small  open  economy  and  hence  vulnerable  to  adverse 
developments  in  the  global  economy,  especially  in  the  international  commodity 
markets.  These  vulnerabilities  transmit  to  the  domestic  economy  through  the 
trade  and  financial  sectors,  posing  major  challenges  to  the  macroeconomic 
fundamentals. For instance, the past decade has witnessed significant turmoil in 
the global economy with rippling effects on international commodity and financial 
markets. Because of the openness of the Ghanaian economy, such global shocks 
ultimately  pose  challenges  to  macroeconomic  stability,  which  is  a  necessary 
condition  for  growth.    Such  events  present  immense  challenges  to  monetary 
policy formulation and the Bank’s mandate of price stability.  
9.  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  financial  sector  has  also  witnessed  significant 
transformation  over  the  years.  From  a  few  government-owned  banks,  the 
banking  sector  is  now  characterized  by  privately-owned  banks  with  diverse 
countries  of  origin.  The  sector  continues  to  record  asset  growth  and  remains 
liquid,  although  some  financial  soundness  indicators  have  weakened  in  recent 
times, raising concerns for financial stability. For instance, the prevalence of high 
non-performing  loans reduces  liquidity  which  impacts  negatively  on  profitability, 
and broadly obstructs transmission mechanism of monetary policy.  
10. 
Mr.  Chairman,  as  part  of  our  mandate  to  maintain  financial  stability,  the 
Bank  has  embarked  on  a  process  to  resolve  some  of  the  prevailing  issues  which 
threatens stability of the banking sector. Just this week, the Bank of Ghana revoked 
the  licenses  of  2  banks  and  approved  a  purchase  and  assumption  agreement  that 
allowed GCB Bank Ltd to take over the affected banks’ selected assets and deposits. 
This,  together  with  other  prudential  and  supervisory  measures  introduced  by  the 
Bank  of  Ghana,  is  geared  toward  safeguarding  the  stability  of  the  financial  system 
and  creating  a  healthy  financial  sector  capable  of  supporting  the  transformational 
agenda of the Government.  
11. 
Mr.  Chairman,  a  decade  ago,  the  Bank  launched  a  comprehensive 
programme  to  revamp  the  payment  and  settlement  systems  which  is  deemed 
critical  for  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  The  Ghana  Interbank  Payment 
and  Settlement  Systems  Limited  (GhIPSS)  was  then  established  to  implement 
and  manage  the  payment  system  infrastructures  for  banks  and  non-bank 
financial  institutions  in  Ghana.  Currently,  GhIPSS  manages  the  National  Switch 
and  Biometric  Smart  Card  Payment  System  (E-zwich),  the  Cheque  Codeline 
Clearing  (CCC)  and  Automated  Clearing  House  (GACH)  systems.  Today,  our 
payment  system  infrastructure  is  among  the  best  in the  sub-region  and  we  are 
gearing  up  to  take  it  to  the  next  level  of  interoperability  which  should  unleash 
more  innovative  products  and  services  and  promote  financial  inclusion  in  the 
country.    
12. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, we can go on enumerating the achievements, but 
I would also like us to refocus our energies on the future of the Bank of Ghana.  
13. 
Mr.  Chairman,  the  uncertainty  in  the  global  economy  suggests  that  the 
Bank’s  mandate  of  price  and  financial  stability  should  be  anchored  on  new 
strategies  to  strengthen  monetary  policy  formulation  to  ensure  macro  stability 
and a healthy financial system. The combination of which would unleash the full 
potential of the private sector to boost economic growth.  
As  per  the  amended  Bank  of  Ghana  Act,  2016  (Act  918),  the  operational 
independence is still guaranteed and the central bank will continue to employ all 
tools available to achieve the mandate of price stability.   
14. 
  In  our  quest  to  maintain  sanity  in  the  financial  industry,  the  Bank  of 
Ghana  will  continue  to  strengthen  the  licensing  requirements,  regulatory  and 
supervisory  frameworks  of  banks  and  non-bank  financial  institutions.  Together 
with  other  relevant  stakeholders,  we  will  work  to  build  a  stronger  industry  in  a 
business-friendly  environment  by  ensuring  that  banks  have  adequate  capital  to 
match  their  risk  appetite.  The  Bank  is  fully  aware  of  its  overall  institutional 
responsibility  of  developing  an  integrated  financial  system  that  can  provide 
diversified  range  of  products  and  services  to  support  a  dynamic  growing 
economy.  As  we  mark  this  60th  Anniversary,  therefore,  the  Bank  commits  to 
pursue  this  objective  with  professionalism  and  integrity,  as  we  lay  another 
foundation for the next phase of central banking in Ghana.      
15. 
  In  conclusion,  Mr.  Chairman,  I  should  say  that  I  consider  it  a  privilege 
and an honour to be part of this important milestone of the nation’s central bank. 
And I welcome you all to take active part in the celebrations. 
 Thank you for your attention.  
  