William C Dudley: The US economic outlook and the implications for
monetary policy
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at Money Marketeers of New York University, New York City, 7 September
2017.
 Good evening.  It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak at this Money Marketeers event. 
In  my  remarks,  I  will  focus  on  two  topics:    1)  The  economic  outlook  and  the  implications  for
monetary policy, and 2) the Fed’s balance sheet normalization process, which is likely to begin
relatively soon.  As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those
1
of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.
Overall, the economy remains on a trajectory of slightly above-trend growth, which is gradually
tightening the U.S. labor market.  Over time, this should support a rise in wage growth.  When
combined with a firmer import price trend—partly reflecting recent depreciation of the dollar—and
the fading of effects from a number of temporary, idiosyncratic factors, that causes me to expect
inflation will rise and stabilize around the FOMC’s 2 percent objective over the medium term.  In
response, the Fed will likely continue to remove monetary policy accommodation gradually.  But,
the upward trajectory of the policy rate path should continue to be shallow, in part because the
level of short-term interest rates consistent with keeping the economy on a sustainable long-run
growth path is likely to be considerably lower than it was in prior business cycles. 
The  process  of  balance  sheet  normalization—in  which  an  increasing  proportion  of  maturing
Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) repayments are allowed to run off the
Fed’s balance sheet—should also exert some monetary policy restraint over time.  But, I believe
this impact will be quite modest.  Not only is this shift in policy now widely anticipated, but we
have  also  seen  that  the  impact  on  the  level  of  long-term  interest  rates  has  been  small  as
expectations have adjusted. 
Economic Outlook
So,  why  do  I  anticipate  that  the  economy  will  likely  continue  to  grow  at  a  slightly  above-trend
pace?   The fundamentals supporting continued expansion are generally quite favorable.  Low
unemployment, sturdy job gains, and rising wages—even at a pace below previous expansions
—are lifting personal income.  Household wealth has been boosted by rising home and equity
prices,  and  household  debt  has  been  growing  relatively  slowly,  contributing  to  a  healthy
household  balance  sheet.    Thus,  consumer  spending  should  continue  to  advance  in  coming
quarters.  
Business fixed investment outlays are also likely to continue to rise.  With the supply of labor
tightening,  there  are  greater  incentives  for  businesses  to  invest  in  labor-saving  technologies. 
Investment spending should also benefit from a better international outlook and the improvement
in U.S. trade competitiveness caused by the dollar’s recent weakness.  The softer dollar and
solid  growth  abroad  also  suggest  that  the  trade  sector  will  no  longer  be  a  significant  drag  on
economic growth.  
Turning to the outlook for inflation, I have been surprised by the persistence of the shortfall from
the FOMC’s 2 percent long-run objective.  While some of this year’s shortfall can be explained by
one-off  factors,  such  as  the  sharp  fall  in  prices  for  cellular  phone  service,  its  persistence
suggests that more fundamental structural changes may also be playing a role.  These include
the increased ability of prospective buyers to compare prices across different sellers quickly and
easily, the shift in retail sales to online channels of distribution from traditional brick-and-mortar
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
stores, and the consequences of these changes on brand loyalty and business pricing power. 
Over  the  coming  months,  I  hope  that  we  will  be  better  able  to  differentiate  between  these
competing explanations. 
If it turns out that structural changes have played a significant role, I would generally view this as
a  positive,  rather  than  negative,  development.    It  would  imply  that  the  U.S.  economy  could
operate at a higher level of labor resource utilization without generating a troublesome large rise
in  inflation.    More  people  could  be  put  to  work  on  a  sustainable  basis,  enabling  them  to  gain
opportunities  not  just  to  earn  greater  income,  but  also  to  develop  their  skills  and  grow  their
human capital.
Before I go further, let me say a few words about the impact of Hurricane Harvey.  The massive
flooding in Texas has been a tragedy for countless people.  My heart goes out to all who have
suffered and face a long and difficult recovery. 
While the human toll of such a storm is immense, past disasters such as Hurricane Katrina and
Superstorm Sandy have shown that the impact on the national economy tends to be modest and
transitory.  At first, activity dips as normal commerce is disrupted.  But later, when rebuilding gets
underway in earnest, economic activity receives a modest boost. 
Although I expect that the Texas floods will make it more difficult to assess the economic data in
the months ahead, I do not expect it to fundamentally alter the underlying trajectory of the national
economy.  Of course, for parts of Texas, sadly, the consequences will be immeasurably greater.
Monetary Policy Outlook
As  I  noted  earlier,  I  still  anticipate  that  above-trend  growth  will  lead  to  higher  utilization  of  the
economy’s resources, and that, over time, this will help push inflation higher.  Thus, even though
inflation is currently somewhat below our longer-run objective, I judge that it is still appropriate to
continue to remove monetary policy accommodation gradually. 
This judgment is supported by the fact that financial conditions have eased, rather than tightened,
even as the Fed has raised its short-term interest rate target range by 75 basis points since last
December.    For  example,  equity  prices  have  risen,  credit  spreads  have  narrowed  modestly,
longer-term  interest  rates  have  declined,  and  the  dollar  has  weakened.    On  balance,  these
movements have been large relative to the upward drift in short-term interest rates.  The easing
in  financial  conditions  is  important  because  monetary  policy  does  not  directly  influence  the
trajectory of economic growth and inflation.  Instead, as I have noted in previous remarks, short-
2
term interest rate changes are an important factor that affects broad financial market conditions.
Financial conditions, in turn, influence the demand for goods and services by households and
businesses.    But,  if  financial  conditions  ease  even  as  we  are  removing  monetary  policy
accommodation, this may have  implications  for  further  policy  adjustments.   All  else  equal,  an
easing of financial conditions may warrant a somewhat steeper policy rate path.  Conversely, if
financial conditions were to tighten unduly, then this might necessitate a shallower rate path to
temper that tightening. 
To  be  clear,  this  does  not  mean  that  the  Fed  should  mechanically  target  a  particular  set  of
financial conditions.  That is because the set of financial conditions appropriate to achieving the
Fed’s statutory objectives of maximum employment and price stability will evolve over time as
the  economic  outlook  changes.    Financial  conditions  are  just  a  means  to  an  end—the
achievement of the Fed’s employment and inflation objectives. 
With that background, I would like to comment on some of the criticism of Fed policy decisions.
Some of the commentary surrounding the FOMC’s June decision to raise the federal funds rate
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
target  by  25  basis  points  illustrates  the  current  tension  between  “too  low”  inflation  and  “too
buoyant” financial conditions.  On one hand, some observers question the decision to reduce
policy  accommodation  given  that  inflation  has  fallen  somewhat  further  below  our  objective.    I
would respond to these concerns by noting that monetary policy is still accommodative and that
financial conditions have eased.  In addition, the long and variable lags between monetary policy
adjustments  and  their  impact  on  the  economy  imply  that  the  FOMC  may  need  to  remove
accommodation  even  when  inflation  is  below  its  goal.    In  particular,  if  the  unemployment  rate
were already below its longer-run natural rate, as may be the case currently, the impact on wage
growth and price inflation would still likely take some time to become evident.  This would be
particularly  true  if  inflation  expectations  were  well-anchored  at  or  slightly  below  our  2  percent
objective, as is the case currently. 
On the other hand, some Fed watchers have argued that we are helping to create financial asset
bubbles by not removing accommodation more quickly.  My view is that asset valuations are not
particularly troublesome given the economic environment in which we’ve been—that is, a long
period of moderate growth, low inflation, low interest rates, and low recession risks.  I would be
much  more  concerned  about  asset  valuations 
financial  market  performance  were
disconnected from the economy’s performance—for example, if market volatility were very low
and  asset  valuations  elevated  at  a  time  when  the  economy  was  performing  poorly  and  the
outlook  was  highly  uncertain.    Stretched  valuations  would  also  be  of  greater  concern  if  credit
growth  were  unusually  strong  and  financial  institutions  were  becoming  more  leveraged  and
dependent  on  wholesale  funding.    The  good  news  is  that  the  substantially  higher  capital  and
liquidity requirements enacted in response to the financial crisis have helped to reduce the risks
to financial stability. 
if 
Relatedly,  some  critics  have  argued  that  our  asset  purchases  have  unduly  distorted  financial
asset prices.  My response to this critique is that monetary policy—including large-scale asset
purchase  programs—works  through  its  influence  on  financial  conditions.    We  turned  to  asset
purchases  to  provide  additional  monetary  policy  stimulus  when  the  federal  funds  rate  was
constrained by the effective zero lower bound.  In buying longer-maturity Treasuries and agency
MBS, we sought to reduce risk premia to provide additional support to economic growth at a time
when the economy was operating far from full employment.  The argument that monetary policy
should  avoid  affecting  asset  prices—that  it  be  somehow  “neutral”—is  not  one  that  I  find
compelling.  Such an argument essentially implies that monetary policy should not be utilized to
achieve the Fed’s dual mandate objectives. 
Another recent critique is that the Fed has contributed to the low volatility of financial markets by
making  monetary  policy  too  predictable.    Some  argue  that  we  should  surprise  market
participants in order to manufacture greater uncertainty and generate more market volatility.  The
notion is that if the Fed were more unpredictable, market participants would be less complacent. 
And, if markets were perceived as riskier, this might hinder the development of financial asset
bubbles. 
I am not supportive of such a strategy for several reasons.  First, I don’t think it is necessary to
be  unpredictable  to  keep  financial  market  participants  “on  their  toes.”    There  are  plenty  of
potential  surprises  from  the  economic  environment  without  the  Fed  seeking  to  deliberately
generate  its  own.    Changes  in  the  economic  outlook  affect  financial  asset  prices  and  market
participants’ expectations for future monetary policy actions.  I don’t see a significant benefit to
artificially adding “noise” to this process.  Developments in early 2016 provide a good example. 
As  the  economic  environment  changed  and  financial  conditions  tightened,  we  responded  by
raising short-term interest rates much more slowly than had been anticipated. 
Second, deliberately degrading the signal of how we are likely to react to changes in economic
circumstances  would  likely  lead  to  higher  risk  premia.    This  would  represent  a  real  cost  that
would have to be borne by households and businesses.  Third, a less reliable Fed would also
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
presumably loosen the linkage between the stance of monetary policy and financial conditions. 
Because the monetary policy impulse works through its impact on financial market conditions, I
don’t  see  why  the  Fed  would  want  to  act  in  a  way  that  deliberately  made  this  linkage  less
predictable.    In  actuality,  I  have  been  pushing  in  the  opposite  direction.    By  explaining  the
importance of financial conditions as part of our monetary policy decisions, I am trying to tighten
the linkage.   
Balance Sheet Normalization
I’d like to wrap up my comments tonight by discussing the likely next step in the monetary policy
normalization process: beginning to allow maturing Treasuries and agency MBS paydowns to
run  off  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet,  in  contrast  to  our  current  practice  of  reinvesting  all  of  the
proceeds.  As you are aware, following the June FOMC meeting we issued an addendum to our
Policy  Normalization  Principles  and  Plans.       In  that  addendum,  the  FOMC  outlined  how  it
planned to gradually reduce the Fed’s securities holdings over time.  Namely, when that program
is implemented, the FOMC will decrease its reinvestments in an orderly way, with repayments
reinvested  only  to  the  extent  they  exceed  gradually  rising  caps.    For  maturing  Treasury
securities, the FOMC anticipates that the monthly cap will be $6 billion initially and will increase in
steps  of  $6  billion  at  three-month  intervals  over  12  months  until  it  reaches  $30  billion.    For
repayments of agency MBS, the monthly cap will be $4 billion initially and will increase in steps of
$4 billion at three-month intervals over 12 months until it reaches $20 billion.  
3
For Treasury securities, when the caps are fully phased in, they will generally only be binding
during the middle month of each quarter, when there is typically a spike in maturing Treasuries in
the Fed’s portfolio.  For agency MBS, as long as long-term interest rates are steady or rising, we
expect that the fully-phased-in caps will not be binding.  However, if long-term interest rates were
to  fall  sharply—provoking  a  surge  in  refinancing  and  mortgage  repayments—the  caps  would
likely  bind,  limiting  the  amount  of  agency  MBS  that  would  have  to  be  absorbed  by  the  private
market.
As currently anticipated, once we start the balance sheet normalization program, we expect it to
continue in the background until the FOMC judges that the Fed’s securities holdings are no larger
than  necessary  to  implement  monetary  policy  efficiently  and  effectively.    Adjustments  to  the
target range of the federal funds rate will remain the primary tool of monetary policy.  However, if
economic circumstances were to change during the normalization process in a way that would
warrant a sizable reduction in the target range for the federal funds rate, the FOMC would be
prepared to resume reinvestment. 
The  program  has  been  designed  to  be  implemented  gradually  and  predictably  so  that  market
participants and the U.S. Treasury can anticipate when and at what pace the portfolio is likely to
run off over the course of normalization.  This should keep expectations more stable and reduce
the risk that a sharp shift in expectations could generate undesirably large movements in interest
rates and asset prices. 
As  I  see  it,  a  few  questions  about  this  program  remain  and  are  worth  addressing.    The  first
question is why do this at all.  After all, the Fed has had a large balance sheet for many years
now.  In my view, the balance sheet expansion was undertaken in response to an extraordinary
set of circumstances—a deep recession, short-term interest rates at the zero lower bound, and
the  economy  far  away  from  our  dual  mandate  objectives.    Now  that  these  circumstances  no
longer hold, it seems appropriate to begin to reduce the size of the Fed’s balance sheet.  
In thinking about the decision to reduce the size of the Fed’s balance sheet, I see two important,
opposing  factors.    One  is  that  a  large  balance  sheet  could  conceivably  make  further  asset
purchases less attractive.  This factor suggests that we should use the opportunity to shrink the
balance sheet during good economic times so that this tool will be fully available to us in the
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
future  if  necessary.    However,  on  the  other  side,  reducing  the  size  of  the  balance  sheet  is
another form of monetary tightening, one with which we have little experience.  This suggests we
should  proceed  with  caution.    The  FOMC  has  judged  that  a  gradual,  predictable  approach  to
normalization is the best way to appropriately balance these two factors.  
Another question is how long the normalization process will take.  Assuming that this process
begins later this year and continues uninterrupted, the balance sheet size would likely normalize
in  the  early  part  of  the  next  decade.   There  is  uncertainty  about  the  exact  timing  for  several
reasons.  We don’t know how fast our agency MBS holdings will pre-pay, how quickly currency
outstanding  will  grow,  how  many  bank  reserves  will  be  required  for  the  efficient  execution  of
monetary policy, or the evolution of other liability items on the Fed’s balance sheet that affect the
amount of bank reserves. 
4
Against that backdrop, one major issue that remains outstanding is whether the Fed will continue
to  operate  with  a  “floor”  system,  in  which  the  Fed  maintains  a  relatively  abundant  supply  of
reserves and the effective federal funds rate is managed by periodic adjustments to the interest
rate the Fed pays on bank reserves.  Or, whether the Fed will move back to a “corridor” system,
in  which  reserves  are  relatively  scarce  and  the  effective  federal  funds  rate  is  managed  by
frequently  adjusting  the  supply  of  reserves  to  meet  demand  at  the  desired  federal  funds  rate
level.  In this type of regime, it is the quantity of reserves, rather than the interest rate the Fed
pays on reserves, that is the primary driver of the federal funds rate.     
5
Having managed the System Open Market Account during the financial crisis—a period during
which the demand for reserves was very volatile—I very much favor a floor-type system.  It is
much easier to manage on a day-to-day basis.  It also eliminates the need for a lot of interbank
trading activity to move reserves to banks that would otherwise find themselves short of reserves
on a particular day.  In my view, this type of intermediation activity does not have much social
value.
While the FOMC has discussed these issues, it has made no decision about its choice of long-
term  monetary  policy  operating  framework.    This  seems  appropriate  to  me  because  over  the
next  few  years  we  will  gain  considerable  further  experience  about  operating  with  a  floor-type
system.  Nevertheless, my expectation is that the FOMC will ultimately favor maintaining a floor-
type system similar to what is in place today.  As support, I would point to the minutes of the
November 2016 FOMC meeting, in which participants observed that the current framework had
been working well. 
This leads us to the next question:  Assuming that a floor system is retained, what amount of
reserves will be needed in the banking system so that day-to-day open market operations are not
necessary to keep the federal funds rate within its target range?   In other words, how small can
the amount of excess reserves be before banks begin to compete and bid for such reserves,
introducing unwanted volatility to the federal funds rate?  First, there will need to be sufficient
excess  reserves  to  accommodate  day-to-day  fluctuations  in  the  “autonomous  factors”  that
influence the amount of reserves in the banking system.  These include shifts in the Treasury’s
cash balance, the foreign repo pool, and overnight reverse repo facility usage.  Second, there will
have to be an additional buffer to meet banks’ underlying demand for reserves.  We expect that
the  demand  for  reserves  will  be  considerably  higher  than  it  was  prior  to  the  financial  crisis
because  reserves  can  be  used  to  satisfy  the  more  stringent  liquidity  requirements  that  are  in
place today, and because the opportunity cost of holding reserves is much lower now since the
Fed pays interest on reserves. 
Together, as a rough starting point, we have suggested that the necessary amount of excess
reserves could be in a range of $400 billion to $1 trillion.    Coupled with uncertainty about the
likely growth in other factors, such as currency outstanding, this implies a normalized balance
sheet size of, perhaps, $2.4 trillion to $3.5 trillion in the early 2020s.  
6
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
After reaching that level, one should anticipate that the Fed would resume purchases of Treasury
securities.    These  purchases  would  allow  the  balance  sheet  to  expand  to  accommodate  the
growth in currency outstanding and in banks’ demand for reserves as the economy grows.  They
also would make up for ongoing paydowns of the agency MBS that remain in our portfolio. 
Although there is considerable uncertainty about the long-run size of the Fed’s balance sheet, I
would stress that the balance sheet is likely to shrink by much less than it grew between 2007
and 2014.  Based on New York Fed staff projections, I would expect the Fed’s balance sheet,
which currently stands at $4.5 trillion, to shrink by roughly $1 trillion to $2 trillion.  This compares
to an increase of about $3.7 trillion in the wake of the financial crisis.  This is another reason why
I anticipate that the impact of balance sheet normalization on financial markets is likely to be quite
mild.  This view is supported by empirical research carried out within the Fed  and is consistent
with the results of surveys of private sector economists, including the Survey of Primary Dealers
8
and the Survey of Market Participants conducted by the New York Fed’s Markets Group.   
7
To sum up, I expect that the U.S. economy will continue to perform quite well, with slightly above-
trend growth leading to further gradual tightening of the U.S. labor market.  As this occurs, I would
anticipate  that  wage  growth  will  firm  and  that  price  inflation  will  gradually  rise.    In  response,  I
expect  that  we  will  continue  to  gradually  remove  monetary  policy  accommodation.    Balance
sheet normalization will likely be part of this process.  But, we expect this to have only a mild
impact and to run passively in the background.  Short-term interest rates will remain the primary
tool of monetary policy. 
Thank you for your kind attention.  I would be happy to take a few questions.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Gerard Dages, Lorie Logan, Jonathan McCarthy, Paolo Pesenti and Simon Potter assisted in preparing these
remarks. 
William C. Dudley, The Importance of Financial Conditions in the Conduct of Monetary Policy, March 30, 2017. 
See Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, adopted June 13, 2017.
See Projections for the SOMA Portfolio and Net Income, July 2017.
For related discussions, see Lorie Logan, Implementing Monetary Policy: Perspective from the Open Market
Trading Desk, May 18, 2017, and Simon Potter, Money Markets at a Crossroads: Policy Implementation at a
Time of Structural Change, April 5, 2017.
The New York Fed’s portfolio projections report and accompanying data files illustrate some projected paths for
the size of the Fed’s securities portfolio under alternative scenarios for the long-run level of liabilities.  For mid-
year 2017 update and report archive, see www.newyorkfed.org/markets/annual_reports.html. 
See,  for  example,  Eric  M.  Engen,  Thomas  Laubach,  and  David  Reifschneider  (2015), The  Macroeconomic
Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Unconventional Monetary Policies, Finance and Economics Discussion Series
2015–005 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February); Brian Bonis, Jane Ihrig,
and Min Wei (2017), The Effect of the Federal Reserve’s Securities Holdings on Longer-Term Interest Rates,
FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 20); and Troy Davig and A.
Lee Smith (2017), Forecasting the Stance of Monetary Policy under Balance Sheet Adjustments, Macro Bulletin
(Kansas City, Mo.: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, May 10).
See David Harrison (2017), “Economists See Modest Impact from a Fed Balance-Sheet Reduction,” Wall Street
Journal,  May  11. 
the  July  results  at
www.newyorkfed.org/markets/primarydealer_survey_questions.html 
and
www.newyorkfed.org/markets/survey_market_participants.html.
the  New  York  Fed’s  Markets  Group  surveys,  see 
  For 
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
