Makoto Sakurai: Economic activity, prices, and monetary policy in
Japan
Speech by Mr Makoto Sakurai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting
with business leaders, Saga, 25 May 2017.
I. Economic Activity at Home and Abroad: Recent Developments and the Outlook
 A. Overseas Economies
Let me start with developments in overseas economies.
The decelerating trend in overseas economies that had continued since the global financial crisis
has at long last come to a halt, and a recovery is starting. Since the latter half of 2016, trade has
been  recovering  globally,  due  partly  to  a  rise  in  IT-related  demand  for  smartphones  and  data
centers as well as progress in inventory adjustments in emerging economies. Prices of crude oil
and other commodities have been stable, and this is also helping to underpin economic activity,
especially in commodity-exporting economies. Under these circumstances, business sentiment
has been improving rapidly in many regions. Going forward, overseas economies are likely to
continue  to  recover  for  the  time  being.  According  to  the  April  2017 World  Economic
Outlook (WEO) released by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), global growth is expected to
rise from 3.1 percent in 2016 to 3.5 percent in 2017, and 3.6 percent in 2018, picking up pace for
the first time in three years. The April 2017 estimate also represents an upward revision from the
previous estimate made in January 2017.
Let  me  elaborate  on  developments  by  region,  starting  with  advanced  economies.  The  U.S.
economy has continued to recover firmly, mainly due to a recovery in household spending, owing
to a steady improvement in the employment and income situation. While monetary policy has
started to be tightened, it is likely that the federal funds rate will be raised only gradually, so that it
is  unlikely  that  monetary  tightening  will  restrain  economic  activity  excessively.  As  for  the
economic  policies  of  the  new  U.S.  administration,  optimistic  expectations  have  receded
somewhat,  but  the  majority  view  still  appears  to  be  that  expansionary  fiscal  policies  will  be
implemented, albeit at a later date than previously expected. In this situation, the U.S. economy is
expected to continue to see firm growth for the time being, driven mainly by domestic demand,
and lead the recovery of the global economy.
The  European  economy  has  continued  to  grow  moderately,  driven  mainly  by  the  household
sector. There remains uncertainty associated with political issues, such as negotiations on the
United Kingdom’s exit from the European Union (EU) and elections in major countries, as well as
uncertainty  associated  with  debt  problems  including  those  in  the  financial  sector.  While  such
uncertainty  is  likely  to  continue  to  weigh  on  the  economy,  it  is  highly  likely  that  the  European
economy will continue to grow moderately as a trend.
Let me turn to emerging economies. The Chinese economy has continued to see stable growth
and is expected to remain on a stable growth path on the whole. This is due to the flexible fiscal
and monetary policy conduct by the authorities, although factors such as adjustments of excess
production capacity are likely to exert downward pressure on the economy. Many other emerging
Asian  economies  have  recently  shown  a  sharp  increase  in  exports.  In  commodity-exporting
economies  such  as  Russia  and  Brazil,  positive  developments,  including  improvements  in  the
trade  balance  and  in  business  and  consumer  confidence  indicators,  have  been  observed
following the bottoming out of commodity prices. As for the outlook, emerging and commodity-
exporting economies are expected to grow moderately, supported mainly by the effects of the
recovery in advanced economies and of economic stimulus measures gradually taking root.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Needless  to  say,  the  outlook  is  not  free  from  uncertainty.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  there  is
persistent uncertainty over issues such as U.S. economic policies, negotiations on the United
Kingdom’s exit from the EU, and elections in major European countries. Given that economic
fundamentals  have  recently  been  sound,  it  is  relatively  unlikely  that  markets  will  become
excessively  risk  averse  in  the  near  term.  In  fact,  contrary  to  previous  expectations,  markets
reacted favorably to the outcome of the U.S. presidential election. Over the long term, however,
economic  activity  around  the  world  will  inevitably  be  affected  if  uncertainty  over  the  issues  I
mentioned heightens further. I believe that particular attention needs to be paid to the fact that this
uncertainty is linked to signs of a growing protectionist mood. Over the past few decades, global
economic growth has been driven by the expansion of trade and direct investment, spurred by
technological innovation. Today, complex supply chains have been established at the global level.
If the protectionist mood gains traction, this will restrain trade and direct investment, making it
necessary to rebuild existing supply chains. This could cause significant disruption to the global
economy and deprive it of its main growth engine. For the global economy to maintain stable
growth over the long term, it is essential to ensure the freedom of trade and direct investment.
B. Japan’s Economy
Next, I will discuss developments in Japan’s economy.
The  economy  has  been  turning  toward  a  moderate  expansion  amid  the  recovery  in  overseas
economies. The annual real GDP growth rate in fiscal 2016 was 1.3 percent, higher than the
potential growth rate, which is estimated to be in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent, and the output gap
has clearly climbed into positive territory. Going forward, Japan’s economy is likely to continue its
moderate  expansion  for  the  time  being,  on  the  back  of  the  continuing  recovery  in  overseas
economies as well as progress in the implementation of the government’s economic stimulus
measures, helped, moreover, by a strengthening of synergy effects between economic stimulus
measures  and  accommodative  financial  conditions.  In  the  Bank’s  April  2017 Outlook  for
Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (hereafter  the  Outlook  Report),  the  median  of  Policy  Board
members’ forecast of real GDP growth was 1.6 percent for fiscal 2017 and 1.3 percent for fiscal
2018. As the economy is likely to continue growing at a relatively high pace above its potential,
the positive output gap is also expected to steadily widen.
Let  us  look  at  Japan’s  growth  by  expenditure  item.  Since  the  latter  half  of  2016,  the  growth
momentum  of  exports  has  become  more  pronounced  in  line  with  the  recovery  in  overseas
economies. Exports to emerging economies — which had continued to be relatively sluggish —
have recently shown a marked increase, led by exports of electronic parts and capital goods to
Asia. Going forward, exports are expected to follow a moderate increasing trend in line with the
moderate rise in growth in overseas economies.
Corporate  profits  have  been  at  historically  high  levels,  supported  not  only  by  the  increase  in
demand at home and abroad but also by the depreciation of the yen since late 2016. Under these
circumstances,  business  sentiment  has  steadily 
the  Bank’s  March
2017 Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan),  the  diffusion  index  for
business  conditions  for  all  industries  and  enterprises  (the  proportion  of  firms  responding  that
business conditions were “favorable” minus the proportion of those responding that they were
“unfavorable”) suggested that business conditions have improved for three consecutive quarters,
reaching a level last seen in March 2014 just prior to the consumption tax hike to 8 percent. As
for the outlook, corporate profits are projected to follow a steady increasing trend, supported by
the rise in demand at home and abroad on the back of the improvement in overseas economies
and the effects of economic stimulus measures.
improved. 
In 
Business fixed investment has been on a moderate increasing trend as corporate profits have
improved. In the March 2017 Tankan, business investment — based on a definition similar to that
employed in the GDP statistics, i.e., including software as well as research and development
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
investment,  but  excluding  land  purchasing  expenses,  in  all  industries  including  the  financial
industry — increased by 1.3 percent in fiscal 2016, and business fixed investment plans for fiscal
2017 signal an increase of 1.9 percent. This latter figure is well above the average growth rate of
planned business fixed investment for the next fiscal year in the March Tankan in previous years;
the average rate from fiscal 2004 through 2015 stands at minus 0.9 percent. As corporate profits
continue to improve, business fixed investment is expected to continue increasing moderately,
supported  by  the  synergy  effects  between  accommodative  financial  conditions  and  the
government’s economic stimulus measures.
Supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market  have  tightened  further,  with  the  active  job
openings-to-applicants ratio reaching 1.45, which is close to the peak of 1.46 observed during the
asset price bubble in the late 1980s. The unemployment rate is 2.8 percent, which essentially
represents full employment. In this situation, wages have been rising, albeit at a moderate pace.
In the annual spring labor-management wage negotiations in 2017, many firms are likely to have
raised their base pay for the fourth consecutive year. While the rate of increase is more or less
the same as in the previous year, wage increases have become more widespread, as shown by
the  notable  wage  increases  at  small  firms,  which  are  experiencing  particularly  acute  labor
shortages. Given that small firms account for a large share of employment, it is expected that the
wage growth for employees as a whole will accelerate.
Meanwhile, growth in private consumption had been slow following the consumption tax hike in
2014. However, private consumption has recently been resilient due to the improvement in the
employment and income situation as well as the wealth effect resulting from the rise in stock
prices. Private consumption is expected to gradually become firmer on the back of continued
improvement in the employment and income situation.
Turning  to  the  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy,  some  argue  that  the  tightening  of  labor  market
conditions limits the room for growth. Personally, I do not agree with this view. Firms have been
addressing immediate labor shortages by, for example, closing unprofitable stores, shortening
business  hours,  and  limiting  orders  for  their  services.  I  believe  that  rather  than  signaling  that
firms have given up hopes for growth, these steps represent efforts to use labor more efficiently.
Furthermore, some firms have decided to invest in labor-saving machinery and equipment such
as self-checkout machines. The fact that tighter labor market conditions are encouraging firms to
improve  productivity  seems  to  be  desirable  for  economic  growth  over  the  long  term.  From  a
historical perspective as well, labor shortages are not a significant problem in terms of economic
growth. In past episodes, the main factor underlying economic growth was not an increase in the
labor  force.  Rather,  past  economic  growth  can  be  explained  mostly  by  improvements  in
productivity.  Also,  a  sustainable  rise  in  wages  achieved  through  productivity  improvements
encourages households to be proactive in spending and this, I believe, will likely lead to a stable
rise  in  prices.  In  this  respect,  I  see  these  activities  by  firms  in  a  positive  light  also  from  the
viewpoint of monetary policy management.
C. Prices
The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food
has  recently  been  about  0  percent.  Although  prices  of  petroleum  products  have  turned  up,
housing  rent  and  public  utility  charges  have  continued  to  make  negative  contributions  to  CPI
inflation. In addition, the reduction in mobile phone prices and charges has also put downward
pressure on prices.
Compared  with  the  improvements  in  the  output  gap  and  corporate  profits,  the  recent  pace  of
increase in inflation and wages seems somewhat unsatisfactory. One of the factors behind this
situation  is  that  in  Japan,  where  the  inflation  rate  has  remained  very  low  for  the  past  few
decades, it is difficult for people to imagine prices to rise to some extent every year. Recently,
price  hikes  in  some  services  and  other  industries  have  received  intense  media  coverage  by
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
newspapers and television programs. Based on this reaction, I feel that in Japan, price hikes still
tend to be rather exceptional, and the country has not yet reached a stage where people accept
such  hikes  as  a  matter  of  course.  Moreover,  concerns  regarding,  for  example,  the  growth
potential  of  Japan’s  economy  seem  to  be  strengthening  households’  tendency  to  save  their
income as well as firms’ cautious wage-setting stance. I will return to this point later.
That  being  said,  upward  pressure  on  prices  is  expected  to  increase  further  as  the  moderate
economic expansion continues. Going forward, Japan’s positive output gap is expected to widen
further on the back of (1) an improvement in capital utilization rates brought about by the increase
in exports and production, and (2) a tightening of labor market conditions due to the effects of
various economic stimulus measures taking hold. If the observed inflation rate — as a result of
the  past  rise  in  energy  prices  and  the  depreciation  of  the  yen  —  rises,  people’s  inflation
expectations  are  likely  to  change  gradually  through  the  adaptive  formation  mechanism.  The
Bank’s pursuit of monetary easing through its strong commitment to achieving the price stability
target  is  also  expected  to  contribute  to  a  rise  in  people’s  inflation  expectations.  Under  these
circumstances, prices are likely to gradually turn to a clear uptrend. In terms of the median of
Policy Board members’ forecasts in the April 2017 Outlook Report, the rate of increase in the CPI
for all items less fresh food is projected to steadily accelerate to 1.4 percent for fiscal 2017 and
1.7 percent for fiscal 2018. I feel comfortable with this outlook and believe that the momentum
toward achieving the price stability target of 2 percent is intact.
II. Monetary Policy
In  September  2016,  the  Bank  introduced  Quantitative  and  Qualitative  Monetary  Easing  (QQE)
with Yield Curve Control as a new framework for strengthening monetary easing. The framework
consists of the two components of an inflation-overshooting commitment and yield curve control.
Under the inflation-overshooting commitment, the Bank commits itself to continuing to expand
the monetary base until the observed year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items less
fresh food exceeds the price stability target of 2 percent and stays above the target in a stable
manner.  Let  me  note  that  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  spread  through  the  economy  with  a
certain time lag. Therefore, central banks in general conduct monetary policy in a forward-looking
manner based on projections for economic and price developments. In this respect, the inflation-
overshooting commitment is an extremely strong commitment in that it is linked to observed CPI
inflation. As I mentioned earlier, in Japan, the expectation — shaped by past experience — that
prices will not rise much in the future is deeply entrenched. In this situation, I believe that a strong
commitment  like  this  is  necessary  in  order  to  try  to  enhance  public  confidence  that  the  price
stability target will be achieved and thereby raise inflation expectations.
Under yield curve control, the Bank facilitates the formation of short- and long-term interest rates
that are considered most appropriate in light of the 2 percent price stability target. In the current
guideline for market operations, the target level for the short-term policy interest rate is set to
minus 0.1 percent and the target level for yields on 10-year Japanese government bonds (JGBs)
is  set  to  around  0  percent. As  part  of  the  interest  rate  control,  the  Bank  also  formulates  the
guideline of the approximate amount of JGBs to be purchased; currently, the guideline sets out
an annual pace of increase in the amount outstanding of the Bank’s JGB holdings of about 80
trillion yen. Interest rate control and JGB purchases are two sides of the same coin. However,
while the target for JGB purchases is set as an approximate amount, the interest rate target is a
clear-cut commitment. This may lead to the conclusion that the focus is on the control of interest
rates. Nevertheless, there is no change in the Bank’s stance of continuing with monetary easing
from both a quantitative and an interest rate perspective.
In my view, the introduction of yield curve control has made it possible for the Bank to implement
monetary easing measures more flexibly, taking account, for example, of the effects on financial
intermediation, and the sustainability of these measures has been enhanced. I should also note
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
that, as a secondary effect, it has become easier to understand the effects of the Bank’s policies.
The policy measures implemented prior to QQE with Yield Curve Control — which had set the
monetary  base  as  the  operating  target  for  monetary  policy  —  also  had  the  effect  of  lowering
interest rates, but people, other than market participants, were probably less familiar with these
policy measures. Yield curve control, which directly sets a target level for 10-year JGB yields,
more  clearly  demonstrates  accommodative  financial  conditions  to  a  wider  range  of  economic
entities. Let me highlight that even though long-term interest rates have been rising around the
globe since the U.S. presidential election, 10-year JGB yields — which the Bank’s yield curve
control focuses on — have been firmly kept at the target level. I believe that this has provided an
effective demonstration of the positive impact of Japan’s monetary policy.
Until  now,  many  central  banks  have  set  short-term  interest  rates  as  the  operating  target  for
monetary policy. Controlling long-term interest rates is a new challenge, and the introduction of
this  policy  framework  has  involved  a  certain  degree  of  uncertainty.  However,  since  the
introduction  of  the  framework,  the  Bank  has  been  able  to  maintain  10-year  JGB  yields  at  the
target level without particular problems. Going forward, it is important for the Bank to continue to
conduct  monetary  policy  with  care  while  accumulating  experience  through  the  fine-tuning  of
operations based on day-to-day market conditions and through close communication with market
participants as well as the general public.
Let me emphasize that the Bank will work toward the formation of the yield curve that is deemed
appropriate for maintaining the momentum toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target.
Given that long-term yields overseas have started to rise, some market participants have argued
that the Bank in the near future might start considering to raise the long-term interest rate target
level.  However,  given  that  the  recent  pace  of  increase  in  prices  is  still  moderate  and  there  is
lingering uncertainty regarding overseas economies, the Bank, for the time being, should support
economic entities’ initiatives by persistently pursuing monetary easing under the current policy
framework.
III. Challenges Facing Japan’s Economy
Japan’s economy has recently been recovering steadily. On the other hand, rises in prices and
wages have been relatively moderate. There are various factors behind this, with one example
being the previously mentioned concerns among households and firms regarding the future. It
seems  that  households  have  tended  to  save  their  income  due  to  a  lack  of  confidence  that
income  rises  are  permanent  while  firms  —  in  anticipation  of  a  possible  deterioration  in  their
earnings  environment  —  remain  cautious  about  raising  wages,  particularly  base  pay,  due  to
downward wage rigidity. Factors behind the rise in concerns regarding the future likely include:
(1) doubts over Japan’s economic growth potential stemming from the low birth rate and aging
population and doubts over the sustainability of the social security system, including pensions,
(2)  relatively  unfavorable  working  conditions  for  non-regular  employees,  and  (3)  the  growing
protectionist mood across the globe.
Given these factors, what policy actions should be taken? As I already mentioned, the current
economic situation is favorable, and the positive output gap is likely to widen steadily for the time
being. Under these circumstances, it is unnecessary to implement additional policy measures to
forcibly  push  up  short-term  demand.  Doing  so  would  only  increase  fluctuations  in  economic
activity and thereby do more harm than good; for example, it could hamper efficient resource
allocation.  It  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  Bank’s  goal  is  to  achieve  the  price  stability
target  in  a  stable  manner  and  in  that  situation  realize  sustainable  economic  growth.  Even  if
forcibly boosting short-term demand might succeed in achieving 2 percent inflation, such inflation
would not be sustainable.
In my view, if people’s concerns regarding the future are rooted in the longer-term challenges that
I cited earlier, the only solution is to make steady efforts to address each of these challenges in
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
earnest, although resolving them might take time. For example, in order to raise the economic
growth  potential  amid  the  low  birth  rate  and  aging  population,  it  is  important  to  provide  policy
support for firms’ efforts to improve productivity and accelerate innovation. Of course, initiatives
to expand the labor force should also continue, such as creating a work environment favorable to
women and the elderly. To enhance confidence in the social security system, it is necessary to
work  on  fiscal  consolidation.  The  government’s  initiatives  for  working-style  reforms,  which
include an improvement in working conditions for non-regular employees, are a very significant
policy  challenge.  I  would  also  like  to  note  that  although  the  importance  of  free  trade  is  widely
recognized in the global community, if the protectionist mood gains traction in the future, it will be
necessary to reaffirm the value of free trade and direct investment at international forums.
Addressing these long-term challenges takes time and may sometimes be a painful process.
That is why it will be more difficult to address these challenges in times of recession. Although
the current economic situation is favorable, the economy goes through cycles of expansion and
recession.  It  is  obviously  impossible  to  maintain  economic  growth  above  potential  forever.
Therefore, it is important to do the utmost to tackle long-term challenges before the economy
enters recession. Such efforts will more firmly ensure long-term economic stability and alleviate
concerns  regarding  the  future  among  households  and  firms,  thereby  contributing  to  a  rise  in
inflation and in wages in the near term.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
