Vítor Constâncio: Inequality and macroeconomic policies
Intervention by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Annual
Congress of the European Economic Association, Lisbon, 22 August 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 It  is  indeed  a  pleasure  to  participate  in  this  timely  discussion  on  the  distributional  impact  of
macroeconomic policies. For too long, the distribution of income and wealth was almost ignored
by macroeconomics. As recently recalled by Krusell, this is perhaps due to the “presumption in
the  literature  that  the  distribution  does  not  matter  in  the  determination  of  aggregates”.   In  the
1990s,  some  studies  underlined  the  end  of  the  Kuznets’  phase  of  declining  inequality  and
demonstrated  that  the  trade-off  between  equality  and  growth  no  longer  seemed  to  hold
empirically.  The analysis of distribution in macro theory was however not pursued. A possible
second  reason  for  the  neglect,  could  have  been  that  income  distribution  was  not  a
macroeconomic  concern,  as  it  was  mostly  explained  by  micro  factor  price  theory  with  the
consequence that at the macro level, “trickle-down economics” would be the right approach to
economic policy.
1
2
These views were wrong and, naturally, the crisis shattered both presumptions.
3
First,  the  contributions  of  Mian  and  Sufi,  Carroll  or  Muellbauer   showed  how  relevant
heterogeneities related to indebtedness, credit restrictions or marginal propensities to consume
out of different sources of income or wealth, were important to explain aggregate consumption
behaviour before and after the crisis. Since then, the Heterogeneous Agents New Keynesian –
HANK – class of models became an active area of research on the monetary policy transmission
mechanism.   The  recent  contribution  of Ahn,  Kaplan,  Moll,  Winberry  and  Wolf  (2017)  at  the
NBER  Macroeconomics  Annual  Conference   titled  “When  inequality  matters  for  Macro  and
Macro matters for inequality” demonstrates how significant the feedback loop is and how models
with realistic household heterogeneity better fit empirical consumption dynamics.
4
5
Second, the social and political aftermath of the crisis have shown how important distribution of
income and wealth as an economic policy issue is. In this respect, the seminal empirical and
policy contributions of Atkinson, Piketty, Saez, Milanovic and others, were very relevant to make
the point as they analysed the dynamics of the distributions of household income and wealth,
across many countries and over many decades. The shocking increase of inequality since the
late  seventies  and  the  hollowing  out  of  the  middle  class  in  many  advanced  economies,  as
showed in the famous “elephant graph” of Milanovic,  have focused minds on developments in
7
inequality. The striking developments can be seen in Table 1 from Alvaredo et al. (2017).
6
 1 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The data for the US from 1978 to 2015 show a cumulated decrease of 1% in the income of the
bottom 50% of the population whereas the top 10% saw their income increase by 115% and the
top 1% by 198%, a segment of the population that, by 2015, owned 20% of income and 40% of
total US wealth.
The numbers for France are significantly less unbalanced. In general, developments of inequality
within European countries have been more subdued in recent decades than in other parts of the
world. Chart 1 shows this well, by depicting the evolution of income inequality, measured by the
Gini coefficient on household disposable income.8
 2 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The first key fact shown in the chart is that, while income inequality has been steadily rising since
the 1970s in the US and the UK, it has been quite stable in continental Europe or even declining
as in France and Italy. In particular since the 1990s, the Gini coefficient has been relatively stable
in the European countries.
Equally important, the chart documents that the bulk of the dynamics in inequality is driven by
low-frequency developments driven by structural and institutional factors, rather than by shocks
at the business-cycle frequency.
Chart  1  uses  disposable  income  which  hides  the  much  higher  inequality  associated  with  the
distribution of income before taxes and transfers. To illustrate this point, Chart 2 from Wang and
Caminada  (2014)   shows  that  difference  and  the  fact  that  the  fiscal  systems  of  European
countries dampen income inequality substantially more than those in other countries: in Europe,
the  difference  between  the  Gini  coefficient  on  market  (gross)  and  disposable  (net)  income  is
almost 20 percentage points, more than twice the difference in other countries.
9
 3 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The slow-moving nature of inequality is also confirmed with the more recent survey data from the
Eurosystem  Household  Finance  and  Consumption  Survey  (HFCS).  Chart  3  summarises  the
euro area distributions of household income and net wealth  since 2010.
10
 4 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Both the distribution of income and the distribution of household net wealth remained stable. For
example,  the  Gini  coefficient  on  net  wealth  increased  only  modestly,  from  68.0%  in  2010  to
68.5% in 2013. Similarly, the share of the top 5% of households on total net wealth remained
between 37% and 38%.
Based on the evidence mentioned above, one could already draw some tentative implications for
monetary  policy.  First,  given  the  slow-moving  nature  of  inequality,  one  could  argue  that  the
prevailing  monetary  policy  regime,  defining  long  term  goals,  is  likely  to  be  the  most  important
factor  through  which  central  banks  may  influence  the  distribution  of  income  and  wealth.  For
example,  the  conquest  of  inflation  in  countries  going  through  prolonged  experiences  of  high
inflation is arguably an important factor contributing to the reduction in inequality.
The second tentative implication is that, for a given monetary policy framework committed to a
low  inflation  regime,  the  specific  measures  adopted  to  respond  to  cyclical  developments  are
unlikely to significantly alter inequality.
It  is  useful  to  bear  in  mind  these  considerations  when  discussing  a  topic  that  has  recently
received much attention in the public debate, i.e. how non-standard monetary policies, such as
those  undertaken  in  the  recent  years  by  the  European  Central  Bank,  affect  the  welfare  of
individual  households.  More  specifically,  to  what  extent  non-standard  monetary  policies  affect
wealth inequality and income inequality in the short- and medium run? Which households benefit
from those policies and how much?
Despite the two tentative conclusions above, I do not intend to simply brush aside this debate.
Indeed, while measures such as the top shares and Gini coefficients are important to consider
when  thinking  about  inequality,  they  can  sometimes  mask  specific  dimensions  of  household
heterogeneity, such as those along demographic or socioeconomic characteristics, which can
be  investigated  in  data  from  household  surveys  (containing  additional  information  beyond  the
data  on  income).  For  example,  it  is  possible  to  analyse  to  what  extent  not  only  the  Gini
coefficients,  but  also  income  and  wealth  of  individual  households  react  to  changes  in  the
unemployment rate or to increased growth of wages and asset prices.
11
Let me provide some new empirical evidence on this topic based on ongoing work at the ECB by
Lenza and Slacalek.
 More specifically, they quantified how the ECB’s recent Asset Purchase
Programmes (APP) affected the income and wealth of individual households in the four largest
euro area countries, combining aggregate and household-level data.
12
First, they estimate the effects of the ECB’s unconventional monetary policy on components of
household  income  and  wealth  using  a  Bayesian  vector  autoregression  (VAR)  which  includes
variables that affect wealth – house and stock prices – and variables that affect income – the
unemployment rate and wages.
13
The APP shock is identified by assuming (i) that it affects the term-spread on impact, without
leading  to  a  change  in  standard  monetary  policy  over  the  full  sample under  analysis  (which
spans three years) and (ii) that it has a positive effect on the real economy, on impact.
 The
shock is scaled to a term-spread reduction by 34 basis points, which is the estimated level of the
impact of the announcement of the December 2016 APP package on the euro area 10-year bond
rates. This implies that the size of the impact considered in the estimates presented in the charts
below  is  smaller  than  the  total  effect  of  our  unconventional  policies  from  2014  to  2016.  The
analysis is nevertheless representative and conclusive regarding the distributional impact of our
monetary policy.
14
15
The  VAR  estimated  for  the  four  largest  euro  area  countries  shows  a  degree  of  heterogeneity
across the countries that can be taken as representative of the dispersion that would be found in
all other euro area countries (see Chart 4).
 5 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Chart 5 below shows the four countries’ average reaction to the relevant variables (house and
stock prices, unemployment and wages), four quarters after the impact of the APP shock.16
 6 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The APP purchases are estimated to increase house prices by more than 1% and stock prices
by 0.8%. As for the variables, which affect household income (in the bottom two panels): the
unemployment rate declines by roughly 0.7 percentage points, while wages rise somewhat.
17
In the second step, these aggregate results are combined with household-level data to estimate
the effects of monetary policy on individual households. The HFCS provides detailed household-
level data on income and wealth, but so far only for two waves. However, since the bulk of the
effect on wealth occurs via asset prices, we can assume that the response of individual wealth
components  to  the  APP  after  four  quarters  mirrors  the  response  of  asset  prices  at  that
horizon.
 The assumption seems acceptable given the short horizon we are considering and
18
 7 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
given  the  empirical  evidence  on  the  sluggishness  of  adjustment  of  holdings  of  real  and  also
financial assets in household portfolios.
As  for net wealth,  Chart  6  shows  that  the  effects  of  the APP  on  household  wealth  are  very
modest across its distribution:
19
Most quintiles increase by around 1%. The median net wealth in the lowest quintile increases by
2.5%  from  a  rather  low  level,  from  EUR  1120  to  EUR  1150  and  can  in  part  be  driven  by  the
leverage of the households Similarly, the Gini coefficient on net wealth barely changes – it ticks
down from 68.09 to 68.07.
20
These results appear to be fully in line with my previous considerations based on the long-run
evolution of inequality measures.
Another way of illustrating why the effect of APP on wealth distribution does not seem to have
been  significant  is  provided  by  the  analysis  in Adam  and  Tzamourani  (2015).
  They  use  the
euro area average wealth composition by asset classes taken from the HFCS, and simulate the
effects  on  the  wealth  distribution  of  an  arbitrary  increase  of  10%  in  the  prices  of  each  asset
class: housing, equities and bonds. The results are shown on Chart 7, taken from their paper.
21
 8 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  chart  shows  that  the  effect  of  housing  prices  on  wealth  dominates  the  impact  both  of
equities or bonds. It also illustrates that changes in housing prices reduce inequality in wealth
distribution.  Bond  price  increases  are  fairly  neutral  and  equity  price  variations  aggravate
inequality but their effect is smaller than the one from housing prices, at the euro area level.
The  overall  effect  of APP  on  wealth  distribution  in  the  four  countries  analysed  for  the  recent
period in Chart 6 should therefore not come as a surprise.
Let me now discuss how the effects of APP on income of individual households are estimated.
The impulse responses give information about the aggregate response of the intensive (wages)
and the extensive (unemployment) margin.
To  distribute  the  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate  across  households  depending  on  their
demographics  (such  as  age,  education,  marital  status  and  the  number  of  children),  a  probit
model  is  estimated  at  the  country  level  with  the  employment  status  as  the  dependent
variable.
 Such a model captures some heterogeneity in the probability of employment across
households.  The  fitted  values  from  the  probit  model  are  then  used  to  run  a  simulation  that
distributes the aggregate decline in unemployment across households.
 Chart 8 compares the
changes in the unemployment rates across income quintiles.
22
23
 9 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The key point to note is that households with lower income are at any point in time substantially
more  likely  to  be  unemployed  and  that  their  employment  status  also  tends  to  react  more
significantly to monetary policy impulses. The aggregate decline in unemployment following the
APP disproportionately impacts groups with a higher share of the unemployed, such as those in
the  lowest  income  quintile.
  The  effect  is  economically  important  as  in  that  quintile
unemployment rates drop by more than 2 percentage points. For the remaining income quintiles
the drop in the unemployment rates does not exceed 0.5 percentage points.
24
These changes in the employment status affect the distribution of income and, overall, tend to
compress income inequality.
 This result confirms that, from the distributional perspective, the
main impact of expansionary monetary policies is on the reduction of unemployment with positive
effects on the reduction of inequality.
25
The  positive  overall  effect  of  unemployment  reductions  and  wage  increases  on  the  income
distribution is shown on Chart 9. The mean income in the lowest quintile increases by almost
3.5%, which is substantially higher than the impact in the rest of the distribution. These changes
have effects on the income distribution with the Gini coefficient on income declining from 43.1 to
42.8.
 10 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
In conclusion, let me summarise these findings in two main points.
First,  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  on  aggregate  measures  of  inequality,  such  as  the  Gini
coefficient are rather modest, compared to the low-frequency dynamics of these indicators over
the  past  several  decades.  This  is  more  the  case  for  household  wealth  than  for  income.  In
particular,  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  can  have  substantial  income  (and
employment) effects for subgroups of households such as the unemployed. Those measures
can improve their welfare and contribute toward reducing income disparities, at least in the short-
term.
Second,  the  low-frequency  dynamics  in  inequality  is  more  likely  affected  by  structural  and
institutional  factors,  such  as  skill-biased  technological  progress,  economic  globalisation  and
changes  in  the  progressivity  of  fiscal  systems.  In  this  context,  those  drivers  may  very  well
aggravate the situation as a result of further technological developments in artificial intelligence
and  robotisation.  The  hollowing  out  of  the  middle  class  and  the  increasing  polarisation  of
incomes  in  the  labour  market  will  presumably  continue  unabated.  Education  promotion  or  the
introduction of a Universal Basic Income (UBI) will not change that trend. According to the OECD
the UBI could even aggravate poverty.26
27
 11 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
27
The Kuznets’ hypothesis , stating that as development progresses inequality first increases and
then  starts  decreasing  as  income  grows,  was  confirmed  until  the  1970s  with  inequality
decreasing  since  the  period  before  World  War  I.  The  increase  of  inequality  since  the  1970s
however, has disproved the hypothesis. A subsequent Kuznets’ inequality decline phase, with the
same  causes  of  the  first  (higher  taxes  and  transfers,  wars,  revolutions,  hyperinflation  and
nationalisations)  seems  quite  unlikely  at  present.  On  the  other  hand,  according  to  Atkinson,
Piketty or Milanovic, effective changes would require interventions at the level of market results
by  operating  changes  in  endowments,  which  seem  unlikely  to  happen.  Indeed,  the  type  of
measures  they  refer  to  could  include  wealth  taxes,  meaningful  inheritance  taxes,  Employee
Share  Ownership  Plans  (ESOPs)  and  share  distributions ,  birth  endowments  in  the  form  of
financial  assets,  for  example.
  Most  of  these  are  seen  by  many  economists  as  distortions
detrimental to economic efficiency. Usually, this concept refers to potential Pareto improvements
occurring  when  the  income  winners  could  compensate  the  losers,  even  if  they  do  not  do  it.
These  are  usually  referred  to  as  “welfare  enhancing”  consequences  which,  obviously,  do  not
include  any  considerations  about  distribution  while  pretend  to  be  the  basis  of  “scientific”
economic advice.
28
29
Maybe the normative word “welfare” in this narrow sense is an ambiguous misnomer that we
should  no  longer  use.  This  does  not  imply  that  economists  should  stop  giving  advice  on
economic efficiency and growth which are of course essential to reduce poverty and inequality.
At the same time, we should be aware that all policies involve trade-offs and have distributional
consequences, which are often forgotten or concealed. That is why Gunnar Myrdal underlined
that economics could hardly be value neutral: He proposed that the only acceptable approach
was for a researcher to disclose his values not hiding a pretense of science.
 On this point, at
the American Economic Association Annual Meeting in 1973, in a lecture about Thorstein Veblen,
Kenneth  Arrow  reminded  us  that:  “The  world  is  indeed  full  of  injustices  and  the  writings  of
economists full of attempts to disguise them".
 Unfortunately, this has continued to hold true for
a long time but, hopefully, much has started to change over the last few years, in the aftermath of
the crisis.
30
31
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
Krusell, P. (2017), “AKMWW: a weapon of Mass Creation?”, comment on Ahn, Kaplan, Moll, Winberry and Wolf
(2017) “When inequality matters for Macro and Macro matters for Inequality”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
This literature is very well summarised up in the book by Aghion, P. and J. Williamson (1998) “Growth, Inequality
and Globalization: theory, history and policy”,Cambridge UP.
See Atkinson, A. (2015), “Inequality: what can be done?”, Harvard UP; Piketty, T. (2014), “Capital in the twenty-
first  century”,  Harvard  UP;  Milanovic,  B.  (2016),  “Global  inequality:  a  new  approach  for  the  age  of
globalization”, Harvard UP, The Belknap Press; Atkinson, A. and S. Morelli (2014), “Chartbook of economic
inequality”,  ECINEQ  Working  Paper  324; Atkinson, A.  and  S.  Morelli  (2015),  “Inequality  and  crises”,  CSEF
Working Paper 387; Piketty, T., E. Saez and G. Zucman (2016), “Distributional national accounts: methods and
estimates for the U.S.”, NBER Working Paper 22945; Alvaredo, F., L. Chancel, T. Piketty, E. Saez and G. Zucman
(2017), “Global inequality dynamics: new findings from WID.World”, NBER Working Paper 23119; Mian, A. and A.
Sufi (2012), “What explains unemployment? The aggregate demand channel”, NBER Working Paper 17830;
Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2016), “Who bears the cost of recessions? The role of house prices and household debt”,
NBER  Working  Paper  22256;  Carroll,  C.  D.  (2013),  “Representing  consumption  and  saving  without  a
representative consumer”, CFS Working Paper 464; Carroll, C. D., J. Slacalek and K. Tokuoka (2014), “The
distribution of wealth and the MPC: implications of new European Data”, ECB Working Paper 1648; Muellbauer,
J. (2010), “Household decisions, credit markets and the macroeconomy: implications for the design of central
bank  models“,  BIS  Working  Paper  305;  Muellbauer,  J.  (2016),  “Macroeconomics  and  consumption”,  CEPR
Discussion Paper 11588.
Kaplan, G., Moll, B. and G. L. Violante (2016), “Monetary policy according to HANK”, ECB Working Paper 1899.
Ahn, S., G. Kaplan, B. Moll, T Winberry and C. Wolf (2017), “When inequality matters for Macro and Macro matters
 12 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
for Inequality”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Milanovic, B. (2016), ibid page 11.
Alvaredo, F., L. Chancel, T. Piketty, E. Saez, and G. Zucman (2017), “Global inequality dynamics: new findings
from WID.world”, NBER Working Paper 23119.
The  Gini  coefficient  is  a  commonly  used  measure  of  inequality:  a  value  of  0  reflects  a  completely  even
distribution, while a value of 1 represents a complete inequality. Disposable income is after taxes and public
transfers.  Equivalised  disposable  income  means  disposable  income  corrected  by  household  size.  For  the
correction, net household income is divided by the number of “equivalent adults” with a weight of 1 for the first
adult, 0.5 to any other member over 14 and 0.3 for other household members under 14.
Wang, C. and K. Caminada (2014), “Income inequality and fiscal redistribution in 39 countries, around 2004–
2010”, Leiden University, available at: media.leidenuniv.nl/legacy/key-figures-fiscal-redistribution-around-2004–
2010.pdf
Net wealth is the sum of financial and real assets, net of total liabilities.
The work on the relation between monetary policy and inequality includes Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, L.
Kueng  and  J.  Silvia  (2017):  “Innocent  Bystanders?  Monetary  Policy  and  Inequality",  Journal  of  Monetary
Economics 88, pages 70–88; Adam, K. and J. Zhu (2016): “Price-Level Changes and the Redistribution of
Nominal Wealth across the Euro Area", Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 14, Issue 4, pages
871–906 and Adam, K. and P. Tzamourani (2016), “Distributional consequences of asset price inflation in the
euro area", European Economic Review, Elsevier, Vol. 89(C), pages 172–192. Coibion et al. (2017) estimate in
the  U.S.  data  that  contractionary  monetary  policy  increases  inequality  in  labour  earnings,  total  income  and
consumption. Adam and Zhu (2016) estimate that unexpected price-level declines redistribute wealth from the
young (indebted) households toward older households. Adam and Tzamourani (2016) estimate how wealth of
individual households responds to asset-price movements depending on the composition of their portfolios (i.e.
their holdings of stock, bonds and housing).
Lenza, M. and J. Slacalek (2017), “The effects of unconventional monetary policy on inequality in the euro area",
mimeo, European Central Bank.
The VAR is estimated by means of Bayesian techniques over the sample 1999Q1 – 2016Q4, and it includes 25
variables (GDP, GDP deflator, the unemployment rate, wages and house prices for Germany, France, Italy and
Spain, the short-term interest rate, long-term interest rate and stock prices for the euro area and GDP and the
short-term interest rate for the US). The model estimation follows the approach described in Giannone, D., M.
Lenza, and G. Primiceri (2015), “Prior Selection for Vector Autoregressions”, Review of Economics and Statistics
97 (2): 436–51.
The endogenous reaction of standard monetary policy that is hardwired in the euro area data is switched off by
means of a sequence of standard monetary policy shocks that is calibrated to zero out the reaction of the short-
term interest rate to the improvement of the economic conditions in the euro area implied by the unconventional
monetary policy shock.
The identification follows: Baumeister, C. and L. Benati (2013), “Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Great
Recession:  Estimating  the  Macroeconomic  Effects  of  a  Spread  Compression  at  the  Zero  Lower  Bound",
International Journal of Central Banking, Vol. 9(2), pages 165–212 and Altavilla, C., D. Giannone and M. Lenza
(2016), “The Financial and Macroeconomic Effects of the OMT Announcements", International Journal of Central
Banking, Vol. 12(3), pages 29–57.
Chart 5 shows impulse responses averaged across the four countries (Germany, Spain, France, Italy). The
point estimates shown in the chart are subject to estimation uncertainty; standard errors are not shown.
The effects of the APP turn out to differ somewhat across the four countries. For example, house prices increase
substantially more in Spain than in Germany, while the unemployment rate declines strongly in Spain.
We assume house prices affect the value of the household main residence and other real estate; stock prices
affect the value of shares and self-employment business wealth.
See Ameriks, J. and S. P. Zeldes (2004), “How do household portfolio shares vary with age?”, working paper,
Columbia University.
 13 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
If we turn off the effect of monetary policy on house prices, the median net wealth in the top quintile increases
most and the Gini coefficient rises to 68.14.
Adam, K. and P. Tzamourani (2016), “Distributional consequences of asset price inflation in the euro area",
European Economic Review, Elsevier, Vol. 89(C), pages 172–192.
The model follows Ampudia, M., A. Pavlickova, J. Slacalek and E. Vogel (2016), “Household heterogeneity in the
euro area since the onset of the Great Recession”, Journal of Policy Modeling, Elsevier, Vol. 38(1), pages 181–
197.
For each unemployed individual a uniformly distributed random number is drawn. If that number lies sufficiently
below his/her fitted value, then the individual becomes employed. The simulation is undertaken in such a way
that  the  aggregate  number  of  newly  employed  people  is  equal  to  that  implied  by  the  aggregate  decline  in
unemployment (estimated using the VAR for each country).
The  probit  model  also  implies  a  second,  dampening  effect,  whereby  the  probability  of  employment  for  the
households  in  the  lowest  income  quintile  is  lower  than  for  others.  However,  this  effect  is  relatively  small
compared to how disproportionately the unemployed are represented in the lowest quintile.
We account for two channels of the effect of the APP on income. First, the newly employed households receive a
wage determined by estimates from a Heckman selection model. Second, all employed households receive an
increase in their labour income proportional to the change in wages shown in Chart 5.
See OECD (2017), “Basic Income as a policy option: can it add up?”, Policy Note (May).
The hypothesis that as an economy develops, inequality favours growth but as income grows to higher levels,
inequality  starts  to  decline.  See  Kuznets,  S.  (1955), “Economic  growth  and  income  inequality”,  American
Economic Review 45, pages 1-28. The famous Kuznets inverted U-shaped curve graphs the rise in inequality
from mid-XIX century to the period before World War I and the decline in inequality from then until the 1970s.
ESOPs or Employee Share Ownership Plans, involved already 14 million American workers in 2014 (see the
National Center for Employee Ownership www.nceo.org).
A more pessimistic view is expressed by the historian Walter Scheidel in his recent book “The great Leveler:
violence and the history of inequality from the Stone Age to the Twenty-first century”, The Princeton Economic
History of the World, Princeton UP, (2017). He thoroughly documents the view that in history, only catastrophes,
wars, revolutions, nationalisations and other forms of wealth destruction led to reductions in inequality. The
Kuznets’ phase of declined inequality, from the period before World War I to the 1970s, included in fact two world
wars, the cold war and a period of highly progressive taxation.
Myrdal, G. (1953), “The Political Element in the Development of Economic Theory: A Collection of Essays on
Methodology”, Routledge & Kegan (1953), London. This is the first edition in English of the 1933 Swedish
original, but there are several other editions, including the more recent edition by Taylor & Francis (2007).
Arrow, K. (1973), “Thorstein Veblen as an economic theorist”, John R. Commons Lecture at the Annual Meeting
of the American Economic Association.
 14 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
