Jens Weidmann: Welcome remarks - "Frontiers in Central Banking -
Past, Present and Future"
Welcome  remarks  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and
Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Bundesbank
Policy Symposium "Frontiers in Central Banking - Past, Present and Future", Frankfurt am Main,
14 June 2017.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
I bid you all a warm welcome here today at the Bundesbank Policy Symposium entitled "Frontiers
in Central Banking – Past, Present and Future".
Conferences like this one feed off the knowledge and experiences of their participants. And that’s
why  I’m  proud  that  so  many  high-ranking  academics  and  policymakers  have  accepted  our
invitation to be here today. Let me therefore extend my cordial thanks to all the panellists and
moderators who are involved in this event. I am particularly indebted to Otmar Issing, who will
make some concluding remarks at the end of today’s proceedings.
But as Karl Popper once pointed out, no matter how knowledgeable we are: to find out whether
our  ideas  are  sound,  we  need  other  people  to  try  them  out  on.  That’s  the  reason  for  today’s
symposium,  and  that  is  why  I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers  of  the  symposium  and,
especially, Emanuel Mönch and his team, who arranged the programme.
Ladies and gentlemen, I’m quite sure I’m telling you nothing new when I say that (modern) central
banking is a consequence of crises.
The  Federal  Reserve  is  a  prominent  example.  It  was  established  in  1913  as  an  answer  to
financial  panics.  When,  in  the  19th  century,  bank  deposits  began  to  emerge  alongside
banknotes,  financial  soundness  became  an  issue  for  central  banks.  Banks  operating  in  a
fractional reserve system are susceptible to a bank run. That is why the function of the central
bank  as  a  lender  of  last  resort  gained  importance  –  a  development  which  was  described  in
particularly lucid terms by the British journalist, businessman, and essayist Walter Bagehot in his
1
book "Lombard Street".
Financial  panics  and  bank  runs  were  a  recurring  feature  at  the  time,  particularly  during  the
second half of the 19th century and the early years of the 20th century – not only in the United
Kingdom but also in the United States and other countries. The sole original purpose of the Fed,
then, was to preserve financial stability.
According to Robert Latham Owen, one of the authors of the Federal Reserve Act, the Fed was
established to "provide a means by which periodic panics which shake the American Republic
2
and do it enormous injury shall be stopped."
Today, however, we know that placing the primary focus on financial stability turned out to be
problematic.  When  speculative  lending  ballooned  in  the  late  1920s,  the  Fed,  in  pursuit  of  its
mandate, tightened monetary conditions in a situation when inflation rates were already slightly
negative.
While the Fed could not stop asset prices from soaring, its interest rate moves contributed to an
economic downturn. This disconnect threw into sharp relief the mispricing in the asset markets.
The crash of October 1929 was then followed by waves of bank failures.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Having seen the impact of the Great Depression, central banks increasingly shifted their focus
towards macroeconomic objectives: price stability and – in the case of the Fed – employment.
Financial stability, by contrast, dropped off monetary policymakers’ radar.
The Deutsche Bundesbank is another example of the role which crises played in the definition of
a central bank’s mandate. When the Bank was established exactly 60 years ago, there was a
broad  understanding  that  its  primary  objective  should  be  to  "maintain  the  stability  of  the
currency". After the German population had suffered the loss of their savings twice in the first half
of the 20th century – in the early 1920s due to hyperinflation, and after the Second World War
due  to  the  suppressed  inflation  caused  by  the  wartime  economy  and  the  ensuing  currency
reform – they held price stability in very high store. And so it was widely appreciated by society
that the Bundesbank interpreted its mandate as meaning that it should maintain price stability.
The  oil  crises  of  the  1970s  and  80s  were  further  events  that  shaped  central  banking.  It  was
during this time that the merits of politically independent central banks like the Bundesbank and
the Swiss National Bank came into sharp focus. They were able to disconnect their economies
from the worldwide inflation train by pursuing policies which were aimed squarely at preserving
price  stability.  As  a  consequence,  their  institutional  design  formed  the  basis  for  the  global
3
consensus about monetary policy – a consensus which is still in place today:
1.    Central banks should primarily aim to maintain price stability, that is to say, consumer price
stability.
4
2.    Central banks should be independent of their governments.
3.        The  credibility  of  central  banks’  commitment  to  low,  but  slightly  positive  inflation  –  by
anchoring inflation expectations – is key to their ability to deliver on their price stability objective.
This  consensus  shaped  the  statutes  of  many  central  banks,  not  least  that  of  the  European
Central Bank, which was agreed upon in 1991.
But this view was fundamentally challenged when the crisis struck.
Central banks around the world intervened on a massive scale: interest rates were slashed to all-
time lows, and unprecedented non-standard measures were rolled out. This was in keeping with
the then-reigning consensus: that monetary policy cannot be used effectively to deflate a bubble,
but it can clean up afterwards if a bubble bursts. A consensus which was called into question
after the crisis.
In the euro area, where the financial and economic crisis evolved into a sovereign debt crisis in
2010,  monetary  policymakers  repeatedly  came  under  pressure  to  prevent  the  crisis  from
escalating. Sometimes they went to the very limits of their mandate.
 
2. Benefits and boundaries of unconventional monetary policies
Central  banks  all  over  the  world  reacted  in  classic  Bagehot  fashion  when  the  financial  crisis
erupted. As soon as mistrust between private money market players began to take hold and the
spread  between  the  risk  premiums  for  secured  and  unsecured  money  market  transactions
skyrocketed,  the  volume  of  money  market  transactions  fell  and  the  number  of  participants  in
monetary policy operations soared.
The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  reacted  swiftly  and  decisively  by  switching  its  refinancing
operations  to  tenders  with  full  allotment.  As  long  as  banks  were  able  to  pledge  adequate
collateral,  they  received  unlimited  amounts  of  liquidity  from  the  Eurosystem.  In  practice,  this
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
allowed  them  to  bypass  the  strained  interbank  market.  The  Governing  Council  also  offered
additional longer-term refinancing operations, including the three-year refinancing operations at
the end of 2011 and the beginning of 2012 in particular.
This way, the Eurosystem took over much of the money market's role as an intermediary. In so
doing, it made sure that monetary policy impulses would still find their way into the real economy.
And by lending freely, it helped dispel concerns about banks’ liquidity and thus prevent a run.
By providing oxygen to the economy, central banks are able to offer vital support. But in the long
term, an oxygen supply is no substitute for a healthy heart. Quite the opposite, in fact: if a tank of
oxygen  takes  the  place  of  exercise  and  a  healthy  diet,  it  might  prolong  the  condition  if  it  is
administered for too long.
Hence, if the abundant injections of central bank money are used not only to bridge temporary
liquidity  shortfalls  but,  in  extremis,  to  keep  insolvent  banks  on  long-term  life  support,  matters
could get tricky.
The  more  the  central  bank  safeguards  banks  against  risks  and  promises  them  central  bank
funding  even  in  dubious  situations,  the  more  they  will  have  an  incentive  to  take  on  excessive
risks, of course. Raghuram Rajan  and Jean Tirole , amongst others, have convincingly argued
that  the  implicit  promise  of  a  central  bank  to  step  in  by  lowering  interest  rates  and  injecting
liquidity when banks default whets banks' appetite for risk.
5
6
This also shows that selecting an appropriate strategy for liquidity provision is something of a
balancing  act.  Being  too  restrictive  in  granting  liquidity  can  cause  a  spark  to  turn  into  a  fire.
Granting liquidity too liberally, on the other hand, and propping up institutions without sustainable
business  models,  may  also  mean  that  the  water  used  to  extinguish  the  fire  ends  up  causing
more damage than the fire itself. This is all the more relevant as it is hard to determine ex ante
whether an institution is illiquid or insolvent.
By the same token, another unconventional policy comes with risks attached, too. I am talking
about the large-scale purchases of sovereign debt which have been deployed by many central
banks in response to the crisis.
By buying up large quantities of sovereign bonds, central banks are able to push down long-term
interest  rates.  This  provides  additional  monetary  policy  stimulus,  but  at  the  cost  of  potentially
becoming a sovereign’s largest creditor. In a currency union like the European one, with a single
monetary policy but national economic and fiscal policies, sovereign bond purchases blur those
all-important boundaries between monetary and fiscal policy.
At  the  end  of  the  day,  this  can  lead  to  political  pressure  being  exerted  on  the  Eurosystem  to
maintain  the  very  accommodative  monetary  policy  for  longer  than  appropriate  from  a  price
stability standpoint. After all, in the context of these asset purchases, changes in monetary policy
impact  more  directly  on  governments'  funding  costs  than  interest  rate  moves. And  they  are
naturally  also  more  problematic  in  view  of  the  disciplining  effect  of  the  capital  markets  on
government finances. This is a risk for the euro area in particular, as risk differentiation between
the different countries is significantly reduced.
 
3. The hot potato of policy intervention
Still,  the  risk-reward  profile  of  sovereign  bond  purchases  certainly  differs  depending  on  the
institutional set-up of the policy area in question. A central bank buying up federal bonds to drive
down the long-term risk-free interest rate with a view to speeding up inflation is a different kettle
of fish from one acting as a lender of last resort to governments. And this brings me to the issue
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
debated  in  today’s  second  panel:  "Who  is  willing  to  act?  Passing  on  the  hot  potato  of  policy
intervention."
Economists like Paul de Grauwe  argue that monetary policymakers should channel their inner
Bagehot when it comes to sovereign debt.
7
In his view, a sovereign that is actually solvent but suddenly falls prey to the sceptical gaze of the
market  can  be  driven  into  insolvency  by  the  rising  interest  burden.  Downgraded  market
perceptions can amount to a self-fulfilling prophecy, a phenomenon which economists refer to as
markets with multiple equilibria.
In such cases a central bank should come to a country's aid, according to de Grauwe. Just as
acting as the lender of last resort to banks serves to safeguard financial stability, so, too, could
central bank intervention in the government bond market fulfil the same purpose.
But for me, this stretches the analogy too far. Lending to governments is different in that it is not
collateralised.  Walter  Bagehot  advised  central  banks  to  lend  to  banks  only  against  adequate
collateral, such that moral hazard is minimised. Buying up sovereign bonds amounts to lending
to governments without mitigating the risks of moral hazard that come with it.
A  second  difficulty  stems  from  the  fact  that  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  determine  the
fundamentally justified price for sovereign debt – in other words, it is all but impossible to judge
whether the market reaction  is  justified  or  overblown.  In  determining  the  price  by  themselves,
central banks are setting themselves up for pressure from governments who tend to think that
they deserve better rates. 
It follows that the notion of central banks acting as a lender of last resort to governments is less
in keeping with the Bagehot tradition than is sometimes assumed.
And it runs into arguably far greater problems with moral hazard, especially in a monetary union
with fiscally sovereign member states, as I mentioned before.
Incentives to reform public finances and the real economy are stunted. If action is taken at the
national  level  but  accountability  is  located  at  the  European  level,  chances  are  that  euro  area
growth will atrophy rather than accelerate.
8
Research  also  suggests  that  providing  a  central  bank  backstop  for  government  finances  can
have  detrimental  effects  on  capital  allocation  by  the  financial  sector. A  recent  study  by  Viral
Acharya  and others looks at the real effects of the announcement of the OMT programme and
finds that while it stabilised the banking system, it also increased zombie lending by banks to
unproductive firms. Creditworthy firms in industries with a prevalence of zombie firms suffered
significantly from credit misallocation, which slowed down the economic recovery.
Who, then, should take on the hot potato of policy intervention to avoid the pitfalls of last resort
lending when a country runs into financing troubles? It might help to look at what can be done to
mitigate  the  ill-effects  of  central  bank  lending  to  banks.  The  answer  here  is  an  effective  bank
recovery and resolution regime. If banks turn out to be not temporarily illiquid but truly insolvent,
they will need to be restructured or resolved. As the late Allan Meltzer once quipped: "Capitalism
without failure is like religion without sin. It doesn't work." This holds for banks and for companies
in general. In the euro area, progress has been made in terms of requiring banks to hold higher
capital buffers as well as establishing the Single Resolution Mechanism.
But similar progress is lacking when it comes to the possibility of restructuring sovereign debt.
The ESM could function as a vehicle for such a regime. But crucial elements are still missing.
One such element is changing the contractual terms of government bonds in the euro area by
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
introducing an automatic maturity extension for all bonds, which would be activated the moment
a government applies for an ESM programme. Ongoing deficits would therefore be financed, but
original creditors would not be paid off for maturing bonds.
Not only would this continue to provide incentives for private creditors to lend cautiously, it would
also  significantly  reduce  the  need  for  financial  aid  under  an  ESM  programme.  Furthermore,  it
would vastly broaden the scope of the rescue mechanism. Had it been possible to automatically
extend the maturity of bonds back in 2011, Portugal would only have needed around €43 billion to
cover  its  entire  budget  deficit  until  2014,  rather  than  the  €76  billion  in  total  that  it  received  in
assistance loans.
This  solution  would  allow  the  ESM  to  work  as  a  restructuring  regime.  Automatic  maturity
extension buys time to figure out whether a country is merely facing a liquidity shortfall or is, in
fact, insolvent. Bonds bought by private creditors can still be restructured at a later date, while
official support can be used to smooth the economic adjustment process.
Of course, the financial system must also be able to withstand a debt restructuring. Otherwise,
precious little would have been gained. Because privileged regulatory treatment allows banks to
buy almost unlimited amounts of government bonds, which they are not required to back with
capital, a haircut is particularly risky for banks. That has got to change.
Not until banks have begun to hold sufficient capital against government bonds and the size of
individual exposures has been limited, will banks be able to effectively cope with the process of
restructuring sovereign debt. And only then is there likely to be any concrete political will to take
such  action.  Government  bonds  are  far  from  being  risk-free.  Banking  regulation  should
acknowledge this fact once and for all.
Capping the size of individual sovereign exposures in bank balance sheets would provide much
of  the  diversification  benefits  that  are  envisaged  by  the  European  Safe  Bond  proposal  the
European  Commission  has  recently  taken  up.  That  proposal  conceives  a  diversified  security
where  member  state  sovereign  debt  is  pooled  and  divided  into  a  safe  tranche  and  a  junior
tranche, thereby providing for risk-free assets.
But  a  European  Safe  Bond  created  by  an  official  European  entity  could  be  perceived  as  a
stepping stone towards full-blown Eurobonds, i.e. mutual liability.
To  avoid  that  perception,  European  Safe  Bonds  would  have  to  be  constructed  by  market
participants.
It would be easier still to split new sovereign bonds into senior and junior bonds at the time of
issuance,  sensibly  adding  a  maturity  extension  feature  for  the  junior  bond.  Combined  with
effective  regulation  of  sovereign  bonds,  this  solution  would  offer  the  same  advantages  of
diversification and safe-asset generation while being arguably much more feasible politically.
These are steps that would allow the potato to be taken when it’s hot. But, of course, it would be
better still to not let matters come to the boil in the first place. And this means strengthening
sustainable growth.
I’m convinced that we all share the view that it’s not central banks which can put the economy on
a  higher  growth  path.  It’s  up  to  governments  to  unlock  economic  growth.  What’s  needed  are
reforms fostering competition and innovation to make investment more profitable. With regard to
Europe, the finalisation of a common services market and a single digital market are promising
initiatives.  Studies  suggest  that  this  could  yield  double  the  growth  effects  unleashed  by  the
creation of the common market for goods.  
9 10
By  the  same  token,  unleashing  the  forces  of  the  market  would  not  only  serve  growth.  More
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
geographically diversified investment would strengthen risk sharing as well, as profits and losses
are shared more across borders. The euro area has some catching up to do when it comes to
private risk sharing, and this is why we need to press ahead with the capital markets union.  
Lowering the barriers that prevent enterprises from exiting the market will likewise foster growth.
It  would  facilitate  what  Joseph  Schumpeter  called  "creative  destruction".  OECD  research
suggests that policy-induced exit barriers matter for productivity growth, because fewer exits lead
to less scope for productivity spillovers and to the misallocation of labour, capital and skills. It
concludes, for instance, that insolvency regimes should be streamlined. This is also important
when it comes to financial market integration and private risk sharing.  
11
And investing more in skills and education promises to deliver rich rewards, too. This would not
only boost labour productivity, but also make workers less at risk of losing their jobs. And this in
turn  would  be  the  most  effective  antidote  to  the  widespread  sense  of  being  fundamentally
threatened by globalisation and technological progress.
Fortunately, many of the measures that foster growth also make the economy more resilient.
And  more  resilience  is  needed,  because  long  recessions  can  reduce  potential  growth.
  But
more can be done to bolster resilience, for instance, by shoring up the shock-absorbing capacity
of  public  finances.  With  regard  to  the  euro  area,  this  implies  stronger  fiscal  discipline  and
compliance with the fiscal rules of the Stability and Growth Pact.
12
 
4. How do new technologies shape the future of central banking?
Ladies and gentlemen, getting the issue of policy intervention right still seems to be a formidable
task.  But  while  no  effort  should  be  spared  in  addressing  this  topic,  central  banks  need  to  be
aware that, more often than not, change is not the result of crisis, but of technology.
Every technology comes with technical risks – the recent WannaCry cyber attacks are a case in
point. But the main challenge for central banks will probably lie with the tectonic shifts triggered
by digitalisation. Digitalisation will spawn new forms of financial intermediation. While this might
be a boon to the economy, central banks will be faced with questions regarding the transmission
of their monetary policy.
Some even suggest that privately issued digital currencies might do away with our currencies
altogether.  However,  closer  economic  analysis  indicates  that  this  scenario  is  likely  to  be
overblown.  As  a  medium  of  exchange  and  unit  of  account,  money  is  subject  to  substantial
network  externalities  that  alternative  currencies  seem  unlikely  to  overcome.  I  am  also  pretty
confident that central banks are better able to deliver price stability than a rigid monetary rule or
an algorithm.
But even if private digital currencies do remain a fringe phenomenon, central banks are urged by
some  to  consider  embracing  the  new  era  by  issuing  their  own  digital  currencies.  This  would
mean  that  non-financial  corporations  and  even  households  would  have  access  to  the  central
bank balance sheet in the form of digital balances which – unlike cash – have no noteworthy
storage costs.
What might appear intriguing from a technological point of view raises fundamental questions
about the nature of the financial system and our economy at large.
Allowing  the  public  to  hold  claims  on  the  central  bank  might  make  their  liquid  assets  safer,
because a central bank cannot become insolvent. This is an feature which will become relevant
especially in times of crisis – when there will be a strong incentive for money holders to switch
bank deposits into the official digital currency simply at the push of a button. But what might be a
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
boon  for  savers  in  search  of  safety  might  be  a  bane  for  banks,  as  this  makes  a  bank  run
potentially even easier.
But in taking deposits away from banks, it also removes their ability to engage in maturity and
liquidity transformation and make loans.
A new technology therefore reopens an old debate in economics: does maturity transformation
enhance welfare, or should banks be prevented from creating liquidity?
My personal take on this is that central banks should strive to make existing payment systems
more efficient and still faster than they already are – instant payment is the buzzword here. I am
pretty confident that this will reduce most citizens’ interest in digital currencies.
 
5. Conclusion
At  this  point  I  would  like  to  conclude.  (Modern)  central  banking  itself  is  the  consequence  of
economic crises, but it is certainly not the answer to end all questions. And for the host of an
economic conference like this, that is not necessarily a bad thing!
On that note, I am now looking forward to the answers our esteemed participants come up with! 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Walter Bagehot (1873), Lombard Street: a description of the money market, King, London.
As quoted by Ben S Bernanke (2013), A century of US central banking: goals, frameworks, accountability, in
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol 27, No 4, pp 3-16.
See Marvin Goodfriend (2007), How the world achieved consensus on monetary policy, in Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Vol 21, No 4, pp 47–68.
See Alberto Alesina  and  Lawrence  H  Summers  (1993):  Central  bank  independence  and  macroeconomic
performance: some comparative evidence, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking Vol 25, No 2, pp 151–162.
Douglas W Diamond and Raghuram Rajan (2012), Illiquid banks, financial stability, and interest rate policy,
Journal of Political Economy, Vol 120, Issue 3, pp 552–591.
Emmanuel Farhi and Jean Tirole (2012), Collective moral hazard, maturity mismatch, and systemic bailouts,
American Economic Review, Vol 102, Issue 1, pp 60–93.
De  Grauwe,  P.  (2011),  “The  ECB  as  a  lender  of  last  resort",  VoxEU,  October,  (www.voxeu.org/  index.php?
q=node/6884)
Viral V Acharya, Tim Eisert, Christian Eufinger and Christian Hirsch (2017), Whatever it takes: the real effects of
unconventional monetary policy, CEPR Discussion Paper DP12005.
Roland de Bruijn, Henk Kox and Arjan Lejour (2008), Economic benefits of an integrated European market for
services, Journal of Policy Modeling 30, pp 301–19.
Copenhagen Economics (2010), The economic impact of a European digital single market, Final Report.
Müge Adalet McGowan and Dan Andrews (2005), Insolvency regimes and productivity growth: a framework for
analysis, OECD Working Paper (2016)33.
See, for instance, R Martin, T Munyan, B A Wilson (2015). Potential output and recessions: are we fooling
ourselves?  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  International  Finance  Discussion  Papers
Number 1145.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
