Muhammad bin Ibrahim: The dollar, the renminbi, and the evolution
of the international monetary system
Welcoming remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the SEACEN-OMFIF Policy Dialogue “The dollar, the renminbi, and
the evolution of the international monetary system”, Kuala Lumpur, 31 May 2017.
 Welcome to the SEACEN-OMFIF Policy Dialogue. I am privileged to be here as we assemble to
exchange views, insights and perspectives on an interesting and contemporary issue. Indeed,
the theme on “The Dollar, the Renminbi and the Evolution of the International Monetary System”
not only has regional importance but also global implications.
The  rules,  institutions  and  conventions  of  the  international  monetary  system  are  far-reaching.
They shape the actions and behavioral responses of players in the global economy. It is for this
very reason that I look forward to the diversity of views that will enrich our discussion on this
topic today.
I  shall  provide  some  perspectives  on  the  existing  landscape  of  the  international  monetary
system, the shift that is taking place and the possible implications for Asia. Although there are
various  elements  of  the  international  monetary  system,  I  will  focus  on  the  interaction  of
currencies, particularly as the title indicates, on the dollar and the renminbi.
Dollar Dominance
The  US  Dollar  (dollar)  is  unequivocally  the  dominant  currency  in  the  international  monetary
system. Its influence is, no doubt, prevalent.
a.  Firstly, in international trade, more than 40% of international trade settlement is invoiced in
dollars despite the United States making up only approximately 20% of the global trade;
b.  Secondly,  for  financial  markets,  more  than  88%  of  foreign  exchange  trading  involves  the
dollar;
c.  Thirdly,  on  safe  assets,  more  than  63%  of  the  world’s  central  bank  reserves  are  held  in
dollars.
These three figures represent the present. However, the dollar has only been dominant over the
last 70 years. To understand the present and to form expectations about the future, let us first
take a look at the past.
Peering into history, numismatic records indicate that a few national currencies played important
roles in enabling international trade. Ancient Athens issued the silver drachma in the 5th century
B.C. It became the first currency circulated widely outside its issuing state’s borders. This was
followed by the Roman aureus and the Byzantine solidus coin in the 6th century; the Arabian
dinar  in  the  7th  century;  and  the  Mediterranean  currencies  between  the  13th  to  the  15th
centuries.
From the 16th century onwards during the Age of Exploration, the Dutch, Portuguese, Spanish
and British empires expanded their trading colonies, and with it, their currencies. It was not until
the 19th century that national central banks and treasuries began holding gold as reserves. This
development coincided with Britain’s rise as a lead exporter and importer between the 19th and
20th  centuries.  Consequently,  the  British  pound  sterling  became  the  de  facto  international
currency of the modern age.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  recent  decades,  however,  the  prime  position  of  the  dollar  has  been  unchallenged.  Its
surpassing of the sterling occurred in the 1920s, although many historians would ascribe the pre-
eminence of the dollar as coming to the fore with the Bretton Woods agreement in 1944. Since
then, the “dollar dominance” continued unabated despite the US experiencing various challenges,
including the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system in the 1970s and the recession in 1981.
Closer  to  present  times,  the  dominance  of  the  dollar  continues  to  hold  even  after  the  Global
Financial Crisis, the most damaging crisis since the Great Depression.
Although the privileged position of the dollar was not in question, the magnitude of its influence
certainly varied across time. It was not linear, consistent nor smooth-sailing. In fact, over the past
few years, it was a favorite past time of market commentators to call time on the ‘reign’ of the
dollar as the world’s reserve currency. A few candidates were cited to supplant the role of the
dollar in the past, including the yen, the euro and recently, the renminbi.
Necessity for Economic Rebalancing
In  1971,  the  US  Treasury  Secretary  John  Connally,  famously  said  to  the  European  finance
ministers that the “dollar is our currency, but your problem”. This statement had validity then, as it
does now.  For emerging markets in Asia, this braggadocio or arrogance rings true. This reality
was  starkly  demonstrated  during  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis  in  1997/98,  where  the  emerging
Asian economies were at the mercy of “original sin”. With the relatively cheaper dollar being the
vehicle currency of the world, these economies became reliant on the dollar for its borrowings,
despite proceeds being largely in local currency. The corresponding currency mismatch, evident
during  the  AFC,  made  these  economies  vulnerable  to  shifts  in  capital  flows.  The  impact  of
sudden stops were amplified, causing the currencies to devalue and the cost of servicing the
external debt to escalate, leading to a vicious cycle of default and instability. Capital flows to the
region  went  from  a  USD93  billion  inflow  in  1996  to  a  USD12  billion  outflow  in  1997.  As  a
consequence, growth of the economies in this region contracted between a range of 16% and
10%, a big contrast to the robust growth of 7% in the period before 1998.
Since  then,  emerging  Asian  economies  have  learnt  their  lesson.  The  reliance  on  external
financing was reduced. Sources of domestic financing were diversified through the development
of the domestic bond market. Regional bond markets have expanded significantly. The region
has  replaced  foreign  currency  borrowings  with  local  currencies  and  addressed  the  inherent
weaknesses in currency mis-matches in funding.
However, there are unintended repercussions. An open and well-developed bond market attracts
non-resident participation and the diversity of market players is said to enhance market liquidity.
However,  we  have  discovered  that  beyond  a  certain  threshold  the  presence  of  non-residents
participation is a source of instability. The higher the participation of non-residents in the bond
market, the more vulnerable the market is to volatile portfolio outflows.
So it is said that with history, if we learn it well, will not repeat itself. Nevertheless, sometimes
lessons in history are cloaked in apparent success.
The 2008 Global Financial Crisis and corresponding policy responses by major central banks
caused  risks  not  seen  before.  In  the  periods  after,  unconventional  monetary  policy  and  a
prolonged  period  of  low  interest  rates  had  negative  spillovers  to  emerging  markets.  This  was
notably evident through the waves of volatile capital flows in large magnitude. These flows were
drawn  by  the  search  for  yields,  and  ironically  coincided  with  a  significant  expansion  and
development of our financial markets, a key reform measure following the AFC. The region was
once again at the mercy of global easy money, flattered with an overvaluation of asset prices and
domestic  financial  market  exuberance.  As  these  capital  inflows  mainly  originated  from  the
advanced economies, regional financial markets became increasingly exposed to their vagaries.
Take the Taper Tantrum for example, which exemplifies how fragile the region’s fate is when just
a  hint  of  the  US  Fed  possibly  tapering  its  asset  purchases  was  sufficient  to  trigger  massive
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
capital outflows from the region.
Time and again, a clear policy lesson has come to the fore – the importance of diversification
and the need to reduce reliance on the de facto reserve currencies to manage negative spillover
effects.
The aftermath of the shifting economic tectonics spurred countries to strengthen regional and
bilateral cooperation. The impetus for regional integration in ASEAN deepened, and efforts were
made to strengthen the regional safety net through bilateral currency swap arrangements and the
Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation. At the global level, the G20 was made the premier forum
for international economic cooperation and the leaders involved have indicated their commitment
to reforming the international financial architecture.
Collectively, countries in this region are resilient with strong domestic savings, current account
surplus and high international reserves. The strength and stability of this region could be further
enhanced  with  increased  regional  cross-border  investments,  supported  by  a  wide  network  of
regional banks. While some central banks and sovereign wealth funds have taken the lead to
invest  regionally,  the  size  of  these  cross-border  investments  in  local  currencies  pales  in
comparison with investments in the dollar markets. Nevertheless, re-channeling savings into the
region, albeit still small, is a welcome start.
China: Roaring Dragon
The  story  of  China’s  rise  in  the  global  economy  is  a  remarkable  one.  Its  integration  and
increasing influence in the global economy is becoming more pronounced. In 1990 its size was
only 1.9% of the global economy. Now it constitutes close to 15%. Rapid growth of a staggering
9.4% between 1978 and 2012 led to this rise. In fact, if one measures the size of the economy by
purchasing power parity terms, China is already the largest economy in the world.
China’s  ascent  was  in  part  due  to  its  integration  with  the  global  economy,  signified  by  its
membership in 2001 to the World Trade Organization. It opened itself to the world, embracing
globalisation. This new phase of openness to the global markets was evidenced by the shift from
goods  export  to  capital  exports,  the  move  up  the  global  value  chain  by  producing  high-tech
products, new business models such as cross-border e-commerce, and over the last few years,
an  evolution  from  being  a  net  capital  importer  to  a  net  capital  exporter.  All  these  further
strengthened China’s transformation from a manufacturing and investment based economy, to
one based on services and consumption.
Economically, China is introducing a bold strategy to enhance connectivity within this region and
beyond.  The  clearest  example  of  this  is  the  ‘One  Belt  One  Road’  initiative  that  is  adding  to
previous initiatives such as the establishment of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and
the New Development Bank.
The  consequence  of  China’s  economic  rise  is  the  increasing  use  of  its  currency.  This  was
further spurred by China’s gradual internationalisation of the renminbi in 2009. Renminbi hubs
have been established around the world, including in Malaysia, and a global payment, clearing
and  settlement  platform  for  renminbi,  namely  the  Cross-border  Interbank  Payment  System
(CIPS) is in the development stage. Six years on, an estimated one-third of all Chinese trade is
settled in renminbi, making it the third most traded currency in the world after the euro and the
dollar. It is also now ranked 5  as the world FX currency in trading value and 6  as a payments
currency in value. 
th
th
Given the steady internationalisation of the currency, the renminbi is expected to be on a gradual
path to become a fully convertible currency, along with the emergence and expansion of major
Chinese  cities  such  as  Shanghai,  as  formidable  truly  global  financial  centres.  The  ongoing
accessibility  to  the  domestic  financial  markets,  if  further  accelerated,  will  set  forth  a  virtuous
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
cycle of development that will facilitate greater use of the currency.
Thus, should the internationalisation of the renminbi continue as expected, it will further cement
its  role  as  the  influential  currency  for  trade  and  investment,  and  some  say,  a  path  towards
becoming one of the more significant global reserve currencies.
What are the implications for Asia?
Using an analogy is apt in describing the implications for Asia. Japan, a country experiencing
approximately  1,500  earthquakes  a  year,  is  finding  innovative  ways  to  support  its  structures.
Instead of using steel and concrete, traditional materials to strengthen its  structure, a Japanese
textile  firm  is  experimenting  with  carbon  fibre  rope-curtains,  which  are  tough  and  pliant  to
earthquake-proof a building.
This  will  allow  the  building  to  realign  itself  when  it  is  quivering  during  an  earthquake.  This
company, Kengo Kuma and Associates, realising the potential risks from stress, also planted
anchors around the structure to prevent the ground from rising up when the carbon-fibre curtain
is activated.
Likewise,  Asia  should  ensure  it  has  its  own  ‘carbon-fibre  curtain’  of  policy  adaptability  and
flexibility  to  manage  destabilising  movements  in  the  financial  system.  Despite  the  inevitable
diversification of de facto reserve currencies, the dollar will remain a significant force to facilitate
global trade and cross-border capital flows.
Thus,  it  is  of  primary  importance  for Asia,  in  particular  the  emerging  markets,  to  ensure  that
economic fundamentals are strong and financial markets are resilient with adequate buffers. At
the  same  time,  we  need  to  continuously  improve  the  necessary  infrastructure  for  corporates,
businesses and financial institutions to transact in a multi-currency environment.
Currently,  cross-border  trade  within  the  ASEAN  region  are  transacted  and  settled  mostly  in
dollars despite almost half of ASEAN trade being intra-regional. It makes economic and business
sense,  that  transacting  in  local  currencies  would  enhance  the  efficiency  of  trade  and
investments, with strong probability of reducing the cost of doing business. In an environment of
volatile market conditions, businesses will have more options to choose the currency to transact,
providing  flexibility  and  insulation  from  exogenous  shocks.  Greater  usage  of  local  currencies
would  be  an  impetus  for  the  development  of  the  region’s  financial  markets,  consistent  with
ASEAN’s collective vision for an integrated cross-currency market.
Malaysia has been forward-looking in preparing for the inevitability of a multi-currency market:
i.  We  have  diversified  our  international  reserves  into  emerging  market  currencies  in  early
2000, including into renminbi assets. We were confident in the diversification benefits given
the  strength  and  sustainability  of  China  and  emerging  markets’  economic  growth.  These
new asset classes serve to reduce vulnerabilities and recycle some of the regional savings
for the development of regional financial markets;
ii.  Putting in the necessary supporting infrastructure is critical to facilitate the development and
readiness  of  our  markets  to  accept  multi-currencies.  This  is  the  basic  idea  behind  the
signing of the currency swap arrangements with the People’s Bank of China and Bank of
Korea to promote greater usage of renminbi and korean won ; and
iii.  In December 2016, Bank Negara Malaysia signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs)
with Bank Indonesia and Bank of Thailand to promote the settlement of bilateral trade and
direct  investment  using  domestic  currencies. An  established  Operational  Framework  will
pave the way for wider usage of local currencies in support of closer integration under the
ASEAN economic community.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion, the need to re-engineer the international monetary system
The  current  international  monetary  system  needs  to  be  re-engineered.  Our  past  experiences
have  proven  that  the  current  system  is  unstable,  prone  to  shocks  and  broken.  Stakes  in  the
international monetary system are far too high to be beholden to conventional thinking and status
quo. Like Japan and its buildings, we must continue to find innovative ways to strengthen the
structure of the international monetary system. Such re-engineering efforts may unseat us from
our  comfort  zone.  It  will  certainly  invite  resistance  and  may  even  cause  some  temporary
disruptions. But standing still is the costliest option, as we would be stumbling from one crisis to
another. In a sense, the work is cut out for us, we need to distrust the status quo or we will
continue to live in a decaying, sub-optimal and dysfunctional system, punctuated with frequent
financial crisis. The needed reform will mean less disruptive capital flows, more robust financial
safety nets and most relevant of all, greater impetus for diversification that will lead to greater
resilience. Now is as good a time as any to begin.
I wish all of you a productive dialogue. Thank you.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
