Benoît Cœuré: Productivity and growth - innovation and diffusion
Introductory statement by Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central Bank, at the session "Revitalizing the Global Economy", World Economic Forum, Davos,
20 January 2017.
 The panel’s main theme is the question of how can we boost productivity and economic growth
in  the  long-term.  This  is  a  topic  that  matters  for  central  banks.  Long-term  growth  rates  are
important for interest-rate setting since they influence and define equilibrium real interest rates in
the  economy.  And  policymakers  taking  the  question  seriously  will  help  dispel  misplaced
expectations that monetary policy can create sustainable long-term growth.
When it comes to economic growth, it is always useful to go back to the textbook and conduct
simple  growth  accounting  decompositions.  By  definition,  growth  in  output  per  capita  equals
growth  in  labour  productivity  plus  growth  in  hours  worked  per  capita.  In  many  advanced
economies  and  in  the  euro  area  in  particular,  growth  in  hours  worked  per  capita  looks  set  to
shrink, in the long run, due to adverse demographics and a falling working age population. Using
OECD  population  projections  and  holding  labour  productivity  constant,  by  2050  the  decline  in
output per head induced by ageing would be 14% in Germany, 16% in Italy and 22% in Spain.
A continuation of current rates of labour productivity growth in the euro area would just about
offset  that  scenario.  But  this  would  mean  running  just  to  stand  still.  If  we  are  to  raise  living
standards  within  ageing  societies,  productivity  growth  must  accelerate. And  yet  what  we  see
today  is  sluggish  labour  productivity  growth  relative  to  twenty  years  ago  in  most  advanced
economies.
This  is  in  part  because  so-called  capital  deepening  has  slowed  –  the  amount  of  capital  per
worker – as investment has fallen during the crisis. But it also reflects weak trends in total factor
productivity,  which  captures  increases  in  efficiency  from  new  technologies  or  more  efficient
business  processes,  and  which  is  thought  to  be  the  main  contributor  to  long-term  economic
growth.
Raising total factor productivity is about two main things: innovation and diffusion. The former is
about the creation of new technologies at the global frontier, and the latter about their spread to
other countries and non-frontier firms, that is, firms that are less productive than those at the
frontier. To lift aggregate productivity both mechanisms need to be working – and we are not
seeing that sufficiently in the euro area at the moment.
Regarding innovation or technology creation, we know there is a lively debate among economists
about  how  much  new  technologies  can  add  to  productivity  growth  going  forward  (“techno-
optimists  vs  “techno-pessimists”).  But  for  now  we  do  not  observe  a  major  slowdown  in
innovation:  productivity  growth  in  global  frontier  firms  remains  robust. And  the  performance  of
euro  area  firms  at  the  frontier  has  been  broadly  comparable  with  that  of  other  advanced
economies in manufacturing in recent years.
Where the euro area is lagging behind is in services, where frontier firms are less than half as
productive as their global peers. Why this is happening is complex, but seems in part to be a
result of lower investment in human capital and in intangibles, such as R&D, which are key to
push out the frontier. To give just one measure of differences in innovation, in absolute terms the
US still submits more patents to the European Patent Office than does the euro area. Contrary to
popular wisdom, the best way to improve our living standards may not be to “re-industrialise”
Europe but rather to make services more productive.
So what can policymakers do? One thing that is clear is that government support for innovation
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
matters:  in  Europe  differences  in  innovation  capacity  across  countries  are  closely  related  to
1
public spending on R&D, particularly in basic research.
Hence such spending needs to be prioritised in national budgets and in the EU budget, and in
particular in situations of fiscal consolidation. Spending on higher education is also key: the US
spends about twice as much on tertiary education per pupil as we do in Europe (including private
2
contributions).
Yet  the  problem  is  not  just  innovation. Across  all  advanced  economies,  productivity  growth  in
non-frontier  firms  has  not  been  keeping  pace  with  the  leaders.  In  the  euro  area,  non-frontier
productivity has overall stagnated in manufacturing since the early 2000s, and has even declined
3
in the services sector.
And this is where diffusion comes in.
Put simply, markets are not setting the right incentives for non-frontier firms to invest in adopting,
understanding and incorporating new technologies into their production process. For example:
barriers for young, innovative firms to enter markets and expand domestically or internationally
are too high; competitive pressures on incumbent firms are too low; and unproductive firms exit
too  rarely,  preventing  reallocation  of  resources  to  others.  The  aim  of  “structural  reforms”  in
Europe should therefore be to raise business dynamism and productivity, not to cut wages below
the  levels  consistent  with  productivity,  in  an  elusive  search  for  temporary  gains  in  market
4
shares.
Only in this way can reforms be a positive- rather than a zero-sum game.
Different  countries  require  different  solutions.  But  there  are  clearly  some  common  European
factors, and coordination can make a difference. Most obvious is the need for a more ambitious
single market agenda, and in particular for services. The Capital Markets Union project is also
key as a facilitator of capital reallocation to more productive firms.
But we should also remember that deepening the single market can only happen within a stable
legal framework that provides a level playing-field and stimulates competition – which is to say,
the single market is not only about removing trade barriers, or even just a customs union, but
about having common governance and common rule of law under the jurisdiction of the ECJ. It
guarantees a secure framework for rule setting, regulatory enforcement and dispute settlement
for citizens and businesses. Such legal certainty is crucial for investment decisions, and it in turn
supports productivity and welfare.
Still, even if we are able to elicit such a creation and diffusion of new technologies, we know it will
not solve all problems. Increasing automation, for example, might simply displace workers into
lower productivity jobs, causing aggregate productivity to stagnate. And more worryingly, it might
actually  destroy  jobs  faster  than  it  creates  them.  So  it  is  clear  that  if  we  are  serious  about
focusing on innovation and diffusion, we also have to be serious in thinking about redistribution.
That entails thinking about ex ante redistribution: making sure that the markets created by new
technologies  are  efficient  and  firms  are  not  capturing  excessive  rents  at  the  expense  of
consumers. And it entails thinking about ex post redistribution, which requires efficient tax and
social security systems, and about ways to manage globalisation such that both objectives are
attainable, within countries and across them. In my view the sooner we start this discussion, the
better. And there is no better place than Davos to begin.
1
2
Veugelers, R. (2016), “The European Union’s Growing Innovation Divide”, Bruegel Policy Contribution, Issue
2016/08, April 2016.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
3
4
EIB (2016), Restoring EU Competitiveness, January 2016.
OECD (2015), The Future of Productivity, OECD, Paris, France.
See Cœuré, B. (2014), “Structural reforms: learning the right lessons from the crisis”, speech at the Bank of
Latvia Economic Conference 2014, Riga, 17 October 2014.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
