Vitas  Vasiliauskas:  Central  banking 
innovation – what does it take?
Speech by Mr Vitas Vasiliauskas, Governor of the Bank of Lithuania, at the Conference "Living
without  globalization?",  Session  8  "Digital  transformation  and  innovation",  organized  by  the
Hamburgisches WeltWirtschaftsInstitut (HWWI) and the Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee,
Hamburg, 4 July 2017.
in  the  age  of  financial
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen,     
 Firstly let me thank the other panelists for their insights. I would like to add some thoughts on
financial services and central banking – their new mission in the age of innovation. 
I  guess,  some  of  these  thoughts  may  sound  unusual  or  even  controversial.  Especially  for  a
representative of a central bank that also holds the role of financial system supervision. However,
this  is  our  goal  for  today  –  to  have  a  productive  discussion,  frankly  sharing  our  thoughts  and
offering outside-the-box views. 
Needless to prove the obvious: financial markets are changing. And they are doing so swiftly and
fundamentally. In this light, central banks – being the guardians of financial stability – must alter
the way they operate. 
To respond to new challenges, they need to become more flexible. Otherwise – you see the poor
guy  in  the  picture  –  central  banks  and  supervisors  will  stand  with  their  hands  tied,  while  the
financial sector is moving forward, fueled by technological advance. 
Yet while saying “A” we must say “B”. 
Despite  a  surge  in  innovations,  there  still  exists  a  vast  unused  potential.  In  practice,  private
actors  may  be  held  back  by  unfavorable  market  structure  and  regulatory  environment.  What
these actors often need is a gentle push – a supportive stance from the authorities. 
On the other hand, authorities – and consumers as well – also face challenges. 
Firstly, fintech developments formulate the need to balance innovation on one side and – stability
on the other. 
Adding to this, certain sectors – such as payments – may be ready for innovation. But they are
hampered  by  high  entry  barriers,  preserving  relatively  inefficient  and  costly  systems.  What  is
more, technological advances – like automated trading and investment – alter market structures.
This calls for upgrades in regulatory frameworks.
Conventional wisdom and tools are often insufficient. Central bankers and supervisors are thus
facing  a  choice.  They  must  either  opt  for  an  unconventional  path,  which  requires  broader
outlooks, or risk lagging behind the markets.      
Now let us look past the financial sector. 
It  is  widely  agreed  that  international  trade  has  been  instrumental  in  boosting  global  growth
throughout the last decades. What are the reasons for this? 
Apart from other factors, bringing previously unbanked segments of societies into the financial
system has been crucial in making global trade and, therefore, the global economy more vibrant. 
It  is  widely  believed  that  the  saturation  point  for  boosting  international  trade  via  financial
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
deepening has already been reached. But I am not so sure about that. I believe that by employing
technological advances wisely, we may take the process further.
Financial innovations may become the crucial trigger in unlocking at least some of the unused
potential of global trade, bringing new life into this sector. However, as I have already mentioned,
markets need additional impulse. This is where authorities may come into the picture. Their role
is  quite  clear  –  establishing  forward-thinking  regulation,  which  would  allow  innovative  financial
products and services maximize their potential. 
Such developments would add to efficiency gains for societies across the globe.          
Let us now focus on fintech. As you can see, global investment in fintech companies has surged
from 9 to 25 billion USD in just few years. 
What makes this sector so lucrative for investors?
To put it straight, it is the potential benefits. Creating more competition in the financial market,
fintech developments cut prices for consumers, offering them better and faster services. They
also empower users, democratizing financial services and making them more inclusive. 
Due  to  greater  decentralization  and  depth  of  the  market,  the  financial  system  becomes  more
resilient. New credit channels for households and SMEs reduce the risks of disruptions in bank
credit  due  to  economic  distress.  On  top  of  this,  there  are  obvious  gains  in  terms  of  financial
efficiency and productivity of capital allocation. 
What do we – as a central bank – do to maximize these benefits? The Bank of Lithuania has set
a strategic goal of establishing itself not just as a watchdog, but also as a partner for the financial
sector.  In  practice  this  means  putting  the  right  infrastructure  in  place  –  facilitating  innovation,
while ensuring system stability. 
We have launched a “Newcomer program”, which works as a one-stop shop for new market
entrants.  We  are  among  the  pioneering  central  banks  in  establishing  regulatory  “sandbox”
regime, which operates as a safe space for market participants to test their innovative ideas.
From the supervisory perspective, this is a crucial instrument, as it allows building the necessary
know-how and designing adequate instruments in advance. 
The payments sector. 
We  believe  that  efficient  and  easy-to-use  payment  methods  at  a  competitive  price  are  key  to
improved overall competitiveness of the economy and decreasing social or regional exclusion. 
We  have  thus  designed  and  implemented  measures  to  facilitate  widespread  adoption  of
innovative payment methods – concentrating particularly on instant mobile payments.
Among  the  most  important  steps  so  far  is  the  provision  of  open  access  to  our  payments
infrastructure for non-bank service providers. New players are constantly joining the system –
just in the last several days, for instance, three internationally-renowned companies have come
on board. 
Such  open-access  infrastructure  allows  reducing  the  new  players’  dependence  on  banks,
providing them with a level playing field and creating an additional source of competition for the
established banking sector.
This comes hand in hand with payment schemes standardization – creating a one-stop shop for
both firms and consumers. This allows eliminating intermediaries and increasing the efficiency
and speed of payment chains. Standardization helps ensure that individual service providers do
not  develop  incompatible  systems,  which  would  fragment  the  market  and  reduce  their
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
competitiveness vis-à-vis commercial banks.
Trading  and  investment  strategies.  These  activities  have  decisively  shifted  toward  systemic
quantitative decision-making and minimization of the human factor. The aim is clear – improving
the risk-to-reward ratio and increasing efficiency in asset management.
Questions  of  artificial  intelligence  or  even  quantum  computing  may  seem  far  from  central
banking. But again: authorities cannot fall behind in face of critical changes taking place. This is
the one and only way of implementing effective regulation. 
And it is crucial for central banks to master these new paradigms so as to maximize efficiency of
public funds management. We have already taken steps in this direction – for instance, we have
launched an automated trading project. The central aim of this project is to enhance and diversify
the bank’s investment decisions by employing cutting-edge automated quantitative strategies. 
I believe these examples illustrate that the Bank of Lithuania is aiming to constantly stay not just
side  by  side  but  one  step  ahead  of  the  market.  Our  goal  is  to  function  as  an  accelerator  of
innovative solutions. Solutions, which, under the right regulatory regime and supervision, would
lead to more efficient and resilient financial markets.  
Wrapping up, these are the principal takeaways from this presentation. 
Firstly, financial innovations can bring benefits for the real economy – for instance, by boosting
global  trade.  Secondly,  new  players  in  the  financial  markets  create  additional  competitive
pressures for commercial banks. Thirdly, this is good news both for consumers (due to price
gains) and for the financial system as a whole, as it becomes more resilient and efficient. 
And  lastly,  operating  in  this  new  environment,  central  banks,  as  well  as  supervisors,  must
become more flexible and facilitate innovation – while taking into account new challenges and
constantly building new regulatory and supervisory know-how. 
This might sound like a bold statement, but otherwise authorities risk failing to meet expectations
in a rapidly changing and dynamic financial system.
Thank you for your attention! It has been my pleasure to address you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
