The  Bank  of  Korea
New  Year  Speech
January  2,  2017
 Juyeol  Lee
Governor
The  Bank  of  Korea
Dear  fellow  members  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,
Today  is  our  first  day  of  work  in  2017,  and  I  would  like  to 
begin  by  expressing  my  sincere  appreciation  to  all  of  you,  for  so 
faithfully  carrying  out  your  duties  last  year.  At  the  opening  ceremony 
for  each  new  year,  we  always  resolve  to  show  renewed  spirits  of 
determination,  but 
think  even  more  extraordinary 
resolutions  are  called  for  than  in  the  past. 
this  year 
I 
Looking  back  on 
the  past  year,  a  series  of  unexpected 
shocks  at  home  and  abroad  caused  our  economy  great  difficulties. 
At  the  beginning  of  the  year  factors  such  as  economic  unrest  in 
China,  the  further  decline  in  international  oil  prices  and  uncertainties 
as  to  the  timing  of  the  policy  rate  hike  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
kept  us  awake.  After  that  the  Brexit  vote  in  the  UK,  the  presidential 
election  in  the  US  and  political  uncertainties  at  home  arose  as 
additional  destabilizing  factors.  As  a  result  of  this  series  of  events, 
our 
foreign  exchange  markets  were  hit  by  high 
volatilities,  and  economic  sentiments  weakened  sharply.
financial  and 
Against  this  backdrop,  in  order  to  support  the  recovery  of  our 
economy’s  growth  the  Bank  of  Korea  eased  its  monetary  policy 
stance  further.  In  March  of  last  year  we  raised  the  total  ceiling  of 
the  Bank  Intermediated  Lending  Support  Facility  greatly,  and  in  June 
we  cut  the  Base  Rate  to  1.25%  per  annum.  Moreover,  while  closely 
monitoring  the  financial  and  foreign  exchange  markets  at  home  and 
abroad,  we  worked  actively 
the  markets  whenever 
factors  causing  instability  arose.
to  stabilize 
-  1  -
Despite  these  efforts,  however,  our  country‘s  economic  growth 
still  fell  short  of  its  potential  last  year.  Consumer  price  inflation  also 
remained  considerably  below  the  target.  The  trend  of  high  growth  in 
household  lending  continued  as  our  accommodative  policy  stance 
became  prolonged,  and  concerns  grew  about 
the  possibility  of 
household  debt  causing  a  contraction 
in  consumption  and 
undermining  financial  stability.
Dear  members  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,
to 
thanks 
This  year  our  economy  is  expected  to  maintain  its  modest 
growth, 
the  global 
economic  recovery.  If  we  look  around,  however,  at  conditions  here 
at  home  as  well  as  abroad,  there  are  potential  risk  factors  lurking 
everywhere  that  could  limit  the  pace  of  growth.
the  strengthening  somewhat  of 
toward 
the  movements 
First  of  all,  as 
strengthened 
protectionism  in  major  countries  become  more  evident,  it  is  possible 
that  world  trade  could  contract.  Uncertainties  concerning  the  policy 
directions  of  the  new  US  administration,  the  rate  hikes  by  the  US 
Federal  Reserve  and  the  UK‘s  Brexit  from  the  EU  could  cause 
international 
the  world 
economic  recovery.  Domestically,  it  is  hard  to  rule  out  the  possibility 
of  the  lingering  political  uncertainties  having  adverse  effects  not  only 
on  the  consumption  and  investment  sentiments  of  economic  agents, 
but  on  the  views  of  foreign  investors  concerning  our  economy  as 
well.
financial  market  unrest,  and  a  delay 
in 
-  2  -
At  a  time  like  this,  keeping  the  foreign  exchange  market  and 
the  real  economy  stable  is  of  primary  importance.  Given  the  Korean 
economy’s  robust  external  soundness  and  financial  resilience  as  well 
as  its  adequate  policy  space,  it  should  be  able  to  withstand  shocks 
of  some  extent.  We  cannot  just  sit  back  complacently,  however.  If 
multiple  external  risks  should  materialize  all  at  once,  or  in  concert 
with  a  deterioration  in  domestic  conditions,  the  repercussions  can  be 
greater  than  expected.  We  should  therefore  devote  every  effort  to 
comprehensive  risk  management,  so  that  we  can  deal  in  a  timely 
manner  with  any  such  situation  that  may  arise.
We  also  need  to  push  consistently  ahead  with  reforms  to 
counteract  structural  problems  such  as  our 
low  birth  rate  and 
population  aging,  the  accumulation  of  household  debt,  labor  market 
segmentation,  and  income  inequality.  If  we  leave  our  economy’s 
structural  vulnerabilities  unresolved,  citing  the  unfavorable  conditions 
currently  before  us,  then  the  recovery  of  our  growth  potential  will 
become  even  more  difficult  to  attain.
Dear  members  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,
I  would  like  to  touch  now  on  the  major  tasks  that  we  will 
need  to  focus  on  this  year.
We  will  conduct  our  monetary  policy  so  as  to  ensure  that  the 
recovery  of  economic  growth  continues,  and  that  consumer  price 
inflation  approaches  the  target  level  over  a  medium-term  horizon. 
Although  the  pace  of  inflation  will  gradually  pick  up,  owing  to  the 
rising  oil  prices,  it  is  forecast  that  the  upward  pressures  from  the 
demand  side  will  not  be  great  since  economic  growth  is  expected  to 
-  3  -
be  only  modest.  Going 
forward,  maintenance  of  our  current 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  for  a  considerable  time  will 
thus  be  appropriate. 
in 
improving 
the  direction  of 
financial  support 
We  also  need  to  operate  the  Bank  Intermediated  Lending 
for 
Support  Facility 
for  SMEs  suffering 
economic  growth.  The 
to 
temporary 
the 
increasing  employment,  needs 
considerably  changed  financial  and  economic  conditions,  we  will  also 
have  to  examine  the  need  for  reforming  our  lending  facilities  over  a 
medium-  to  long-term  horizon. 
to  be  expanded.  Given 
financing  problems,  and 
that  contribute 
its  support 
those 
for 
When  carrying  out  our  monetary  policy  this  year,  we  should 
devote  particular  attention  to  financial  stability.  As  the  possibility  of 
expansions  in  financial  and  FX  market  volatilities  is  high,  we  will 
have  to  carry  out  stabilization  measures  actively  as  needed,  while 
closely  monitoring  the  trends  of  price  variables  and  capital  flows. 
The  upward  pressures  on  market  interest  rates,  which  have  grown 
in  consequence  mainly  of 
the  US  Federal 
Reserve,  could  aggravate  households’  debt  repayment  burdens.  We 
thus  need  to  work,  in  close  consultation  with  the  government  and 
the  supervisory  authorities, 
trend  of  sharply  rising 
household  debt  and  to  prevent  the  risks  of  default  among  the 
vulnerable  groups  from  escalating.
the  rate  hikes  by 
to  ease 
the 
We  must  also 
redouble  our  efforts 
the 
effectiveness  of  our  monetary  policy,  and  most 
to 
increase  the  accuracy  of  our  economic  forecasts.  We  should  devote 
efforts  to  continually  improving  our  forecasting  model,  to  using  new 
to  enhance 
importantly 
-  4  -
technologies  such  as  big  data,  and  to  expanding  the  number  of  our 
specialist  staff.  At  the  end  of  last  year  we  released  the  “General 
Principles  of  Monetary  Policy  Operation,”  and  resolved 
to  push 
ahead  with  improving  the  contents  of  the  monetary  policy  statement 
from  the  Monetary  Policy  Board  meeting  as  well  as  expanding  the 
scope  of  related  reports  released  to  the  public.  These  efforts  will 
heighten  the  predictability  of  our  monetary  policy  and  thus  contribute 
to  enhancing  its  effectiveness.
to 
to  establish  a 
to  respond  actively 
We  will  need  as  well 
the  digital 
revolution  in  the  payment  and  settlement  field,  which  is  progressing 
rapidly.  Through  cooperation  with  the  financial  sector,  and  with  IT 
specialized  enterprises,  we  will  need 
foundation 
facilitating  the  wider  use  of  FinTech,  distributed  ledger  technology 
and  biometric  authentication.  While  on  the  one  hand  working  to 
support  the  smooth  launch  and  settlement  into  place  of  Internet 
banks,  we  should  at  the  same  time  push  ahead  without  delay  on 
the  pilot  program  exploring 
introduction  of  a  “coinless  society”. 
Central  banks  of  major  countries  are  carrying  out  in-depth  research 
recently  on  digital  currencies,  and  we  too  should  begin  research  on 
the  forms  of  issuance  of,  the  technical  framework  for,  and  the 
effects  on  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  of  digital  currencies.
As 
the 
risen, 
in 
in  external 
the  Korean  economy’s  status 
its  engagement 
international 
community  has 
financial 
cooperation  is  becoming  more  important,  and  the  Bank  of  Korea  is 
for  example  now  expected 
in 
international  organizations. 
to 
implement  our  organization  and  personnel  management  in  a  way 
that  supports  improved  specialization  for  these  tasks. 
take  on  a  strengthened  role 
this,  we  need 
responding 
to 
In 
to 
-  5  -
to  adjust  our  personnel  and 
In  order  to  help  our  central  bank  cope  effectively  with  the 
rapidly  changing  domestic  and  external  environments,  we  must  work 
to  enhance  the  expertise  and  diversity  of  our  staff.  To  this  end,  we 
should  constantly  improve  our  recruitment  system  and  our  human 
resource  management 
framework.  We  should  also  continue  our 
efforts 
in 
directions  whereby  the  fairness  of  our  staff  evaluations  is  enhanced 
job  competencies  and  performances  are  emphasized.  The 
and 
construction  of  a  new  annex  building,  combining 
two  currently 
separate  buildings,  will  begin  this  year  together  with  the  remodeling 
of  our  main  building.  We  need  to  all  cooperate  closely  to  ensure 
that  this  project,  as  well  as  other  complementary  measures  including 
the  temporary  relocation  of  our  offices  and  the  transfer  of  unissued 
banknotes,  can  be  accomplished  as  planned.
remuneration  systems 
Dear  fellow  members  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,
Korea  now 
faces  extremely  critical  political  and  economic 
conditions.  In  this  situation  it  is  inevitable  that  social  expectations  for 
the  central  bank,  which  is  responsible  for  one  axis  of  the  nation’s 
macroeconomic  operations,  are  high. 
to  continue 
devoting  your  best  efforts  to  fulfill  your  duties  entrusted  to  you, 
without 
full  sense  of  commitment  and 
responsibility.
faltering  and  with  a 
I  ask  you  all 
In  carrying  out  our  duties,  we  should  also  try  to  be  flexible  in 
our  thinking.  As  we  witnessed  during  the  AlphaGo  fever  last  year, 
the  pace  and  scope  of  advance  of  the  4th  Industrial  Revolution  is 
hard  to  even  imagine.  Under  circumstances  like  these,  our  current 
experience  and  knowledge  could  become  less  valid  in  the  future, 
-  6  -
its  policy  goals 
the  central  bank’s  achievement  of 
and 
through 
reliance  on  conventional  wisdom  alone  could  be  difficult.  Bearing 
this  in  mind,  we  need  to  listen  carefully  to  diverse  opinions  with 
open  minds.  Even  as  we  do  so,  however,  it  goes  without  saying  of 
course  that  we  must  continue  to  uphold  our  fundamental  principles 
as  the  central  bank. 
that 
I  believe 
if  all  of  us  work 
firm 
determination,  our  economy  will  be  able  to  overcome  the  many 
difficulties  now 
In 
welcoming  the  new  year,  I  want  to  wish  all  of  you  in  our  Bank  of 
Korea  family  very  abundant  health  and  happiness. 
it,  and  advance  one  step 
together  with 
further. 
facing 
Thank  you.
-  7  -
