Rameswurlall Basant Roi: Evolution of the Basel capital adequacy
requirements
Address by Mr Rameswurlall Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Seminar on
"Enhancements  to  the  Basel  Process:  Recent  developments  relating  to  Basel  II  &  Basel  III",
hosted  by  AFRITAC  South,  International  Monetary  Fund,  Africa  Training  Institute,  Ebene,  21
August 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen
 Thank you Mr Ravi Mohan, Resident Advisor to the IMF’s AFRITAC South, for inviting me again to
share my views on this very interesting topic: Capital Adequacy Framework. It’s a great feeling to
be in the midst of so many regulators from our continent. I said it’s a “great feeling” because of
“fellow  feeling”.  Our  contributions  as  regulators  and  supervisors  of  financial  institutions  to
financial stability are seldom recognized. But we always hit the news headlines when all the sins
of an ailing or a failed financial institution are conveniently heaped on us. 
As  regulators,  we  however  need  to  have  the  unswerving  faith  in  our  abilities  to  regulate  and
supervise financial institutions that have become increasingly complex in a world where trillions
of dollars flow across the world in a single day by the simple click of a mouse. True, at times, the
weight  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  burden  turns  out  to  be  exceedingly  demanding,  so
demanding  that  it  takes  a  serious  toll  on  us.  I  am  nevertheless  truly  happy  –  and  very  happy
indeed – to be here, this morning, to address the participants of the AFRITAC South Seminar
today on a topic that constitutes the very foundation of a safe and sound financial sector.
To set the backdrop for the sharing of your regulatory and supervisory experience during this
Seminar, I believe it’s fitting to go back into history in order to give it a sense of perspective. But
before I do so, let me narrate a short childhood story about myself. In my native village which is in
the  southern  part  of  this  country,  there  was  only  one,  what  used  to  be  commonly  known  as,
barber’s shop. The barber was a plain and financially lean countryside fellow. My parents used to
send me to that barber’s shop for a haircut about once every month in the early 1950s. Once
seated  in  the  chair  for  a  haircut,  no  person  could  miss  a  framed  picture  of  what  looked  like
smartly dressed businessmen in an office with one of them in a standing position talking to the
rest. A line at the top of the picture read as follows: “For Credit, Come Tomorrow.”  I was six
years old or thereabout when I had first read it. And I had not then understood what it meant and
why was this colourless picture glued against the wall side by side with a mirror in the full view of
all the barber’s clients. As I grew up, I had slowly started to get the gist of this line. Years later, I
had asked a school friend about the barber who was not around anymore. I was told that the
barber  had  gone  out  of  business  because  he  had  given  up  the  idea  of,  “For  Credit,  Come
Tomorrow.” I had then asked myself the question, “What if the principal business of an enterprise
is not to give haircuts to people but to extend credit out of other people’s money?” Once I joined
the Bank of Mauritius as an economist in the mid-1970s, I got a very wide angle view and a full-
scale appreciation of the importance of capital for any enterprise, more specifically for financial
institutions.
Regulators have long realised that capital is the backbone of a bank; it absorbs losses and it can
prevent  bank  failures.    What  the  capital  base  of  a  bank  should  be  is  a  grand  question.  The
determination of the right amount of capital has always been a very demanding exercise. Why is
it so? It is primarily because of credit and the risks associated with it. By definition credit is the
disposition of one person to trust another. It is singularly varying.
In the 1950s, the US Federal Reserve used the Analysis of Bank Capital to bring up a formal
evaluation basis for banks’ capital adequacy. This approach was dropped in 1970 as it proved
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
difficult to precisely determine the adequate quantum of bank capital in the face of the growing
complexity of the system. The long period of financial repression, that is, direct control on bank
lending  to  the  private  sector  and  force-feeding  banks  with  government  debt  instruments  had
made the core business of commercial banks safe between the mid-1930s and the early 1970s.
Central banks’ function of maintaining financial stability by way of regulation and supervision had
atrophied. Questions were vigorously set as to how monetary policy could be better applied to
forestall  booms  and  busts.  The  collapse  of  the  Franklin  National  Bank  of  New  York  and  the
collapse of the infamous Bankhaus Herstatt in 1974 had turned out to be a clarion call for putting
emphasis on regulation and  supervision  of  banks.  The  then  financial  crisis  found  both  central
banks and banks ill-equipped and lacking in respect of skills in risk management. They were both
unprepared for disruptive shocks to financial stability.
  For  many  years,  a  select  group  of  central  bankers  used  to  meet  regularly  at  the  Bank  for
International Settlements in Basel. Supervisory officials, too, forming part of the central banking
community  had  joined  in  to  discuss  matters  of  common  interest.  The  Basel  Committee  on
Banking Regulation and Regulatory Practices eventually took shape. If I understand correctly, it
later came to be known as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS for short). The
concerns for financial stability in the wake of the collapse of the two banks in 1974 I referred to
earlier and the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system that subsequently ushered in a phase of
financial  sector  liberalisation,  including  exchange  control  liberalization  worldwide,  gave  rise  to
quite a wide spectrum of risks. If unchecked, they could jeopardise financial stability.
The first Basel standard, Basel I, also known as the Basel Accords, was a product of the Cooke
Committee, after Peter Cooke from the Bank of England who chaired the Basel Committee for
more  than  a  decade.  The  Cooke  Committee  Report  was  agreed  in  1988,  a  response  to  the
collapse  of  the  Franklin  National  Bank  and  of  the  Bankhaus  Herstatt  in  1974  and  to  other
considerations. Basel I had set a minimum capital requirement for internationally active banks.
The  minimum  ratio  of  regulatory  capital  to  total  risk-weighted assets was set at 8 per cent of
which the ‘core capital’, a restrictive definition of eligible capital labelled as Tier I capital, stood at
4 per cent. It was designed to be implemented by the members of the BCBS by 1992, only four
years  after  it  was  agreed.  Basel  I  was  amended  in  1996  to  take  into  account  market  risks  in
banks’ trading books, whereby an additional capital charge was introduced to cover market risk.
Although Basel I was meant for implementation by members of the BCBS, many non-member
countries with internationally active banks also started implementing the Basel standards.
Basel I had weaknesses. It did not differentiate enough the risks associated with individual loans,
thus providing banks with opportunities for regulatory arbitrage. Basel I, overlooking operational
risk, focused on credit and market risk only. These deficiencies demanded an improvement in
the Basel standards. After years of intense debates and negotiations, Basel II was finally agreed
in 2004. While leaving some basic parameters of Basel I unchanged, Basel II aimed at ensuring
that  the  regulatory  capital  reflected  actual  risks  banks  were  taking.  In  other  words,  Basel  II
dramatically altered the system for risk-weighting of assets. It, of course, goes to say that Basel II
moved  away  from  compliance-  based  supervision  to  a  more  complex  risk-based  supervision.
Basel  II  thus  assigned  a  pivotal  role  to  the  players,  that  is,  banks  and  external  credit  rating
agencies, in the workings of risk assessment. Banks were allowed, under the foundation Internal
Ratings-Based approach, to use their own models for risk assessment by using metrics set by
the supervisors.
I am sure most of you here must be aware that Basel II requirements were more elastic and
institution-specific. They brought on the scene a risk management regime whereby banks could
opt for either the standardised approach with its fine-grained risk categories linked to external
credit ratings or the internal ratings approach where sophisticated mathematical models could be
used.  The years following the implementation of the Basel II Accord saw a surge in the reliance
on various models by large international banks.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The 2008 financial crisis revealed weaknesses in Basel II. The risk-sensitivity of Basel II capital
requirements  were  questioned  as  they  were  found  to  have  exacerbated  pro-cyclicality  with
deepened likelihood of crisis. The need to effectively address risks associated with securitization,
counterparty credit exposure arising out of derivatives and securities financing was palpably felt. 
Basel III was thus agreed between 2010 and 2014; it seeks to increase the quantum and quality
of  banks’  capital  beside  introducing  liquidity  standards  and  macro-prudential  measures  for
preventing the build-up of systemic risk.
With a view to giving a broad perspective of what is required of regulators in today’s world, let me
give you a broad brush stroke of what Basel II and III are made of. Basel II, whose focus was
mainly on refining the risk sensitivity of assets, encompasses the following:
1.      Standardised Approach to credit risk;
2.      Foundation Internal Ratings-Based approach to credit risk;
3.      Advanced Internal Ratings-Based approach to credit risk;
4.      Basic Indicator approach to operational risk;
5.      Standardized Approach to operational risk;
6.      Advanced Measurement approach to operational risk;
7.      Standardized Measurement method for market risk;
8.      Internal models approach to market risk;
9.      Pillar 2 which is the Supervisory Review Process, and
10.  Pillar III which is market discipline.
Basel III has enhanced the capital framework and introduced stringent liquidity standards along
with a macroprudential flavour.  The innovative elements of Basel III are:
1.      Upgraded quality of capital;
2.      Capital conservation buffer;
3.      Countercyclical capital buffer;
4.      Leverage ratio;
5.      Liquidity Coverage Ratio;
6.      Net Stable Funding Ratio;
7.      Risk coverage – counterparty credit risk;
8.      Capital surcharge on Global Systemically Important Banks;
9.      Capital surcharge on Domestic Systemically Important Banks; and,
10.  Total Loss Absorbency Capital (TLAC).
The  foregoing  gives  a  full  view  of  what  are  expected  of  regulators  in  the  standard-setting
countries  as  well  as  in  the  standard-taking  countries.  It’s  a  formidable  task  for  all  of  us.  The
majority of the world’s regulators are ‘standard-takers’ as far as international banking standards
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
are concerned. They have no say in the standard-setting exercise and have no formal obligation
to adhere to the standards. Yet many countries falling outside the BCBS are implementing them.
Regulators in developing countries face enormous implementation challenges not only because
of the complexity of the standards and the recalibration needed to reflect local contexts before
they can be fully implemented but also because of gaps in financial market infrastructure and the
lack of sophistication of the financial markets. Where these are missing, one could only expect
low levels of implementation.
We  have  a  bank-centric  financial  system  in  Mauritius.  Of  the  21  banks  operating  in  our
jurisdiction,  12  are  foreign  international  banks.  Two  of  our  locally-owned  banks  have  gone
international.  We  therefore  find  it  obligatory  to  adhere  to  the  principles  established  by  the
standard setters of the BCBS. Basel I Accord was adopted in our jurisdiction way back in 1993.
The Capital Adequacy Ratio initially set at 8 per cent was raised to 10 per cent in 1998.  Basel II
became operational in Mauritius as from March 2008 on a one-year parallel run with Basel I and
was fully implemented as from March 2009. Of the three options for the measurement of credit
risk, Mauritius elected to go by the Standardised Approach. Foreign banks were, however, given
the latitude to compute their ratios using the more advanced approach for reporting to their head
office. Pillar I, Pillar II and Pillar III were adopted in a phased approach. This allowed banks the
necessary timeframe to align their risk management framework with the requirements of Basel II.
To  keep  pace  with  international  norms,  Mauritius  adopted  Basel  III  in  relation  to  its  capital
framework as from 2014. The capital framework included the conservation buffer of 2.5 per cent
which is graduated for full implementation by 2020 when banks will need to maintain a ratio of
12.5 per cent. This does not represent a challenge for our banking industry as they are already
maintaining  a  ratio  averaging  17.8  per  cent.  With  regards  to  the  liquidity  requirements  under
Basel III, the Bank of Mauritius has revised its Guideline on Liquidity requirements to incorporate
Liquidity Coverage Ratio in line with the Basel III standards. By October this year, the Guideline is
expected to become effective.
The  two  large  and  locally-owned  banks  which  account  for  over  60  per  cent  of  the  domestic
market  and  a  few  of  the  foreign  banks  are  considered  systemically  important.  The  Bank  of
Mauritius has come up with a Guideline for Dealing with Domestic Systemically Important Banks.
They are required to maintain a capital surcharge ranging from 1.0 to 2.5 per cent as from 2016,
in addition to the capital adequacy ratio and the capital conservation buffer.
Even with the implementation of Basel III, the question remains: are good quality and quantity of
capital sufficient to avert systemic shocks?  Regulators and supervisors are pretty well aware
that they are not.  Basel III sets down the minimum standards. However, rules alone, no matter
how well written and how consistently implemented, will not be enough to maintain the financial
health and stability of the banking system.  Poor risk management, interlinkages and common
exposures can still give shocks to the financial system.  For example, a bank’s capital ratios can
be rendered meaningless or highly misleading if they are based on inaccurate assessment of
asset quality, off-balance sheet exposures and contingent liabilities. A bank may be reporting high
capital ratios when in fact it may be insolvent due to poor asset quality and inadequate provision
for  losses.  Furthermore,  stringent  capital  requirements  may  be  of  little  use  if  the  corporate
governance system of banks are deficient. Capital merely acts as a cushion against losses and
can  never  be  a  substitute  for  poorly  managed  organisations.  On-going  vigilance  in  respect  of
corporate governance of banks  as  another  over-arching  priority  in  the  supervision  of  banks  is
critically important.
Micro-level supervision, thus, effectively supplements the largely macro-prudential nature of the
Basel III capital adequacy framework. Behavioural changes in banks, including change in culture,
should  top-up  risk  management  practices  for  the  effectiveness  of  any  capital  adequacy
framework.
Let me take leave of you with a final thought: do never forget the story about the barber that dates
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
back to the years before the 1970s. His business had collapsed not because of the variety of
risks  stemming  from  the  rapid  pace  of  technological  progress  (Schumpeter’s  creative
destruction)  but  because  of  the  risk  associated  with  misplaced  trust.  The  world  has  since
changed  cinematically  and  dramatically.  In  the  decades  before  the  1960s,  the  life  of  tools,
equipment and machines for production of goods and services lasted for 25 to 30 years. The
cycle  of  obsolescence  was  so  long  that  the  risks  of  enterprises  going  bust  because  of
technological progress were lower than they are today. Lending institutions faced lesser risks in
those days. With digital technology, the cycle of obsolescence has accelerated. Just imagine the
average lifespan of a phone app is a mere 30 days. We do not have  enough  time  to  master
anything  in  today’s  world  before  it  is  displaced.  The  risks  of  enterprises  and  along  with  them
lending institutions going bust are indeed unprecedentedly heightened. It’s very difficult for any
lender to appropriately assess risks arising out of digital advancement – and more so for any
regulator. Lending institutions indisputably need much stronger capital buffers than in the past in
order to meet the challenges of the unknowns.
            With this final thought, may I wish you all the very best in your pursuit to know more about
how  best  to  implement  the  Basel  standards  of  regulation  of  banks.  The  regulatory  and
supervisory community in Africa faces enormous challenges. I fervently hope that by the end of
this Seminar you will have learned from each other quite some ways and means of improving
your approach to regulation and supervision of financial institutions.
Thank you.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
