  
 
 
3 July 2017 
 SPEECH 
SPEECH BY GOVERNOR LARS ROHDE AT THE 
SWISS FINANCE POLICY SEMINAR OF THE 
FEDERAL ASSEMBLY’S FINANCE COMMITTEES 
 
  DANMARKS NATIONALBANK'S MONETARY POLICY – POSSIBILITIES AND 
LIMITATIONS 
First let me thank you for inviting me to speak at this seminar. It is a spe-
cial pleasure to have this chance to share views and experiences on a 
matter close to my heart, namely Danish monetary policy. Especially with 
this audience as there are many similarities between monetary policies in 
Denmark and Switzerland.  
Out of the grey sky on a cold and dull Thursday in January 2015, these 
similarities caught the financial markets' attention – fueled by the SNB 
announcement that it would abandon the floor on the Swiss franc against 
the euro. As you probably know, Denmark experienced a massive inflow 
of currency shortly after this announcement. And over the following 
weeks, we saw unusual turbulence in the Danish foreign exchange mar-
ket. 
[AGENDA]  
Today I will talk about the Danish fixed-exchange-rate regime with the 
cold Thursday in January 2015 as a point of departure. Then I will discuss 
some of the potential spill-overs to Danish financial markets from the un-
conventional monetary policies conducted by the ECB in recent years.  
I will end my speech with some remarks on our experiences with very low 
interest rates. We have had negative rates for some years now and so far 
their implications have been far less exciting or radical than some might 
have thought before entering the negative territory. Basically, negative 
interest rates have just been a continuation of low interest rates. 
Page 1 of 9 
  1 Background for the fixed-exchange-rate regime 
Let me revert to that episode in 2015.  
[CHART 1: Intraday DKKEUR]  
The Swiss announcement surprised financial markets resulting in in-
creased volatility in a wide range of financial asset markets. The Danish 
FX market was one of them. In the first few hours after the Swiss an-
nouncement, the Danish exchange rate fluctuated more than usual. Over 
the following days and weeks, we experienced a massive currency inflow, 
resulting in strong appreciation pressure on the exchange rate. 
The Swiss decision seems to have led some foreign investors to look for 
comparable candidates to abandoning a peg. There are not many coun-
tries to look for. These investors could make a substantial profit if the 
fixed-exchange-rate policy were to be abandoned and the krone appreci-
ated.  
The initial push came from foreign investors. However, nearly two thirds 
of the increased demand for kroner in those few weeks in January and 
February came from domestic investors, including insurance companies 
and pension funds. Some of these companies wished to at least partly 
insure themselves against losses in the unlikely event that the krone ap-
preciated like the Swiss franc.  
[CHART 2: FX reserve] 
But we are not SNB copycats – we are ECB copycats! 
So in response, we used our usual measures to defend the peg. We inter-
vened heavily in the FX market by buying euros and selling Danish kroner 
to meet the elevated demand. In addition, monetary-policy rates were 
significantly reduced. The sizeable intervention caused a sharp increase in 
FX reserves by almost 15 per cent of GDP in less than two months. As the 
pressure abated, the level of FX reserves was gradually reversed over the 
course of 2015 to reach a level of just above 20 per cent of GDP – close to 
the current level.  
There is an inherent asymmetry in our use of instruments: Under depreci-
ation pressures, there is no limit to how high policy rates can be raised. 
And the size of the FX reserves constitutes the upper bar for FX interven-
tions. Under appreciation pressures, there is a limit to how low policy 
rates can be reduced. The scope for selling kroner and buying euros, in 
Page 2 of 9 
  contrast, is unlimited as we can print as many kroner as we deem neces-
sary. 
As a further and unconventional measure to bring the currency inflow to 
a halt, the government decided to suspend issuance of government 
bonds temporarily. This move was made after recommendation from 
Danmarks Nationalbank. It was an option because the government al-
ready had ample liquidity reserves.  
The suspension of issuance is a version of QE – reducing the supply of 
bonds available for private investors. It led to a strong decline in the yield 
spread to German government bonds for all maturities, in particular in 
the short end of the yield curve. The spread became negative even for 
long maturity bonds. This made it more costly to speculate against the 
krone. 
A key point is that despite many similarities, there are significant differ-
ences between the monetary policy regimes in Denmark and Switzerland. 
Even when faced with the largest currency flows in the history of our 
fixed-exchange-rate regime, we were willing to do whatever it took to 
maintain the peg. Abandoning the peg was never an option. 
 Let me jump back to some 200 years ago. Danmarks Nationalbank was 
established in 1818 to restore the monetary system after a state bank-
ruptcy a few years earlier. Danmarks Nationalbank became an independ-
ent institution more than 100 years later in 1936. The National Bank of 
Denmark Act of that year is still the legal basis for our activities.  
Central-bank independence is enshrined in this act. Among other things, 
it states that the Board of Governors is solely responsible for determining 
monetary-policy interest rates. However, the act does not explicitly say 
anything about exchange-rate policy. The current fixed-exchange-rate 
policy was decided and introduced by the Danish government in 1982. 
Since then the policy has been sustained by consecutive governments 
with broad parliamentary support.  
[CHART 3: exchange rate since 1982] 
The formal framework for the fixed-exchange-rate regime is the European 
Exchange Rate Mechanism, ERM2. Officially, the krone may fluctuate by 
up to 2.25 per cent on either side of the central rate. In practice, Dan-
Page 3 of 9 
  marks Nationalbank ensures that fluctuations are far smaller as you can 
see from this chart. 
The decade-long experience with the exchange-rate peg means that the 
regime is deeply rooted in the Danish economy and economic policy. It is 
strongly supported by the general public. And the regime enjoys strong 
credibility among market participants. Market forces normally ensure that 
the exchange rate is close to the parity without any need for central-bank 
interventions. 
[CHART 4: Inflation rates] 
The current Danish fixed-exchange-rate policy was introduced on the ba-
sis of an unsustainable macroeconomic situation in the 1970s and early 
1980s with high levels of unemployment. There were recurrent deficits on 
the government budget balance as well as on the balance of payments. 
Furthermore, repeated devaluations in order to restore competitiveness 
only resulted in high and volatile inflation and high interest rates. 
In contrast, the German Bundesbank had good experience of maintaining 
a rather stable inflation by the standards of that time. Since Germany was 
Denmark's largest export market, it was decided to link the Krone to the 
D-mark. 
As time passed and the peg gained credibility, it gradually became a dis-
ciplining mechanism for wage and price setters and policy makers. Pro-
gressively the Danish inflation level approached that of Germany.  
Over the past 30 years, the macroeconomic situation has improved a lot 
due to the stabilisation-oriented economic policy. After substantial im-
provements in competitiveness, we have had significant surpluses on the 
balance of payments for the past many years – much like Switzerland. 
Denmark is now a creditor nation with net foreign assets around 50 per 
cent of GDP. 
The fixed-exchange-rate regime is still a cornerstone of Danish economic 
policy. The policy framework implies a clear division of responsibilities in 
the economic policy. Monetary-policy interest rates are reserved for 
keeping the krone stable and do not take factors such as growth, em-
ployment and house prices into account. These considerations are ad-
dressed by other economic policies. In particular, fiscal policy plays an 
important role in ironing out economic fluctuations.  
Page 4 of 9 
  2 Spill-overs from monetary policy in the euro zone 
An exchange-rate peg can only be maintained if one is willing to imple-
ment the same monetary policy stance as the anchor country. This is a 
precondition in a world with international capital mobility. A strong spill-
over from the ECB's monetary policy to Danish financial conditions is 
therefore to be expected. 
[CHART 5: Monetary policy rates in DK and ECB] 
Indeed, as we can see from this chart, the key monetary-policy rate of 
Danmarks Nationalbank tends to track that of the ECB very closely. Usual-
ly we announce interest-rate changes within a few hours of the ECB's an-
nouncements.  
The exceptions are in situations with volatility in foreign-exchange mar-
kets and large capital flows. In those situations, unilateral interest-rate 
changes might be necessary. I have already talked about one such occa-
sion – the surge in capital inflows in early 2015.  
In normal times, the euro-area monetary-policy stance is summarized by 
the short-term interest rate set by the ECB. When the ECB wants to loos-
en policy, it reduces its key interest rate. And when it wants to tighten, it 
increases it again. 
Since the great financial crisis of 2007-08, many things have been far from 
normal. In response to persistently weak demand and low inflation, cen-
tral banks across the globe have reduced their monetary-policy rates to 
levels close to their effective lower bound. In that respect, Switzerland 
and Denmark are actually on the forefront. In the beginning of 2015, we 
both reduced our monetary-policy rates to -0.75 per cent. 
With interest rates close to their effective lower bound, central banks 
have deployed a host of unconventional measures to achieve the desired 
amount of monetary accommodation. Of these measures, the most prom-
inent one has been to engage in purchases of financial asset on a massive 
scale – often referred to as QE. For more than two years, the ECB has 
been purchasing assets worth between 60 and 80 billion euros per 
month.  
And this takes me back to the point that to support an exchange-rate 
peg, monetary policy must mirror that of the anchor country – in our case 
the monetary policy of the ECB. 
Page 5 of 9 
  In normal times, matching the monetary policy moves of the ECB is sim-
ple. To offset the impact that an interest-rate change by the ECB has on 
the krone-euro exchange rate, we simply adjust our interest rate by the 
same magnitude. 
But how do we match the monetary-policy stance of the ECB when it pro-
vides monetary stimulus by engaging in large scale asset purchases? As 
the ECB purchases bonds issued by euro area sovereigns, the supply of 
such bonds available to private investors is reduced. In such a situation 
Danish sovereign bonds stand out as an obvious alternative to for exam-
ple German bonds. 
The strong commitment to the peg implies that there is no exchange-rate 
risk for euro area investors associated with investing in krone-
denominated assets. Moreover, the strong focus on fiscal sustainability 
that has been exercised by successive Danish governments implies that 
the risk of default is very low. And furthermore, Danish sovereign bonds 
are in general highly liquid. 
[CHART 6: Danish and German 10-year government bond rates] 
So it should come as no surprise that changes in Danish sovereign bond 
yields tend to track changes in German yields very closely. This was also 
the case in late 2014. Mounting expectations of an ECB QE programme 
led to substantial declines in sovereign bond yields across euro area 
countries. And it continued to be the case after the launch of the ECB's 
Public Sector Purchase Program (PSPP), although the suspension of gov-
ernment bond issuances caused some fluctuations in Danish yields. 
In a forthcoming paper we will provide more details on the way market 
participants' expectations of the ECB's asset purchases have affected 
Danish financial markets. In particular, we assess the impact on Danish 
sovereign bond yields.  
We find that the reaction of Danish sovereign bonds has been very much 
in line with how German bonds have reacted. And clearly more so than 
the bonds issued by a number of countries which are in the euro area. 
[CHART 7: Decline in 10-year yields due to ECB communication] 
This chart shows how long-term sovereign yields in a number of coun-
tries have reacted to selected pieces of ECB communication in the six 
months leading up to start of QE.  
Page 6 of 9 
  In the study, we look at the reaction of sovereign bond yields in the two 
days following each piece of communication. Summing over the 17 pieces 
of communication included in the study, we arrive at the effects that you 
can see here.1 
The chart shows that in all of the 2-day windows combined, Danish 10-
year sovereign bond yields declined by a total of 30 basis points. This is 
very close to the corresponding decline in German yields of 28 basis 
points. Yields in other northern European countries declined slightly 
more.  
However, countries in the south of Europe experienced substantially 
larger declines in yields. To sum up, Danish and German bond yields are 
close substitutes. The impact of QE on bond yields in the euro area also 
has a spillover effect on Danish bond yields. 
3 Monetary policy when rates go negative 
Let me share with you some of our experiences with very low and nega-
tive interest rates. Danmarks Nationalbank pioneered by setting a key 
monetary-policy rate well below zero already in 2012 to stave off large 
capital inflows.  
Since then, many other central banks, including the ECB and the SNB, 
have now gained experience with policy rates significantly below zero. 
With monetary policy rates as low as currently -0.75 per cent in Switzer-
land and -0.65 per cent in Denmark, we have been in unchartered territo-
ry for some years now. What have we learnt from this period?  
A key message is that the situation with negative policy rates in Denmark 
largely mimics that of low, but slightly positive rates. And side effects 
have generally been negligible. In the following I will go a bit more into 
detail on some of the aspects. 
 [CHART 8: Different deposit rates for different segments] 
There has been more or less full pass-through to lending rates in the 
economy since the key policy rate was lowered to -0.75 per cent in 2015. 
However, the degree of pass-through to banks' deposit rates has differed 
across customer segments.  
Many large non-financial corporations face negative interest rates on 
their bank deposits. The same applies to the majority of insurance and 
                                                   
1
   We use the 17 events listed in Carlo Altavilla, Giacomo Carboni and Roberto Motto, 2015, Asset purchase pro-
grammes and financial markets: lessons from the euro area, ECB Working Paper Series, No 1864. 
Page 7 of 9 
  pension companies. This is appreciated due to the importance for the 
transmission to the exchange rate.  
Banks have, on the contrary, been reluctant to introduce negative inter-
est rates to households. Their actions have generally little impact on the 
exchange rate. 
With negative policy rates one potential concern could be a significant 
hoarding of cash. So far, there have been no signs that this should be the 
case in Denmark. One explanation for this is that firms and institutional 
investors would face significant costs of handling, storing and insuring 
cash. And as just mentioned, households have not been meet with nega-
tive deposit rates so far. 
[CHART 9: Declining share of cash payments] 
Another explanation is that Danes to an increasing extent seem to prefer 
to use electronic payments instead of cash – either by using credit cards 
or smart phones. This suggests that the inconvenience cost of cash is ra-
ther high in Denmark. The decreasing use of cash suggests that the effec-
tive lower bound of policy rates is well below the current level in the Dan-
ish case. 
Another frequently mentioned concern in relation to negative rates is the 
potential impact on banking sector profitability. Do we see a substantial 
decline in earnings in the banking sector because of low interest-rate 
margins and flatter yield curves? The short answer is no.  
Banking sector profitability in Denmark has been robust and increasing in 
recent years because other factors have countered those negative effects 
on interest earnings. Low interest rates also stimulate economic activity 
and ease debt-servicing costs for businesses and households. The result 
is lower impairment charges for the banks. Furthermore, banks have also 
been able to raise their fees. 
Periods of low interest rates are sometimes associated with risks of bub-
bles in asset prices. Given the current long period of very low interest 
rates, we continue to monitor the development in asset prices closely, 
especially in property markets. Thus far, the development in real-estate 
prices has been broadly in line with fundamentals such as income, inter-
est rates and other user costs.  
There are, however, some important regional challenges in the capital 
area, where strong vigilance is needed. In case of any concerns about in-
Page 8 of 9 
  flated asset prices, other economic policies may need to be activated, 
including micro and macroprudential policies. 
The recent years' unconventional policy measures by many central banks 
have resulted in higher prices of long-dated bonds. This could be re-
garded as a transfer of wealth from debtors to creditors. It has led to 
some discussions about the distributional aspects of monetary policy.  
However, one should bear in mind that the central bank's ability to influ-
ence longer-term interest rates is often a crucial feature of monetary poli-
cy because longer-term interest rates are important for economic activity. 
Hence, distributional effects may be knock-on consequences of the con-
duct of monetary policies.  
The extremely low policy interest rates around the world have to be un-
derstood in the context of very low inflation and high private demand for 
financial assets – the counterpart to high savings and low investments in 
the private sector.  
The low interest rates set by central banks across various currency re-
gimes – fixed, floating or monetary unions – are responses from central 
banks pursuing their mandates. It might not be a preferred state, but the 
global economy would have been worse off had interest rates been high-
er. In the Danish case, the negative interest rates have been nothing but 
a necessary consequence of our exchange-rate policy.  
Thank you for your attention!  
 Page 9 of 9 
DANMARKS 
NATIONALBANK 
MONETARY POLICY IN  DENMARK  
– POSSIBILITIES AND CONSTRAINTS 
​Lars Rohde, Chairman of the Board of Governors, 3 July 2017  
Agenda 
1. Background for fixed 
exchange rate regime 
2. Spill-overs from monetary 
policy in the euro zone 
3. Monetary policy with 
negative interest rates 
4. Questions? 
2 
Swiss contagion to Danish FX market 
15 January 2015 
Note: Left-hand axis: Reversed scale. Right-hand axis: 30-minutes moving average of bid-ask spreads measured at 5 minutes intervals. 
​Source: OlsenData. 
3 
Sharp increase in foreign exchange 
reserve in 2015 
​Note: In per cent of nominal GDP at yearly frequency. GDP for 2017 is from Danmarks Nationalbank’s most recent projection from March 2017. 
​Source: Danmarks Nationalbank and Statistics Denmark. 
4 
The ERM2 agreement and the fixed 
exchange rate 
Note: Reverse scale. 
​Source: Danmarks Nationalbank. 
5 
Fixed-exchange-rate policy introduced 
after a period of high and volatile inflation 
​Source: Statistics Denmark and Thomson Reuters Datastream. 
6 
Danish monetary-policy rates tightly 
linked to ECB rates 
Note: Key policy rates. 
​Source: Thomson Reuters og Danmarks Nationalbank. 
7 
Danish government bond yields co-
moves strongly with German yields 
​Note: 9-year par rates. 
​Source: Nordea Analytics. 
8 
Decline in long-term Danish yields in line 
with core euro area countries 
​Note: Aggregate decline in sovereign bond yields in two-day windows following 17 pieces of ECB communication. 
​Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream, ECB and own calculations. 
9 
Households are largely exempt from 
negative interest rates on deposits 
Rate of interest on bank deposits 
​Note: ‘Other types of deposits’ refer to time deposits, lending-related deposits, etc. 
​Source: Danmarks Nationalbank. 
10 
Share of cash payments in Denmark is 
declining steadily 
​Note: Payments made by smart phones are included in card payments. 
​Source: Statistics Denmark, Danmarks Nationalbank, Finance Denmark,  
​Nets and own calculations. 
11 
DANMARKS 
NATIONALBANK 
THANK YOU! 
12 
