 
TITLE SLIDE 
  GREECE: A COMEBACK TO THE FINANCIAL MARKETS? 
Are we near the finishing line? 
 Yannis Stournaras, Governor, Bank of Greece  
Economist, Frankfurt, May 31, 2017 
 It is a great pleasure for me to be here with you today and have the opportunity 
to  share  my  thoughts  on  the  prospects  of  the  Greek  economy.  I  will  focus  on 
three issues: First, I will present the progress that has been made so far. Second, I 
will address to the remaining challenges. Finally, I will discuss the preconditions 
for a sustainable return to financial markets. 
1.  Progress so far 
Since the beginning of the sovereign debt crisis, Greece has implemented a bold 
programme  of  economic  adjustment  that  has  eliminated  fiscal  and  external 
deficits and improved competitiveness. 
SLIDE 1  
  The  general  government  balance  from  a  deficit  of  15.1%  of  GDP  in  2009 
turned into a  surplus of 0.7% of GDP in 2016.  Between  2009 and  2016,  the 
primary  balance  improved  by  about  14  percentage  points.  In  2016  the 
primary  surplus  was  4.2  percent  of  GDP  outperforming  not  only  the  0.5 
percent target for 2016, but also the 3.5 percent target for 2018. Practically, 
 1 
the  required  fiscal  adjustment  until  the  end  of  the  programme  in  2018  has 
nearly been made. This represents one of the largest fiscal adjustments ever 
undertaken. 
  The  current  account  deficit  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  has  fallen  by  15 
percentage points. For the last two years the current account has effectively 
been in balance. 
  Labour cost competitiveness has been fully restored. Price competitiveness is 
almost  back  at  its  2000  level    and  can  be  expected  to  continue  to  improve 
with  the  implementation  of  further  product  market  reforms  that  raise 
competition in various sectors of the economy.  
  At  the  same  time,  sweeping  structural  reforms  have  been  implemented 
covering  the  pension  system,  the  health  system,  labour  markets,  product 
markets, the business environment, public administration, the tax system and 
the  framework  in  which  fiscal  policy  is  conducted,  while  the  privatization 
programme is on-going. 
  Recapitalisation  and  restructuring  have  taken  place  in  the  banking 
system,  enabling  it  to  withstand  the  crisis  and  the  deterioration  of  banks’ 
asset quality. In addition, significant institutional reforms have been initiated 
aiming at reducing the volume of non-performing loans. 
 SLIDE 2 
On account of these developments, there is evidence that the economy has been 
undergoing  a  rebalancing  towards  tradable,  export-oriented  sectors.  A  few 
figures are indicative of the forces exerted. 
  The  share  of  exports  in  GDP  increased  from  19%  in  2009  to  32%  in  2016 
with most of the increase stemming from exports of goods. In fact, according 
to Eurostat data, Greece’s exports of goods have increased by 43% since 2009 
in  real  terms,  compared  to  42%  for  the  euro  area  and  47%  for  Germany, 
Europe’s export engine. 
 2 
  Between 2010 and 2015, the relative price of tradables versus non-tradables 
rose  by  about  10%.  Whereas  both  sectors  were  hit  hard  by  the  recession, 
tradables  performed  better 
than  non-tradables  as  outward-looking 
companies increased their exports, taking advantage  of the  improvement in 
competitiveness.  As  a  result,  the  relative  size  of  the  tradables  sector, 
measured  by  Gross  Value  Added,  grew  by  approximately  12%  in  volume 
terms and by about 24% in nominal terms. Finally, in terms of employment, 
the size of the tradables sector increased relative to the non-tradables sector 
by around 8%. 
These  figures  would  improve  further  if  the  reforms  already  implemented  were 
enhanced  by  those  planned  under  the  ESM  programme.  Based  on  estimates  of 
the  OECD,  full  implementation  of  all  reforms,  both  those  undertaken  and  those 
scheduled, is expected to boost real GDP over a 10-year-horizon by about 13%. 
And  this  figure  excludes  further  positive  effects  from  structural  reforms  that 
cannot  be  easily  quantified  such  as  the  modernisation  of  the  public 
administration  and  the  judiciary  system,  the  strengthening  of  insolvency 
regulations  and  the  resolution  of  non-performing  loans.  In-house  work  by  the 
Bank  of  Greece  provides  similar  estimates  of  the  effects  of  structural  reforms 
with the main effect coming from higher total factor productivity (TFP) growth. 
2.  Challenges remain 
In spite of these positive developments, considerable stock disequilibria remain:  
  Unemployment,  though  falling,  remains  very  high  (at  about  23%);  Job 
creation, although robust, is dominated by temporary and part-time jobs. 
  The  general  government  debt  to  GDP  ratio  has  risen  to  unsustainable 
levels (179% of GDP). 
  The private debt overhang hampers banks’ ability to support the recovery 
by granting new credit. 
In  addition,  despite  the  fact  that  structural  competitiveness  improved  over  the 
period 2013-2014 (according to a number of indices compiled by the OECD, the 
 3 
World Bank, and the World Economic Forum), Greece still ranks at the lower end 
of  advanced  economies,  and  progress  has  stalled  or  even  retreated  slightly  in 
recent years. 
3.  Prospects for a sustainable comeback to financial markets 
SLIDE 3 
In  order  to  address  the  remaining  challenges,  to  improve  the  future  growth 
prospects of the Greek economy, and to ensure a comeback to financial markets 
in 2018, several conditions should be met. 
a.  Implementation of 2nd review reforms 
First  and  foremost,  following  the  closure  of  the  second  review,  it  is  necessary 
that  there  is  a  smooth  and  timely  implementation  of  the  agreed  growth 
enhancing reforms.  
Delayed  closing  of  the  second  review  increased  uncertainty  and  reduced 
confidence which, coupled with the high tax burden, reversed the positive course 
of economic activity in 2016 Q4. As a consequence, following the mild recession 
in  2015,  the  economy  stagnated  in  2016.  However,  a  positive  medium-term 
outlook  is  still  possible, conditional  on  a  smooth  implementation  of  agreed 
reforms.    Consumption  is  expected  to  continue  rebound,  driven  by  robust 
employment,  which  is  recovering  faster  than  output,  pointing  to  a  job-rich 
recovery.  Investment  is  projected  to  increase  as  confidence  is  restored  and 
financial  conditions  improve.  Exports  are  projected  to  benefit  from  the  benign 
global economic outlook and past improvements in cost competitiveness. Finally, 
although  the  sizeable  over-performance  in  2016  is  assessed  to  be  mainly  of  a 
temporary  nature,  the  2017  target  is  expected  to  be  met  with  a  safe  margin. 
Moreover, rebalancing the budget towards a more growth-friendly composition 
would support economic recovery. 
b.  Implementation  of  further  growth  enhancing  reforms  to  boost  exports 
and attract FDI  
 4 
Second,  further  growth  enhancing  reforms  are  needed  that  will  boost  exports 
and  attract  FDI  are  needed.  The  economic  adjustment  and  the  structural 
improvements during the past six years made Greece more business friendly and 
have  created  significant  investment  opportunities.  However,  domestic  savings 
are insufficient to meet the investment needs of the Greek economy that, after a 
long period of very low investment rates, are significant. Thus, besides restoring 
access  of  companies  to  capital  markets,  conditions  should  be  encouraged  to 
attract foreign capital, notably in the form of Foreign Direct Investment. 
In  order  to  attract  both  domestic  and  foreign  investment,  further  emphasis 
should  be  given  to  reforms  that  improve  the  business  environment,  enhance 
competition  and  reduce  excessive  regulation,  protectionism,  bureaucracy  and 
complex  legislation.  For  example,  investment  licensing  procedures  need  to  be 
simplified,  the  administrative  burden  on  businesses  reduced,  the  remaining 
regulated  professions  and  network 
industries  opened  up, 
the  public 
administration modernised and strengthened, judicial efficiency enhanced, court 
proceedings speeded up and of course personal and corporate taxation lowered. 
Additionally,  a  more  effective  use  of  the  domestic  high-skilled  human  capital 
(and  the  return  of  high-skilled  scientists  and  executives  who  work  abroad) 
requires the adoption of policies and reforms that encourage research, facilitate 
the  diffusion  of  technology  and  boost  entrepreneurship.  Policies  include 
providing incentives to increase investment in research and development (R&D), 
strengthening  the 
links  between  enterprises  and  the  academic/research 
community by allowing universities to commercially exploit research results and 
ideas, and effectively using available EU funds. 
Alongside  structural  reforms,  and  in  order  to  facilitate  the  recovery  through  a 
normalization  of  financial  conditions,  as  a  matter  of  urgency  the  private  debt 
overhang  problem  is  addressed,  since  it  is  the  greatest  challenge  the  Greek 
banking system and the Greek economy faces. 
On  the  one  hand,  the  high  stock  of  NPLs  reduces  bank  profitability  and  thus 
constrains the supply of credit, which primarily affects bank dependent SMEs. On 
the  other  hand,  high  NPLs  delay  corporate  restructuring  and  thus  thwart  the 
 5 
ability of viable firms to finance new investment projects. According to research 
by the OECD, when more industry capital is sunk in non-viable (“zombie”) firms, 
the average viable firm undertakes less investment than otherwise. Simulations 
by  the  OECD  suggest  that  reducing  the  share  of  capital  of  non-viable  firms  in 
Greece to the minimum across OECD countries would be associated with a gain 
in investment for a typical viable firm of 4.7%, improving productivity-enhancing 
capital reallocation in the Greek economy. 
A series of legislative and regulatory reforms have already been enacted as part 
of  the  strategy  to  reduce  NPLs,  such  as  the  operational  targets  of  individual 
banks,  revisions  of  the  insolvency  law  and  the  gradual  setup  of  a  secondary 
market for NPLs. 
In  addition,  a  number  of  new  measures  have  already  been  legislated  as  prior 
actions of the second review, such as the introduction of an out-of-court workout 
framework, the revision of corporate insolvency law and the launch of a platform 
for electronic auctions. 
Besides structural reforms and NPL management, growth prospects can also be 
improved by acting on the fiscal policy front in two ways:  
  First,  a  growth  friendly  fiscal  policy  mix  can  be  adopted.  The  increased 
emphasis on taxation needs to be reduced in favour of policies that focus on 
restraining  and  restructuring  non-productive  spending  and  making  more 
effective and efficient use of the public sector’s assets, especially land. 
  Second, the medium-term fiscal target can be reduced. According to estimates 
by the Bank of Greece, a lowering of the general government primary surplus 
target from 2021 onwards to 2 per cent of GDP, from the 3.5 per cent that is 
envisaged now, would be consistent with debt sustainability if combined with 
some  mild  debt  relief  measures  and  structural  reforms  to  raise  potential 
growth.  The  easing  of  the  primary  surplus  targets,  together  with  the 
implementation  of  the  agreed  structural  reforms,  would  put  the  necessary 
conditions  in  place  for  a  gradual  lowering  of  tax  rates,  with  positive 
multiplier effects on economic growth. 
 6 
c. Ensuring debt sustainability 
A final condition for return to financial markets is to ensure debt sustainability. 
The ratio of general government debt to GDP is still high. In 2008 that ratio stood 
at  around  110%.  It  is  now  around  179%.  The  debt  path  has  been  strongly 
affected by the so-called snowball effect – that arises from interest rates on debt 
being much higher than growth. Indeed, from 2010 to 2016, the snowball effect 
is estimated at some 82% of GDP. But whatever the causes of its rise, it is crucial 
that it is put on a sustainable path. In the context of the above proposals in the 
area of fiscal policy making, the Bank of Greece recently made specific proposals 
to ensure the sustainability and manageability of public debt. 
The  short-term  measures  decided  at  the  Eurogroup  meeting  of  December  5, 
2016 are a positive step and are expected to reduce public debt as a ratio of GDP 
by 20 percentage points by 2060. 
However,  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  public  debt  going  forward,  additional 
medium-term  measures  are  necessary.  When  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  is  above 
100%,  measures  that  reduce  interest  payments  on  debt  can  improve  the  ratio 
quicker than a rise in the primary balance. 
SLIDE 4 
The  interest  burden  of  Greek  public  debt  is  low  until  2021  but  increases 
substantially  thereafter  because  of  payments  of  deferred  interest  on  the  EFSF 
loans  and  interest  on  new  debt  issued  in  financial  markets.  A  simulation 
performed by the Bank of Greece defers interest on EFSF loans, extending their 
Weighted Average Maturity by 8.5 years – Option 1 in the right-hand diagram. 
SLIDE 5 
If, in addition  to  interest  deferment, we  assume a  primary surplus target of 3.5 
percent in 2018-2020 and a reduction to 2 percent thereafter,  we can see from 
the left-hand diagram that the debt path is close to that where a primary surplus 
of  3.5  per  cent  for  10  years  is  assumed.  This  exercise  is  indicative  of  how 
admittedly  mild  debt  relief  measures  can  have  significant  effects  on  the  debt 
profile with no cost for the creditors. 
 7 
However,  as  the  right-hand  diagram  shows,  in  terms  of  gross  financing  needs, 
option  1  makes  debt  sustainable  at  the  margin.  Hence,  further  debt  relief 
measures  are  necessary  in  order  to  reduce  gross  financing  needs  significantly 
below the  20% threshold and bring debt  to a sustainable path.  Of course, were 
the  interest  smoothing  accompanied  by  higher  growth,  as  a  consequence  of 
lower primary surpluses, then the debt-to-GDP profile and gross financing needs 
would be more favourable. Alternatively, if interest rate smoothing were to occur 
and the costs shared equally between Greece and the ESM, this would also lead 
to more favourable outcomes. 
4. Conclusions and final remarks 
The  economic  adjustment  and  the  structural  improvements  during  the  past 
seven  years  have  made  Greece  more  business  friendly,  have  created  significant 
investment  opportunities,  and  have  generated  positive  prospects  for  the  Greek 
economy. 
The realization of these positive prospects requires a consistent and determined 
implementation  of  the  reform  and  privatization  programme  including  tackling 
the private debt overhang problem. 
These  enable  the  adoption  of  medium-term  measures  to  ensure  the 
sustainability of Greek public debt, which will pave the way for the inclusion of 
Greek  government  bonds  in  the  ECB’s  quantitative  easing  programme.  Such 
developments  will  set  in  motion  a  virtuous  circle  leading  to  Greece’s  return  to 
international  financial  markets  in  2018,  the  elimination  of  capital  controls,  the 
return to financial normality and the definite exit from the crisis. 
In  order  to  capitalize  on  the  macroeconomic  and  fiscal  adjustment  achieved  so 
far,  the  institutions  and  our  European  partners  must  act  now  in  a  decisive  and 
bold  manner  by  specifying  the  medium-term  debt  relief  measures  for  the 
sustainability of Greece’s public debt, which, as was agreed last year, will go into 
effect  at  the  end  of  the  current  programme.  This  must  be  done  because  the 
markets on which Greece will need to borrow after the end of the programme in 
the summer of 2018 are demanding to know from now whether the debt will be 
sustainable or not. We are all aware of the fact that re-gaining access to financial 
 8 
markets after the end of the current programme is the only way forward. No one, 
neither the partners nor Greece, are in any mood for another memorandum. 
 28 
March 
Sources: 
McGowan A. Andrews, M. D. and Millot V. 2017 “The walking dead: Zombie firms 
and productivity performance in OECD countries”. OECD Economics Department 
Working Papers No. 1372. 
 
Stournaras,  Y.  2017  “Entrepreneurship,  NPL  Resolution  Policies  and  Economic 
Growth  Prospects  in  Greece”  Speech  at  an  event  organized  by  Piraeus  Bank  in 
Athens, 
2017. 
http://www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?It
em_ID=424&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05-4166-9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b 
 
Stournaras, Y. 2017 “Greece and the euro area going forward” Speech at Delphi 
Economic Forum II, in Delphi 4 March 2017. 
http://www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?It
em_ID=416&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05-4166-9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b 
 
Stournaras,  Y.  2017  “Macroeconomic  developments  and  the  contributions  of 
investment,  research  and  innovation  of  the  pharmaceutical  sector  to  the  new 
growth  model”  Speech  at  an  event  organized  by  the  Confederation  of 
Pharmaceutical Companies in Athens, 15 March 2017. 
http://www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/el/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?It
em_ID=419&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05-4166-9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b 
 
Stournaras,  Y.  2017  “Towards  a  new  sustainable  development  model  with  a 
designation of origin” Speech at an event organized by the Hellenic Association of 
Industries of Branded Products in Athens, 22 February 2017. 
http://www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/el/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?It
em_ID=412&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05-4166-9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b 
  9 
