   IEMed Forum 
The Mediterranean economies in a changing world 
Lessons learned in economic and financial instability:  
what scenarios can we envisage? 
The role of Central Banks at present.  
Monetary policies and exchange rates in the Mediterranean countries 
Address by Dr Mario Vella 
Governor of the Central Bank of Malta 
Barcelona, 24 February 2017 
 Dear Governor Linde, dear fellow Governors, ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  participate  in this  forum  on  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  in 
Mediterranean  countries.  The  Central  Bank  of  Malta  is  both  a Mediterranean central  bank,  which 
once pursued a monetary policy regime similar to that followed by many Mediterranean central banks 
today, as well as a member of the Eurosystem.  
Since January 2008, when Malta adopted the euro, the Central Bank of Malta is an integral part of the 
Eurosystem.  This comprises the European Central Bank and the national central banks of those EU 
member  states  that  have  adopted  the  euro  as  their  currency.    For  us,  therefore,  our  monetary  and 
exchange rate policy is that of the euro area as a whole.  
The primary objective of monetary policy in the euro area is price stability.1  The Governing Council 
has defined price stability as an average annual rate of inflation of below, but close to, 2% over the 
medium term.  This  focus on price stability is based on the knowledge that money is neutral in the 
long run, meaning that it can affect nominal variables, such as the price level or the exchange rate, but 
not real variables, such as income and employment.  It also reflects the historical experience of many 
countries, which clearly shows that inflation is ultimately a monetary phenomenon.  
The existence of a single currency, the euro, entails a single exchange rate.  This has both internal and 
external implications. 
From  an  internal  perspective,  the  single  exchange  rate  means  that  the  euro  shields  its  member 
countries from exchange rate volatility between them.  Indeed, the desire to eliminate such volatility 
was one of the main driving forces behind the creation of the euro itself.  Prior to the existence of the 
                                                           
1   See European Central Bank (2011) The Monetary Policy of the ECB.   
1 
euro, exchange rate arrangements in Europe were subject to the risk of destabilising currency crises.  
This  instability  was  seen  as  incompatible  with  the  existence  of  a  single  market  and  an  integrated 
European economy.2  
From an external perspective, like most major currencies, the euro is a freely floating currency.  The 
external  value  of  the  euro  is  determined  by  the  interaction  of  demand  and  supply  in  the  foreign 
exchange  market.    Of  course,  the  exchange  rate  remains  an  important  indicator  for  the  Governing 
Council, in so far as exchange rate movements affect developments in economic activity and inflation. 
At  the  same  time,  the  monetary  policy  stance  of  the  ECB,  while  fully  oriented  towards  the  price 
stability objective, does influence the exchange rate.   
From a theoretical viewpoint, one can argue that the member countries of the euro area have chosen to 
go beyond a fixed exchange rate by adopting a single currency.  The adoption of the euro implies the 
irreversible abolition of national currencies and, hence, of national exchange rates themselves. 
This choice involves a trade-off.  On one hand, a single currency, as we have seen, eliminates the 
volatility of exchange rates within the monetary union.  The euro, as a freely-floating currency, helps 
protect  the  economies  of  its  member  countries  from  external  shocks.    The  single  currency  also 
facilitates trade between them, deepening economic integration. 
However,  the  elimination  of  national  currencies  implies  that  market  signals  regarding  domestic 
economic imbalances are lost, allowing such imbalances to build up.  More importantly, the absence 
of national currencies also implies that a valuable tool for stabilising the economy in the short term in 
the face of asymmetric shocks is no longer available.  The sovereign debt crisis in the euro area has 
brought home the implications, both positive and negative, of membership of a single currency area.  
It remains my firm opinion, however, that the gains outweigh the losses. It is also my firm opinion 
that greater efforts need to be made to reduce and eventually eliminate internal imbalances within the 
monetary union in order to protect its sustainability. 
I would now like to turn briefly to the experience of the Central Bank of Malta in dealing with these 
policy issues over almost 50 years of its existence.   
Malta is an extremely small, open economy, highly dependent on international trade for its prosperity.  
The Bank’s monetary policy objective was initially set as the promotion of “the orderly and balanced 
development of Malta and a rising level of employment and income consistent with the maintenance of 
monetary stability in Malta and the external value of the currency”.   
In practice, among these multiple objectives, the Bank  gave priority to maintaining stability in  the 
external value of the Maltese lira (or pound as it was initially known).  An exchange rate peg was seen 
as necessary to support foreign trade and inward investment from abroad.  Moreover, given Malta’s 
                                                           
2   For an account of the euro area’s exchange rate policy during the first decade of its existence, see Lorenzo 
Bini Smaghi, “The euro area’s exchange rate policy and the experience with international monetary co-
ordination during the crisis”. Speech delivered on 6 April 2009 in Brussels.   
2 
dependence  on  imported  goods  to  satisfy  domestic  consumer  demand,  the  peg  was  also  seen  as  a 
prerequisite  to  safeguard  domestic  purchasing  power.3    Throughout  its  existence,  therefore,  the 
Bank’s  monetary  policy  orientation  was  always  focused  on  a  fixed  exchange  rate  as  the  nominal 
policy anchor.   
When the Bank was founded in 1968, Malta formed part of the sterling area, reflecting its past as a 
British  colony  and  its  strong  ties  with  the  United  Kingdom.    When  the  Bretton  Woods  system 
collapsed  in  1972,  the  Maltese  monetary  authorities  decided  to  break  the  exclusive  link  with  the 
pound  sterling  and  to  peg  the lira  to  a  trade-weighted  basket  of  currencies.    During  the 1980s the 
composition of the basket was revised on several occasions until, in 1989, the number of component 
currencies  was  reduced  to  three,  the  ECU  -  which  had  replaced  several  European  currencies  -  the 
pound sterling and the US dollar.  In 2002, the weight of the euro was raised to 70%, while those of 
the dollar and the pound were set at 20% and 10%, respectively.   
Following Malta’s accession to the European Union, in May 2004, the authorities resolved to move 
swiftly to adopt the euro.  A year later, the Maltese lira entered Exchange Rate Mechanism Mark II 
(ERM II) with a unilateral commitment by the Maltese authorities to maintain its value unchanged at 
the central parity rate.  This central parity rate then became the conversion rate between the Maltese 
lira and the euro when Malta adopted the single currency at the beginning of 2008.  
In effect, Malta has moved from a currency union with the pound sterling to membership of the euro 
area, with a period characterised by a basically fixed exchange rate in between.   
Maintaining  an  exchange  rate  peg  over  such  a  long  time  span  is  hard,  though  changes  to  the 
composition  of the  currency  basket  allowed some  flexibility.   Throughout  this period, the  lira  was 
only  devalued  once, in  1992,  in the  wake  of the turbulence  seen in  Europe,  which  saw  the  pound 
sterling  ejected  from  the Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  (ERM)  and  the  devaluation of the  Italian lira 
among others.  Otherwise, the Bank’s determination to maintain the peg never wavered. We never 
blinked. 
The ability to maintain the peg may have been partly due to restrictions on trade and stringent controls 
on capital movements, at least in the early decades.  By the mid-1990s, however, trade and financial 
market liberalisation meant that these factors became less and less important.  Instead, major reforms 
in 1994 brought about fuller independence for the Central Bank and a gradual liberalisation of interest 
rates amid increasing recognition that, in the absence of capital controls, monetary policy had to be 
more actively oriented towards maintaining the peg.   
Throughout,  the  lira  was  buttressed  by  a  healthy  stock  of  external  reserves.    The  Central  Bank  of 
Malta was legally bound to maintain reserves equivalent to at least 60% of the monetary base, but in 
                                                           
3   For a review of Malta’s monetary and exchange rate policy over the years, see Anton Caruana Galizia (1989) 
“Malta’s exchange rate policy since the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system” in the Central Bank of 
Malta Quarterly Review, June 1989 and Aaron G Grech (2003) “The framework of monetary policy in 
Malta”. MPRA Paper No 33464.   
3 
practice this ratio normally exceeded 100%.  As capital controls were eased, interest rate policy was 
increasingly set with an eye on the spread vis-à-vis interest rates offered on the basket currencies (and, 
later, the euro). 
More profoundly, maintaining the exchange rate peg required discipline in domestic wage and price 
setting to safeguard Malta’s external competitiveness.  Despite an element of  wage indexation, the 
labour market was fairly flexible, with relatively low coverage of collective bargaining in the private 
sector and with wage negotiations being handled at the level of the individual firm.  Broadly speaking, 
fiscal discipline was also maintained.  The government debt to GDP ratio remained below 60% until 
the late 1990s, peaked at around 72% in 2004, and is now just at about the 60% threshold again.   
This discipline helped establish the credibility of the exchange rate peg, which became embedded in 
the  decision-making  process  across  the  economy.    For  this  reason,  the  Bank  never  adopted  policy 
options that would have entailed greater exchange rate flexibility, even when this became possible, for 
instance in ERM II.   
Subsequently, this internal discipline also served in good stead after euro adoption, which, as we have 
seen before, entails the loss of the exchange rate and interest rates as a policy tool.  Despite the several 
shocks that have hit the euro area since 2008, the Maltese economy has performed well.  Malta has 
taken full advantage of the opportunities offered by EU accession and euro adoption to diversify its 
economic  base,  from  an  economy  driven  mainly  by  export-oriented  manufacturing  industry  to  one 
characterised by the increasing importance of export-oriented services. It also engaged in structural 
reforms to increase competition in key markets and to encourage labour market participation.  Malta 
now enjoys rapid growth, full employment and moderate inflation.   
The latest Economic Forecast by the European Commission, that of Winter 2017, shows that Malta’s 
economy is expected to remain on a sustained positive trajectory. According to the Commission: 
“Malta’s  economic  growth  has  settled  down  from  the  exceptional  levels  of  2014  and  2015  but  is 
forecast to remain well above the EU average. Unemployment is set to remain at record lows while 
productivity gains contain unit labour costs and preserve competitiveness.”  
Malta’s  real  GDP  growth  is  estimated  to  remain  robust.  For  both  2017  and  2018,  the  Maltese 
economy is estimated to expand at the rate of 3.7%. This places Malta amongst the top performers in 
the EU. During 2017, GDP in the euro area and the EU is expected to grow at the rate of 1.6% and 
1.8% respectively. For 2018 growth in the euro area is expected to increase to 1.8% whilst average 
growth in the EU will remain as in the previous year (1.8%). 
Malta’s historical low unemployment rates are envisaged to be maintained over the coming period. 
The EC forecast shows that both for 2017 and 2018, Malta’s unemployment rate will be 4.9%, which 
is extremely low when compared to the both the euro area and the EU.  During 2017, it is expected 
that  unemployment  in  the  euro  area  and  the  EU  will  be  9.6%  and  8.1%  respectively.  For  2018, 
4 
unemployment in the euro area is expected to go down to 9.1% whilst that in the EU will also decline 
to 7.8%.    
Malta’s  general  government  deficit  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  is  also  expected  to  continue  on  the 
positive trajectory it has embarked on the in the previous years. It is expected to narrow further to 
0.6% in 2017 and remain at this level in 2018.  This figure is also compares favourably to the average 
deficit  ratios  projected  in  the  euro  area19  (2017  and 2018:  -1.4%)  and the  EU (2017:=  -1.7%  and 
2018= -1.6%). 
For the first time in many years, Malta’s gross government debt to GDP is expected to fall below the 
60% threshold. In fact, for 2017 the debt ratio is expected to be 58.0% and to decline even further in 
2018 (55.6%). 
In my view, the main lesson to be learnt from this half a century of experience is that while a flexible 
exchange rate policy may afford some leeway in the short term, allowing the economy to withstand 
economic shocks, it is no substitute for structural reforms that achieve greater flexibility in product 
and  labour  markets. This  is  especially  the  case  for  small  open  economies.    In  such  economies the 
internal market is far too small for firms to enjoy sufficient economies of scale that enable them to be 
competitive  internationally.    Moreover,  these  economies  wield  little  market  power  in  the  global 
economy.  Ultimately, the realities of rigid labour and product markets and unsound fiscal policies 
always catch up.  Exchange rate adjustment alone is unable to restore or improve living standards.  
Therefore, a fixed exchange rate policy provides incentives for prudent fiscal behaviour as well as for 
policies  that  promote  productivity  and  competitiveness.    These  policies  are  crucial  to  avoid  large 
current  account  deficits,  depletion  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  and  currency  depreciation.  
Depreciation  increases  inflation  and  deters  investment  if  market-oriented  reforms  in  product  and 
labour market policies remain absent and fiscal discipline is missing.  Diversification of an economy’s 
production base and of the markets it targets insulate an economy from shocks more effectively than 
exchange rate flexibility. 
In conclusion, I hope I have shown how the Central Bank of Malta has journeyed from a monetary 
and exchange rate policy based on a currency peg – an arrangement common to many Mediterranean 
central banks today – to membership of a single currency area.  I contend that we have managed this 
transition successfully.  At the same time, we cannot afford to lose the focus on internal discipline and 
external competitiveness that served us so well over the last five decades.  The former exchange rate 
peg policy, as well as our current membership of the euro area, are not ends in themselves, but are a 
means to ensure the economic well-being of our citizens. 
5 
