William C Dudley: "Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on the
Regional Economy"
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Economic Press Briefing on the Regional Economy, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, New York City, 10 August 2017.
 Good morning, and welcome to the New York Fed’s Regional Economic Press Briefing.  Today,
we will provide an update on economic conditions in the region, and then discuss the issue of
regional  wage  inequality.    As  always,  what  I  have  to  say  reflects  my  own  views  and  not
1
necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.
Current Economic Conditions
The  Federal  Reserve  has  pursued  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  since  the  Great
Recession  to  facilitate  achieving  our  dual  mandate  of  maximum  sustainable  employment  and
price stability.  This policy stance has provided support to the economy and helped lower the
unemployment  rate  from  10  percent  at  the  depths  of  the  Great  Recession  to  4.3  percent
currently.  Measures of underemployment have also improved considerably and are near pre-
crisis levels. 
Stronger  labor  market  conditions  are  perhaps  the  best  means  to  improve  the  economic  well-
being of most Americans, particularly those who have been struggling and are most vulnerable to
economic  downturns.    Improved  job  opportunities  have  helped  to  support  household  income
growth, consumption, and saving, as well as the housing market.  And, as discussed in the Fed’s
recent Monetary Policy Report and in Chair Yellen’s testimony before Congress, it is encouraging
that unemployment rates continue to fall for most major demographic groups, including African-
Americans and Hispanics.  At the same time, we should remain concerned about those groups,
for  which  the  jobless  rates  remain  above  the  unemployment  rate  for  the  nation.    Our  outlook
anticipates  a  continued  moderate  growth  trend,  with  some  further  strengthening  in  the  labor
market and an increase in inflation over the medium term toward our objective of 2 percent. 
Although  job  growth  in  our  region  has  slowed  somewhat  in  recent  months,  economic  activity
continues to expand.  After outpacing the United States as a whole for a number of years, job
growth in New York City is now running a bit below the national average.  And, as has been the
case for some time, job growth in Northern New Jersey remains a little below New York City’s
pace.  Over the past year, job growth has flattened out in much of upstate New York, with Albany
remaining a bright spot in the region.  Unfortunately, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands both
remain mired in economic difficulties with no clear signs of a revival.
While the post-crisis expansion is now the third-longest on record, by historical standards it has
been marked by a relatively weak pace of growth, with annual GDP growth averaging just 2.1
percent  since  mid-2009.    Wage  growth  has  also  been  comparatively  modest  even  as
unemployment has declined.  In part, this likely reflects the fact that productivity growth has been
sluggish compared to historical experience.  Relative income differences are likely to get more
attention when economic growth is weak and people do not see significant improvement in their
absolute income levels.  With that in mind, as we consider how to address the issues of income
inequality  and  mobility,  we  should  also  consider  how  to  improve  flagging  productivity  growth,
because that would help raise the level of household income.
Wage Inequality
Today’s briefing will focus on labor market inequality, including wage inequality in our region.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Currently,  we  see  comparatively  high  levels  of  inequality  in  the  labor  market  in  terms  of
differences  in  the  wages  workers  earn.    This  situation  has  been  in  the  making  for  several
decades.  Since the early 1980s, wages have increased more rapidly for workers toward the top
of the income distribution than for the median worker, and much more rapidly than for workers
toward the bottom of the distribution.  Further, this increase in inequality can be seen throughout
the entire distribution of wages.
In my view, two main factors are responsible for this pattern of differential wage growth and the
resulting increase in wage inequality.  First, advances in technology have dramatically changed
the  nature  of  work,  increasing  the  skill  requirements  for  many  jobs  while  displacing  others. 
Second,  the  pace  of  globalization  has  accelerated  in  recent  decades,  with  increased  cross-
border trade, investment, immigration, and the emergence of global supply chains.  Together,
these economic forces have contributed to significant job losses in certain sectors, most notably
manufacturing.    The  resulting  decline  in  demand  for  middle-  and  lower-skilled  workers  has
resulted  in  fewer  jobs  and  has  depressed  wages  for  many  in  those  industries.    Other,  less
important factors behind the rise in inequality include the decline in private sector labor unions
and the falling real value of the minimum wage. 
At the same time, technological change and globalization have created jobs in areas such as
engineering  and  software  development.    Demand  has  been  particularly  high  for  knowledge
workers, resulting in strong wage growth in certain sectors.  All told, the forces of technological
change  and  globalization  have  contributed  to  wage  inequality  by  pushing  up  wages  for  those
toward the top, and stifling wage growth for workers toward the middle and bottom of the wage
distribution.  As I have said in previous remarks, we need to do a better job of helping those hurt
2
by globalization.
Monetary policy can help support economic growth, but it is much less powerful in addressing
the structural factors that underpin inequality in the labor market.  That said, understanding the
causes and consequences of economic inequality is important to the Fed.  We are working hard
at  producing  research,  information,  data,  and  analysis  so  that  we  can  better  understand
inequality  and  participate  in  an  informed  debate  on  how  to  best  address  it.    One  significant
initiative  within  the  Federal  Reserve  System  is  the  creation  of  the  Opportunity  and  Inclusive
Growth Institute at the Minneapolis Fed.  The Institute conducts research to measure, analyze,
and  make  recommendations  to  improve  the  economic  well-being  of  all  Americans,  with  a
particular  focus  on  structural  barriers  that  limit  full  participation  in  economic  opportunity  and
advancement.
Lagging Economic Mobility
In  a  free  market  economy,  some  wage  inequality  is  inevitable  given  variability  in  individuals’
endowments, skill sets, and education levels.  These attributes influence the demand for their
services and the wages they are paid. We don’t expect those just starting out to have the skills of
more experienced workers. 
But,  the  access  and  opportunity  needed  to  attain  the  attributes  associated  with  higher  wages
may not be uniform—and that is concerning.  Inequality reflects impediments to people reaching
their potential.  These include limits on access to education, credit, transportation, and housing. 
Such impediments may discourage workers from investing in themselves, and may lead some
to drop out of the labor force.  We should all work to ensure that people have opportunities to
develop their skills, build human capital, and improve their job prospects. 
To me, inequality is especially problematic when it reflects and reinforces barriers to economic
mobility.  Too many parents are increasingly pessimistic about their children’s economic future. 
According to a recent Pew Research Center survey, only 37 percent of American parents think
their children will be better off financially than they are.    This is a deeply troubling finding.  I
3
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
believe that income inequality is generally less problematic when it does not impede economic
mobility and when economic mobility is high.  While the “rags to riches” story has been a popular
theme in U.S. history, income mobility in the United States is now notably lower than in many
other advanced economies.
4
Unfortunately,  substantial  differences  in  economic  mobility  exist  within  the  United  States. 
Important  research  by  Raj  Chetty  and  his  co-authors  suggests  that  upward  mobility  strongly
depends  on  where  one  grew  up.     That  is,  places  themselves  seem  to  have  a  measureable
effect on economic outcomes for children as they reach adulthood.  In particular, this research
indicates  that  higher  upward  mobility  is  associated  with  areas  that  are  less  residentially
segregated by race or income, and that have higher-quality schools, stronger social networks,
greater community involvement, and stable family structures.  Significantly, they find that places
with  greater  upward  economic  mobility  tend  to  have  lower  income  inequality.    This  evidence
suggests  that  there  is  a  fundamental  inequality  of  opportunity  for  advancement  that  is  tied  to
where people live.  Reducing inequality of opportunity is something we should all work toward. 
Directions for Policy
So, what are some specific ways policy can address inequality and improve economic mobility? 
While  this  is  a  difficult  and  complex  set  of  issues  with  no  easy  answers,  I  do  have  a  few
thoughts.  First and foremost, we can improve the quality of education for our most vulnerable
citizens.  Children who attend better schools and attain higher levels of education have more
favorable  long-term  outcomes,  including  better  job  prospects  and  higher  earnings.    There  are
large disparities in the quality of education a student receives, which are highly correlated with
where that student lives.  We need to look for ways to provide higher-quality education regardless
of  where  people  live.  Reducing  the  role  of  local  property  taxes  in  school  financing  to  better
equalize school quality across locations is one example.     
5
In  addition,  education’s  benefits  start  very  early  in  life  and  are  cumulative.    While  we  need  to
further  strengthen  primary  and  secondary  education,  there  is  convincing  evidence  that
educational investments in early childhood have especially high rates of return in terms of lifetime
6
earnings and are associated with many other positive outcomes.
Workforce  development  is  another  key  policy  area  that  can  improve  economic  mobility  and
reduce  inequality.    Because  of  the  swift  pace  of  economic  change  driven  by  advances  in
technology  and  globalization,  we  ought  to  step  up  efforts  to  help  workers  build  the  skills
necessary to adapt to change.  This means providing these types of services at the local level. 
These  efforts  should  include  innovative  workforce  development  programs,  coursework  and
certifications  in  key  skills  that  are  in  demand,  and  fostering  partnerships  between  higher
education institutions and local employers.  Here, I would point to Monroe Community College in
Rochester as a model of successful collaboration with employers to create job-training programs
7
that align with current employment opportunities.
Conclusion
The issues of economic inequality and income mobility are among the most important that we
face as a nation and as a region.  These issues are particularly relevant for our region because
the Second District is home to some of the highest and lowest levels of wage inequality in the
country.  Next, Research Officer Jaison Abel will discuss regional economic conditions and wage
inequality.
Thank you for your kind attention.
1
2
Jaison Abel, Jason Bram, Gerard Dages, Richard Deitz and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
3
4
5
6
7
See William C. Dudley, Benefits and Challenges from Globalization, May 11, 2017. 
Pew Research Center, “Global Publics More Upbeat About the Economy,” June 5, 2017.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. “Where is the Land of Opportunity? 
The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1553–
1623. Chetty, Raj and Nathaniel Hendren. 2016.  “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility II:
County-Level Estimates,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 23002, December.
See William C. Dudley, Economic Opportunity and Income Mobility, April 11, 2016.
Heckman,  James  J.    2006.    “Skill  Formation  and  the  Economics  of  Investing  in  Disadvantaged  Children,”
Science 312, 1900.
For a discussion of examples from Rochester and other parts of the region, see William C. Dudley, Workforce
Development and Reinvention in the Rochester Economy, August 12, 2015.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
