Philip R Lane: External and internal spillovers
Speech by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the 56th ACI FMA World
Congress, Dublin, 12 May 2017.
Introduction
 1
It is an honour to speak at the ACI World Congress and welcome delegates to Dublin.  
Today,  I  wish  to  discuss  two  types  of  macro-financial  interactions  that  are  relevant  in
understanding  the  macro-financial  dynamics  of  the  euro  area.  First,  there  are  inward  and
outward linkages between the euro area and the rest of the world that may generate external
spillovers by which shocks and policies elsewhere affect macro-financial conditions in the euro
area and, in turn, shocks and policies in the euro area matter for macro-financial conditions in the
rest of the world. Second, there are even stronger linkages across the member countries within
the euro area, such that internal spillovers matter for each member state in the euro area.
Both external and internal spillovers are relevant in evaluating the impact of the ECB’s monetary
policy. In particular, the ECB has pursued a multi-dimensional monetary policy since mid-2014
that has combined a negative deposit rate, an asset purchase programme, targeted long-term
refinancing  operations  (TLTROs)  and  forward  guidance  on  the  expected  future  path  for  its
policies. This strategy was adopted in recognition of the risk of persistent under-shooting of its
inflation target, including a tail risk of deflation. 
As captured in the introductory statement to the most recent monetary policy press conference
on  27th April  2017,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  expects  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  to
remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time and well past the horizon of its
net asset purchases. Net asset purchases are expected to run at a monthly pace of €60 billion
until the end of December 2017 or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until the Governing
2
Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with its inflation aim.
The  assessment  of  the  Governing  Council  is  that  this  very  substantial  degree  of  monetary
accommodation is still needed for underlying inflation pressures to build up and support headline
inflation  in  the  medium  term.  If  the  outlook  becomes  less  favourable,  or  if  financial  conditions
become  inconsistent  with  further  progress  towards  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of
inflation,  the  Governing  Council  stands  ready  to  increase  the  asset  purchase  programme  in
terms of size and/or duration.
In analysing the stance of monetary policy, it is essential to incorporate the impact of external
conditions on the design of the ECB’s monetary measures, while also recognising the role of the
external  sector  in  determining  their  effectiveness.  From  a  global  perspective,  the  external
spillovers  from  the  ECB’s  monetary  strategy  also  matter  for  macro-financial  conditions
elsewhere and may affect optimal monetary strategies for other central banks.
In addition, from the perspective of individual member countries, the national impact of the ECB’s
monetary  strategy  depends  on  a  host  of  country-specific  factors,  together  with  the  indirect
impact through the matrix of inter-linkages among the member countries. To the extent that there
is a mis-match between the current macro-financial conditions in an individual member country
and the ECB’s monetary stance, this can be analytically viewed as a type of internal spillover
generated by the deviation vis-a-vis macro-financial conditions in the rest of the euro area. We
will return to the analysis of internal spillovers later in the speech.
 1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
External spillovers
In thinking about external spillovers, it is important to bear in mind that nature and magnitude of
spillovers varies over time, across regions and across different states of the world. Accordingly,
it is essential to adopt an empirical approach in assessing the role of spillovers at a given point in
time.
To this end, let me make a few empirical observations.
First, as shown in Figure 1, the share of world GDP (measured in current US dollars) that is
generated  by  emerging  and  developing  countries  has  risen  sharply  from  about  20  percent  in
2000 to 30 percent in 2007 and 40 percent in 2017. In relation to the trade channel, Figure 2
shows  that  this  group  is  collectively  far  more  important  than  the  United  States  as  a  trading
partner for the euro area. It follows that the assessment of macro-financial conditions in these
economies  is  an  important  task  in  determining  the  appropriate  monetary  stance  for  the  euro
area.  
 2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Second, the nature of external linkages and spillovers inevitably varies with the current state of
the  euro  area  economy.  To  take  just  one  dimension,  some  transmission  mechanisms  are  a
function of output levels, while others are a function of domestic expenditure levels. Accordingly,
the cross-border transmission of shocks and policies will differ depending on the direction and
magnitude of the euro area’s trade balance, which is simply the difference between output and
expenditure. 
Figure 3 shows net exports as a share of GDP for the euro area: the current net surplus position
means that the domestic expenditure level in the euro area is running substantially below the
output  level.  A  related  point  is  captured  in  Figure  4  that  shows  the  time-varying  accounting
contribution  of  net  exports  to  GDP  in  the  euro  area.  While  net  exports  were  quite  significant
during  2010–2013  and  again  during  2015  (the  first  full  year  of  the  ECB’s  accommodative
monetary  strategy),  the  accounting  contribution  of  net  exports  was  marginally  negative  during
2016.
 3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Third, the extent and composition of international financial linkages matter for external spillovers
that  operate  through  financial  channels.  Drawing  on  my  joint  research  with  Gian  Maria  Milesi-
Ferretti  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  Figure  5  shows  the  expansion  in  the  size  of
international balance sheets (relative to world GDP) since 1990. Furthermore, it illustrates the
increase in prominence of financial centres as intermediaries of international financial assets and
liabilities and the rising prominence of emerging and developing countries as holders and issuers
of international financial positions. 
In  relation  to  the  former,  the  intermediation  of  financial  flows  through  international  financial
centres calls for a deeper level of analysis in order to understand the underlying sources and
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
destinations for international financial flows, which is hampered by the considerable data gaps in
the  tracking  of  international  financial  transactions.  In  relation  to  the  latter,  increasing
interdependence means that close monitoring of financial conditions in emerging economies is
essential in evaluating risks to domestic financial conditions in advanced economies.
Fourth,  the  external  value  of  the  euro  has  varied  sharply  across  time.  This  matters  for  the
transmission  of  shocks  and  policies  both  through  output  and  financial  channels.  As  an
illustration, Figure 6 shows the euro-dollar rate over 1999–2017. Even if 1999–2001 depreciation
and  2002–2007  appreciation  of  the  euro  against  the  dollar  had  limited  direct  impact  on  the
conduct  of  monetary  policy  during  the  1999–2007  period,  these  medium-term  fluctuations
plausibly  exerted  considerable  influence  on  financial  conditions  in  the  euro  area,  given  the
extensive bilateral linkages between the US and European financial systems and the unique role
of the dollar in the international financial system.3
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
More recently, it is plausible that diverging monetary strategies between the ECB and the Federal
Reserve played a role in the appreciation of the euro against the dollar from mid-2012 to mid-
2014 and the subsequent depreciation in the second half of 2014 and early 2015. However, in
evaluating  the  transmission  mechanisms  of  the  ECB’s  accommodative  monetary  policy,  it  is
4
important to bear in mind the relative stability of the dollar-euro rate since Spring 2015.
Taking  into  account  these  empirical  patterns,  how  should  we  think  about  the  interactions
between external spillovers and the ECB’s monetary policy?
In the inward direction, the euro area is affected by macro-financial conditions in the rest of the
world through trade, exchange rate and financial channels.
The relative prices of tradable goods (especially commodities and other non-differentiated goods)
are  determined  by  global  supply  and  demand  conditions.  Most  obviously,  the  analysis  of  the
global factors driving the persistent and large-scale fluctuations in oil prices has been a priority
for all central banks in recent years. In addition, global excess capacity may have constrained
pricing for various manufacturing sectors in recent years.
In addition to their influence on the terms of trade, external demand conditions also may boost
domestic output levels, especially in situations in which domestic expenditure levels are weak.
For  the  euro  area,  an  expansion  in  net  exports  clearly  played  an  important  role  in  sustaining
output during 2010–2013 and again in 2015.
Furthermore, it is plausible that the depreciation in the external value of the euro between mid-
2011 and mid-2012 and again between mid-2014 and mid-2015 contributed to the expansion in
net exports, while the appreciation phases from mid-2010 to mid-2011 and mid-2012 to mid-2014
5
 6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
represented headwinds to recovery in the euro area.
With the exception of currency reversal during the euro crisis phase of mid-2011 to mid-2012,
the  euro  persistently  appreciated  against  the  dollar  from  mid-2010  to  mid-2014.  During  this
period,  the  Federal  Reserve  implemented  several  phases  of  quantitative  easing.  In  turn,  the
sharp depreciation of the euro against the dollar from mid-2014 to mid-2015 correlates with the
adoption  by  the  ECB  of  an  accommodative  monetary  strategy,  including  asset  purchase
programmes,  a  negative  deposit  rate,  forward  guidance  and  targeted  long-term  refinancing
operations.  At  this  broad  level,  it  seems  clear  that  differences  in  the  phasing  and  scope  of
monetary strategies account for some proportion of the medium-term swings in the exchange
rate over this period.
While Figure 2 showed that bilateral trade vis-à-vis the US is relatively limited, the importance of
the euro-dollar rate for exporters and importers in the euro area is amplified by the dollar tracking
strategies  of  many  emerging  economies,  together  with  the  dominant  role  of  the  dollar  in
6
international price setting.
At  the  same  time,  the  rising  share  of  emerging  and  developing  economies  in  world  GDP  (as
captured in Figure 1) means that it is also necessary to allow for the possibility of discrete shifts
in the currency values of major emerging economies (vis-à-vis the euro) that would materially
affect the external environment facing the euro area. For emerging economies, sizeable currency
movements  over  a  short  interval  may  occur  through  a  combination  of  the  greater  inherent
volatility of emerging economies and the potential sensitivity of the exchange rate to revisions in
reserve management strategies.    As it has turned out, this risk has not been realised in recent
years, even if concerns have been elevated at various times (including in early 2016).
7
8
It is important not to exaggerate the exchange rate as a transmission mechanism for monetary
policy.    In particular, in relation to the ECB’s current monetary strategy, the dollar-euro rate and,
more generally, the effective exchange rate for the euro area have been relatively stable since
April 2015 (at least compared to the amplitude of the fluctuations during 2008–2014) and the net
export channel in fact turned negative in 2016.
That is, the ECB’s monetary policy has substantially operated through domestic channels over
the last two years, with the improvement in financial conditions facilitating a recovery in domestic
expenditure,  led  by  consumption.  It  follows  that  the  recovery  in  the  euro  area  economy  in
combination with a stable exchange rate constitutes a positive external spillover for the rest of the
world.
So far, I have focused on external macroeconomic spillovers. In addition, external spillovers may
operate  through  financial  channels. As  was  illustrated  in  Figure  5,  the  scale  of  cross-border
financial  integration  has  sharply  increased  over  the  last  two  decades,  with  financial  systems
intertwined through two-way cross holdings. Financial conditions in the euro area are affected by
external financial shocks via international balance sheet effects, shifts in international financial
9
flows and common influences on discount factors and risk premia.
The  history  of  the  last  fifteen  years  illustrates  the  importance  of  global  factors  in  determining
financial conditions. During 2003–2007, easy credit conditions and a risk-on attitude pervaded the
financial systems of advanced economies, which was reinforced by the international reallocation
of  liquidity  across  regions.  In  turn,  this  period  was  followed  by  the  sudden  stop  of  the  global
financial crisis during 2008–2009.
Since  2010,  there  has  been  more  diversity  in  financial  conditions  across  the  globe  due  to
differences  in  speed  of  recovery  from  the  crisis,  the  state  of  balance  sheets  and  variation  in
policy  decisions.  Under  these  conditions,  there  is  greater  potential  for  adverse  external  policy
spillovers since countries are at different points in the tightening-loosening policy spectrum.
 7 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
10
in 
tightening 
financial  conditions 
In addition, lower bound constraints mean that it is more problematic for a central bank to offset
an  externally-driven 
through  domestic  monetary
easing.
  Furthermore, a tightening in financial conditions is especially damaging during phases
in  which  domestic  sectoral  balance  sheets  are  under  repair.  Given  these  constraints,  a  well-
designed  monetary  strategy  can  provide  a  strong  anchor  for  domestic  financial  conditions  by
providing clear forward guidance on the commitment of the central bank to meeting its medium-
term inflation target.
Internal spillovers
Its unique status as a monetary union of nineteen member countries means that it is essential to
address  also  internal  spillovers  within  the  euro  area.  The  high  levels  of  trade  and  financial
integration among the member countries mean that the scope for cross-border internal spillovers
is especially acute. Indeed, avoiding the disruptive impact of shifts in national currency values
(including from a political  economy  perspective)  was  one  of  the  motivating  factors  behind  the
formation of the monetary union.
11
Let me focus on a particular type of internal spillover: if macro-financial conditions in an individual
member  country  substantially  deviate  from  the  rest  of  the  euro  area,  the  area-wide  monetary
policy may not be optimal from the perspective of the country in question.
 In this sense, the
macro-financial  conditions  in  the  rest  of  the  euro  area  spillover  to  this  country  through  their
impact on monetary policy.
12
13
To mitigate the impact of this type of internal spillover, it is now widely accepted that national
macroprudential  policies  can  play  an  important  role,  especially  in  relation  to  differences  in
financial  cycles  across  member  countries.
  In  addition,  taking  due  account  of  fiscal
sustainability  considerations,  counter-cyclical  national  fiscal  policies  can  contribute  to  macro-
financial stabilisation. In fact, recent analysis shows that there are complementarities between
national  macroprudential  policy  and  counter-cyclical  fiscal  policies,  which  limits  the  burden
placed  on  either  policy  instrument  if  both  are  simultaneously  deployed.
  Through  such
mechanisms,  the  impact  of  internal  spillovers  within  the  monetary  union  and  any  potential
financial stability side effects of the area-wide common monetary policy can be mitigated.
Conclusions
14
In summary, the focus of this speech on external and internal spillovers serves to illustrate the
analytical  challenges  in  determining  the  optimal  monetary  strategy  for  the  ECB  and  the
appropriate  set  of  domestic  ancillary  policies  for  the  member  countries  of  the  euro  area.
Information exchange and the sharing of analysis across the global central banking community
through  fora  such  as  the  bimonthly  meetings  of  governors  at  the  Bank  for  International
Settlements  and  the  biannual  meetings  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  provide  a  valuable
common platform in assessing and evaluating external spillovers.
 Equally, in relation to internal
spillovers, the work of the Financial Stability Committee of the ECB and European Systemic Risk
Board provides a framework to develop a shared analysis of financial stability risk within the euro
area and, more broadly, across the EU.
15
——————————————————————-
References
Aguiar,  Mark  and  Gita  Gopinath  (2007),  “Emerging  Market  Business  Cycles:  The  Cycle  is  the
Trend,” Journal of Political Economy 115, 69–102.
Ammer,  John,  Michiel  De  Pooter,  Christopher  Erceg,  and  Steven  Kamin  (2016).  “International
Spillovers  of  Monetary  Policy,”  International  Finance  Discussion  Note  2016–02–08,  Board  of
 8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Bruno,  Valentina  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2015),  “Cross-Border  Banking  and  Global  Liquidity,”
Review of Economic Studies 82(2), 535–564.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
(2015), “Global Imbalances and Currency Wars at the ZLB,” NBER Working Paper No. 21670.
Carney,  Mark  (2016),  “Redeeming  an  Unforgiving  World,”  Speech  at  8th  Annual  Institute  for
International Finance G20 Conference, Shanghai, 26th February 2016.
Carvalho, Daniel and Michel Fidora (2015), “Capital Inflows and Euro Area Long-Term Interest
Rates,” Journal of International Money and Finance 54(C), 186–204.
Casas, Camila, Federico J. Díez, Gita Gopinath and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2016), “Dominant
Currency Pricing,” NBER Working Paper No. 22943.
Dieppe, Alistair, Georgios Georgiadis, Martino Ricci, Ine Van Robays and Bjorn van Roye (2017),
“ECB-Global:  Introducing  ECB’s  Global  Macroeconomic  Model  for  Spillover  Analysis,”  ECB
Working Paper No. 2045.
Draghi,  Mario  (2016),  “The  International  Dimension  of  Monetary  Policy,”  Speech  at  the  ECB
Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, 28th June 2017.
Eichengreen,  Barry  (1993),  “European  Monetary  Unification,”  Journal  of  Economic  Literature
31(3), 1321–1357.
Lane, Philip R. (2016), “The Funding of the Irish Domestic Banking System During the Boom,”
Journal of the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland XLIV, 40–68.
Lane,  Philip  R.  and  Gian  Maria  Milesi-Ferretti  (2017),  “International  Financial  Integration  in  the
Aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis,” IMF Working Paper No. 17/115.
Martin,  Philippe  and  Thomas  Philippon  (2017),  “Inspecting  the  Mechanism:  Leverage  and  the
Great Recession in the Eurozone,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
I presented earlier versions of these remarks at the CFS-IMFS “ECB and Its Watchers XVIII” Conference on the
6th of April and the IBRN-IMF “The Transmission of Macroprudential and Monetary Policies Across Borders”
Conference on the 19th of April. I thank Mary Everett, Donata Faccia, Garo Garabedian and Rebecca Stuart for
their inputs to this speech.
In  addition,  the  strategy  includes  reinvestments  of  the  principal  payments  from  the  maturing  securities
purchased under the asset purchase programme. 
See, amongst many others, Bruno and Shin (2015) and Lane (2016).
A wider measure of the nominal effective exchange rate for the euro area is highly correlated with the dollar-euro
rate.
I emphasise the impact of the exchange rate on activity levels, since the direct impact on the consumer price
level is very limited for a continental-sized economy. The direct effect of the exchange rate on the price level is
much more significant for small open economies.
Casas et al (2016).
For instance, see Aguiar and Gopinath (2007) on the volatility of emerging economies.
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
See, amongst others, Ammer et al (2016), Carney (2016) and Dieppe et al (2017).
For instance, see Carvalho and Fidora (2015).
Caballero et al. (2015).
See Eichengreen (1993) on the political economy problems associated with material shifts in intra-EU bilateral
exchange rates.
The category of internal spillovers also includes intra-area contagion effects of financial crises in individual
member countries. The analysis of crises is beyond the scope of this speech.
Macroprudential  policies  also  have  a  role  to  play  in  addressing  the  common  component  in  the  euro  area
financial cycle, in view of the costs associated with deploying monetary policy to manage financial stability risks.
Martin and Philippon (2017).
See Draghi (2016).
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
