Michael  Held:  Remarks  at  the  Securities  Industry  and  Financial
Markets  Association's  Compliance  and  Legal  Society  Monthly
Luncheon
Remarks  by  Mr  Michael  Held,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Legal  Group  of  the  Federal
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Securities  Industry  and  Financial  Markets  Association's
Compliance and Legal Society Monthly Luncheon, New York City, 9 May 2017.
 Martin Grant, Thomas Noone, and Jennifer Spain assisted in preparing these remarks.
Thank  you  for  your  kind  words. And  thank  you  to  SIFMA’s  Compliance  and  Legal  Society  for
inviting  me.  I’m  grateful  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  with  you. As  always,  what  I  have  to  say
reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the
Federal Reserve System.
I have been a lawyer in the Legal Group at the New York Fed for almost twenty years. In my
current role as General Counsel, I also oversee the Bank’s compliance function. Martin Grant,
whom some of you may know, is our Chief Compliance Officer. Martin has been an advisor and
role model for me throughout my tenure at the New York Fed. So much of what I have learned
about  compliance,  I  have  learned  from  Martin.  It’s  not  every  day  you  get  to  thank  a  mentor
publicly, so I don’t want to let this opportunity pass without saying thank you to Martin.
I will offer some observations today as a fellow traveler in the legal and compliance fields. But I
also hope to share some lessons learned from when our institutions may have been on opposite
sides of the table. I do not aim to break any new ground today. This is, after all, a luncheon. I am
worried about your digestion. Instead, I want to offer some high-level reflections. I will then share
with you a few of the questions that are on my mind.
Let’s begin with some high level observations about the state of play in compliance. The role of
compliance within supervised financial institutions has grown dramatically—in size, scope, and
relevance. It’s the relevance of compliance that stands out to me. In day-to-day interactions with
supervised financial firms, I sense that risk and compliance functions have grown in respect and
stature across the financial services industry. That’s a good thing.
I am further encouraged by what may be on the horizon for compliance. In the same way that
social psychology has altered the fields of economics and other social sciences, compliance is
beginning to learn from academic research about human behavior.  Again, this is a good thing. I
am  particularly  fond  of  a  description  of  one  method,  coined  by  Cass  Sunstein  and  Richard
Thaler:  the  “nudge.”  I  believe  compliance  will,  in  the  near  future,  supplement  an  existing
framework that restricts poor choices with new ways to encourage good choices.
1
Here is a classic example of the type of change I have in mind. When employers recommend
that their employees “opt in” to retirement plans, they achieve a far lower rate of participation than
when  employees  are  automatically  enrolled,  but  may  “opt  out.”  What  accounts  for  this?  The
economics of the plan work either way. And the incentives have not changed. Employees are not
promised more money if they choose not to “opt out” than if they choose to “opt in.” But a better
2
result is achieved by “nudging” employees simply by changing the starting point.
Compliance programs may be more likely to achieve their desired effects if they are based on
studies of how people actually behave. Here are three ideas that would benefit from continued
empirical study.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
First,  can  we  increase  participation  in  voluntary  training  and  education  programs  by  pre-
populating enrollment? That is, can we rely on the same type of inertia that keeps employees
from  opting  out  of  retirement  savings  programs?  I’m  speaking  here  of  programs  above  and
beyond  the  minimum  training  firms  already  require.  These  might  explore  in  greater  depth  the
ethical  decisions  that  come  up  in  corporate  life—in  particular,  times  when  the  corporation’s
interest and a client’s interest appear to diverge.
Second,  I  am  interested  in  the  potential  for  certain  employees  to  serve  as  carriers  for  social
norms. Their identification is not always based on rank in a corporate hierarchy. Step one is to
find out who these people are. We might, for example, attempt to map electronic communication
within  an  organization.  We  might  then  ask  how  these  can  people  become  living,  breathing
“nudges” in favor of better behavior.
Third, and more generally, I wonder whether our approach to compliance is, at times, too rules-
based. This is a classic “rules versus standards” debate, that is familiar to many lawyers.  A
surfeit of rules may cause employees to believe that they are not trusted. This could create the
misimpression that it is someone else’s job to consider long-term consequences or what is the
right thing to do. Now, I am not suggesting that there should be a wholesale elimination of rules.
But, in some areas, compliance programs may be more effective if some rules were redeployed
as  standards.  That  way,  front  line  businesses  would  have  to  exercise  good  judgment  in
interpreting and applying those standards. Simply put, some empirical basis for evaluating the
right balance of rules and standards would be helpful.
3
So,  there  is  room  for  improvement  and  creative  thinking  in  compliance—even  in  ways  that
challenge basic assumptions on how compliance should work. You are familiar, no doubt, with
the phrase, “Don’t let the perfect be the enemy of the good.” My first message to you is, “Don’t let
the good be the enemy of the better.”
Compliance and influence
Progress  aside,  I  still  see  confusion  about  the  basic  roles  and  responsibilities  of  compliance
functions within supervised financial institutions. Or, perhaps, there is a degree of entrenched
resistance.
Before I tell you what I mean by that, here is what I don’t mean. I am not advocating for a vast
expansion of the role of the compliance function. It is tempting to think that vesting compliance
officers with greater and greater authority over business will lead to better outcomes—at least in
terms of the safety and soundness of the financial institution. But, I am very sensitive to the risk
that  as  compliance  becomes  more  involved  in  business  decisions,  it  loses  its  independence.
That  independence  is  critical  to  effective  governance  and,  ultimately,  to  the  safety  and
soundness of an institution. What’s more, there is some point at which compliance becomes an
end in itself, detracting from broader corporate and social purposes. I will return to this thought
later.
Here is my point: Most if not all firms could use greater clarity about who is responsible for what
within their organization. I offer this observation based, in part, on the compliance enhancements
required in many Federal Reserve enforcement actions. Many compliance professionals have a
very clear understanding of their own role—in terms of both duties and limitations—and strive to
maintain  their  independence.  I  am  less  confident  about  the  degree  to  which  others  in  an
institution are aware of what the role of compliance is, and what it is not. A shared understanding
between business and compliance about this is critical. A misunderstanding of roles can lead to
confusion  of  responsibility  (or  diffusion  of  responsibility),  laying  the  groundwork  for  control
failures.
Let me explain how confusion about rules might play out. The more that the compliance function
is perceived to be certifying or validating the business’s actions, the less the business sees itself
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
as responsible for adhering to the firm’s policies, and even to the law. Because the compliance
function often has the power to block business decisions, as a practical matter, it can also be
viewed  as  giving  its  approval  by not  blocking  decisions.  That  tacit  approval  can  work  like  a
license to take increased risks.
When  those  increased  risks  become  a  control  failure,  government  investigators  start  asking
questions about what went wrong. Witnesses then start pointing fingers. Compliance is quick to
say that the business owns the risk. Bankers say it is not their fault because compliance gave its
blessing—often inferred from silence.
Neither side has it quite right. For one thing, I do not buy the excuse “if it was really a problem our
compliance people should have stopped us.” This kind of scapegoating can sacrifice credibility
with a regulator. It can also damage the morale within the compliance group. On the other hand, I
wonder  why  compliance  personnel  did  not  look  for  and  identify  a  gap  in  understanding  and
escalate the issue. It is not enough for compliance to lob its advice over the wall and then move
on. Compliance is not simply an advisory function. It bears a certain responsibility to safeguard
the organization. When risks are not being addressed, senior management—or, if necessary,
the board—must be alerted.
The  role  of  the  compliance  officer  is  often  divided  into  two  categories—serving  as  a  control
function and serving as an advisor. In many respects, this framing works just fine. Compliance
sometimes needs to control. And sometimes it needs to advise. Indeed, for in-house counsel,
this dual-hatted approach is not unfamiliar. I have discussed in previous remarks the “partner-
guardian” model espoused by the former general counsel of General Electric, Ben Heineman. He
argues  that  a  lawyer  serves  as  both  a  partner  to  the  business  unit  and  a  guardian  of  the
organization.  I am a big fan of this model and think it serves in-house lawyers well.
4
But, this binary approach—advisor versus controller—also misses something. I think we would
be well served to keep in mind that the mark of a strong compliance function—at least, from my
perspective—is  that  it  is influential within the organization. Compliance functions, like in-house
counsel, need to adeptly use all the tools in our respective toolkit to influence behavior within an
institution. Some of these tools are more advisory; others, are more controlling.
Policies and procedures that reinforce clear roles for the first and second lines of defense, along
with  clearly  defined  escalation  paths,  can  help  compliance  exert  appropriate  influence  over
business decisions. When a senior manager understands that she has responsibility for control
failures  that  occur  on  her  watch,  and  sees  that  her  responsibility  cannot  be  deflected  or
redistributed, then her view  of  the  compliance  function  shifts.  What  was  once  something  that
was inhibiting her business line is now something that is helping her protect it. She may find that
compliance as a constructive and independent partner can offer ways to avoid problems .
Greater  clarity  about  roles  is  a  good  starting  point.  Here  are  some  additional  ways  in  which
compliance may strengthen its influence while preserving its independence.
First, compliance should insist on getting involved earlier. Influence delayed is influence denied. If
a firm is considering restructuring a unit or designing a new product, compliance should be at the
drafting  table  with  an  opportunity  to  hear  and  to  be  heard.  If  a  new  trading  strategy  is  to  be
implemented, compliance should review sooner than on the eve of execution. I understand that
time is money, but investing time early in a compliance review may save years of investigation
later.
Second,  compliance  should  keep  an  eye  out  for  larger,  more  systemic  compliance  risks  and
issues. As a centralized function, compliance is well-situated to connect the dots and identify
broad  issues  that  are  not  always  visible  to  management.  The  compliance  function  typically
serves the entire organization, and can use that enterprise-wide view to spot systemic problems.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
One  type  of  systemic  compliance  risk  that  I  think  about  is  what  Gillian  Tett  of  the Financial
Times has called The Silo Effect. Silos can result from the specialization common in hierarchical
organizations working in highly technical fields. Silos are at risk of breaking away from the main.
They  may  develop  aberrant  norms  that  can  undermine  standard  oversight  and  controls.
Compliance  can  and  should  leverage  its  independence  to  spot  silos—or  any  form  of
“groupthink”—before undue risks mature.
Third,  compliance  can  increase  its  influence  through  careful  stewardship  of  its  people.  This
means  attracting  and  retaining  talented  compliance  professionals,  and,  whenever  possible,
insisting on getting to know the business area. The role of a compliance officer should include
building relationships and becoming a trusted resource. Such relationships can yield a deeper
understanding  of,  among  other  things,  the  motivations  and  pressures  that  are  affecting  the
business.  These  insights  can  inform  and  help  improve  policies,  procedures,  testing  and
monitoring.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  compliance  can  become  more  effective  if  it  calibrates
processes to actual circumstances and behaviors.
Finding  and  retaining  talented  people  for  compliance  roles  is  a  major  challenge  facing  firms
across the industry right now. After all, compliance can be a nearly impossible job. And well-
trained,  experienced  compliance  personnel  are  scarce.  Those  are  but  two  of  the  many
challenges  that  compliance  functions  in  financial  institutions  face.  I  certainly  do  not  have
solutions  to  every  compliance  challenge.  But,  having  to  manage  the  attraction,  retention,  and
development of the New York Fed’s compliance staff, I am sympathetic.
I am optimistic, too. As I mentioned earlier, I think the broad trends in compliance are heading in
the right direction. Compliance functions are gaining influence. Greater clarity about roles can
help. Compliance will always be a difficult job, but does not have to be a seemingly impossible
one.
Another cause for optimism is the attention compliance now receives in law schools and other
graduate programs. Two examples are NYU Law School’s Program on Corporate Compliance
and Enforcement, and Fordham Law School’s LLM program in Corporate Compliance. These
programs engage key leaders in the field in important public discussions, and train students who,
in terms of their understanding of corporate governance, are well ahead of where many of us
were  when  we  began  our  careers.  These  programs  will  contribute  to  a  bright  future  for  the
compliance profession.
Compliance, enforcement, and accountability
I also want to say a few words about enforcement and accountability. I believe, of course, that
past  misconduct  should  be  punished.  I  also  believe  that  we  who  play  a  role  in  bringing
wrongdoers to account should also require forward-looking reforms under the mantra of “Never
again.”  For  those  forward-looking  reforms  to  be  successful,  firms  and  enforcement  attorneys
need to pay attention to root causes of misconduct.
There  is  a  vigorous  and  important  debate  in  academic  and  regulatory  circles  about  the
prosecution  of  individuals  in  cases  of  corporate  misconduct.  Virtually  everyone  agrees  that
individual prosecutions can have deterrent effect on future misconduct if people believe they will
get caught. I follow the debate with great interest. Suffice it to say, I agree that individuals must be
held  accountable  for  misconduct.  If  the  misconduct  is  criminal,  criminal  prosecution  is
warranted.
I also believe what science teaches about behavior: Our actions are a product of both individual
disposition or volition and the situation in which we function. And, the situation might be more
potent than we might think.  So, I wonder, for example, whether the thought of “getting caught”
even crosses someone’s mind if a prohibition is so routinely disregarded that violating that rule is
normal. In the LIBOR and FX cases, for example, traders discussed openly their manipulation of
5
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
reference rates in electronic chat rooms that they knew were recorded and monitored. The fact
that those traders used a back channel to communicate evidences an awareness of wrongdoing
—not to mention the brazen content of their communication. I have to conclude that the risk of
getting caught either never crossed their minds or was massively discounted.
On behalf of their firms, compliance personnel can help identify the root causes—especially the
situational factors—that contribute to control failures. A thorough and honest exploration of those
factors can help inform structural and governance changes mandated in enforcement actions. It
is in everyone’s interest for those reforms to succeed, to fulfill the mantra of “Never again.”
I do not think this type of inquiry is easy—not because the root causes are unknowable. Rather, it
may be uncomfortable to ask the right questions. Here are some examples. There are sure to be
others.
Are behavioral expectations—and the consequences of violating those expectations—clear?
In other words, does the company say, “This is the conduct we want, and this is how we will
hold you accountable for it.”
Does the company employ leaders who are visible role models of good conduct and fire
those who are not?
Are systems of compensation and promotion aligned with corporate goals and purposes?
And, if there is a pattern of misconduct, are you sure that your incentive programs are based
on merit?
Can the heads of business lines—the people responsible for P&L— explain how it is that
each part of their business makes money and manages the associated risks? If not, are
they really capable of effective oversight?
When  misconduct  comes  to  light,  does  the  company  assess  itself  and  challenge
assumptions with brutal honesty?
Upon learning of misconduct, is the company willing to intervene in a timely fashion? If there
is an emerging pattern of misconduct, how quickly is it identified and addressed?
Finally,  are  there  particular  desks  or  teams  in  which  everyone  is  quite  junior?  Too  junior,
perhaps, to have worked through a down business cycle or the financial crisis? If so, are we
giving that area adequate supervision and compliance attention?
Concluding thoughts
I want to raise one final topic with you today, which, to my mind, is related to the question of
accountability. It is the risk that control groups in large institutions can evolve to a place where
they are driven by their own self-preservation or immediate concerns.
If the compliance regime—inclusive of policies, procedures, testing, monitoring, etc.—is geared
toward shielding the compliance function itself from blame or responsibility, then it has failed to
serve the institution. It also risks becoming irrelevant. Compliance has to resist adopting a “check
the  box”  mentality—slavishly  adhering  to  formal  rules  while  ignoring  standards  of  suitability,
integrity, and fairness. Compliance personnel are professionals. As such, they are entrusted to
exercise  judgment.  They  are  expected  to  make  conscious  choices,  not  merely  to  rely  on  the
6
outcome of a particular process.
Lawyers  are  not  immune  from  a  similar  criticism:  permitting  the  avoidance  of  legal  risk  to
become a goal in itself, rather than a tool for advancing the purposes of the organization. When
an acutely litigious mindset prevents a company from launching a cross-organizational review, or
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
writing a self-critical report, the near-term goal of managing discovery has overrun the broader
interests of the company in honest self-assessment and improvement.
A legal group should not automatically veer toward shutting down self-reflection for the sake of
being  able  to  rest  easy  about  litigation.  Similarly,  compliance  cannot  rest  easy  when  its
processes  succeed  in  building  a  paper  trail,  but  do  little  to  uncover  and  resolve  problematic
behavior. In short, some risks are worth taking.
Thank you for listening to my remarks today. I am happy to take any questions.
1
2
3
4
5
6
See  generally  Donald  Langevoort,  “Behavioral  Ethics,  Behavioral  Compliance,”  in Research  Handbook  on
Corporate Crime and Financial Misdealing (Jennifer Arlen, ed.) (2016).
See Michael Barr et al., “Behaviorally Informed Regulation,” in Behavioral Foundations of Public Policy (E. Shafir,
ed.) 440–64 (2012).
See Kathleen M. Sullivan, “The Supreme Court 1991 Term: Forward: The Justices of Rules and Standards,”
106 Harv. L. Rev. 22, 57 (1992) (arguing that the choice of a rule or a standard depends on where the “legal
directive . . . fall on the continuum of discretion”—that is, how much do we trust the decisionmaker?).
Ben Heineman, The Inside Counsel Revolution 7 (2016).
See  generally  Lee  Ross  and  Richard  E.  Nisbett, The  Person  and  the  Situation:  Perspectives  of  Social
Psychology (1991), 28 (“ocial pressures and other situational factors exert effects on behavior that are more
potent than we generally realise . . . . [T]o understand the impact of a given social situation, we often need to
attend to its subtle details.”).
Sue Jaffer, Nicholas Morris and David Vines, “Why Trustworthiness is Important,” in Capital Failure: Rebuilding
Trust  in  Financial  Services  (Morris  and  Vines,  eds.),  15–16  (2014)  (“Trustworthiness  requires  conscious
choices to be made rather than merely being the outcome of a reliable process.”).
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
