Benoît Cœuré: Sustainable globalisation - lessons from Europe
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Workshop "Financial globalization and its spillovers – monetary and exchange rate policy in
times  of  crises",  special  public  event  "25  Years  after  Maastricht:  The  Future  of  Money  and
Finance in Europe", Maastricht, 16 February 2017.
 I  would  like  to  thank  Roland  Beck  for  his  assistance  in  preparing  this  speech.  All  views
expressed herein remain mine.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Let me first thank the organisers for inviting me to this impressive Jean Monnet workshop, which
is taking place at a critical point in time.
25 years after Maastricht, you might expect me to reflect upon the implications of the Maastricht
Treaty,  which  brought  about  the  biggest  transfer  of  sovereignty  in  Europe  since  the  Treaty  of
Rome. And indeed today 500 million people benefit from the Single Market and 19 countries enjoy
stable prices thanks to the euro. You might also be expecting me to talk about the advantages of
Europe’s new Single Supervisory Mechanism. Or about the challenges we face in completing
Economic and Monetary Union.
Well,  these  are  indeed  important  issues,  but  I’d  like  to  approach  them  today  from  a  slightly
different angle, namely from the perspective of economic and financial globalisation. Over the
past 25 years, global trade relative to GDP almost doubled, financial openness quadrupled and
global value chains emerged as a worldwide phenomenon.  These figures suggest that a too
inward-looking appraisal of the European project 25 years after Maastricht would fail to draw the
full lessons from the project. European integration and “globalisation” are at least partly based on
the same principles. So it’s no surprise that the acute concerns expressed about globalisation
today coincide with equally acute doubts over European integration.
1
As we know, the push for European integration was initially a political one.  It was built in the
post-war period on the promise of lasting peace and security and democracy on our continent.
Over time, enlargement extended this promise to the new democracies in southern and eastern
Europe.  As  the  continent  experienced  an  unprecedented  era  of  political  stability,  economic
integration  was  no  longer  presented  just  as  a  means  to  that  end:  it  was  at  the  centre  of  a
promise of economic prosperity and protection for European workers in times of technological
change and increased global competition.
2
But  many  today  feel  that  Europe  has  not  kept  this  promise.  Moreover,  the  conflicts  that  have
ravaged  our  continent  are  a  fading  memory. As  a  result,  the  European  project  is  now  being
judged more from an economic than from a political perspective. European policymakers should
not  shy  away  from  the  political  discussion,  but  they  also  need  to  enter  into  the  fundamental
economic debates about free markets, free trade and free capital flows, and spell out how the
European project has helped reap the benefits while addressing the costs.
The concerns expressed about globalisation are also coinciding with recent signs of economic
deglobalisation: trade and financial flows appear to have taken a pause after the global financial
crisis,  partly  because  global  banks  had 
their  business
models.  Deglobalisation is most visible in the re-emerging correlation between domestic saving
and  domestic  investment,  known  as  the  Feldstein-Horioka  puzzle.  This  correlation,  which
declined among OECD countries from almost 80% from 1980 to 2000 to less than 50% between
2000  and  2006,  went  back  up  to  almost  70%  in  2016.   In  2017,  according  to  the  Institute  of
to  deleverage  and  change 
3
4
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
International Finance, foreign direct investment flows to emerging markets are expected to fall to
5
their lowest level since the financial crisis .
It  is  less  clear,  however,  whether  deglobalisation  patterns  can  be  identified  when  using  other
metrics of financial integration.  And it is not obvious how to judge such developments from a
normative perspective. While most economists still make the case for free trade, the costs and
benefits of financial globalisation are being reassessed in academic and policy circles.  These
discussions  have  already  led  to  the  IMF  holding  a  more  benign  view  on  the  usefulness  of
temporary capital controls.
6
7
In my remarks today I will take a look at common concerns related to political and economic
integration and argue that some of them are based on fallacies.
I will argue that the European project can be regarded as the most elaborate attempt ever to
mitigate the inevitable political trade-offs arising in a globalised world, and that it has been largely
successful.  I  will  review  the  case  for  free  trade  and  capital  flows.  Concerns  in  this  area  are
legitimate,  but  they  should  be  addressed  with  policies  which  are  targeted  at  specific  market
failures rather than with outright protectionism. Building on specific ideas I recently spelled out for
a  better  version  of  financial  globalisation,  I  will  issue  a  more  general  call  for  “sustainable
globalisation” which should be efficient, enduring and equitable.  These elements have important
implications for the European project, both in its internal and external dimensions, as I will make
clear in my conclusion.
Political fallacies about globalisation
8
It’s  often  said  that  globalisation  undermines  national  sovereignty  and  democracy.  A  more
sophisticated version of this popular claim appears in academic discussions about the “political
trilemma of the world economy”. According to this concept, devised by Dani Rodrik in 2007, we
cannot  simultaneously  pursue  democracy,  national  sovereignty  and  economic  globalisation  at
the same time.  As a corollary, we can find ourselves only in situations where we either (i) stick
to  democracy  and  national  determination  while  compromising  on  economic  globalisation,  as
under the Bretton Woods system, (ii) maintain the nation state, but make it responsive only to the
needs of the international economy at the expense of domestic objectives, or (iii) establish a form
of “global federalism”, where we, to quote Rodrik, “align the scope of democratic politics with the
scope of global markets”.
9
This analysis suggests that we are confronted with difficult trade-offs when attempting to make
globalisation  compatible  with  democracy  and  the  nation  state.  But  the  European  experience
shows  that  these  trade-offs  are  manageable. A  variant  of  globalisation  could  be  based  on  a
parsimonious  framework  of  international  rules  which  leaves  room  for  manoeuvre  for  national
governments.  In  fact,  the  principle  of  subsidiarity  which  is  firmly  anchored  in  the  Treaty  on
European Union can be interpreted as a regional attempt to solve Rodrik’s “political trilemma”. It
aims to ensure that decisions are taken as closely as possible to the citizen and that action at
European level is only taken if the objectives cannot be properly achieved at national, regional or
local level.
If you put an economist, a political scientist and a legal scholar in the same room, they will define
subsidiarity  in  different  ways.
  Nevertheless,  subsidiarity  guides  the  relationship  between
different political levels and strikes the right balance between centralisation and decentralisation.
And in fact integration in some areas does not exclude decentralisation in other areas. Since the
1980s,  European  integration  has  been  accompanied  in  several  countries  by  transfers  of
competences from the state to the regions.
10
Convergence processes may also play a role in allowing for an efficient centralisation of policies.
While  harmonisation  of  policies  can  be  harmful  if  economies  diverge  too  much,  citizens  or
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
governments  may  agree  on  a  convergence  process  ensuring  that  the  benefits  of  a  common
policy outweigh its costs.
 Without such convergence processes, neither the European Union
nor Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) would have been possible. And the euro area’s travails
are largely due to lack of effective convergence, both before the financial crisis and since then.
11
An  example  of  the  subsidiarity  principle  is  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  which  spells  out
common rules for the fiscal deficit and debt levels in order to avoid fiscal dominance within the
currency union. At the same time, the Stability and Growth Pact leaves space for Member States
to  determine  both  the  composition  of  government  expenditures  and  revenues  and  their  size
relative to the economy and thus to choose from a variety of social models based on democratic
deliberation.
This point has recently been made also in the debate on globalisation: the power to levy taxes
and determine the size and composition of government expenditures has remained in the hands
of national governments, despite economic and financial globalisation. Whether or not they have
been successful is debatable, but this has little to do with globalisation.
12
Another common political fallacy about globalisation is the view that international markets flourish
if  the  state  is  weak.  In  fact,  the  opposite  appears  to  be  true:  international  trade  has  thrived
because  of  the  existence  of  strong  states  which  helped  markets  to  overcome  specific  risks
stemming  from  cross-border  trade,  including  security  risks,  transaction  costs  and  the
enforcement of property rights , and also because of multilateral institutions and fora created by
these states. Likewise, the experiences from the emerging market crises of the late 1990s and
the global financial crisis suggest that well-functioning international capital markets require strong
financial regulation, both domestically and across borders.
13
In addition to this traditional role of the state, governments also need to ensure that the gains
from trade are shared within societies. And in fact, countries with higher trade openness tend to
have larger, not smaller, public sectors.
 Governments have acted to mitigate the distributional
consequences of globalisation, although they now face issues to which I will turn later.
14
Before turning to the economic fallacies about globalisation I would therefore conclude that global
markets  need  to  be  underpinned  by  strong  states  and  firm  governance. Although  opinions  do
differ on the scope of competence of institutions and administrations, carefully crafted structures
and networks of national and international bodies and rules can ease the political trilemma.
Economic fallacies about globalisation
It is useful to re-state the case for free trade from its early origins, which date back to a time even
before  the  seminal  work  of  David  Ricardo.  In  fact,  it  was  recognised  back  in  1701  that  the
benefits  from  trade  are  very  similar  to  those  from  technology.
  The  concept  of  comparative
advantage makes the argument even stronger and suggests that free trade is not a zero-sum
game because differences in comparative, and not absolute, costs matter.
15
16
But like technological progress, free trade has distributional effects. In fact, unskilled workers will
inevitably suffer long-term losses in income from free trade, as the Stolper-Samuelson theorem
shows. Empirically, it is also well documented that globalisation was associated with a rise in
inequality within the developing and the developed countries, although establishing a causal link is
more challenging.
17
18
While economists disagree on the size of the distributional effects of international trade relative to
its efficiency gains , it is important to keep in mind that free trade works through a number of
channels  which  are  absent  in  simple  trade  models  and  which  are  difficult  to  pin  down  in  an
equilibrium framework.
 In addition we should remember that simple trade models do not take
non-tariff barriers to trade into account. In fact, it is a fallacy per se to believe that globalisation is
19
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
concerned only with the removal of tariffs. This stems from the fact that trade is often hindered
by more subtle forms of protectionism, including national regulation aimed at protecting domestic
industries and state aid provided for similar reasons. The removal of these barriers, as in the
European case to which I will turn later, might lead to large efficiency gains. As a matter of fact,
modern free trade agreements cover non-tariff barriers to trade as much as traditional tariffs.
Other  channels  through  which  free  trade  can  raise  overall  efficiency  include:  increased
economies  of  scale  due  to  larger  markets,  aggregate  productivity  gains  due  a  reallocation
towards  more  productive  firms  and,  at  the  firm  level,  productivity  gains  from  higher-quality
imports. In addition, it appears that import competition interacts with deregulation (in the sense of
removing  red  tape)  via  which  it  tends  to  boost  productivity  growth.
  When  it  comes  to
generating new knowledge, which is crucial for generating future growth, the mobility of students,
researchers and high-skilled labour is also essential.
 All of these considerations suggest that
gains from trade are likely to be quite large, in particular if a wide-ranging set of transmission
channels and a broad definition of free trade is accounted for.
20
21
But  the  case  for  free  trade  can  also  be  challenged  due  to  the  presence  of  externalities  and
information asymmetries which can negatively affect social welfare. For example, importers may
find it difficult to find out under which conditions or standards the imported goods or services
have been produced. Externalities, including eventual social costs of free trade, are one reason
why we also regulate technological progress, e.g. if new technologies have adverse side effects
on public health, safety or the environment.
Overall,  the  economic  case  for  free  trade  thus  remains  strong  on  efficiency  grounds,  like  the
case for using more productive technologies. But the political case for free trade depends on
whether its distributional, social and environmental consequences can be adequately managed.
22
A similar reasoning applies to the free flow of capital.
 In principle, free capital flows allow for
risk sharing and a better allocation of resources across economies. They also help economies to
catch  up  in  terms  of  technology  and  financial  market  development  through  the  transfer  of
knowledge. But recent academic analysis and policy experience, both globally and at euro area
level,  have  revealed  that  capital  flows  can  pose  risks.  They  can  be  volatile  and  pro-cyclical,
fuelling economic and financial cycles, and eventually asset price bubbles. In this context, the
composition  of  flows  has  important  implications  for  the  likelihood  of  sudden  stops  and
reversals. Finally, countries participating in financial globalisation should have reached a certain
level of institutional development in order to avoid costly boom-and-bust cycles.
23
24
Overall, these considerations lead me to conclude that the case for real and financial integration
is still strong but should be qualified. At the same time, I believe that reducing real and financial
integration  via  harsh  protectionism  is  tantamount  to  destroying  machines,  as  the  Luddites  did
during the industrial revolution. In fact, outright protectionist measures have adverse side effects
that reduce economies’ growth potential. Over time, these side effects may reduce welfare by
more than the problems they seek to address. And there are better ways of dealing with the side
effects, as I will argue below.
Towards sustainable globalisation
Globalisation can be made more sustainable if we make it more efficient, enduring and equitable.
To that end, let me expand on some ideas I have put forward on financial globalisation.
More efficient globalisation should be on the agenda of even mainstream economists because it
would mainly address common market failures, which are well known from the domestic context.
For trade flows, it would imply reducing information asymmetries, rents from monopoly power,
and dealing with externalities, e.g. by giving better information to importers. It could also resort to
Pigouvian taxes, e.g. in the case of transportation externalities which damage the environment.
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
For financial flows, efficiency requires channelling capital flows into productive uses, rather than
fuelling  inefficient  consumption-led  boom-and-bust  cycles.  This  should  be  achieved  largely  by
improving  overall  institutional  quality  and  supervisory  frameworks  and,  as  a  last  resort,  by
resorting to capital flow management measures. Harmonisation of international tax codes can
help avoid large but inefficient gross flows into and out of financial centres which are purely tax-
driven.
25
Making  globalisation  more enduring  means  to  me  making  it  politically  sustainable. As  recent
political outcomes have shown, this is an area which has been underappreciated, in particular by
economists.  In  practice,  it  means  that  we  have  to  enhance  the  legitimacy  of  international
economic rules, allow for different economic and social models to the extent that fair competition
and  macroeconomic  stability  is  not  impaired,  and  explain  the  case  for  globalisation  in  more
nuanced ways.
Enduring  globalisation  also  implies  raising  the  “quality”  of  trade  and  financial  flows.  For  trade
flows, this could include “global standards” (e.g. on labour conditions or product safety) to the
extent  that  externalities  cannot  be  dealt  with  through  market-based  solutions.  Such  standards
have become important ingredients in free trade agreements and contribute considerably to the
political legitimacy of globalisation.
For financial flows, “high quality” would imply e.g. the tilting of the composition of flows towards
less volatile types including equity, thereby reducing the likelihood of sudden stops. This can be
achieved, for example, through better corporate governance and better protection of shareholder
rights  globally.  Enduring  globalisation  also  includes  environmental  sustainability.  The  Financial
Stability  Board  has  started  important  work  in  this  area  via  its  task  force  on  climate-related
disclosure. In line with the notion that markets can only allocate resources efficiently if risks are
adequately priced, this initiative aims to reduce information asymmetries stemming from financial
exposures related to climate change.
Finally, globalisation cannot be enduring if it does not become more equitable. A more equitable
globalisation would pay more attention to the distributive impact of globalisation than in the past.
As in the case of new technology and competition, economic efficiency gains stemming from
free trade often have distributional consequences. As we learn at university, free trade is Pareto-
improving only if it comes with lump-sum transfers or other redistributive tools.
 But lump-sum
transfers  are  enforceable  only  if  governments  keep  control  of  their  tax  and  benefit  systems,
which financial globalisation has called into question. In particular, it has become more difficult to
tax multinational companies. In order to compensate the losers from globalisation under a more
equitable form of globalisation, we would need to reduce tax base erosion and profit shifting along
the lines proposed by the OECD and endorsed by the G20.
26
27
Broader  and  more  stable  tax  bases  should  enable  governments  to  ensure,  through  smart
government expenditures backed by stable tax revenues, that income losses from globalisation
do not become permanent. Recent research suggests that the most efficient instruments in this
area  include  active  labour  market  policies,  such  as  retraining  programmes  and  relocation
subsidies, which compensate for the switching costs and facilitate the migration of workers away
from depressed regions.
28
Let me also stress that policymakers also need to consider links between the three elements for
sustainable globalisation. For example, a financial transaction tax is not an efficient tool to curb
risk-taking in the financial sector, but given that it is easy to understand and intuitive to many
citizens,  it  could  increase  the  political  legitimacy  of  financial  globalisation,  thus  making  it
more enduring  and,  to  some  extent,  more equitable.  This  assumes,  of  course,  that  it  can  be
designed in a way that minimises losses in efficiency.
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Sustainable European integration
Let me now sketch out how the European project can help make globalisation sustainable both
inside Europe and worldwide.
In  respect  of efficiency,  recent  evidence  suggests  that  EU  membership  has  increased  it
considerably since the 1980s: according to one recent estimate, GDP per capita in the EU is
around  12%  higher  relative  to  a  counterfactual  scenario  excluding  Union  membership.
  This
positive effect of EU membership not only comes from free trade since Europe’s Single Market is
the best example of a free trade area whose benefits go well beyond the removal of tariffs and
non-tariff barriers: it has also established a stable legal framework that protects investors and
consumers, and stimulates competition by ensuring a level playing field – which is to say, the
Single Market is not only about removing trade barriers, or even just a customs union, but about
common  governance  and  having  common  rule  of  law  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  European
Court of Justice. In addition, the EU has also acted in particular in emerging Europe as an anchor
for an institutional environment which is conducive to well-functioning markets.
29
30
The efficiency track record of financial flows within the euro area and the rest of the EU is more
mixed, to say the least. Such flows certainly contributed for a long time to desirable catching-up
growth, in particular in some eastern European Member States. 
 But the European sovereign
debt crisis has demonstrated that the original design of EMU was incomplete and did not prevent
inefficient boom-and-bust cycles within the euro area. In fact, cross-border financial flows were
excessively biased towards interbank lending at the expense of bond and equity investment and
there  was  no  common  system  of  banking  oversight  to  monitor  the  former,  which  allowed
competitiveness losses in some countries to be masked by unsustainable finance-driven growth
in low-productivity industries. During the European sovereign debt crisis, these imbalances led to
a sudden reversal in capital flows and thus a growing fragmentation of the euro area.
 Since
2012 these adverse developments have receded, partly in response to policy measures taken at
European and at national level.
 Additional important steps which should address these issues
have been taken, namely towards a banking union, of which the Single Supervisory Mechanism
is one component. It should lead to more prudent bank lending.
31
32
Enduring  European  integration  is  achieved  to  some  extent  through  a  common  regulatory
framework enforced by the European Court of Justice, including common product standards to
ensure a high quality of trade flows. While, as I mentioned earlier, the quality of financial flows
has  been  so  far  deficient,  the  capital  markets  union  has  the  potential  to  bring  about  a  more
resilient  form  of  financial  integration  based  on  more  cross-border  equity  holdings  rather  than
short-term debt.
33
But more can be done with regard to making European integration more equitable.
Let me point out that Europe has established the first continent-wide redistribution system – the
structural  and  investment  funds.  They  support  economic  development  and  in  particular  help
redress regional inequalities. While some may feel that these funds improve their lives still too
little, such schemes – along with the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights protecting in particular
the  most  vulnerable  –  constitute  an  important  element  in  making  European  integration
more equitable compared with a purely market-based outcome. Moreover, such schemes are
complemented  by  progressive  tax  systems,  social  safety  nets  and  regional  equalisation
arrangements at national level.
This  means  that  the  European  model  caters  for  what  I  mentioned  before:  although  Member
States need to respect common rules, sovereigns keep control of their tax and benefit systems,
reflecting  different  conceptions  of,  and  preferences  for,  social  protection  and  the  size  of  the
welfare state. The European Commission has also adopted decisions that sanction unfair tax
benefits  and  has  only  recently  re-launched  the  Common  Consolidated  Corporate  Tax  Base
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
(CCCTB),  which  will  strengthen  the  Single  Market  by  making  it  easier  and  cheaper  for
companies to operate cross-border in the EU. Reducing harmful tax practices is therefore a vital
element of the European approach towards integration.
Conclusion
Let  me  address  at  the  end  of  my  remarks  the  last  challenge  when  heading  for  sustainable
globalisation in Europe, namely that the European voice is heard in international bodies which
shape international economic rules. The Single Market and Economic and Monetary Union clearly
enhance Europe’s global influence in four ways. First, a common trade policy gives Europe more
weight  in  global  negotiations,  both  in  bilateral  trade  negotiations  and  when  setting  multilateral
rules in the World Trade Organization. Second, a large single market with a single competition
authority  has  significant  leverage  over  multinational  firms,  allowing  Europe  to  protect  what  it
deems important. Third, a single currency and single supervisory mechanism allow 19 countries
to speak with one voice on monetary policy and exchange rates and increase their leverage over
global regulatory and supervisory standards. Finally, a Europe which speaks with one voice is
carefully listened to by organisations such as the IMF, the G20 and the BIS, whose European
members already, to some extent, seek to coordinate their views.
These bodies play a key role in shaping economic and financial globalisation since they aim for a
global consensus on the international economic order.
Given the criticisms of globalisation, international cooperation and European integration we are
confronted with, the time has come to make the case for globalisation to be made more efficient,
enduring and equitable. Europe has become a blueprint for sustainable globalisation and it bears
lessons  for  the  rest  of  the  world.  Provided  that  we  make  further  strides  towards  sustainable
integration, Europe will be strong enough to promote a better global economic order.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
The  figures  on  trade  and  financial  openness  refer  to  a  sample  of  27  countries  for  which  coherent  data  is
available since 1992. Trade openness is computed as the sum of exports and imports over GDP; financial
openness is measured as total foreign assets over GDP.
See Cœuré, B. (2016), “Addressing Europe's economic and political challenges”, Introductory Remarks at TUM
Speakers Series/HEC Débats organised by the Technical University of Munich, Munich, 21 November.
See  e.g.  Cœuré,  B.  (2013),  “Global  liquidity  and  international  risk-sharing  in  the  post-crisis  environment”,
speech at the Bank of Korea International Conference 2013 “Assessing Global Liquidity in a Global Framework”,
Seoul, 3 June.
These figures refer to a sample of OECD countries for which a correlation between gross national savings and
investments in percent of GDP is computed for annual data since 1980.
See Institute of International Finance (2017), February 2017 Capital Flows to Emerging Markets, 8 February.
Price-based  measures  of  global  financial  integration,  for  example,  present  a  different  picture:  international
equity market co-movements, for example, remain strong. By some estimates, they remain as high as ever in
more than a century.
For an overview of this debate, see e.g. Cœuré, B. (2016), “The Case for Rethinking International Capital Flows”,
Dinner Speech, SUERF/PSE/CEPII Conference on “Rethinking Capital Controls and Capital Flows”, Paris, 15
September 2016.
Ibid.
See Rodrik, D. (2011), “The Globalization Paradox: Democracy and the Future of the World Economy”, New York
and London: W.W. Norton.
The economic literature on fiscal federalism emphasises the trade-off between the benefits of centralisation
arising from internalising externalities across jurisdictions on the one hand and, on the other hand, the cost of a
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
common  policy  in  the  presence  of  heterogeneity  of  preferences  and  economic  characteristics.  Some
applications of this framework to the European Union suggest that EU involvement may be overextended in
some areas and too limited in others. See Alesina, A., I. Angeloni and L. Schuknecht, (2005) “What Does the
European Union Do?”, Public Choice, Vol. 123, No. 3, pp. 275–319; Cœuré, B. and J. Pisani-Ferry, (2007), “The
governance of the EU’s international relation: how many voices?”, in A. Sapir (ed.), Fragmented Power: Europe
and the Global Economy, Bruegel.
See Jamet, J.-F. (2011), “The Optimal Assignment of Prerogatives to Different Levels of Government in the EU”,
Journal of Common Market Studies, 49, pp. 563–584.
See Tilford, S. (2017), “Crisis of capitalism? Perhaps, but don't blame it on globalisation”, Insight, 10 February
2017, Centre for European Reform.
This observation was nicely recalled by Rodrik using the example of chartered trading companies in the 17th
century.
Rodrik, D. (1998), “Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Governments?”, Journal of Political Economy
106, no. 5: 997-1032.
See Martyn (1701) as cited in Rodrik (2011).
Ricardo, D. (1817) as cited in Rodrik (2011).
See e.g. Goldberg, P.K. and N. Pavcnik (2007), “Distributional Effects of Globalisation in Developing Countries”,
Journal of Economic Literature, 45(1): 39-82; Ebenstein, A., A. Harrison, M. McMillan, and S. Phillips. (2014),
“Estimating the Impact of Trade and Offshoring on American Workers using the Current Population Surveys”,
Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(3): 581-595.
One point which is particularly concerning and which has been emphasised by serious globalisation sceptics is
that in standard models of international trade the distributional effects can be large relative to the efficiency
gains, in particular when tariffs are already low. Unlike technology, free trade in the form of tariff reductions
encounters diminishing returns. See Rodrik, D. (2011, pp. 57) and Rodrik, D. (1994). The large “redistribution-
to-efficiency  gains  ratio”  might  tempt  protectionists  to  argue  that  with  a  small  increase  in  tariffs  a  large
redistribution would be achieved at the cost of only small efficiency losses. This seems a plausible argument,
provided that the redistribution is politically desirable. But the argument is misleading because more recent
research has also shown that gains from trade are large once their causal effects are derived from quasi-
natural  experiments.  General  equilibrium  estimates  tend  to  be  somewhat  lower.  See  Feyrer,  J.  (2009),
“Distance, Trade, and Income – The 1967 to 1975 Closing of the Suez Canal as a Natural Experiment,” NBER
Working Papers 15557.
See  Hornok,  C.,  and  M.  Koren  (2016),  “Winners  and  Losers  of  Globalisation:  Sixteen  Challenges  for
Measurement and Theory,” Chapter 6 in Blundell et al. eds, Economics without Borders, Economic Research for
European  Policy  Challenges,  and  the  references  provided  there.  For  additional  channels,  see  Melitz,  M.  J.
(2003), “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity”, Econometrica,
71(6): 1695-1725; Hornok, C., and M. Koren (2016), Ibid; Ben Yahmed, S. and S. Dougherty (2017), “Domestic
Regulation, Import Penetration and Firm-Level Productivity Growth”, Journal of International Trade & Economic
Development; Coelli, F., Moxnes, A., Ulltveit-Moe, K., (2016), “Better, Faster, Stronger: Global Innovation and
Trade Liberalization”, London, Centre for Economic Policy Research.
There is also very recent evidence from firm-level patent data, suggesting that trade policy during the Great
Liberalisation of the 1990s had a significant positive effect on innovation. What is even more striking is that this
increase in patenting reflects innovation, rather than simply more protection of existing knowledge. See Coelli F.,
A. Moxnes, K. H. Ulltveit-Moe (2016).
See e.g. Kaiser, U., Kongsted, H.-C., Rønde, T. (2015), “Does the mobility of R&D labor increase innovation?”,
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, Volume 110, pp. 91-105.
See Cœuré, B. (2016, op. cit.) for an extended discussion of these issues and the references given there.
In particular, financial globalisation in assets with longer maturity and state-contingent payoffs – such as equity
and foreign direct investment (FDI) – has been shown to be less volatile than one based on short-term bank or
portfolio flows. FDI is also more desirable as it is much less sensitive to global push factors, such as global
risk aversion or monetary policy in major economies. The evidence for positive growth effects of FDI in the
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
literature is much more robust than for portfolio flows.
See Cœuré, B. (2016, op. cit.) and the references given there.
See  IMF  (2012),  “The  Liberalization  and  Management  of  Capital  Flows: An  Institutional  View.”,  International
Monetary Fund; Ostry, J., Ghosh, A., Habermeier, K., Laeven, L., Chamon, M., Qureshi, M., and Kokenyne, A.
(2011), “Managing Capital Inflows: What Tools to Use?”, IMF Staff Discussion Note, April 5, SDN/11/06.
Taxes and subsidies on goods and services can be alternatives to transfers, see Dixit, A., and V. Norman,
(1986), “Gains from trade without lump-sum compensation”, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 21, pp.
111-122.
See www.oecd.org/ctp/beps-explanatory-statement-2015.pdf
See Hornok, C., and M. Koren (2016), Ibid and the reference provided there.
See  Campos,  N.,  F.  Coricelli,  and  L.  Moretti,  (2014),  “Economic  Growth  and  Political  Integration:  Synthetic
Counterfactuals Evidence from Europe”, IZA Discussion Paper, No 8162, April.
See the ECB’s Convergence Reports for a review of progress made by non-euro area Member States towards
meeting the criteria for euro area membership.
See Beck, R., G. Georgiadis and J. Gräb (2016), “The geography of the great rebalancing in euro area bond
markets during the sovereign debt crisis”, Journal of Empirical Finance, Elsevier, vol. 38(PA), pages 449-460.
See “Financial integration in Europe”, an annual publication of the European Central Bank.
See “Building a Capital Markets Union – Eurosystem contribution to the European Commission’s Green Paper”,
21 May, 2015.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
