   Remarks by Luigi Federico Signorini at the 
presentation of the Bank of Italy’s report on 
economic developments in Lombardy 
   Luigi Federico Signorini 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy 
    Milan, 5 July 2017 
    Italy has emerged from the longest and deepest recession in peacetime 
memory. Slow and hesitant at first, the recovery is gradually strengthening, 
and for two years now the trend has been clearly positive. Of course, the road 
ahead  is  still  long  and  fraught  with  uncertainty.  Notwithstanding  its  recent 
growth, Italy’s GDP remains seven percentage points below the level of early 
2008. Spain’s is about to reach that level, while France and Germany have 
already  outstripped it  by  five  and  eight  points respectively.  Nor should the 
risks on the horizon be underestimated. And yet, even taking account of the 
lost ground that will be difficult to make up, recent economic developments 
have been undoubtedly favourable.  
In the first three months of this year Italy’s GDP grew by 0.4 per cent,  
exceeding the expectations of the leading forecasters.  
Exports have continued to expand. In the last few years the growth in 
Italian  export  sales  has  outpaced  that  in demand  from  outlet  markets.  This 
was  not  the  case  between  1999  and  2009,  when  Italian  firms  struggled  to 
keep up with competition from emerging economies and even from the other 
developed countries. The improved export capacity of Italian firms has been 
especially important as it has supported GDP growth in the most testing times 
of the crisis. Since 2010 Italy’s  market shares have stabilized.  Since 2013 
there has been a surplus on the current account of the balance of payments. 
Italy’s  net  foreign  debtor  position  has  diminished  rapidly  in  recent  years, 
from 25 per cent of GDP in 2013 to 15 per cent at the end of last year.  
The  investment-to-GDP  ratio  had  shed  five  percentage  points  since 
2007, when in 2014 it hit a postwar low of 17 per cent. The fall in investment 
was  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  signs  of  the  crisis:  the  poor  economic 
outlook discouraged it and its collapse in turn lowered GDP and productivity, 
making the outlook even worse and triggering a vicious circle. Years of low 
 investment  led  to  fixed  capital  not  being  renewed,  lowering  production 
capacity and contributing to weak GDP growth on the supply side too.  
However, little by little since 2014 investment has recovered, though 
the  trends  by  sector  and  type  vary  greatly.  Purchases  of  capital  goods  – 
machinery, equipment and transport equipment – have risen by almost 11 per 
cent in the last three years: as a share of GDP they are back near pre-crisis 
levels. By contrast, spending on construction has lagged behind for longer. 
Between 2008 and 2014 it  contracted  uninterruptedly,  weighing heavily  on 
the overall investment-to-GDP ratio, which to date has hardly risen at all. Yet 
even  this  sector  has  shown  some  signs  of  a  revival  starting  last  year.  The 
signs are clearer in the residential sector, which has long benefited from tax 
incentives for the renovation of existing buildings, while the non-residential 
construction  sector  is  still  struggling  to  pick  up  and  public  investment  has 
been on a trend decline since 2010.  
Why  has  investment  returned  to  growth,  at  least  in  machinery  and 
equipment?  The  Bank  of  Italy’s  econometric  model  can  give  us  some 
quantitative answers. According to our estimates,1 almost half of the growth 
recorded is attributable to the improvement in the credit market: the strongly 
expansionary  monetary  policy  stance  has  recently  led  to  a  reduction  in  the 
cost of capital and fostered more relaxed supply conditions. Yet the gradual 
improvement in demand and increased confidence on the part of firms have 
also contributed by one third; if the favourable economic situation continues, 
then this factor’s contribution should increase.  
Lastly,  government  policies  to  encourage  spending  on  capital  goods 
have also made a significant contribution, which we estimate at around one 
fifth  of  the  total.  As  is  well  known,  various  tax  incentive  schemes  for 
 1  See  the  box  ‘The  trend  in  investment  and  the  cyclical  recovery’  in  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  Annual 
Report for 2015, 2016.  
 investment have been set up and implemented in recent years, especially in 
favour  of  advanced  technology.  The  results  of  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  annual 
business survey (to which, as always, the Bank’s regional research network 
has made a vital contribution) show that in 2016 tax benefits for investment 
provided  considerable  support,  and  will  do  so  to  an  even  greater  extent  in 
2017. We estimate that these benefits are going to boost investment by 3.5 
percentage  points  overall  in  the  period  2016-18.  The  fact  that  they  are  of 
limited duration is also important: part of their short-term effect is that firms 
bring forward their spending plans.  
Our  surveys  show  that  in  2016  investment  was  higher  for  small  and 
medium-sized  manufacturers,  which  had  been  particularly  hard  hit  by  the 
recession.  They  also  indicate that  investment will  expand  further  this  year: 
the share of manufacturing firms that plan to increase investment in 2017 was 
much  higher  than  the  share  of  those  planning  to  reduce  it.  The  slowdown 
recorded  in  the  early  months  of  the  year  is  therefore  expected  to  be 
temporary. 
Household  spending  also  continues  to  rise.  The  recovery  has  been 
driven  until  now  by  the  durable  goods  sector,  which  had  contracted  more 
than the others in the early stages of the crisis, but in recent years has fared 
comparatively  better  owing 
the  highly  accommodative  financial 
conditions. Loans to households in the form of home purchase mortgages and 
consumer loans have increased considerably. The latest available data show 
that the increase in household spending is now extending to services.  
to 
Real estate wealth, which accounts for over 60 per cent of net Italian 
household  wealth,  has  turned  upward  again  thanks  to  the  initial  signs  of  a 
recovery in prices. Confidence indicators remain high. Yet the main driver of 
consumption  is the improvement  in income  levels  and prospects.  Last  year 
households’  disposable  income  increased  in  real  terms  by  1.6  per  cent, 
 double the figure for 2015; it continued to grow, though at a slightly slower 
rate, in the first three months of this year too.  
The  consequent  improvement  in  households’  economic  conditions  is 
partly  due  to  net  job  creation.  Employment  has  been  increasing  since  the 
second half of 2014, though with some fluctuations in the monthly data. The 
growth  is  wholly  attributable  to  payroll  employment,  which  has  now 
exceeded  pre-crisis  levels,  while  the  number  of  self-employed  workers  has 
continued to fall. 
The  recovery  in  employment  has  been  greater  than  the  mechanical 
effect of the increase in GDP. This may be partially ascribable to the results 
of  various  measures  introduced  over  the  last  few  years,  such  as  those  on 
social security contribution relief, and the reform process that began with the 
Fornero Law (Law 92/2012) and continued with the approval in 2015 of the 
legislative  decrees  of  the  Jobs  Act.  According  to  our  estimates,2  these 
measures  have  especially  benefited  payroll  employment  and  permanent 
contracts.  
 This is an overview of the recent changes in the main macroeconomic 
variables.  But  what  is  the  current  situation  and  what  is  the  short-term 
outlook?  For  the  quarter  just  ended,  our  estimates  suggest  overall  GDP 
growth  more  or  less  in  line  with  that  of  the  previous  quarter.  The  latest 
quantitative  and  qualitative  indicators  all  point  to  a  fresh  increase  in 
economic  activity  in  services  and  to  a  return  to  growth  in  manufacturing, 
which in recent months had stalled a little.   
 2  Sestito,  P.,  and  Viviano,  E.  (2016)  ‘Hiring  incentives  and/or  firing  cost  reduction?’,  Banca 
d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), 325. 
 Forecasts  beyond  the  short  term  are  always  uncertain.  However,  our 
central  projections  continue  to  be  moderately  favourable.  On  9  June  we 
published the Bank of Italy’s macroeconomic projections prepared as part of 
the  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections:  these  suggest  that  GDP 
will rise by 1.0 per cent this year, before accelerating to 1.2 per cent in the 
subsequent  two  years.  The  projections  will  be  updated  as  usual  in  the 
Economic  Bulletin  to  be  published  on  14  July,  incorporating  the  new  data 
which will become available in the meantime. Just the revised GDP estimates 
for  the  last  quarter  of  2016  and  the  first  quarter  of  2017,  released  by  Istat 
after the closure of our projections exercise, raises the outlook for the growth 
achieved so far in the current year by about 0.3 percentage points.   
Growth  in  global  demand  is  expected  to  continue  and  leading 
international  forecasters  are  actually  predicting  that  it  will  strengthen  this 
year  and  the  next.  Nothing  can  ever  be  taken  for  granted  in  these  matters; 
there is continuing uncertainty about the future stance of US trade policy and 
the  consequent  possibility  of  a  global  shift  towards  protectionism,  which 
would curb demand and might cause tensions at international level. However, 
for the time being at least, the economic forecasts are positive. 
 As  we  heard  during  the  presentation  of  the  report  on  economic 
developments  in  Lombardy,  these  positive  trends  are  being  confirmed  at 
regional  level.  In  the  last  15  years  Lombardy  has  almost  always  boasted 
higher GDP growth than that for Italy as a whole, though it has lagged behind 
−  as  the  report  points  out  –  comparable  European  regions  in  terms  of 
economic development and productive structures, both as regards per capita 
income and firms’ innovation capacity. Indicators of industrial activity and of 
firms’  investment  plans  in  2017  are  encouraging  and  could  foreshadow 
 Lombardy’s  gradual  convergence  towards  the  more  advanced  areas  of  the 
EU. 
Growth is also starting to take hold in the southern regions. The data 
collected  by  our  branches  from  local  economic  operators  also  provide 
positive  indications,  though  these  are  less  widespread  than  in  the  Centre-
North.  For  the  labour  market  too,  after  widening  at  the  height  of  the 
recession,  since  2014  the  gap  between  the  Centre-North  and  the  South  has 
narrowed.  
 Those  who  have  been  listening  up  to  now  might  have  received  the 
impression that the picture is almost uniformly optimistic, perhaps in contrast 
with the often bleak overtones that continue to mark the current debate on the 
state of Italy’s economy. So, in the interest of balance, I wish to reiterate the 
two essential provisos I made at the outset. First, growth is moderate and we 
are still nowhere near bridging the chasm in our living standards opened by 
the crisis that hit the Italian economy between 2008 and 2012, which was − 
and it bears repeating − the deepest and longest ever experienced in Italy in 
peacetime  memory,  and much deeper than that suffered by the other major 
European  countries.  Second,  several  elements  of  uncertainty  weigh  on  the 
medium-term outlook; some of these are exogenous, while others are more 
within our control. By way of conclusion, I would now like to share with you 
some brief thoughts on the first point and some slightly longer observations 
on the second,  particularly  on  the  need to  accomplish  what  lies  within our 
power − which is a lot. 
Let  me  first  say  that  even  before  the  crisis  the  Italian  economy  was 
growing  more slowly,  not only  than the emerging  economies  but  also than 
the other major advanced countries. And while the recession appears to have 
swept  away  the  old  debate  about  Italy’s  ‘decline’,  its  intensity,  so  much 
 greater in Italy than elsewhere, was probably due at least in part to the same 
structural  problems  that  for  years  had  been  holding  the  country  back.  We 
must now tackle them. These are recurring themes among attentive observers 
and ones which the Bank of Italy and the ECB never fail to underscore: the 
need for structural reforms in the labour market and in the market for goods 
and  services;  greater  efficiency  in  the  justice  system  and  in  general 
government; simpler legal and taxation systems. Despite the crisis, or perhaps 
precisely because of its harsh impetus, Italy has embarked on a far-reaching 
programme  of  structural  reform.  Much  has  been  done,  more  than  that  for 
which we sometimes  get credit. Significant results have been achieved, for 
example  in  the  areas  of  labour  and  pension  reform.  But  much  remains 
undone.  We  must  not  stop,  much  less  go  back,  because  our  future  growth 
depends on this. 
My second point turns on the relationship between cyclical movements 
and economic policy priorities, especially those of fiscal policy. It is about 
the choices that can shelter our country from the uncertainties of the global 
economy versus those that on the contrary could exacerbate them.  
With  all  these  provisos  the  improvement  in  the  economy  is  real;  so 
what  should  we  do  with  this  ‘cyclical  dividend’?  The  answer  that  the 
Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  gave  a  few  weeks  ago  in  his  concluding 
remarks is clear. We must exploit the available leeway to develop a gradual 
and  credible  plan to lower our  debt-to-GDP  ratio,  a  fundamental  source of 
fragility for our economy.  
The ratio has been high for more than 30 years. In the mid-1990s, with 
the  prospect  of  joining  the  euro,  the  reduction  got  under  way  (about  12 
percentage points in five years, between 1995 and 2000); at that time Italy 
succeeded  in  generating  significant  primary  surpluses  over  an  extended 
period,  a  necessary  step  for  gradually  reducing  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio. 
 Unfortunately,  the  crisis has  led  to  another,  sharp  increase,  connected  with 
the exceptional contraction in economy activity and very low inflation. The 
high debt ratio did not allow the government to use fiscal policy to support 
aggregate demand during the double-dip recession. In fact, market concerns 
about  the  sustainability  of  Italy’s  accounts  made  corrective  measures 
necessary at the height of the sovereign debt crisis.  
In  those  days,  Italy’s  vulnerability  to  the  vagaries  of  the  economic 
cycle  and  to  every  murmur  from  the  markets  was  palpable;  there  was  a 
tangible risk of triggering a spiral of recession and debt. I believe the lesson 
we can draw from this is clear: in other words, the importance of getting our 
public  finances  in  order,  to  the  greatest  possible  extent,  during  favourable 
phases in the macroeconomic cycle.  
In  recent  years  it  has  been  wise  to  mediate  between  the  competing 
needs  of  public  finance  and  those  of  the  economy:  pursuing  budgetary 
consolidation too eagerly while hoping to trigger a recovery could have had 
deleterious procyclical effects. A balanced approach has been made possible, 
among other things, by the flexibility allowed in implementing EU rules on 
public finances, in connection with the adverse cyclical conditions, structural 
reforms and some exceptional events.  
Also  owing  to  the  continuation  of  the  crisis,  the  goal  of  achieving  a 
structurally  balanced  budget  in  2015  indicated  in  the  2013  Update  of  the 
Economic and Financial Document (EFD) was postponed several times. The 
latest EFD sets the objective of a substantially balanced budget for 2019 but, 
as  we  know,  there  is  still  some  uncertainty  about  the  measures  needed  to 
accomplish this.  
It  is  now  time  to  dispel  this  uncertainty.  Economic  conditions  have 
improved, the cyclical recovery is turning out to be stronger than expected, 
interest  rates  are  low,  and  international  developments  have  become  more 
 favourable.  And  it  is  during  such  favourable phases  that  the  conditions  for 
courageous decisions are created. As our Governor has said, ‘there must be 
no  repeat  of  past  errors:  the  failure  to  reduce  the  ratio  of  debt  to  GDP 
sufficiently  in  good  economic  times  forced  us  to  make  procyclical 
adjustments during the crisis’.  
Progress can be made in this sense as and when the cyclical upturn is 
reflected in the public finances. But let’s not delude ourselves that we have a 
tesoretto  (treasure hoard) to spend,  as  we  sometimes  hear people  say;  let’s 
not forget the debt mountain in whose shadow we live and which we must 
attempt to reduce, for our own sake and for the sake of future generations. 
 The  cost  of  servicing  the  debt  weighs  heavily  on  Italy’s  public 
finances. Between 1999 and 2016 average annual interest expenses came to 
around 5 per cent of GDP. Italy must necessarily rely on high taxation levels 
or curb its primary expenditure in response. As happened between 2011 and 
2012,  worsening  market  sentiment  about  the  soundness  of  Italy’s  public 
finances could push these costs up further. In any event, the uncertainty this 
entails  holds  back  private  economic  activity  in  Italy.  But  the  launch  of  a 
credible  plan  would  reassure  the  markets  and  would  in  some  way  be  self-
sustaining. For a country with such a high debt, we should remember that the 
spread  game  could  trigger  a  virtuous  circle  just  as  much  as  a  vicious  one, 
depending  on  whether  or  not  we  succeed  in  coming  up  with  serious  and 
credible plans for lowering it. 
Even though the Great Recession is behind us and we hope to never 
see anything of that kind again, one day or another the economic cycle will 
start to worsen again. This is inevitable, and it has always been so. Today the 
markets  are  relaxed,  monetary  policy  is  exceptionally  expansionary  and 
interest  rates  are  exceptionally  low.  These  conditions  cannot  last  forever. 
What we can do today is work to make our country stronger, more resilient 
 and more capable of reacting to adverse economic cycles and to changes in 
market sentiment. We must continue down the path of structural reform and 
do what we can to start to lower the debt. In a nutshell, we must not miss this 
opportunity. 
   