Ewald Nowotny 
Governor 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank 
SPEECH 
Vienna, May 29, 2017 
44th Economics Conference of the OeNB 
Opening Remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  the  44th  Economics  Conference  of  the 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank here in Vienna. 
Today,  I  want  to  invite  you  to  take  a  break  from  our  routine  engagement  in  the  daily 
workings of the financial system. Let us take a look at the future instead: what kind of 
institutions and markets will manage our financial wealth, our liabilities and our payments 
in 10 or 20 years?  
To explore this issue, we have assembled a noteworthy list of distinguished speakers from 
different backgrounds in academia, policy making and the financial sector. I am sure they 
will provide us with intriguing food for thought during our two-day conference. I would 
like to thank all of them for coming to Vienna and for contributing to our endeavor. I would 
also like to take the opportunity to thank the staff members of the OeNB, and our friends 
at SUERF, for their effort in organizing this event. 
We are very pleased to organize this year’s Economic Conference jointly with SUERF – 
The European Money and Finance Forum. SUERF has been in existence since 1963 and has 
made countless contributions to research on money and finance matters over the past half 
century.  
SUERF’s central aim is to facilitate and promote dialogue between policy makers, financial 
firms and practitioners as well as academia on money and finance topics. Such a dialogue is 
definitely also key to shaping the “Financial System of the Future”. 
Publisher and editor: 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank  
Communications Division  
Otto-Wagner-Platz 3, 1010 Vienna, PO Box 61 
 
 
 
The OeNB has had a very special and good relationship with SUERF for over a decade. The 
OeNB  hosts  SUERF’s  Secretariat,  and  a  senior  OeNB  staff  member  acts  as  SUERF’s 
Secretary  General.  We  are  very  glad  about  this  cooperation  and  would  also  like  to 
encourage those among you who are not yet SUERF members to join this network.  
I  am  very  honored  to welcome  my  colleague  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of 
Finland, who will give a lecture here tomorrow. Erkki Liikanen is not only a dear colleague 
of mine on the Governing Council of the European Central Bank, but he also heads the 
central bank of a country that is very advanced with respect to digitalization, which seems 
to be a major route for the future financial system to take all over Europe. He is therefore 
in a vanguard position to shed light on some of the challenges we are most likely to face on 
the road ahead. 
Thank you very much for joining us today. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
One of the key tasks central banks have is to ensure stability. Regardless of how stability is 
defined, it is inextricably linked with a longer-term orientation. Looking back at the 200-
year history of our bank last year, we were reminded of the many unforeseen events that 
had  unfolded  during  the  past  two  centuries.  And  this  will  become  manifest  in  an  even 
broader perspective when we celebrate the centenary of the establishment of the Republic 
of Austria next year.  
Times change, and time and again we realize how flawed our efforts are at predicting the 
future.  Public  institutions  that  are  committed  to  maintaining  stability  are  invaluable 
because, in a long-term perspective, uncertainty about the future seems to be one of the 
few constants in life.  
Today,  technological  innovation  is  an  ever-present  factor,  but  we  should  be  wary  of 
drawing deterministic conclusions from it. Structural changes in our economic system have 
exhibited a remarkable tendency to prove unpredictable. It seems that the only thing we 
can be certain about is uncertainty. This applies both to the future path of innovation and 
the future sources of financial crises. Former U.S. Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld 
is well remembered for his referral to “known knowns” as distinct from “known unknowns” 
and  “unknown  unknowns”.i  In  economics,  these  distinctions  are  well  known,  although 
under different names – certainty, risk and uncertainty.  
For a central bank, committed to representing an anchor of stability, the main orientation 
points  which  guide  its  behavior  in  an  uncertain  world  are  of  a  macroeconomic  nature: 
economic growth prospects, population trends and the distribution of the fruits of growth. 
With respect to growth, the recovery in the wake of the financial crisis has been modest by 
historical  standards.  Strong  savings,  modest  investment  activity  and  a  continuing  debt 
  2
 
 
 
overhang have led some observers to expect a period of secular stagnation. I do not share 
this  gloomy  perspective,  but  I  agree  that  we  cannot  expect  a  return  of  growth  rates 
comparable to those seen in Europe during the two decades of reconstruction after the 
Second World War.  
Let me turn to population trends to illustrate that unforeseen events do not always imply 
a  need  for  a  downward  revision  of  expectations,  but  can  instead  require  an  upward 
adjustment.  A  decade  ago,  Austria’s  demographic  projections  pointed  toward  stability, 
even  decline.ii  Yet,  recent  unforeseen  developments  have  transformed  perspectives. 
Largely due to migration, Austria’s population is expected to grow by as much as 12% until 
2040 according to the latest forecasts.iii 
The impact of migration serves as a reminder that we live in an age of globalization. One 
reason for gloomy expectations in Europe is a widespread perception that we are about to 
be overtaken by strongly growing emerging economies. And indeed, the EU’s share in 
global economic activity has been declining, namely from 26% in 2004 to 22% in 2015, 
and it is expected to fall below 20% by 2030. Similarly, the EU’s share in world population, 
currently at 6%, will shrink to a mere 4% by 2060.iv But let us not lose sight of the fact 
that neither one of these shares in isolation is relevant for measuring our prosperity. What 
really counts is per capita income. Here, the EU – while still slightly lagging behind the 
U.S.A. – is still far ahead of any other economic region. And within the EU, Austria is 
among the top performers with respect to per capita income. 
Perceiving the world economy as an endeavor where the expansion of one country results 
in a loss for the rest is a misperception that can become outright dangerous if it forms the 
basis  of  international  policy  making.  Economic  growth  in  emerging  markets  in  recent 
decades went hand in hand with a growing world economy. In such an environment, a 
declining share in the world economy does not imply a welfare loss. After all, the global 
economy is not a zero-sum game.  
Focusing  on  per  capita  income  might  undoubtedly  mask  huge  asymmetries  in  the 
distribution of the gains from globalization within countries. But also in this respect, the 
European Union comprises the most equal societies in the world. Admittedly, it has not 
managed to escape the general trend of declining labor income shares that had started in 
the 1980s. As to household wealth, information collected in the Eurosystem’s Household 
Finance and Consumption Survey points to disparities that are even more pronounced than 
inequalities  in  income.  Income  and  wealth  inequality  may  fuel  social  tension  and  harm 
economic growth, as pointed out by the IMF’s recent World Economic Outlook. To tackle 
inequality, the IMF reminds us that we will have to envisage policies which strengthen the 
position of those at the bottom of the income and wealth distribution in the labor market, 
and  more substantial redistributive measures.v Otherwise, we risk losing public support 
  3
 
 
 
for policies which contribute to our prosperity. We should not forget that international 
cooperation  and  exchange  remain  the  key  to  prosperity  in  an  interconnected  world 
economy. 
Finally, I would like to come back to the role of technology.  
Let me touch on a few implications for the banking sector. Whatever impact digitalization 
will have on the future shape of the financial sector, it is reasonable to expect a reduction 
of the current labor force in the banking sector. To some degree, such downsizing is already 
an  ongoing  process  in  the  post-crisis  landscape.  In  Austria,  we  see  employment  in  the 
banking sector decline. And we must be prepared to see a continuation of this trend in the 
years to come. 
The other important change that is likely to occur is the rising importance of market-based 
forms  of  finance,  also  in  countries  like  Austria,  i.e.  countries  which  are  traditionally 
characterized by a dominance of bank-based finance. The capital markets union pursued by 
the  European  Union  will  foster  activity  and  cross-border  integration  in  this  domain, 
promoting the development of new forms to finance economic activity.  
But the extent of economic activity to be undertaken and its financing needs will be shaped 
less  by  technology  than  by  the  macroeconomic  parameters  and  policies  I  have  already 
referred to above. 
Having  said  that,  framing  technological  evolution  in  a  way  that  best  adapts  to 
macroeconomic circumstances and contributes to their favorable development is certainly 
an important endeavor in an era of rapid change. I hope our conference will help foster our 
understanding of emerging trends and their possible impact – with all due modesty, given 
our experience in attempting to forecast the future. 
I wish all of us two days of lively and productive discussion, and I hope we will succeed in 
strengthening confidence in the future ahead of us. 
                                                   
i David A. Graham (2014): Rumsfeld's Knowns and Unknowns: The Intellectual History of a Quip, 
https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2014/03/rumsfelds-knowns-and-unknowns-the-intellectual-history-
of-a-quip/359719/   
ii Scherbov et al. (2008): Probabilistic Population Projections for the 27 EU Member States Based on Eurostat 
Assumptions, 
http://www.oeaw.ac.at/fileadmin/subsites/Institute/VID/PDF/Publications/EDRP/edrp_2008_02.pdf  
iii Statistics Austria (2017): Population Forecasts, 
https://www.statistik.at/web_en/statistics/PeopleSociety/population/demographic_forecasts/population_forecasts
/index.html  
iv Sources: European Commission (2017): White Paper on the Future of Europe. Reflections and scenarios 
for the EU27 by 2025, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-
political/files/white_paper_on_the_future_of_europe_en.pdf; World Bank Database 
  4
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                         
v IMF (2017): World Economic Outlook, April, Chapter 3: Understanding the downward trend in labor income 
shares, p. 140, http://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2017/04/04/world-economic-outlook-april-2017  
  5
