Sabine Lautenschläger: Caution should be the life of banking
Introductory  statement  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the
European  Central  Bank  and  Vice-Chair  of  the  Supervisory  Board  of  the  Single  Supervisory
Mechanism, at the Association for Financial Markets in Europe (AFME) Board Meeting, Frankfurt
am Main, 22 March 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 Taking risks is at the heart of any healthy business, including banks. After all, it is the job of banks
to take and allocate risks. But as Walter Bagehot said: “Adventure is the life of commerce, but
caution is the life of banking”.
I agree with him.
Banks are far too important for the economy to indulge in adventures. They enable business by
providing  loans  to  companies  or  by  helping  them  to  tap  the  capital  markets.  And  they  also
facilitate business by providing services in fields such as payments, mergers and acquisitions,
and global trade.
Banks help the economy to grow and prosper. But they can also badly hurt it; we saw that in the
financial crisis. That’s why banks need to be cautious. In practical terms that requires, among
other things, sound risk management.
And this sets the scene for my short statement today. The topic is risk management. I will begin
with  some  smaller,  or  rather  bank-specific,  risk  management  topics  and  end  with  a  few  big
issues.
Sound risk management depends on good data. It also depends on firm-wide risk aggregation
and reporting. Those who take decisions must be in the picture.
But are they? Well, in the crisis we learnt that decision-makers often were not. IT systems, data
architecture and related processes were not up to the mark.
Against that backdrop, we assessed how banks aggregate data and report risks. The yardstick
was  a  set  of  global  best  practices  that  were  defined  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking
Supervision. These are known as the BCBS 239 principles.
The  result  of  our  review:  many  banks  do  not  meet  the  global  standards.  As  usual,  we  will
therefore be very explicit on how these banks should improve. And we will closely monitor the
progress made by the respective banks to ensure that they meet relevant standards.
Ladies and gentlemen, good risk data is one thing. But processing such data is another matter.
And  that  leads  me  to  my  next  topic:  internal  models.  Many  large  banks  use  these  models  to
calculate  their  risk-weighted  assets,  which  then  serve  as  a  basis  for  calculating  capital
requirements. Over the past years, internal models have diverged greatly, not least due to the
fact that supervisors applied different standards when authorising them.
In response, we have launched a project called TRIM. That stands for “targeted review of internal
models”. It aims to ensure two things: first, that the playing field is level; second, that internal
models produce reliable and comparable results. The calculation of risk-weighted assets should
be driven by actual risks rather than by modelling choices. TRIM will help to raise trust in how
banks calculate their risks.
Ladies and gentlemen, there are small risks and big risks. There are risks that affect a single
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
bank and risks that affect the entire sector. And then there are risks that stretch across sectors
and even countries. In that regard, there is one thing that comes to mind: Brexit.
Right now, it is still very unclear how the world will look after the UK has left the EU. Still, banks
and  supervisors  must  prepare  for  any  scenario.  The  worst  case  would  certainly  be  a  “hard
Brexit”. In that scenario, the UK would become a “third country” from the viewpoint of the EU.
As  a  result,  UK  banks  might  lose  their  European  passport  and,  with  it,  access  to  the  Single
Market. This would affect many of the 40 UK banking groups that currently operate in the Single
Market. They would then have to find another way in.
Most likely, they would seek to obtain a banking licence in an EU country to regain the passport.
In the euro area, these licences are granted by the ECB. We obviously don’t care whether UK
banks move to Frankfurt, Dublin, Paris or some other location in the euro area. What we care
about are safe and sound banks.
We will therefore resist any supervisory or regulatory race to the bottom. Any bank that moves to
the euro area will have to meet our standards – regardless of whether it comes from the UK or
any other place.
Most importantly, we will not accept empty shell companies. All entities in the euro area must
have  adequate  local  risk  management,  sufficient  local  staff  and  operational  independence. All
that should be self-evident.
Banks which seek to permanently book all exposures back-to-back with another entity in London
should change their plans. And so should banks that plan to book all exposures with a euro area
entity while having their risk management somewhere else.
We are aware that it is a burden for UK banks to apply for a new licence in the EU. With a view to
internal  models,  we  would  aim  to  be  accommodating  regarding  the  timing.  There  will  be  a
transitional period in which new euro area entities might use internal models that have not yet
been approved by the ECB.
But  of  course,  there  are  conditions  attached.  First,  the  relevant  models  must  have  been
approved by the UK’s Prudential Regulation Authority. We would also reflect on any comments
on the quality of the models from our UK colleagues. Second, the banks must have applied for
internal model approval in the euro area. The transitional period will cease as soon as we have
approved or rejected the bank’s model application.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  sound  banks  are  at  the  heart  of  a  strong  economy.  Banks  therefore
should note Walter Bagehot’s words and remain cautious. It is our job as supervisors to help
them do so and steer clear of risky adventures.
Thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
