  Opening remarks by Francois Groepe, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the workshop on the impact of IFRS 9 on banks and regulators in Africa, 
jointly hosted by the Working Group on Cross-border Banking Supervision 
and the South African Reserve Bank 
 South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria 
26 September 2017 
 Introduction 
 Good morning, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  warmly  welcome  you  to  this  workshop  on  the  impact  of 
International Financial Reporting Standard  (IFRS) 9 on banks and regulators in Africa, 
which the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) is hosting jointly with the Working Group 
on Cross-Border Banking Supervision. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  Association  of  African  Central  Banks  and,  in  particular,  the 
Working  Group  on  Cross-Border  Supervision  of  the  Committee  of  African  Banking 
Supervisors for being present here today. We are indeed privileged to host fellow central 
bankers and regulators from across the African continent to discuss matters relating to 
the implementation of IFRS 9. The SARB truly values the cooperation with its peers from 
the  continent  and  opportunities  like  this  allow  us  to  nurture  networks  and  build 
relationships,  share  experiences  and  learnings,  and  contribute  towards  improving  the 
overall quality of our continent’s prudential supervision of the financial sector. 
    Page 1 of 9 
Financial reporting 
 It is believed that Luca Pacioli,  a Franciscan monk  known as the father of accounting, 
was  the  first  to  codify  the  double-entry  system  of  bookkeeping  in  his  mathematical 
textbook titled Summa de arithmetica, geometria proportioni et proportionalita which was 
published in Venice in 1494. The celebrated German writer Johann Wolfgang von Goethe 
sang the praises of this system and described it as the finest invention of the human mind 
as it allowed the merchant to survey the whole of his business activities at any time; he 
even  suggested  that  ‘every  prudent  master  of  a  house  should  introduce  it  into  his 
economy’. 
 As any system, however, this system also has its challenges and shortcomings, and the 
renowned investor Warren Buffet warns that financial accounting is an imperfect language 
and that to understand accounting one needs to understand its nuances. Buffet further 
warns  that,  ‘in  the  long  run,  management’s  stressing  of  accounting  appearance  over 
economic substance usually achieves little of either’. It is therefore critical that, to extract 
the  most  from  the  system  of  financial  accounting,  one  is  mindful  of  the  inherent 
shortcomings of the system. 
 In order to address some of the challenges in this area, much progress has been made 
towards the ideal of developing a set of high-quality international accounting standards 
that  are  widely  used.  In  this  regard,  international  standard-setting  bodies,  such  as  the 
International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  Foundation,  play  a  vital  role  in  working 
towards this goal. This Foundation has as its mission the development of standards that 
bring transparency, accountability, and efficiency to financial markets around the world 
and serving the public interest by fostering trust, growth, and long-term financial stability 
in  the  global  economy.  The  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (IASB),  an 
independent private sector body which was established in 2001 and operates under the 
oversight of the International Reporting Standards Foundation, has been tasked with the 
development  and  approval  of  IFRSs,  as  well  as  the  issuing  of  interpretations  of  these 
IFRSs. 
  Page 2 of 9 
IFRSs  are  now  required  in  125  jurisdictions  and  South  Africa  too  subscribes  to  the 
accounting  standards  issued  by  the  IASB, as  do  many  of  the  jurisdictions  represented 
here today. Irrespective of whether your respective jurisdiction has adopted IFRS or not, 
I am sure that all of you will find benefit from the discussions and presentations that will 
take place during this workshop. 
 IFRS 9 and the G20 
 On 24 July 2014, the IASB issued a new accounting standard on  financial instruments 
called  IFRS  9,  which  replaced  the  existing  standard,  namely  International  Accounting 
Standard (IAS) 39, and which has a mandatory effective date of 1 January 2018. IFRS 9 
inter  alia  specifies  how  an  entity  should  classify  and  measure  financial  assets  and 
liabilities.  One  of  the  fundamental  changes  that  IFRS  9  introduces  is  the  concept  of 
Expected Credit Loss (ECL) provisioning. This new principle replaces the current incurred 
losses model and will  materially change the way in which companies, and in particular 
banks, are required to approach and account for impairments for credit losses. 
 According  to  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS),  the  great  financial  crisis  of 
2007-09 highlighted the systemic costs of a delayed recognition of credit losses on the 
part of banks and other lenders, and the application of the prevailing standards at the time 
was  seen  as  having  prevented  banks  from  provisioning  appropriately  for  credit  losses 
likely  to  arise  from  emerging  risks.  These  delays  resulted  in  the  recognition  of  credit 
losses  that  were  widely  regarded  as  ‘too  little,  too  late’,  and  gave  rise  to  questions  of 
procyclicality by spurring excessive lending during the boom and forcing a sharp reduction 
in the subsequent bust. 
 The  development  of  the  ECL  accounting  framework  is  consistent  with  the  call  by  the 
leaders of the Group of Twenty (G20) in April 2009 to strengthen accounting recognition 
of loan loss provisions by incorporating a broader range of credit information. One of the 
consequences of this new framework is the fact that while, in the past, a loss event had 
to have occurred before an impairment was raised by a bank. The standard now requires 
that  loss  provisions  be  raised  earlier  and  take  into  account  not  only  past  and  present 
 Page 3 of 9 
information but also forward-looking information, which emphasises the future probability 
of credit losses in determining them. This standard is aimed at resolving the weaknesses 
identified during the global financial crisis of ‘too little, too late’ referred to above, and this 
will  hopefully  result  in  a  more  robust  financial  system  that  is  more  resilient  and  hence 
better able to withstand shocks. 
 The  adoption  of  IFRS  9  will  give  rise  to  higher  levels  of  credit  impairments.  A  study 
undertaken  by  the  European  Banking  Authority  estimated  that  the  implementation  of 
IFRS 9 would give rise to an average increase of 13% in loss provisions compared to the 
current levels under IAS 39; it is further expected that the Core Equity Tier (CET) 1 ratios 
will  decrease  by  an  average  of  45  basis  points.  Smaller  banks,  which  mainly  use  the 
standardised  approach  to  measuring  credit  risk,  estimate  a  larger  impact  on  their  own 
fund ratios than the larger banks. Estimates of the exact impact differ, however, and only 
time will tell which of these estimates was accurate. 
 There are those that argue that the adoption of IFRS 9 may in fact increase procyclicality, 
because during recessionary conditions there may be a sharp fall in CET 1 capital levels 
and this, in turn, may lead to a sharp easing in credit extension due to the so-called ‘cliff 
effect’ of the staged approach prescribed by IFRS 9. Others, notably the BIS, reject this 
argument  on  the  basis  that  banks,  after  the  global  financial  crisis,  are  now  better 
capitalised  with  higher  buffers  and  thus  are  better  able  to  absorb  losses.  They  further 
argue that the early loss recognition of credit losses enables a quicker ‘clean-up’ of banks’ 
balance sheets, thus enabling them to support economic recovery. 
 This debate is clearly not yet settled and we will need to wait and see how this plays out 
during the next recession. The economic impact is, however, not only limited to the level 
of losses and the timing of the recognition; the implementation of IFRS 9 is also likely to 
impact on the pricing of products which may thus impact on overall credit extension within 
the economy and ultimately consumption and hence economic growth. 
 It is furthermore likely that banks’ earnings will be more volatile in  the future due to the 
effect  of  the  forward-looking  approach  that  is  required  under  IFRS  9.  Therefore, 
 Page 4 of 9 
disclosure  and  the  education  of  stakeholders  on  how  to  interpret  financial  information 
under IFRS 9 will be imperative and an important consideration. 
 Over the past two years, many seminars, workshops, and training sessions have been 
provided  by  a  range  of  organisations.  However,  very  few  of  these  have  focused  on 
jurisdictions from the African continent. There are factors that are unique to Africa that 
need to be taken into account. With this workshop, we want to fill this gap and provide a 
platform for African regulators to discuss the specific issues and concerns that may affect 
them in the implementation of IFRS 9. In this context, we are very much looking forward 
to the presentation from the Bank of Zambia on its in-country regulator perspective. 
 Auditors 
 The  BIS  correctly  points  out  that  the  effectiveness  of  the  new  standards  will  not  only 
depend on how banks implement them but will also depend on the contributions of central 
banks,  supervisors,  and  other  stakeholders,  such  as  auditors.  The  BIS  highlights  that 
supervisors  can  play  a  very  important  role  in  promoting  sound  bank  implementation 
practices through their banking supervision activities in a manner that complements the 
efforts of accosting standard setters. 
 The auditing profession, as mentioned, is an important stakeholder when it comes to the 
implementation  of  IFRS  9,  so  a  discussion  of  IFRS  9  would  not  be  complete  without 
reference  to  their  role.  There  is  little  doubt  that  the  audit  profession  is  likely  to  be 
challenged  with  the  introduction  of  IFRS  9.  The  reason  is  that  the  audit  of  accounting 
estimates,  such  as  impairments,  has  always  been  a  very  complex  area  and  the 
introduction of IFRS 9 will further add to that complexity. 
 We are extremely pleased to have multiple representatives from the audit profession in 
our midst today and tomorrow. We will listen to presentations from both PwC and KPMG 
dealing with audit expectations, while EY will provide us with their perspective during the 
panel discussion tomorrow. We especially want to welcome the representatives from PwC 
Kenya who will be sharing with us their experience to date. 
 Page 5 of 9 
 Before I conclude, I would like to touch on two  audit-related topics, namely  mandatory 
audit firm rotation and the recent developments that engulfed the global audit firm KPMG. 
 The  Independent  Regulatory  Board  for  Auditors  (IRBA)  recently  issued  a  new  rule  on 
mandatory audit firm rotation, which limits audit firm appointments to a maximum period 
of 10 years. The efforts by IRBA to improve independence are to be welcomed. The SARB 
has been proactive with regard to auditor independence, for example section 61 of the 
Banks  Act  provides  that  the  Registrar  of  Banks  must  approve  the  appointment  of  an 
auditor before such an auditor can take up office. Such an appointment further requires 
that the Audit Committee do a proper assessment of the suitability of the auditor to hold 
office,  after  which  the  Office  of  the  Registrar  of  Banks  would  also  do  a  fit  and  proper 
assessment prior to the approval of the auditor’s appointment. 
 The SARB, from a supervisory perspective has furthermore, for many years now, required 
large banks to appoint joint auditors as this further reduces the independence-related risk. 
The  SARB  therefore,  while  broadly  supportive  of  the  principle  of  mandatory  audit  firm 
rotation,  believes  that  banks  should  be  exempted  from  these  requirements  as  our 
supervisory standards and practices as it relate to auditor independence far exceed those 
that  have  recently  been  put  in  place.  We  further  believe  that  the  maximum  period  of 
appointment  should  be  increased  from  the  proposed  10  years  to  a  longer  period  of 
between  15  and  20  years,  as  individual  audit  partner  rotation  is  already  in  effect.  The 
challenges around skills shortages are furthermore a reality that may act as an obstacle 
to achieving this objective of rotating audit firms after 10 years. 
 If  mandatory  audit  firm  rotation  is  retained  in  the  current  form,  the  SARB  may  be 
compelled  to  revisit  the  requirement  of  joint  auditor  appointments  for  large  financial 
institutions due  to  some  of  these  practical considerations.  Although  the  removal  of the 
requirement of joint auditors for large financial institutions will lead to reduced audit fees 
and other efficiencies, we believe that this is likely to weaken auditor independence and 
may  detract  from  the  current  high  levels  of  audit  quality  and  thus  possibly  erode  the 
effective oversight and supervision of banks. This would not be in the public interest. We 
 Page 6 of 9 
further  remain  unconvinced  that  mandatory  audit  firm  rotation  represents  an  effective 
policy  intervention  to  address  the  stated  secondary  objectives  of  redressing  the  high 
levels  of  market  concentration  and  to  promote  transformation  within  the  auditing 
profession. 
 As a regulator, the SARB as a rule does not comment on individual firms. We, however, 
took the extraordinary step to comment publicly on the developments surrounding KPMG 
last week as they are the auditors to three of the big four banks, as well as to other banks 
and insurance companies. Our interest stems solely from a public policy perspective that 
arises from  our financial  stability  mandate. We had  noted  with  concern  the  regrettable 
auditing practices and serious errors of judgment that had occurred at KPMG and which 
had led to significant damage being inflicted on certain individuals, organisations, and the 
country as a whole. 
 During our engagement with the local and global leadership of KPMG, we have noted the 
increasing  and firm  commitment of the  new  management  team  to fully  own  up  to  past 
mistakes and to work  towards restoring the public trust. The recent announcements in 
this regard are recognised as important first steps towards this end and we are eagerly 
awaiting the results of the independent investigations undertaken by IRBA and the more 
recently announced one by KPMG. As a regulator, we do not pick winners or losers, but 
we  are  concerned  stemming  from  our  extensive  experience  of  regulating  banks  this 
unfolding  situation  may  take  the  form  of  a  bank  run  with  contagion  risk  that  extends 
beyond an individual firm. This situation calls for thoughtful leadership and restraint as we 
believe  that  our  economy  will  be  better  served  if  we  can  avoid  further  market 
concentration within the auditing and auxiliary professional services sector. 
 These recent developments have, however, provided us cause to pause. In the coming 
months and years, the following policy considerations may need to be pondered in the 
interest  of  further  strengthening  governance  and  transparency  within  the  auditing  and 
accounting professions. These include: 
  Page 7 of 9 
(i) 
The  requirement  that  audit  firms  may  be  ‘too  big  to  fail’  and  whether  this  may 
require  regulatory  intervention,  including  limiting  the  extent  to  which  audit  firms 
provide  non-audit  services,  especially  to  audit  clients.  The  imposition  of  caps 
regarding the value of non-audit services rendered to audit clients and prohibiting 
the rendering of certain category of non-audit services to audit clients in line with 
the reforms announced by the European Commission in 2016 should enjoy serious 
consideration. 
 (ii) 
A far greater degree of disclosure and transparency by the auditing and accounting 
profession are required, given the public functions that audit firms perform when 
they  inter  alia  attest  the  financial  statements  of  public  companies.  Hence, 
consideration  should  be  given  to  making  the  full  public  disclosure  of  a 
comprehensive set of audited financial statements mandatory, irrespective of the 
form or legal structure of ownership of such firms. 
 (iii) 
The appointment of independent boards of directors and the strengthening of the 
risk management function within audit firms will further strengthen oversight and 
governance within auditing and accounting firms. 
 (iv) 
The publication of an integrated report by the large and medium size audit firms as 
this may contribute to improve transparency around transformation initiatives and 
could  assist  to  accelerate  transformation  within  this  sector.  Full  disclosure 
regarding  compliance  with  governance  frameworks  such  as  King  IV  could  also 
assist in improving governance arrangements within these firms. 
 While this list is not exhaustive, it would be useful if there were a public discourse around 
these  policy  questions.  We  firmly  believe  that  the  implementation  of  some  of  these 
proposals  may  go  some  way  to  strengthening  the  governance  within  the  audit  and 
accounting professions and could assist to further support and possibly strengthen the 
trust that society places in them. 
    Page 8 of 9 
Conclusion 
 The saying goes that change is  the only constant in life. IFRS 9 certainly represents a 
major change for the banking industry. It is certainly a change that needs to be embraced. 
The regulated sector will be looking towards their regulators for guidance, hence we need 
to be up to date and well versed in order to be able to provide effective guidance. To this 
end  banks,  auditors  and  regulators  will  have  to  work  together  to  ensure  that  the 
implementation  of  IFRS  9  will  be  a  success.  I  hope  that  this  workshop  will  contribute 
towards this goal. 
 I am sure that during the next one and a half days, there will be very interesting and fruitful 
discussions  that  will  benefit  all  the  jurisdictions  present  here  today  and  even  after  the 
workshops,  I  am  sure  conversations  will  continue.  I  wish  you  well  on  your  IFRS  9 
implementation journey and hope you will enjoy the workshop. 
 Thank you. 
  Page 9 of 9 
