Encik Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour: The ethical challenge – building a
culture of professionalism and integrity
Remarks by Mr Encik Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  AIF-FSBP  Business  Ethics  Conference  2017  “The  ethical
challenge: building a culture of professionalism and integrity”, Kuala Lumpur, 24 April 2017.
 Ethics is not a new topic. It has been talked about for thousands of years. Plato claimed that
“Good  people  don’t  need  laws  to  tell  them  to  act  responsibly,  and  bad  people  will  find  a  way
around  the  laws”.  In  essence,  he  suggests  that  there  are  “good  apples”  and  there  are  “bad
apples”. More controversially, he implies that the state of the apples has nothing to do with “the
barrel”. I am sure that many of us in this room are probably inclined to disagree. But while ethics
has been discussed and debated throughout the ages, it has been put into sharp focus lately.
This is especially so within the ambit of the financial industry. It is therefore an honour to address
you today at the onset of this conference.
The need for ethics
Prior to the global financial crisis, the focus of investors, financial firms and even many regulators
fell primarily on strong balance sheets and robust internal controls. While necessary, these were
not sufficient. Many financial institutions still failed to function as they should. In a 2009 report on
the crisis, the OECD observed that “corporate governance routines did not serve their purpose to
safeguard  against  excessive  risk  taking”.  A  crucial  shortcoming  in  many  cases  was  the
corporate culture within financial institutions. It is therefore no surprise that “weaknesses in risk
culture are often considered a root cause of the global financial crisis”. We all know too well how
loans were systematically sold to people who were clearly unable to repay. Lenders operated on
a  legal,  but  ethically  questionable,  originate-to-distribute  business  model  –  this  saw  the  risks
associated  with  sub-prime  mortgages  being  repackaged  and  sold  off  to  unsuspecting  third
parties.
Another  sobering  example  of  the  link  between  culture  and  crisis  comes  from  a  finding  of  the
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission in the United States on Lehman Brothers. The Chief Risk
Officer was stripped of her role after raising red flags on risks, in the face of intense competition
from other investment banks. As we all know, the bank went on taking much more risk that it
could reasonably manage – and the rest, is history.
While the global financial crisis has inspired much conversation about ethics and culture, these
issues are by no means new. Throughout the 2000s, an estimated 45 million payment protection
insurance (PPI) policies worth around £44 billion were widely mis-sold to customers in the UK.
Many people did not even know that they were buying a PPI policy. In one example, a PPI policy
bundled with a mortgage – cost the customer more than £20,000 over the term of the loan, even
though  the  maximum  amount  claimable  was  only  £31,000!  The  FSA  reported  that  this  abuse
stemmed  from  “a  culture  in  banks  and  other  firms  that  focussed  on  profit  over  customer
outcomes”. Closer to our region, we saw in 2001 the unexpected failure of the Australian HIH
Insurance  Group,  which  experienced  estimated  losses  totalling  AUD  5.3  billion.  This  was
attributed in part to a culture where the board was “unduly deferential” to management, and staff
simply did not question leadership decisions.
In fact, instances of failures in professionalism and integrity do not seem to have waned since
the  global  financial  crisis. According  to  the  Boston  Consulting  Group,  banks  have  paid  fines
amounting to USD 321 billion to regulators around globe since the crisis through the end of 2016.
Instances of misconduct range widely – from the well-known rigging of LIBOR and Euribor rates,
to the more recently uncovered case of Wells Fargo, where over 2 million fake accounts were
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
opened  under  a  senior  management  who  fostered  “an  atmosphere  that  prompted  low  quality
sales and improper and unethical behaviour”.
Our financial industry is not invulnerable to the ethical challenge. In the 1980s and 90s, we had
cases of Malaysian banks that suffered significant losses arising from imprudent lending under
ethically questionable decisions by top management. In the past two years, more than RM 100
million in fines were meted out for breaches under the purview of Bank Negara Malaysia and the
Securities Commission Malaysia. A study led by the University of Malaya and the AICB in 2014
revealed that 43% of employees within the Malaysian conventional banking sector “had observed
or had first-hand knowledge of wrongdoing in the workplace”. I believe that the survey findings
which the FSPB will present later today will reveal that not enough has improved since then. It is
crucial and timely that we take the ethical challenge seriously in Malaysia. We must ensure that
the unflattering history that we have seen elsewhere does not repeat itself here. As stewards of
the people’s money, the finance community must step up to the moral obligation we owe to our
society.
Making sense of ethics
We  have  seen  some  shocking  behaviour  around  the  world  of  finance  in  recent  years.  The
examples I have relayed are replete with “greed”, “dishonesty” and “recklessness”. We are led to
consider – how can respectable and well-educated human beings behave in this way?
In answering this question, I find the work of Philip Zimbardo on the psychology of evil to be very
helpful.  Ethics  is  a  slippery  subject.  Concepts  like  professionalism  and  integrity  are  inherently
subjective. As financiers, we often feel – out of our depth – when dealing with issues of human
behaviour. We tend to be more comfortable with hard numbers and data. This is why I find it
helpful  to  draw  insights  from  psychology.  Zimbardo’s  work  draws  from  well-known  controlled
studies such as Milgram’s electrocution exercise and the Stanford Prison Experiment. He also
examines real-life cases like abuses in the Abu Ghraib and Guantanamo Bay prisons. All these
cases revealed that ordinary people are a lot more capable and willing to engage in shocking and
unethical  conduct  than  we  would  expect.  For  instance,  the  prison  studies  uncovered  deeply
disturbing abuses by guards in both real-life and controlled settings. Verbal insults. Humiliation.
People being treated like animals – all these by men and women who had loving families, a good
upbringing and otherwise ordinary lives.
Zimbardo proposes a threefold framework of “system”, “situation” and “person” to make sense of
the factors affecting such behavioural choices. He points out that ethical and behavioural choices
are often the result of a dynamic interplay. “What do the people bring into the situation? What
does the situation bring out of them? And what is the system that creates and maintains that
situation?”  It  is  fascinating  to  note  his  conclusion  that  “personal”  convictions  matter,  but  only
slightly. The overwhelming evidence shows that the “situation” and “system” – pose the greatest
influence on behaviour. While this appears to paint a grim and depressing picture of humanity, I
believe that there is a silver lining here. These findings suggest that, given the right “situation” and
“system”,  people  are  capable  of  much  good  –  even  in  the  highly-competitive  and  fast-paced
world of finance. In other words, the problem is often not so much about the “people” or the “bad
apples”, but the “bad barrels” – that lead to shocking behaviour.
The  ethical  challenge  for  us  as  leaders  in  the  corporate  and  public  sectors  is  to  build  this
conducive culture. The need is to cultivate the situational environment and broader system that
encourage genuine professionalism and integrity of the people in the system. Let us focus on
these three elements of (a) system; (b) situation; and (c) people.
(a) System
Let us begin at the highest level, the system. This represents the values and assumed beliefs
that  underpin  an  organisation  and  the  financial  sector  in  general.  The  baseline  standards  of
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
acceptable  conduct  and  behaviour  are  articulated  formally  through  laws  and  regulations.  In
Malaysia, the legal and regulatory frameworks for the financial sector are stewarded by Bursa
Malaysia,  Securities  Commission  Malaysia,  the  Companies  Commission  Malaysia  and  Bank
Negara Malaysia. Various efforts have been, and are, taking place on the professionalism and
integrity fronts. The Bank recently issued the enhanced corporate governance standards for the
financial sector – calling for a culture that reinforces ethical, prudent and professional behaviour. I
understand that the Securities Commission is currently finalising a revised Malaysian Code on
Corporate Governance which will be applicable to Bursa-listed firms. Just this month, a Code of
Conduct for the Malaysian Wholesale Financial Markets was issued by the Bank. It is targeted at
raising the bar of professionalism and integrity of participants in the money and foreign exchange
markets. In line with the focus of many prudential regulators worldwide, the next phase of our
efforts  in  strengthening  corporate  governance  includes  enhancing  our  supervisory  toolkit  to
effectively  address  culture.  Beginning  1  January  2018,  the  Bank  will  also  be  introducing  a
strengthened  transparency  framework  for  our  enforcement  actions,  to  serve  as  a  deterrence
against misconduct.
At the same time, we have to be realistic. There is only so much regulation and supervision can
achieve.  Firstly,  because  enforcement  actions  are  ex-post,  occurring  only  after  a  finding  of
misconduct. Secondly, because not everything unethical is illegal. Morality cannot be legislated.
The spirit of the law may be violated even when the letter of the law is kept. As such, while public
sector efforts are necessary to ensure minimum universal standards, the values for the financial
sector are ultimately solidified by private sector forces. In particular, professional bodies have a
crucial role to play. This role includes – but is not limited to – promoting competence within the
financial  sector.  Beyond  training,  these  organisations  are  uniquely  positioned  to  build  for
financiers, a sense of pride and societal purpose toward their vocation. The Asian Institute of
Chartered  Bankers  (AICB)  is  making  substantial  progress  in  this  direction  for  the  banking
profession.  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  its  flagship  Chartered  Banker  curriculum  dedicates  a
significant  emphasis  on  professional  ethics.  This  stands  alongside  various  other  efforts  for
training  and  standard-setting,  including  those  by  AIF,  ICLIF,  SIDC,  FIDE  Forum,  PPKM  and
FSPB.  I  wish  to  take  this  opportunity  to  specifically  commend  the  AIF  and  FSPB  for  their
initiatives, including today’s event. These draw the much needed attention by the industry to this
important subject.
The  system  of  values  affecting  behaviour  does  not  only  depend  on  the  sector-wide  legal  and
regulatory  frameworks  and  the  vibrancy  of  the  professional  community.  Also,  of  crucial
importance, is the role of the board and senior management in each organisation. As has been
often  repeated,  these  leaders  set  the  tone  from  the  top.  This  is  established  through  official
decisions and formal statements, including the corporate values and various codes of conduct.
However, their role goes much further than that. More than their words, the board and senior
management  determine  the  prevailing  values  of  the  organisational  ecosystem  through  their
attitudes, actions and decisions – especially those relating to professionalism and integrity.
Do they give the impression that the ends always justify the means?
How vigorously do they question sudden surges in a business unit’s profitability?
Are they willing to overlook ethically questionable actions so long as the firm is technically
within the bounds of the law?
How do they react to ethical failures and misconduct? How does compromising the policies
of the organisation affect bonuses and promotion?
Apart from the board and senior management, the system affecting each organisation is also
determined by the shareholders. The capitalist system depends on owners of capital to promote
sustainable value creation through market discipline. Is it simply short-term profits that matter?
Are there other social or environmental purposes that must be safeguarded? To this end, the
Securities Commission’s Malaysian Code for Institutional Investors articulates the stewardship
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
role that shareholders ought to play. Ultimately, shareholders need to clarify that – we need more
than just the bottom line – immediate profit is not everything.
(b) Situation
Let  us  move  on  to  the  second  element  –  the  “situation”.  The  system  of  values  creates  and
maintains various situations. The situation represents the environment or immediate setting in
which financial industry professionals operate. This is a broad subject. Today, I wish to focus on
two types of situational incentives. Firstly, remuneration structures. And secondly, the attitudes
toward speaking up.
Remuneration  plays  a  significant  role  in  influencing  behaviour,  including  ethical  choices.
Admittedly,  the  task  of  designing  and  implementing  a  remuneration  system  to  encourage
professionalism  and  integrity  is  not  straightforward.  However,  the  intuition  is  simple  and
attainable: financial institutions should avoid the folly of rewarding A, while hoping for B. In other
words, we cannot hope for or expect ethical behaviour so long as we continue rewarding people
for acting otherwise. In this regard, the Bank is currently phasing in requirements consistent with
international standards to align remuneration with prudent risk-taking – with a focus on material
risk takers. These rules emphasise sensible governance structures – such as preventing control
function  officers  from  having  their  bonuses  determined  by  the  profits  of  business  units  they
oversee. They also require risk-adjustments in quantifying bonuses – for instance, two traders
who  bring  in  the  same  profits,  but  expose  the  firm  to  different  levels  of  risk,  are  rewarded
differently.
The other area that is important to fostering a healthy culture at the situation-level is “speaking
up”. It is important that there are clear and robust whistleblowing arrangements for employees to
raise  legitimate  concerns  about  illegal  or  unethical  practices.  In  addition  to  the  statutory
protection offered for whistleblowing to authorities, it is also important that financial firms have
internal arrangements for concerns to be raised within the organisation. However, whistleblowing
only makes up a small portion of a speaking up culture. In fact, it is a last resort which will not
need to be used in an organisation with a healthy culture of open discussion. For professionalism
and integrity to prevail – it is crucial that financial firms encourage constructive challenge and
healthy  debate.  This  is  particularly  pertinent  for  the  more  ambiguous  issues  of  ethics,
professionalism and integrity.
(c) Person
We have discussed the elements of “system” and “situation”. The third element that is critical for
a  healthy  culture  is  that  of  the  “people”.  I  pointed  out  earlier  that  the  evidence  of  psychology
suggests that the “system” and “situation” are far more likely to predict actual ethical behaviour
compared to personal convictions. This is somewhat comforting, because it means that a huge
part of the ethical challenge can be addressed without the need to reform people from within. The
problem of “bad apples”, it seems, can be largely solved by focusing on cleaning up the “bad
barrels”. However, the element of “people” remains relevant in determining behavioural outcomes
– even if to a lesser extent. Again, this is a very wide and complex subject, but I wish to briefly
mention two key points.
First – we must remember that the financial sector, like human society, is made up of moral
creatures. We cannot live, much less flourish, unless we recognise this and begin to employ the
language of ethics in business. The language of business must align with what most people feel
about how to live well: be honest; give trust; create lasting values; be reliable; and take pride in
your  work.  The  evidence  reveals  that  employees  are  much  more  productive,  and  feel  more
fulfilled, when they believe that they share the same values as the organisation they work for. My
point is simple – we must not shy away from the language of morality and objectivity in finance.
Yes, there are many ambiguous areas. But some things are right, and some things are wrong;
and as moral creatures, we should engage on these terms, even in business. Morality does not
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
cease  to  exist  when  we  go  to  work.  If  dishonesty  is  unacceptable,  then  it  is  unacceptable
regardless of whether we are dealing with a neighbour or with a counterparty. The global financial
crisis has been a sobering reminder of why we must not divorce ethics from finance.
Second – we must all face up to the difficult but necessary decisions of keeping out bad apples
from  the  financial  industry.  Recruitment  and  promotion  plays  a  key  role  here.  Organisations
should pay careful attention to the individuals they hire and promote. Recruitment assessments
should be done with utmost vigilance, and financial firms must be more candid in dealing with
cases  of  misconduct.  Complaints  and  suspicions  should  be  investigated  properly,  with  an
opportunity for the individual in question to make representations. If their name is cleared, then
this should be recorded, to protect them against unfounded accusations in the future. If they are
found to be in the wrong, then proportionate disciplinary action should be taken and recorded.
Often, bad apples are allowed – and even requested – to leave quietly before investigations are
opened.  This  leaves  them  with  a  clean  record  to  go  on  and  stir  wrongdoing  in  another
organisation, and the next, and so on. This practice should stop. We are collectively responsible
for  upholding  the  integrity  of  our  entire  industry,  not  just  our  respective  institutions.  What  is
important is transparency, to allow the job market to make informed decisions. In this regard, the
Bank is currently pursuing an initiative that will mandate the sharing of employment references
with future employers. A key objective for this is to mitigate the problem of ‘rolling bad apples’
within the Malaysian financial industry.
Conclusion
Business ethics has become a popular topic in the world of finance. We must be careful not to
pay lip service to the hype. We must be careful not to pretend that it  can  be  addressed  with
simplistic solutions. We must instead take a holistic, thoughtful and realistic approach in building
a culture of professionalism and ethics. Allow me to conclude here by leaving you with three key
messages–
First – we cannot afford to underestimate the power and danger of “bad barrels”. The evidence
demands  that  we  focus  carefully  on  cultivating  a  “system”  and  designing  “situations”  that
encourage  continuous  ethical  behaviour.  This  is  a  shared  responsibility.  As  I  have  said,
regulators  play  a  crucial  role  in  articulating  the  letter  of  the  law.  But  it  is  the  private  sector
leadership that determines whether its moral spirit will be pursued.
Second – we must not neglect the uncomfortable reality that there are “bad apples” out there. A
clear message needs to be sent out, that the financial industry does not have room for these.
Fair,  proportionate  and  transparent  disciplinary  action  will  be  central  in  communicating  this
message.
Finally – the entire financial sector must embrace the language of ethics and objectivity. Just like
in any human relationship – trust, honesty and integrity are moral values which must permeate
through  the  business.  Perhaps  it  is  fitting  that  I  end  by  quoting  from  a  great  icon  of
professionalism in finance, the late Tun Ismail Ali. And I quote:
“It  is  timely  that  we  should  examine  the  real  meaning  of  integrity,  hard  work  and  capacity  for
efficient management of our affairs, accountability and corporate citizenship”
These words still ring true today. As leaders, our challenge is to emulate his example of building
a  culture  of  genuine  professionalism  and  integrity  –  one  that  sinks  into  the  very  DNA  of  the
financial industry. I wish you all a fruitful session today as you think through and discuss these
interesting issues together.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
