Muhammad bin Ibrahim: De-risking Asia - the growing role of self-
insurance
Keynote address by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara Malaysia), at the Asian Captive Conference 2017 "De-Risking Asia: The Growing Role of
Self-Insurance" Kuala Lumpur, 16 August 2017.
 It is probably fair to say that captives have had, at best, an uneasy relationship with regulators.
Captive insurance did not get off on the right foot with regulators. In the early days of the modern
captive, efforts to regulate captives were mostly ill-suited to the nature of the captive business.
Prudential and market conduct regulations intended for the protection of the general public were
applied equally to traditional and captive insurers. This reduces the cost savings that captives
were set up to achieve. In response, captives relocated and domiciled in jurisdictions with less
onerous regulations, which on hindsight is an onerous consequence.
Fast-forward half a century, captives are have an entrenched reputation for being tax evasion
vehicles  of  large  corporations.  Offshore  centers  that  are  hosts  to  many  captives  have  come
under greater scrutiny, with stronger tax and regulatory regimes back on the cards to haunt the
industry.
We seem to have come full circle, and possibly still without a clear grasp of how captives, as
well as the economics in which they operate, have fundamentally changed over time. This raises
a risk that the captive and regulatory community may yet find itself caught wrong-footed (again!),
with potentially higher stakes at hand.
I thought that it is worth talking about the role of captives in the shifting sands of business in the
21st century. I would like to share some thoughts on what the future holds for captives as we
contemplate the changes taking place around us.
Responding to risk in the 21st century – the role of captives
Major risk events often strike without prejudice. Typhoons do not discriminate in the havoc that
they wreak. Terrorist attacks affect innocent bystanders who happen to be at the wrong place at
the  wrong  time.  Organizations  across  the  globe,  no  matter  what  their  purpose,  have  been
targeted by cyber-attacks. From the National Health Service in the UK, to schools in China, to
chocolate factories in Australia, organizations large and small, for-profit or non-profit, have borne
the brunt of ransomware attacks.
Thanks to globalization and advancements in technology, the impact on businesses is also more
far-reaching and larger in scale than ever before. The malware WannaCry hit 200,000 computers
in 150 countries. Attacks on multinational transport companies based in Europe stranded cargo
at ports in India. The losses from these events are large. Cyber theft cost the global economy
more  than  $450  billion  in  2016.  Lloyd’s  of  London  estimates  that  a  global-scale  cyber-attack
could  rack  up  losses  of  $53  billion,  similar  to  a  catastrophic  natural  disaster  such  as  U.S.
Superstorm Sandy in 2012.
Unsurprisingly, risk awareness is now growing across the entire spectrum of businesses. The
2017 Allianz Risk Barometer, which covers mainly large corporates, as well as a 2016 Zurich
study  on  SMEs  revealed  that  cyber  risk  is  topmost  on  businesses’  minds.  The  same  study
showed that, in Asia Pacific, there are now twice as many SMEs that worry about cybercrime,
fire, technological vulnerabilities, health and safety of customers or employees, and corruption
compared to four years ago.
Yet, in terms of preparedness for dealing with risk events, there is a marked disparity between
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
large corporates, and mid-sized and smaller companies. Predictably, larger companies are the
ones  that  tend  to  have  a  structured  risk  mechanism  in  place,  as  well  as  the  resources  and
expertise to deploy risk management tools. Larger companies also tend to have better access to
specialist insurance products and the resources to establish a captive. Indeed, 90% of Fortune
1000 companies have a captive insurance company.
Smaller  and  mid-sized  companies  are  a  different  story.  Most  do  not  consider  captives  as  a
feasible risk management option. However, this is changing with innovations in captive models,
such  as  group  and  rental  captives  and  protected  cell  companies.  It  is  not  only  possible  for
smaller companies to engage captives. A more compelling business case is emerging for the
use of captives as small and mid-sized businesses evolve.
Some of the most significant small business trends in the 21st century include disaggregated
business  networks,  shorter  cycles  of  proprietary  knowledge,  and  rising  entrepreneurship
powered  by  a  younger  digital  generation.  Take  for  example,  high-growth  tech  startups.  As
disruptors, their business models and risk profiles, are often unique. Much of their competitive
edge  is  derived  from  concepts  and  technologies  that  are  new  to  the  market.  Ride-sharing
platforms  such  as  Uber  and  Grab  are  built  on  seamless  apps  that  work  exactly  the  same
whether in London, New York or Kuala Lumpur.
From  an  insurance  perspective,  however,  trans-border  solutions  for  such  businesses  are
substantially  more  complicated.  The  ride-sharing  model  combines  private  vehicles  with
commercial use. The seamless insurance coverage for Uber drivers that integrates exposures
from  private  and  commercial  use,  and  satisfy  the  mandatory  requirements  under  different
domestic laws, are not yet fully developed in all markets. This example calls for bespoke and
efficient solutions which may not be readily available in certain traditional insurance markets.
To put this in perspective, Google has projected that Southeast Asia’s web-generated business
will multiply over 6 times to $200 billion by 2025, from $31 billion in 2015. The massive impact of
technology on the world as we know it, will create new insurance gaps and demand for bespoke
solutions.  This  will  set  the  stage  for  captives  to  take  on  a  more  active  role  in  the  risk
management ecosystem. Companies that are altering the business landscape will need creative
and efficient risk transfer solutions that address their unique business needs.
Used  alongside  other  risk  management  strategies,  including  the  traditional  insurance  market,
captives  allow  companies  to  design  an  optimal  risk  transfer  structure.  For  example,  more
standard risks can be insured in the traditional market while more specific and bespoke risks can
be tailored and underwritten by the captive.
The  benefits  go  both  ways.  Captives  can,  and  should,  also  contribute  significantly  to  the
development  of  the  industries  they  serve.  Insuring  with  captives  enables  businesses  and
economies  to  better  weather  insurance  market  cycles.  Especially  for  smaller  and  mid-sized
companies, captives can be a powerful catalyst for more mature risk management practices and
culture. This comes from putting control of a company’s insurance needs in its own hands and
encouraging a longer-term and more sophisticated view of risk.
The effects also accrue to the wider insurance industry. The captive can act as a ‘risk incubator’
by recording and accumulating data and information about lesser known risks. In time, this will
promote  conditions  for  the  development  of  new  products  and  markets  as  businesses  and
solution providers continuously seek out more efficient ways to manage risks.
Future trends – opportunities and changing norms for captives
What the future holds for captives. Three trends are worth noting.
First, captives are poised to move beyond the predominant focus on the single parent-captive
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
model and the exclusive domain of large corporates. In fact, many non-profits entities in the US,
and an increasing number of SMEs are accessing captives via group captive models that pool
assets and share risks across its members.
Parallels  can  be  drawn  with  the  mutual,  which  also  shares  similarities  to  takaful  (Islamic
insurance).  During  the  1700s  and  1800s,  the  earlier  forms  of  captives  were  mutual  insurers,
formed together by firms from a particular industry that shared similar exposures.
Today, mutual models are still very much alive. Their contributions to global premiums have risen
in recent years after years of decline, and they include captives set up as mutuals. The takaful
industry is also thriving and poised to continue growing, in large part driven by growth in Asia.
The  overlapping  markets  of  the  mutual,  captive  and  takaful  industries,  is  likely  to  provide  an
important impetus for the wider use of group captives among mid-sized and smaller companies.
This region is especially well-placed to harness this potential, given the vibrance of SMEs and
fast  growing  takaful  market.  Southeast  Asia  alone  contributes  almost  30%  to  global  takaful
contributions, and this offers an opportunity, as Malaysia has long sought to develop a facilitative
regulatory  environment  to  drive  an  innovative,  competitive  and  sustainable  growth  of  Islamic
finance.
Second, technology will be a key driver and opportunity for new captive models. Technological
advancements are already driving the growth of captive insurance business due to the new risks
that businesses face. As an industry founded in response to an inflexible insurance market, the
history of captives is very much intertwined with innovation. The first captive can itself be seen as
a disruption to the market!
Captives can be expected to leverage on new technologies to modernise legacy processes and
systems, strengthen risk management capabilities and capture efficiency gains.
At the frontier of development, the evolution of Big Data and Insurtech has opened up significant
new possibilities for segmenting and pooling of risk and capital, and tailoring solutions to specific
needs and profiles.
Online platforms based on the group captive model and P2P insurance concepts are a case in
point. Given that captives aim to provide specialised coverage that is not typically available in the
traditional market, it is only natural for captives to operate in this space. 
Third, we are likely to see greater traction in efforts to understand captives from a regulatory and
supervisory  perspective.  At  a  global  level,  there  is  a  greater  appreciation  of  the  role  and
importance  of  captive  insurers,  including  by  the  International  Association  of  Insurance
Supervisors  (IAIS).  IAIS  published  two  papers  in  2006  and  2015,  addressing  the  economic
benefits  of  captive  insurance  and  its  relationship  to  traditional  insurance  and  reinsurance
markets. More significantly, it recognizes the importance of applying a supervisory regime that
has due regard to the specific nature, scale and complexity of various forms of captives.
A  primary  objective  of  regulation  for  captives  is  promoting  financial  stability.  In  this  respect,
regulators will continue to be concerned with risks that may be created as a result of arbitrage
and distortions to the broader insurance market. Captives have an important contribution to offer.
However, understanding risks relating to captives at a much deeper level, will be important to
deliver regulatory outcomes that are proportionate and economically efficient.
Captive  risks  will  differ  from  traditional  insurance,  and  they  also  vary  significantly  between
different types of captives, depending on ownership and structure, scope of business and nature
of risks insured.
Managing  these  risks  cannot  simply  be  addressed  at  an  institutional  level.  Macroprudential
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
measures might have relevance in certain circumstances. For example, a pure captive insurer
that merely underwrites the risks of its parent may pose low financial and consumer risks, but if
the  parent  is  an  economically  significant  entity,  with  critical  financial  linkages,  a  different
regulatory response and approach might be warranted.
To  a  large  extent,  our  ability  to  design  suitable  regulatory  frameworks  for  captives  remains
constrained  by  the  paucity  of  data  on  captives.  This  needs  to  be  addressed  as  a  matter  of
priority. Broader measures need to be taken, both at a national and global level, to collect better
data  on  captives  to  understand  their  nature,  evolution  and  impact  on  macro-financial
developments.
Increased efforts by governments to tackle profit shifting and tax base erosion (BEPS) have been
another  factor  behind  recent  regulatory  developments.  Significant  changes  have  taken  place
affecting offshore financial centers in the past decade, shaped by heightened expectations for
enhanced transparency and exchange of information between tax authorities.
These winds of change are likely to pick up speed for captives. And they will change the way
captives have operated in the past. Very likely it would pave the way for the transformation of
offshore financial centers. Captives could metaphorsise from perceived brass plates models into
legitimate commercial vehicles that serve a real economic purpose. Perception management is
pivotal for the future existence of captives.
Captives must be seen as supporting and contributing to the broader economic transformation
and growth.
These three developments; the emergence of more diverse captive models serving a broader
spectrum  of  companies,  technological  advancements  and  more  considered  regulations,  are
likely to foster a greater convergence between the intended economic outcomes of captives, and
the required and appropriate regulatory framework. I hope that this forum will seize the window of
opportunity to bring together mutual interests that have long been somewhat at odds.
As  a  collective,  all  of  us  here  today,  have  a  common  interest  in  ensuring  that  captives
demonstrate  genuine  value  and  valuable  economic  purpose.  Achieving  this  calls  for  strong
corporate  governance  practices,  greater  transparency  and  sound  financial  management  that
commensurate with underwritten risks.
Ultimately,  a  new  reality  needs  to  be  embraced  by  captives.  In  the  long  term,  investing  in
technology,  technical  expertise,  better  and  stronger  compliance  frameworks  are  worthwhile
endeavors. It’s no more a choice.
At stake is the viability of individual captives and an enduring captive industry that will add breadth
and depth to insurance markets.
Conclusion
The captive industry may well be at a turning point. In moving forward, how we start matters.
Efforts to develop the captive industry should be focused on better risk management, promoting
macro-economic  stability  and  encouraging  new  growth  rather  purely  concentrated  on  tax
planning.
There  are  promising  signs,  among  business  and  regulatory  sectors,  that  there  is  a  growing
space for captives to play a role. It is important that we move forward to harness this potential,
responsibly and thoughtfully.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
