Andreas  Dombret:  Major  challenges  facing  Germany's  savings
banks
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at  the  retirement  of  Dr  Rolf  Gerlach  from  his  position  as  President  of  the  Westfalen-Lippe
Savings Bank Association, Bochum, 31 March 2017.
 1 Introduction
Finance Minister Dr Schäuble
Mr Fahrenschon
President Müller
Dr Gerlach
Ladies and gentlemen
It is more than apt that so many of us should have gathered here today in Bochum to pay tribute
to Dr Gerlach as he leaves office. For my part, I intrinsically associate the city of Bochum with
Herbert  Grönemeyer.  He  even  dedicated  a  song  to  the  city  which,  among  other  things,  he
describes as "no great beauty, for work’s lined your face". Even if the song does not seem so at
first glance, it is first and foremost a declaration of love for his hometown. Grönemeyer goes on
to sing "You don’t like wearing make-up – you’re an honest place, […] Your heartbeat’s of metal It
hammers out through the night."
Speaking for myself, I can’t help seeing some of Dr Gerlach’s traits in the lines of this song.
But  I’ll  come  back  to  that  later.  During  his  time  in  office  Dr  Gerlach  has  always  focused  his
attention on the substance of the matter in question. Bearing this in mind, I would like to follow his
example  and  shall  therefore  begin  my  speech  by  outlining  the  challenges  Germany’s  savings
banks currently face.
2 Savings banks face an array of major challenges ...
No  matter  where  you  might  focus  your  attention  as  a  board  member  of  one  of  Germany’s
savings banks, be it old or new competitors, the regulators or your institution’s cost calculations,
there is pressure to act. But perhaps the greatest challenge you’re going to face lies somewhere
down the road. For many of the problems that are currently the subject of intensive debate at
savings bank conferences around the country will not impact in full until a later date.
I  refer,  in  particular,  to  the  prevailing  low-interest-rate  environment.  Lower  interest  margins
started  to  impact  on  savings  banks  back  in  2016,  doing  so  in  the  form  of  reduced  interest
income. At that time, these institutions were still able to counter this effect, chiefly by raising net
commissions received and cutting administration costs. But the longer the current interest rate
1
prevails, the greater the problems will become.
But we need to be clear about one thing: putting an end to low interest rates will not bring relief
right away. On the contrary, the quicker and higher interest rates rise, the greater the burden this
will represent for those institutions that provide short-term refinancing for long-term loans. This
risk, referred to in your circles as interest rate risk in the banking book, naturally also impacts on
savings banks that follow their own heavily deposit-based business model. Based on the Basel
interest rate shock scenario, supervisors have now taken to classifying every other savings bank
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
as subject to heightened risk. Savings banks are thus awarded more or less the same average
rating as that of German credit institutions.
This status does not, in itself, tarnish the reputation of an institution as the latter can safeguard
itself by pursuing an appropriate risk management strategy and ensuring that its risk buffers are
sufficiently strong. Nevertheless, it exemplifies how relevant risk is in the event of an interest rate
reversal. And it justifies closer monitoring by supervisors.
For credit institutions, interest rate risk already represents a demanding balancing act. For any
expansion  of  lending  in  the  current  interest  rate  environment,  say  to  offset  the  lower  interest
margins, intensifies the negative consequences of a sudden, strong hike in interest rates.
As you can see, there are no simple answers to the challenges we face at present. Savings
banks find themselves in a position that begs for balanced decisions that also think of the distant
future. But there is also a positive side to all this. Entrepreneurial skills are the key factor here –
indeed, they will make all the difference, going ahead. And this is where savings banks have an
advantage.
Boards  of  directors  and  supervisory  boards  have  good  reason  not  to  leave  any  stone  turned
when it comes to taking action in this challenging environment. First, of course, this means that
savings banks need to actively manage and hedge their interest rate risk. Second, they need to
have a stable capital base. And third, they need to strengthen their profitability in the long run.
Cost-cutting  measures  such  as  streamlining  their  branch  networks  and  strategically  prudent
consolidation are key to achieving these goals.
To avoid any misunderstanding, I should point out that nobody can reliably predict what kind of
market structure will be economically appropriate for savings banks in five or ten years’ time.
Banking supervisors are likewise unable to foresee what the future holds for this sector and they
have no clear targets or target ratios in mind. That said, at this juncture, I see no indication of
current trends coming to an abrupt halt or even undergoing a reversal. German savings banks
and credit institutions have been scaling back their operations since the early 1990s. No fewer
than  9,000  savings  bank  branches  have  been  shut  down  and  the  number  of  institutions  has
almost halved. Given today’s challenging environment, it is fair to assume that, in some cases,
consolidation might still be the soundest response in economic terms.
3 ... and need a functioning administrative board
Ladies and gentlemen, there is no doubt that Germany’s savings banks are facing some major
challenges. And  if  these  challenges  are  to  be  met,  qualified  staff  will  be  needed  at  all  levels.
Clearly,  this  includes  the  supervisory  bodies,  in  other  words  the  administrative  boards,  in  the
case of savings banks.
As you will probably have noticed, in recent weeks, this issue has been the subject of increased
debate  in  the  press.  This  debate  was  prompted  by  the  current  draft  proposal  for  a  European
Banking Authority  (EBA)   guideline  as  well  as  a  corresponding  ECB  guideline .  Both  papers
contain requirements applying to the members of supervisory bodies in financial institutions and
thus also to persons sitting on the administrative boards of savings banks. Among other things,
the  requirements  address  these  individuals’  specialist  knowledge  and  possible  conflicts  of
interest.
2
3
Let me begin by making one thing clear. In my mind, it makes good sense for the EBA and ECB
to  address  these  matters.  Supervisory  and  administrative  boards  are  extremely  important
bodies. It is therefore essential that their members ask the right questions. To do this, they need
to be uninfluenced by other interests. And their professional skills need to be tip-top. Academic
studies  of  the  German  banking  and  savings  bank  sector  have  confirmed  how  important  the
4
skillsets of an institution’s supervisory board members are in achieving success.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
For  some  commentators,  however,  the  current  proposals  are  a  step  too  far.  The  relevant
associations and politicians have voiced their criticism. But are the basic principles that underpin
the German savings bank landscape really being questioned? To be more specific: What do the
European  proposals  mean  for  administrative  bodies  within  the  savings  banks  and  their
members?
I would first like to remind you that requirements relating to the specialist skills of administrative
board members have long been part of the picture in Germany. They are already enshrined in the
German Banking Act and are partly written into the laws governing savings banks. Compliance
with them is monitored by the supervisors. In practise, this means that members of these boards
will  have  acquired  the  necessary  specialist  skills  either  during  their  training  period  or  in  the
course of their professional career or, alternatively, in follow-up courses.
The EBA and the ECB are therefore putting down on paper targets that are already being met in
Germany. The principle of proportionality also stipulated in their proposals is designed to ensure
that the specialist skill requirements are not overly stringent for any given individual or institution.
To this end, they are tiered according to the size of the institution, as well as its business model
and  complexity.  This  guarantees  that  the  administrative  board  can  effectively  oversee  the
respective senior management team – no more, no less.
But the European proposals are not confined to the professional qualification element. A second
key part of the procedure to test suitability focuses on identifying potential conflicts of interest.
This has raised fears that the new rules could broadly exclude local politicians – or at least those
wielding strong political influence – from joining the board of a savings bank. But this concern is
unfounded. Individual politicians would solely be subject to mandatory careful examination of any
potential conflicts of interest and the commitment to take action, where necessary, to counter
any such conflicts.
For  sure,  some  details  of  the  European  proposals  need  further  discussion.  National
particularities have to be considered, including the principle of municipal support that applies to
savings  banks.  Overall,  I  believe  the  proposals  are  moving  in  the  right  direction.  Existing
structures in Germany’s savings bank landscape will not be destroyed by them. And the notion of
municipal support will not be thrown overboard.
In any case, there is nothing to justify such a move. Because, as far as I can see, there are no
major  objections  to  be  made  to  the  presence  of  municipal  representatives  on  administrative
boards.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  only  logical  that  savings  banks  should  be  monitored  in  the
performance of their public duties by persons representing the public authorities that fund them.
From the broader perspective, I am also convinced that the vast majority of administrative boards
do a good job. And their regional identity assists them in this regard.
Even so, there are two areas where we cannot afford to make any compromises.
First, conflicts of interest must not be allowed to get in the way of the responsible execution of
daily activities. In the past, it has not always been possible to ensure that this was achieved. I
remember a case some years ago where a large savings bank found itself in need of financial
support. In the documents concerning the relevant EU state aid procedure, the difficulties being
experienced  by  the  institution  were  explicitly  attributed  to,  and  I  quote,  “politically  motivated
investment". As a consequence, the institution was forced to restructure its administrative board.
And  there  are  always  fresh  cases  where  members  of  the  administrative  boards  take  the
bolstering of local authority coffers at least as seriously as, or indeed even more seriously than
the long-term resilience of their savings bank. Please don’t get me wrong: There is nothing to be
said against profitable and soundly situated savings banks distributing some of their profits to
their  shareholders.  But  dividend  payments  that  limit  the  options  available  for  adequate  risk
provisioning or that eat away at their resources are unacceptable. And this is especially true in
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  challenging  times  we  now  live  in.  It  is  precisely  amidst  an  environment  of  low,  or  even
negative, interest rates and the associated interest rate risk that generous reserves need to be
accumulated. The long-term stability of any given savings bank must not be sacrificed in favour
of budgetary policy considerations.
Second: Expertise is the indispensable prerequisite that enables administrative board members
to exercise their mandate. For they can only effectively control their institution’s board of directors
if they have a sound understanding of its business activities and the associated risks. Training
courses are of great significance in this context. The fact that the savings bank associations are
taking this in hand is evident here in this region. Take the example of the training programme
“Savings bank forum – administrative boards” that is offered by the Savings Bank Academy in
North-Rhine Westphalia. Elsewhere, in other federal states of Germany, similar formats are also
on offer. That said, it should also be clear that a day or weekend spent attending a seminar is not
enough to make up for a deficit of economic knowledge and banking expertise. We all have a
vested interest in ensuring the highest possible standards.
The  new  European  rules  will  help  make  sure  that  the  aforementioned  points  of  focus,  ie
conflicting interests and specialist skills, are properly considered in the future. This is where the
owners of savings banks need to step in. As early on in the process as selecting and assigning
their  representatives  to  a  certain  administrative  board,  they  should  take  care  only  to  appoint
persons  who  are  well  versed  in  the  business  at  hand,  never  losing  sight  of  the  long-term
interests of the institution.
4 Tribute to President Gerlach
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  discussed  the  matter  of  qualifications  in  great  depth.  But  what
qualities does one need to count as qualified? Aside from having the professional knowledge,
skills and experience required, one needs to take one’s job seriously and be fully committed.
Dr Gerlach is a prime example of just such a person. Some would go so far as to say that, in his
capacity  as  President  of  the  Westfalen-Lippe  Savings  Bank  Association,  Dr  Gerlach  has
sometimes  taken  his  job  a  wee  bit  too  seriously.  He  has  certainly  never  given  way  to
compromise when the interests of his institution were at stake. But the crux of the matter is that
he has always acted in a fair, straightforward and open-minded manner. In view of these traits,
an associate of his – who wishes to remain anonymous – recently referred to him as "a man
who exhibits Westphalian clearness of purpose". Grönemeyer would call you “an honest place".
What  I  appreciate  about  your  work  ethic  is  that  you  have  consistently  remained  true  to  your
convictions,  resisting  the  temptation  to  succumb  to  the  mood  of  the  day,  always  stating  your
case loud and clear. For instance, you have never shied away from addressing awkward issues
like the need for reform within the ranks of German savings banks. In that sense, you definitely
possess what Grönemeyer describes as "a heartbeat ... of metal (that) hammers out through the
night".
Your sense of commitment has not stopped outside your duties as President. For alongside your
professional duties you have also performed numerous tasks in an honorary capacity. Before I
overdo  the  Grönemeyer  quotes,  I  would  like  to  recite  a  verse  by  Wilhelm  Busch  who  once
expressed his views on voluntary work in a somewhat sceptical manner. Here goes:
"If you wish to lead a happy and joyful life
take care to avoid all voluntary strife
If you wish to avoid an early grave
do not to this be a slave"
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The verse continues
"Deeds of charity impart no honour
for, cutting away like a scissor,
the desire for applause
will diminish your cause."
Unlike  Wilhelm  Busch,  however,  I  am  absolutely  convinced  that  Dr  Gerlach  has  chosen  his
honorary positions wisely. He will, for instance, continue to serve as Chairman of the Board of
Directors  at  the  Foundation  for  Photography  and  Media  Arts.  At  this  juncture,  I  should  also
mention his invaluable efforts supporting the Picasso Museum.
Ladies and gentlemen, Dr Gerlach, I would like to conclude my remarks with one last quote from
Grönemeyer’s  song  dedicated  to  Bochum.  In  its  last  line  he  sings  “Glück  auf",  which  roughly
translates  as  “Good  fortune!".  And  on  behalf  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, it is good fortune that I wish you, Dr Gerlach, now and in all your future endeavours.
1
2
3
4
Dombret,  Gündüz,  Rocholl  (2017):  "Will  German  banks  earn  their  cost  of  capital?",  Deutsche  Bundesbank
Discussion Paper No 01/2017.
Consultation paper: Joint ESMA and EBA guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of members of the
management body and key function holders under Directive 2013/36/EU and Directive 2014/65/EU of 28 October
2016 (EBA/CP/2016/17).
ECB draft of a guideline on assessing professional qualifications and personal reliability, dated 14 November
2016.
Harald Hau and Marcel Thum: "Sub-prime crisis and board (in-)competence: private versus public banks in
Germany" in Economic Policy, October 2009, pp. 701-752.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
