Peter Praet: Creating stability in an uncertain world
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
conference  &quot;Brexit  and  the  implications  for  financial  services&quot;,  jointly  organised  by
SUERF and hosted by Ernst &amp; Young, London, 23 February 2017.
Resilient recovery in the euro area
 The economic recovery in the euro area is continuing at a moderate, but firming, pace, and is
broadening  gradually  across  sectors  and  countries.  Real  GDP  growth  has  expanded  for  15
consecutive quarters, growing by 0.4% during the final quarter of 2016 according to the Eurostat
flash estimate. Economic sentiment is at its highest level in nearly six years and unemployment
is back to single-digit figures. Looking beyond the euro area, the global economy, too, is showing
increasing signs of a cyclical upturn.
The euro area economy has been resilient in the face of a number of risks and uncertainties at
global level. One example of its improving resilience is the fact that domestic demand is now the
mainstay of real GDP growth. Previously, growth in euro area was closely correlated with the
strength  of  international  trade,  but  that  relationship  has  weakened  recently;  last  year’s  growth
would not have been possible in view of the lacklustre international conditions.
Our  monetary  policy  measures  have  been  a  key  contributor  to  these  positive  economic
developments. The comprehensive set of measures introduced since June 2014 has worked its
way  through  the  financial  system,  leading  to  a  significant  easing  of  financing  conditions  for
consumers and firms. Together with improving financial and non-financial sector balance sheets,
this has strengthened credit dynamics and supported domestic demand.
The  recovery  has  been  accompanied  by  a  broad-based  improvement  in  measures  of
confidence.  Measured  confidence  for  industry,  construction,  services  and  households  is  in
positive territory, and particularly strong for measures of future expectations. This is in line with
the  normally  high  correlation  between  measures  of  confidence  and  economic  activity.
Households and businesses which are confident about the future are more likely to spend and
invest than those which are concerned.
Despite the resilient recovery in the euro area, and strong indicators of confidence across all
sectors, measures of political and policy uncertainty have been rising recently, although asset
markets are not significantly pricing in tail risks. The recent bouts of uncertainty are a source of
concern, and represent a downside risk to the economic outlook. Today I would like to discuss
the  potential  impact  of  uncertainty  on  economic  activity  and  the  role  of  institutions  in
counteracting uncertainty and providing stability.
Uncertainty and economic developments
The  economic  literature  –  both  theoretical  and  empirical  –  finds  a  link  between  heightened
uncertainty and lower economic activity in the short run. There are usually fixed costs involved
with investment, from creating new capital such as building a factory to hiring new staff, which
cannot  be  recovered  if  the  investment  decision  is  reversed.  So  faced  with  an  increase  in
uncertainty, businesses pare back investment plans. Similarly, if households fear unemployment
1
or lower income from employment in the future they may reduce consumption today.
The literature uses a number of different measures of uncertainty. Such measures usually move
with  each  other,  and  generally  peak  in  recessions.  At  the  current  time,  most  measures  of
uncertainty for the euro area do not appear especially elevated. The economic recovery has been
resilient and steady for a number of years, the financial sector is more robust than it was pre-
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
crisis, and most measures of financial sector volatility are markedly below the peaks witnessed
during the crisis.
2
The  one  indicator  of  uncertainty  that  appears  elevated,  and  has  been  so  since  the  UK
referendum is political uncertainty.  This measure counts how frequently newspaper articles cite
“uncertainty”, “economy” or similar, and particular policy words, such as “deficit” or “regulation”.
A number of recent events have sparked this rise in political uncertainty. Since the US elections,
the outlook for that country’s fiscal policy and trade policy has been uncertain. In the run-up to the
elections in several European countries, the headlines are reflecting political uncertainty about
the future attitude of Member States towards European integration. Not to forget the process of
withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union and the significant uncertainty that
inevitably surrounds the future relationship between the UK and the EU27.
These recent bouts of political and policy uncertainty have come on top of the existing and more
enduring sources of “structural” uncertainty about the economic outlook in advanced economies.
What  do  we  really  know  about  the  impact  of  new  technologies  and  innovation  on  tomorrow’s
economic  landscape?  Will  secular  stagnation  be  the  new  economic  reality?  Various  authors
have suggested that recent innovations have had only limited effect on productivity and growth in
advanced  economies.  Others  have  expressed  concern  that  these  innovations  may  polarise
societies still further and may even have negative effects on employment. Technology optimists
meanwhile  predict  the  advent  of  a  bright  future,  with  the  diffusion  of  innovation  bringing  about
significant productivity increases and high levels of well-being.
It is important for us economists to be humble when forecasting the future. Debating concepts
such as ‘secular stagnation’ may be fashionable now, but we should remember only a decade
ago  it  was  fashionable  to  debate  the  ‘Great  Moderation’.  By  the  same  token,  the  observed
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
resilience of a moderate economic recovery and strong confidence indicators should not lead to
complacency. Respondents to survey questions can be influenced by what they consider to be a
normal benchmark. If the new normal after the Great Recession is below its pre-crisis level, the
same  levels  of  confidence  indicators  can  point  to  lower  growth  rates  than  before  the
crisis.   Indeed,  measures  of  capacity  utilisation  are  high  in  an  environment  of  persistent
economic slack. How resilient the recovery really is to policy uncertainty is also not known. The
World Bank’s Global Trade Watch  report suggests that policy uncertainty is already weighing on
world trade.
3
4
Of  course,  uncertainty  about  the  future  has  always  been  with  us.  The  incidence  of  natural
disasters such as droughts, floods and earthquakes, the doubt of whether contractual promises
will be honoured and the fear of your possessions being taken by force are all factors that can
affect economic activity.
Humankind,  over  the  millennia,  has  put  in  place  various  mechanisms  to  help  cope  with
uncertainty.  For  example,  putting  in  place  narratives  to  filter  and  process  the  vast  array  of
information available and arrange it in order – a cognitive trick to make sense of an uncertain
world. Building institutions has been key to providing economic stability. Inclusive institutions are
5
essential for economic development.
The importance of economic narratives
6
Following  financial  crises,  political  uncertainty  is  often  elevated.  According  to  a  recent
study,  votes for extreme parties can increase by on average 30%, while government majorities
shrink, parliaments end up with a larger number of parties and become more fractionalised. Thus
the political landscape becomes more gridlocked at precisely the moment when decisiveness is
typically required.
This  can  delay  necessary  policy  responses,  such  as  cleaning  up  the  financial  sector,  which
prolongs  the  post-crisis  recovery. And  such  uncertainty,  reflected  in  the  media,  can  gradually
build a narrative of doom and gloom around the economy or around the existing institutions – a
seeping pessimism, which over time alters investors’ and consumers’ expectations, and thereby
their behaviour.
7
Robert Schiller  has recently elaborated on the epidemiology of narratives relevant to economic
fluctuations, ranging from the Great Depression of the 1930s, to the Great Recession of 2007–
2009  and  today’s  climate  of  political  uncertainty.  Popular  narratives  can  drive  economic
developments.  For  example,  when  people  hear  stories  of  declining  prices  and  then  postpone
their purchases: talking about deflation feeds deflation. But the relationship is more than just one
way:  actual  events  play  some  role  in  the  development  of  popular  narratives.  Overall,  popular
narratives act as potent multiplier of economic shocks – the “animal spirits” of Keynes.
Today’s information and communication technologies have opened up a vast field of research
into the role of narratives as determinants of economic developments. These technologies have
also greatly accelerated the diffusion of narratives in our societies; it is surprising how easily fake
news can flourish nowadays.
This  is  a  serious  matter.  The  outcome  of  the  UK  referendum  can  be  partly  attributed  to  the
decades-long  development  and  spread  of  negative  popular  narratives  about  European
integration. More generally, the events I mentioned earlier are the culmination of a broader anti-
establishment  and  anti-globalisation  narrative  that  has  gained  more  traction  in  advanced
economies. As narratives often are key determinants of economic and political outcomes, it is
important to be wary of them.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The stabilising role of institutions
Institutions contribute to stability, especially in times of uncertainty, and help anchor expectations.
In times of political gridlock, effective institutions are vital since they can deliver their mandates
decisively and outside of the push-and-pull of the political process. This in turn foreshortens the
crisis  and  the  self-fulfilling  cycle  of  weak  economic  performance  and  gloom-and-doom
narratives.
For example, while bank failures are always possible, the existence of appropriate institutions
can  mitigate  their  impact. A  sound  supervisory  framework,  for  instance,  makes  failures  less
likely, while resolution plans contribute to seamless unwinding of failed institutions. This is also
true  of  shocks  exogenous  to  the  economy.  In  the  case  of  natural  disasters  such  as
earthquakes,   building  standards  –  properly  enforced  –  can  reduce  deaths,  and  disaster
recovery plans can help after the event.
8
The  move  over  recent  decades  to  grant  independence  to  central  banks  owes  much  to  the
problem of time consistency. When monetary policy was under the control of governments, there
was  always  an  incentive  to  “cheat”  and  deliver  higher  than  expected  inflation  to  temporarily
increase  output.  The  existence  of  this  incentive,  and  the  inability  of  governments  to  credibly
commit to the right policy, gave rise to de-anchored inflation expectations.
Independent central banks with a clear mandate to maintain price stability have been successful
in  anchoring  inflation  expectations.  Having  an  explicit  inflation  objective  provides  its  own
stabilising narrative – people can trust the central bank to deliver inflation, and can base their
economic decisions on that expected inflation rate. In recent years, the ECB has been an anchor
of stability, creating an effective bulwark against deflationary narratives when they appeared in
the  euro  area.  By  acting  forcefully,  the  ECB  has  prevented  deflationary  dynamics  from
materialising.
But  institutions  need  to  be  strong  in  order  to  deliver  in  the  face  of  shocks.  To  put  this  in
perspective, consider how two periods of global economic integration have fared under different
institutions. Global economic integration has fluctuated over time and is now higher than at any
time in the past. Another period of high integration, in the decades prior to World War I, ended
abruptly as a financial crisis of global proportions, accompanied by a credit crunch, broke apart
bilateral arrangements and paved the way for several rounds of retaliatory tariff increases.
Multilateralism has been a cornerstone of economic expansion since World War II. The current
legal  framework  for  world  trade,  embodied  in  the  multilateral  World  Trade  Organization,  has
proven  much  more  robust  to  the  recent  global  financial  crisis.  It  has  played  a  key  role  in
preventing the re-emergence of protectionism in the aftermath of the Great Recession.
Three stylised facts emerge from comparing the evolution of world trade in goods in the periods
1922–38  and  2001–16.  First,  the  pre-crisis  expansion  was  very  similar  in  both  eras.  Second,
world trade collapsed in 1930 and 2009, immediately after the two shocks, but the decline was
sharper in 2009, even though the total decline in the 1930s was larger. Third, the subsequent
recovery has been noticeably stronger in the most recent episode.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Sources: ECB staff calculations based on data in Federico and Tena-Junguito (2016)  and CPB
Trade Monitor data.
9
Notes: The year 0 on the horizontal axis is 1929 in the case of the Great Depression (blue line)
and  2008  in  the  case  of  the  Great  Recession  (yellow  line).  1922–1938  trade  flows  are
constructed using current country borders. Data for 2016 are available until November.
On both occasions, falling output was the main driver of the trade collapse, but protectionism
after  the  Great  Depression  was  largely  due  to  the  emergence  of  a  new  political  constituency
opposed to free trade which, in many cases, was able to develop convincing narratives for the
continuation of protectionism even when the crisis was over.
Institutions provide stability by their very nature of being hard to change. But that inertia can lead
them  to  lack  the  agility  to  deal  with  new  challenges.  Failure  to  react  can  fertilise  counter-
narratives.  But  there  is  also  a  chance  for  new  institutions  to  be  founded  which  improve  on
previous  institutions.  The  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  was  created  in  the  United
States in 1933 to reduce the effect of failed banks on depositors. Following the recent financial
crisis,  the  international  institutional  architecture  was  strengthened  with  the  inauguration  of  the
G20  summits  and  the  creation  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board.  In  the  euro  area,  the
establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism and the Single Resolution Mechanism has
strengthened the financial system and made it more resilient to future shocks.
While  the  current  multilateral  framework  has  so  far  protected  against  rising  protectionist
sentiment, it is worth recognising that anti-globalisation and anti-establishment sentiments have
not disappeared. There is an increasingly common belief that the benefits of globalisation have
not been distributed widely enough and that it has reduced protection for workers. Let me take a
few moments, then, to remind you of the successes of the post-war institutions in Europe.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The European Union as provider of stability and protection
The European Union and the Single Market have successfully delivered decades of peace and
growing prosperity throughout Europe. There has been a steady process of strengthening trade
and economic links, based on the foundations of democracy, a strong social model and the rule
of  law.  These  institutions  are  Europe’s  answer  to  the  questions  posed  by  globalisation,  a
democratic way to reap the benefits of economic integration while still protecting consumers and
workers.
The  Single  Market  is  more  than  just  a  customs  union  or  a  dense  network  of  free  trade
agreements between countries. It is in fact an innovative forward step in economic evolution. It
provides  the  legal  framework  for  trade  between  Member  States,  underpinned  by  the  four
fundamental freedoms – free movement of goods, services, labour and capital.
This  framework  is  vital  to  give  companies  confidence  to  invest  and  integrate  across  national
borders.  For  trade  to  flourish,  businesses  need  to  be  certain  that  contracts  will  be  honoured,
competition rules will be fairly enforced, property rights respected and standards adhered to. In
ensuring  the  rule  of  law,  the  Single  Market  reduces  barriers  to  trade,  labour  mobility  and
competition and increases technological diffusion between countries. Take as a recent example
the abolition of mobile phone roaming fees across the Union, which was a decision based on the
principles of the Single Market that protects consumers.
This is not to say that the European Union is perfect. Strong institutions should always strive to
improve and make sure their policies bring more value to citizens. We should also be clear about
what European institutions are and what they are not. There is a widespread narrative according
to which Brussels imposes its decisions on Member States. Yet all regulations and directives
adopted in Brussels are decided according to a political process involving the governments of all
Member  States,  which  are  all  represented  in  the  Council,  and  elected  representatives  of  all
European citizens. The Union has built over time a set of strong institutions for Member States to
decide together matters of common interest.
But it is important to recognise the tensions that exist between the individual priorities of nation
states  and  the  pooling  of  national  sovereignty  for  mutual  gain.  The  regulations  for  the  Single
Market need to be strong enough to promote innovation, but not so tight that they stifle it. By the
same token, countries have to be able to pursue their own social agendas where these do not
clearly clash with the principles of the Single Market. The principle of subsidiarity is important.
Take  as  an  example  the  fiscal  framework  under  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  There  are
important rules to ensure government finances are run in a sustainable fashion. Yet beyond the
parameters for fiscal sustainability, the framework allows for wide divergences in aggregate tax
rates, the share of the public sector in total output and for national priorities in public spending.
These are at the discretion of each sovereign Member State.
Conclusion
Let  me  return  then  to  my  original  observation  of  the  apparent  disconnect  between  elevated
measures of political uncertainty on the one hand, and other measures of uncertainty at more
benign levels and robust measures of confidence on the other hand.
One of the reasons why prevailing political uncertainties do not weigh on confidence is perhaps
the existence of strong institutions at both national and international level. Markets continue to
believe in the strength of the rules-based international order and its institutions. It has been a
steady  process  of  strengthening  economic  integration,  and  households  and  businesses
demonstrate  by  their  current  decisions  on  consumption  and  investment  that  they  believe  that
there will be no sudden reversal of this process.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
This should however not lead to complacency. An alternative explanation is that adherents of the
anti-establishment narrative truly believe that the future will be brighter once current institutions
are swept away and are acting coherently with that world view. History has proven that accidents
are possible, that protectionism can succeed periods of free trade. We should all be wary of the
filters that our own narratives put on our ability to process information. Brexit proves that there is
a possibility for European integration to go into reverse. A more widespread reversal of European
economic integration would durably jeopardise economic prosperity.
Let me end on one final comment. The success of our monetary policy measures throughout the
crisis has laid the ground for a new narrative, that of the ECB being the “only game in town”. We
have proven able and willing to take the measures necessary to support a sustained adjustment
of the path of inflation back to our objective. This new narrative deserves a word of caution: there
is  only  so  much  monetary  policy  can  do.  Monetary  policy  alone  cannot  ensure  all
macroeconomic  goals  are  met.  It  cannot  by  itself  bring  about  any  redistributive  measures
required to bring the benefits of globalisation to all. A greater contribution is required from other
policies. Structural reforms are also required to build resilience to country-specific shocks and
ensure the full diffusion of innovation across the Single Market to maximise the benefits to all
citizens.  Carrying  out  these  reforms  will  continue  the  decades-long  progress  of  European
economic integration and ensure that the benefits of stability and protection will be maintained in
the future.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
For a more detailed discussion of the economic impact of uncertainty, see “The impact of uncertainty on activity
in the euro area”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 8/2016, ECB and “Uncertainty about Uncertainty”, speech by Kristin
Forbes, External MPC member, Bank of England, 23 November 2016.
This measure is derived from a method proposed by Baker, S., Bloom, N., and Davis, S. (2015), “Measuring
economic policy uncertainty”, NBER Working Paper Series No 21633.
European Commission, European Economic Forecast, Winter 2017. Box 1.2 “A ‘new modesty’? Level shifts in
survey data and the decreasing trend of ‘normal’ growth”.
Trade Developments in 2016: Policy Uncertainty Weighs on World Trade by Constantinescu, C., Matto, A., and
Ruta, M. (2017)
On the importance of inclusive institutions, see Acemoglu D. and J. Robinson (2012), Why Nations Fail: The
Origins of Power, Prosperity and Poverty.
Funke, M., Schularick, M., and Trebesch, C. (2016), “Going to extremes: Politics after financial crises, 1870–
2014,” European Economic Review, 88(C): 227–260.
Robert Schiller (2017) Narrative Economics, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23075
Noy, Ilan, (2009), “The macroeconomic consequences of disasters," Journal of Development Economics, vol.
88(2): 221–231.
Federico, G. and Tena-Junguito, A. (2016), “A new series of world trade, 1800–1938”,  EHES Working Paper, No.
93.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
