   FESE Convention – “Europe’s future in global capital markets” 
Paris, Thursday 22nd June 2017 
Closing remarks by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
governor of the Banque de France  
         Contact presse : Clémence Choutet (01 42 97 74 51 ; clemence.choutet@banque-france.fr). 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Page 1 sur 5 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  with  you  today  to  close  this  FESE  convention.  When 
reflecting  on  Europe’s  future  in  global  capital  markets,  we  all  agree  that  the 
Brexit  vote  last  year  has  significantly  shifted  the  European  landscape.  One 
year  on,  it  is  still  bad  news  for  all  of  us,  but  much  worse  for  the  United 
Kingdom  itself,  and  each  day  more  so.  Faced  nevertheless  with  Brexit,  we 
should  at  least  be  consistent.  And  the  EU-27  is  being  so,  starting  with  Mr. 
Macron and Ms. Merkel: we are hoping for a positive agreement, but there can 
be  no  cherry-picking  in  the  single  market,  and  no  access  without  common 
rules. Furthermore, I’d like to stress two imperatives: first, do not let sources of 
systemic risks for the EU grow outside the EU; second, speed up the creation 
of  a  “Financing  Union  for  Investment  and  Innovation”  to  boost  productive 
investment  thanks  to  a  better  circulation  of  savings  across  borders.  Let  me 
elaborate on these two imperatives in some more detail. 
 1. Do not let sources of systemic risks for the EU grow outside the EU 
Let  me  start  with  the  first  imperative.  The  main  issue  here  is  that  some 
financial  market  infrastructures,  which  are  key  for  the  EU,  will  soon  become 
off-shore to the EU as a consequence of Brexit. This is particularly problematic 
when  these  infrastructures  may  put  the  EU’s  financial  stability  at  risk:  some 
central counterparties (CCPs) for instance can be considered to be “too big to 
fail” entities, especially since clearing is mandatory. This is a specific concern 
for the euro, compared to other currencies, as European savings management 
is  almost  totally  dependent  on  London-based  financial  players  and  market 
infrastructures.  And  yet  we  cannot  reasonably  expect  that  these  global 
financial  market  infrastructures  take  into  account,  in  their  operations  and  risk 
management,  the  financial  stability  of  the  euro  area,  on  top  of  the  financial 
stability of their own jurisdiction.  
Page 2 sur 5 
 Therefore, since, regrettably, London will soon be outside the EU, the current 
setup  is  no  longer  adequate. Replicating  for  clearing  activity  in  the  euro  area 
the  extraterritorial  approach  developed  by  the  US  authorities  cannot  be  a 
solution,  because  of  the  specific  position  of  the  EU  capital  market  vis-à-vis 
London, and because we know by experience that in times of stress the views 
of the domestic authorities prevail when interests diverge. 
So, what should we do? In my mind, a location policy is the most efficient tool: 
first,  it  would  make  it  possible  to  maintain  effective  control  over  the  activities 
denominated in EU currencies; and second, it would foster a better and more 
balanced clearing market structure, less dependent on “too big to fail entities”, 
which  would  enhance  global  –  and  not  only  EU  –  financial  stability.  In  this 
regard,  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  valuable  proposals  recently  made  by 
the  European  Commission,  even 
if 
they  could  be  strengthened  and 
streamlined:  those  CCPs  whose  activities  are  "super-systemic"  for  the  EU 
market should indeed establish themselves in the European Union. A location 
policy  is  the  only  viable  mechanism  to  guarantee  that  European  authorities, 
and the Eurosystem in particular, can control and manage the risks that CCPs 
are likely to pose to the financial stability of the European Union. In order to do 
so, the concept of “substantially systemically important CCPs” should however 
be  clearly  defined  with  objective,  rule-based  requirements;  euro-denominated 
clearing activities should be located in the European Union when they exceed 
certain thresholds. 
 2.  Speed  up  the  creation  of  a  “Financing  Union  for  Investment  and 
Innovation” 
The  second  imperative  is  to  speed  up  the  creation  of  a  “Financing  Union  for 
Investment  and  Innovation”  at  the  European  level.  The  need  for  such  a 
Financing  Union  stems  both  from  a  weakness  and  an  opportunity.  The 
weakness  is  that  the  euro  area  faces  persistent  financial  fragmentation.  But 
the  opportunity  lies  in  its  abundant  resources:  savings  exceed  investment  by 
Page 3 sur 5 
 EUR 350 billion per year in the euro area, which is more than 3% of GDP. An 
obvious  way  to  boost  growth  in  the  EU  is  therefore  to  better  steer  our 
abundant  savings  towards  the  financing  of  investment  and  innovation  across 
borders. We will thereby be able to address the persistent “investment crunch" 
that  followed  the  financial  crisis  –  the  share  of  investment  in  GDP  remains 
below its value at the turn of the century, standing at 20% in 2016 compared to 
22% in 2000-2005.  
The success of this Financing Union lies in the capacity to provide businesses 
with  more  equity  financing  solutions,  supporting  the  scaling-up  of  SMEs. 
Europe is lagging far behind in this area: such financing only represents 68% 
of GDP in the euro area compared with 128% in the United States in the fourth 
quarter  of  2016.  Naturally  the  building  blocks  of  such  a  Financing  Union 
already exist with the Capital Markets Union, which supports the diversification 
of  private  financing;  the  Juncker  Investment  Plan,  which  channels  public  and 
private  investment  into  the  real  economy;  and  the  Banking  Union,  which 
tackles the fragmentation issue. These initiatives have to be brought together 
into the Financing Union in order to go beyond administrative or bureaucratic 
borders,  create  synergies,  and  therefore  give  new  impetus  to  this  agenda. 
Think for instance of a real European venture capital market to promote equity 
financing, which is the most effective way to finance innovative businesses at 
different stages of maturity (seed, venture, and growth). 
More  specifically,  progress  towards  a  Financing  Union  for  Investment  and 
Innovation is needed in three key areas:  
-  First, completing the Banking Union. This means, as a priority, finalising the 
Banking  Union’s  second  pillar,  namely  the  single  resolution  mechanism. 
Within a strong Banking Union framework, banks in the euro area will thus 
be  able  to  engage  in  cross-border  consolidations  on  a  sound  and  safe 
basis and therefore contribute further to reducing financial fragmentation.  
-  Second,  thoroughly  reviewing  the  incentive  schemes  for  cross-border 
investments,  notably  by  promoting 
further  convergence  of 
tax  and 
Page 4 sur 5 
 regulatory regimes. Enhancing the free movement of capital within the EU 
requires  addressing  a  wide  range  of 
legal 
impediments, 
including 
enhancing  the  predictability  of  insolvency  frameworks,  eliminating  fiscal 
biases  that  penalise  equity,  and  further  increasing  the  transparency  and 
harmonisation of accounting rules for small businesses.  
-  Third,  expanding  the  supply  of  financial  intermediation  services.  This  can 
take  the  form  of  new  pan-European  savings  products  and  investment 
vehicles  –  more  long-term  and  risk-oriented  –  or  new  market  initiatives  in 
green  bonds,  private  placement  or  securitisation 
for 
instance. 
Complementary steps could include creating pan-European venture capital 
funds and leveraging on the development of FinTechs, while maintaining a 
high level of consumer protection and efficient conduct of business rules in 
a digital environment. 
 Let me conclude with a general remark. After Brexit and Mr. Trump’s election, 
many expected a euro area crisis. So far, exactly the opposite has happened: 
European  growth  is  accelerating,  at  close  to  the  pace  of  US  growth.  The 
French  election  gave  a  fresh  political  impetus  to  stability  and  reforms;  public 
support  for  Europe  has  significantly  increased:  up  18  percentage  points  in 
France from last year (56% in spring 2017) according to a recent survey by the 
Pew  Research  Center;  and  the  same  trend  can  be  observed  in  a  number  of 
countries. Most importantly, we in the EU-27 should not devote all our energy 
to Brexit, at the expense of investing in our own future. In this regard, it is the 
right time to move up a gear. To boost European growth, financial levers are of 
the  essence,  but  economic  levers  play  a  role  too.  This  is  the  reason  why  I 
often  speak  of  Europe’s  “growth  triangle”.  In  my  view,  Europe  needs  to 
activate three levers: the Financing Union for Investment and Innovation that I 
have just described, but also implement national structural reforms on the one 
hand  and  a  better  euro  area  policy  mix  on  the  other.  National  structural 
reforms  are  a  prerequisite  for  each  country  to  unleash  our  collective  growth 
Page 5 sur 5 
 potential.  In  addition,  they  would  amplify  the  effects  of  the  Financing  Union: 
such  a  Union  would  foster  firms’  ability  to  invest  and  national  reforms  would 
foster  firms’  willingness  to  invest.  The  third  lever  is  a  euro  area  policy-mix 
based  on  a  better  coordination  of  macroeconomic  policies.  This  requires  a 
collective  economic  strategy  whereby  Member  States  seal  a  deal:  if  we 
combine more structural reforms where they are needed – in France and Italy 
for  instance  –,  and  more  fiscal  or  wage  support  in  countries  with  room  for 
manoeuvre  –  for  example,  Germany  and  the  Netherlands  –  growth  and 
employment  will  undoubtedly  be  stronger  everywhere  in  Europe.  If  we  seize 
this opportunity, Europe’s time will come. Thank you for your attention. 
