William C Dudley: Evolving consumer behavior
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  National  Retail  Federation  Annual  Convention,  New  York  City,  17
January 2017.
 Andrew  Haughwout,  Joseph  Tracy  and  Wilbert  van  der  Klaauw  assisted  in  preparing  these
remarks. 
Good morning.  It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak at this year’s gathering of the
National Retail Federation.  Retail activity plays a key role in the U.S. economy, with consumption
comprising about two-thirds of total gross domestic product.  As such, understanding what is
happening  in  your  sector  is  critical  in  assessing  the  economic  outlook—and,  with  that,  the
outlook for employment, inflation and interest rates.  As always, what I have to say reflects my
own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or  the  Federal
Reserve System 
This  morning,  I  will  be  focusing  on  retail  spending—an  important  element  of  household
consumption.    But,  I  will  do  so  in  a  way  that’s  perhaps  somewhat  different  from  the  usual
approach, focusing in particular on the connections between housing and retail sales.  I will argue
that there have been some dramatic changes that have taken place in the way that households
finance their consumption.  I believe—and  hope to convince you—that changes in the housing
and mortgage markets have affected the willingness and ability of households to borrow, and that
this, in turn, has had important consequences for the dynamics of consumption over the last
decade.  It is an important reason why the economic recovery and expansion have been weaker
than we would like, despite the efforts of the Federal Reserve to stimulate economic activity.  It
also matters as we look forward.  The good news is that, while the current expansion is quite old
in chronological terms, it is still relatively young in terms of the health of household finances. 
Later in my remarks, I will talk a bit about the outlook for consumer spending in 2017 and beyond.
It’s  worth  starting  off  with  some  background  in  order  to  develop  the  linkage  between  housing
wealth and retail spending.  Household incomes tend to increase as individuals grow older and
become more skilled in their work and better matched to their employers.  This tends to continue
until they approach retirement age.  This means that incomes are much higher later in life than
when people first enter the workforce.  Ideally, households would like to be able to even out their
consumption based on their lifetime incomes, raising consumption in their early adulthood years. 
In general, this would mean that young people would consume a relatively high share of their
incomes, while older people would save more. Indeed, young people might even wish to borrow
against some of their future income so that they can enjoy some of those benefits earlier in their
lifetimes.
However, there are limits on the ability to shift consumption to earlier in life through borrowing. 
One  problem  is  that  lenders  don’t  have  a  reliable  way  to  compel  repayment  of  such  debts.
 Consequently, the young may not have access to the credit they need to even out consumption
to the extent they would like.  A pledge of assets—collateral—can help to solve this problem,
since it can be claimed by the lender in the event of a loan default.
For most households, the main form of wealth is human capital—the value of the wages that the
household  members  can  earn  over  the  course  of  their  lifetimes.    But  human  capital  cannot
always be credibly pledged as collateral.  For funding of educational investments, government
intervention  in  the  form  of  the  federally-guaranteed  student  loan  program  helps  address  this
problem.  While private student loans exist, they typically require a co-signer with a strong credit
record.  Moreover, these borrowing sources are broadly restricted to education-related spending
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
only.
The second most important asset on the balance sheet of many households is housing equity.
  So,  in  addition  to  being  a  source  of  shelter,  housing  can  be  a  major  form  of  collateral  for
borrowing for many households.  In fact, for those households that have collateral available to
secure loans, housing equity is by far the most important form of collateral.
What this tells us is that the performance of the housing and mortgage markets are important to
the retail business.  When home prices are rising and housing equity can easily be converted
into cash, we can expect to see relatively high levels of consumption, all else equal.  Conversely,
when home prices are flat or declining, or mortgage credit is tight, this will put a damper on retail
spending.  Events of the last decade have driven this point home in a very clear way.
It is well known that beginning in the mid-1990s and intensifying in the early 2000s, there was a
massive U.S. housing boom that dramatically increased the value of residential real estate in the
United States.  Over the period from 1995 to 2006, the aggregate value of real estate owned by
households and nonprofits nearly tripled, rising from $8.6 trillion to nearly $25 trillion.
A remarkable, yet not widely-known, fact about this boom period is that while home values were
rising very quickly, borrowing was growing almost exactly as fast.  Rather than saving the extra
wealth that was being generated by the housing boom, households were diverting a large share
of  it  to  other  purposes.    Indeed,  the  fraction  of  every  additional  dollar  of  households’  housing
wealth that was consumed seems to have been higher than that for financial wealth—such as
investments in equities and bonds—suggesting that they viewed the increase in home prices as
permanent.
In order to be able to assess the evolution of household finances more precisely, we worked with
Equifax—a  major  credit  bureau—to  create  a  new  database  that  tracks  the  credit  files  of  a
random sample of households over time.  From this consumer credit panel data, we conclude
that between 2004 and 2006, households were increasing their cash flow by over $200 billion a
year by borrowing against their housing equity collateral.  They supplemented that with another
$185 billion through non-mortgage borrowing.  So, at the height of the boom, annual consumption
was being supplemented by around $400 billion in cash flow from debt, much of it collateralized
by housing.
As we now know, homeowners were mistaken in viewing the home price increases during the
boom as permanent.  Things turned quickly as housing supply increased, home prices softened
and mortgage underwriting standards tightened sharply as credit losses on residential mortgage
lending  climbed.    The  rise  and  fall  of  mortgage  securitization  activity  marked  by  tranching
mortgage  cash  flows  into  collateralized  debt  obligations  (CDOs)  exacerbated  the  downturn. 
Home values began to fall in mid-2006.  By 2008, we saw a massive reversal in the way people
used  their  housing  equity  to  finance  consumption.    People  went  from  borrowing  hundreds  of
billions of dollars per year and increasing their mortgage debt, to paying back hundreds of billions
dollars and reducing their mortgage debt.  Households deleveraged even apart from the decline
in household debt associated with the charge-offs from foreclosures.  Instead of $400 billion in
net cash flow from increased borrowing, this net cash flow sharply reversed to negative $150
billion by 2010, with increased residential mortgage debt pay-down being the main source.  This
rapid  swing—a  reduction  of  more  than  $500  billion  on  an  annual  basis—in  the  resources
available  for  household  consumption  was  associated  with  a  sharp  and  prolonged  slump  in
personal consumption expenditures during the Great Recession.  Typically, consumption growth
slows but remains positive during a recession.  In contrast, consumption actually contracted by
over $300 billion during the Great Recession.
Between  2009  and  2012,  households  continued  paying  down  debt  of  all  kinds—with  the
exception  of  student  loans,  which  behave  differently  from  most  other  forms  of  consumer
borrowing.  Ultimately, housing prices stabilized and began to increase again in 2012.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
However, since that turning point in home prices over five years ago, something surprising has
happened.  Nationally, home values have risen over 40 percent since 2012, and are now very
close to their pre-crisis levels on average—just 4 percent below their all-time peak reached in
early 2006.  Most other kinds of debt—first auto, and now, credit card debt—have joined student
debt  by  starting  to  rise  again,  resuming  their  traditional  role  in  financing  consumption.    The
surprising development is that housing debt has stayed virtually flat.  The previous behavior of
using  housing  debt  to  finance  other  kinds  of  consumption  seems  to  have  completely
disappeared.  Instead, people are apparently leaving the wealth generated by rising home prices
“locked up” in their homes.
The implications of this development have been quite significant for the retail sector.  As I noted
earlier, housing debt during the boom was rising at essentially the same pace as home values,
leaving household leverage ratios more or less constant.  If housing debt had risen apace with
home prices since 2012—rather than staying flat as it has—then we would once again be seeing
housing  debt  producing  cash  flows  available  for  consumption  of  about  $200  billion  a  year.
 Instead, households continue to divert about $200 billion annually to paying down their housing
debt.  That’s a difference of roughly $400 billion per year, or about 3 percent of total consumption.
 Relative to historical patterns the household saving rate currently seems quite high, given the
ratio of household net worth to disposable income.
So, why has household behavior with respect to housing debt apparently changed so much?  As
always, the data reflect the result of the interaction between the demand and supply sides of the
credit market.  One obvious demand-side candidate is that consumers may have become more
cautious about housing’s value as a financial investment, or its value as collateral for borrowing
to finance consumption.  That is, households may have come to view housing wealth as more
similar  to  financial  wealth  in  that  changes  can  be  transitory  rather  than  permanent.
 Consequently, it may be viewed as prudent not to spend too much out of increases in these
sources of wealth.  Additionally, the deep job losses that occurred during the Great Recession
may have also impressed on households the need for precautionary savings against adverse
income shocks.
In  fact,  the  lessons  from  the  housing  boom  and  bust  may  have  been  even  more  traumatic.
 There are many versions of this story, and most have a word like “scarring” in them.  Perhaps
some potential homeowners, having seen the wild gyrations in home prices during the 2000s,
have soured on homeownership altogether.  This would result in a reduced homeownership rate
due  to  a  loss  of  confidence  in  housing  as  a  good  financial  investment.    Data  indicate  that
homeownership has declined, especially among younger workers.  However, households in our
Survey of Consumer Expectations continue to report that they believe that housing is a sound
financial investment.  So, the explanation for our declining homeownership rate doesn’t appear to
be  that  homeownership  has  lost  its  luster  as  an  investment.   And,  reduced  homeownership
doesn’t explain why people who still own homes have become less likely to tap their available
equity to finance consumption.
Other  households  may  have  been  scarred  by  the  experience  of  seeing  their  neighbors  who
borrowed heavily during the boom lose their homes and have their credit ratings badly damaged.
Observing  these  consequences  may  dissuade  current  homeowners  from  making  themselves
vulnerable  to  foreclosure  by  borrowing  against  rising  home  values.    This  would  lead  to  an
increase in a household’s precautionary demand for savings in the form of higher housing equity.
 This increased equity cushion would guard against the risk that the household could find itself in
a negative equity position in the event of a future decline in home prices.  With an equity cushion,
even if the household were to experience a job loss during a future housing downturn, they would
be able to sell their home, pay off the mortgage and avoid any damage to their credit.
Homeowners’ desire to finance consumption by borrowing against housing equity might also be
diminished by their desire to retain their ability to move easily.  The decline in home prices during
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  bust  eliminated  many  households’  home  equity,  which  is  traditionally  the  source  of  down
payments for households that wish to move and remain homeowners.  This mobility might be
associated with a change of labor markets or an upgrade of your home or residential location.  It
is  possible  that  households  have  saved  their  newly  recovered  equity  in  order  to  rebuild  the
capacity to make future down payments and therefore restore this option to move.  It is certainly
the case that mobility has declined since the housing bust, a fact consistent with this hypothesis.
Many  homeowners  also  took  advantage  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  accommodative  monetary
policy stance to refinance into very low fixed-rate mortgages.  As mortgage rates rise, there is a
higher financial cost to extracting housing equity through a cash-out refinancing.  The pace of
cash-out refinancing has indeed been very low even as housing equity has risen, consistent with
this  hypothesis.    But,  owners  have  other  ways  of  tapping  equity,  like  taking  out  a  second
mortgage or a home equity line of credit (HELOC).  Interestingly, these forms of housing debt
have been paid down even more aggressively than first mortgages.  So, the fluctuation in the
level of mortgage rates also does not explain the change in household behavior.
levels, 
the  data 
A final factor that may be reducing the demand for home equity extraction is a change in the
distribution of housing equity in the population.  Even though aggregate home equity is back to
pre-crisis 
in  equity  since  2012  has  gone
disproportionately  to  older,  wealthier  households.    Presumably,  these  households  have  less
demand for credit to fund their consumption plans.  In contrast, those who would like to convert
housing wealth into retail purchases have not yet seen their housing equity restored to its earlier
levels—reflecting, in part, slower rates of mortgage balance paydown.  In addition, younger and
less credit-worthy households also experienced higher relative declines in homeownership rates.
the  growth 
indicate 
that 
While some of these demand-side factors seem to be playing a role in reducing home equity
extraction, there is undoubtedly a strong supply-side effect in operation as well.  Our consumer
credit data indicate that lenders’ adoption of minimum credit scores for mortgage lending and
their  considerably  more  rigorous  underwriting  standards  for  HELOCs  have  played  a  very
important role in limiting consumers’ ability to convert home equity into new consumption.  The
drivers of this change in lender behavior are complex, but are likely to include a combination of
more  regulation  and  stress  testing  of  banks’  portfolios,  more  conservative  practices  by  the
government  sponsored  enterprises  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac—which  tend  to  dictate
underwriting practices for a large part of the market—and banks’ own experience from the crisis
period, when so many lenders faced extreme stress and residential real estate seemed to be the
main culprit.
The fact that housing prices declined so much and that the foreclosure process was so often
drawn out may also have caused lenders to reassess how much to rely on the housing collateral
as security for their loans.  In response, lenders may have shifted their underwriting to put more
weight  on  the  creditworthiness  of  the  borrower  rather  than  relying  mainly  on  the  value  of  the
collateral.  This is consistent with the fact that mortgage credit is now much harder to get for
lower credit-rated borrowers than during the housing boom.
So, what’s next? When and to what extent will households again start tapping home equity to
fund their consumption?  Answers to these questions will determine the degree to which housing
equity growth will add to income growth as a fundamental driver of consumption.  We do not
want to repeat the experience from the housing boom, but there are prudent ways for households
to access their housing equity.
It  is  hard  to  predict  when  the  recent  trends  might  change,  given  that  some  milestones  have
passed that could have reignited lenders’ and borrowers’ appetite for home lending.  First, home
prices stopped falling in 2010, which could have been taken as a signal that a complete collapse
was not imminent and that the worst was behind us, yet mortgage borrowers continued to divert
cash  to  paying  down  their  debts.    Second,  home  prices—and  home  equity—resumed  their
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
growth in 2012, indicating that the market was recovering.  Yet, far from extracting this equity,
borrowers continued to pay down their mortgages thereby reinforcing the effect of the home price
increases in terms of rebuilding housing equity.  Aggregate home prices and home equity have
almost reached their previous peaks.
Time  will  tell  if  there  is  a  renewed  appetite,  on  both  lenders’  and  borrowers’  parts,  to  convert
housing wealth into consumption.  Perhaps, we will soon see a recovery in cash-out refinancing
and in HELOC borrowing as a means for households to expand their consumption.  In this case,
the household saving rate will begin to decline.  Or, we may need to wait longer for households to
feel  confident  enough  to  extract  some  of  their  home  equity,  and  for  lenders  to  decide  that
expanding such lending is safe enough for their balance sheets.  Whatever the timing, a return to
a reasonable pattern of home equity extraction would be a positive development for retailers, and
would provide a boost to aggregate growth.  In the meantime, consumption growth will largely be
determined by income growth, the trajectory of wages and the strength of the labor market.
The U.S. expansion is now in its eighth year.  By historical standards, it is  long  in  the  tooth. 
Despite this, I am optimistic that the economic expansion will continue over the next few years. 
First, it is important to note that economic expansions don’t simply die of old age.  Usually, they
end  either  because  inflation  climbs  and  the  Federal  Reserve  responds  by  shifting  to  a  much
tighter stance for monetary policy, or because the economy gets hit with a large unanticipated
shock that the Fed and the fiscal authorities cannot respond to quickly enough, or with sufficient
force,  to  prevent  an  economic  downturn.    While  economic  shocks  are,  by  their  very  nature,
difficult to forecast, the risk that the Fed will snuff out the expansion anytime soon seems quite
low  because  inflation  is  simply  not  a  problem.    Not  only  are  underlying  inflation  trends  very
subdued—for example, the core personal consumption expenditures deflator has risen at only a
1. 7 percent annual rate over the past year—but the economy is not growing much above its
sustainable long-term pace.  Thus, while pressures on labor resources have been increasing,
but quite slowly.  Finally, the recent strengthening of the dollar will put downward pressure on
import prices and limit the ability of domestic producers to raise their prices.
Second, the household sector’s financial condition is in unusually good shape for this point in the
economic  cycle.    Household  indebtedness  is  relatively  low,  debt  service  burdens  relative  to
household  income  have  fallen  to  levels  not  seen  since  at  least  the  early  1980s.    Moreover,
household incomes are rising at a moderate pace, supported by continued job gains and some
modest strengthening of wage compensation trends.  If households and lenders again become
comfortable  with  financing  consumption  with  debt  in  addition  to  income,  this  will  provide
additional support to household spending and to the current economic expansion.   
The challenges in the retail space over the near term, therefore, are not likely to be a shortfall of
aggregate demand from households.  Instead, it seems to me the challenges lie more in how to
satisfy households’ changing demands for goods and services, and the medium through which
these  demands  are  satisfied—whether  it  be  brick  and  mortar  or    online.   Also,  there  is  the
important  issue  of  how  to  retain  brand  loyalty  in  a  world  where  information  is  ubiquitous  and
always  near  at  hand,  and  it  is  easy  to  shift  purchases  among  participants  in  the  retail
marketplace.    
Thank you for your kind attention.  
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
