Claudia Buch: Opening speech - 15th Meeting of the Ottawa Group
Opening speech by Prof Claudia Buch, Deputy President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the
15th Meeting of the Ottawa Group, Eltville, 10 May 2017.
1. Introduction
 The Bundesbank is very pleased to be organising one of the largest meetings in the history of the
Ottawa  Group.  The  2017  meeting  is  the  first  to  be  hosted  not  by  a  statistical  office  but  by  a
central bank. We are happy to welcome more than 100 participants from 30 statistical institutes,
10 central banks, 25 international organisations as well as leading scholars in the field of price
statistics.
Price  statistics  are  of  key  importance  for  central  banks.  The  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer
Prices (HICP) is the yardstick for the Eurosystem’s monetary policy. It was launched 20 years
ago, in March 1997. Given the prominent role central banks nowadays play in financial stability,
asset prices – and real estate prices in particular – have been given more and more attention as
well. Today’s discussions will reflect this change in focus.
Before you get into the discussions, I would like to address three questions. 
What has been the contribution of the Group to the development of consumer price indices?
What does digitalisation entail for price statistics?
Where do we stand with regard to the measurement of real estate prices?
 
2. Contribution of the Ottawa Group
Central banks have a key interest in price developments. Given that we have commonly agreed
standards on which price index to use, we tend to forget that defining “price stability” is not a
trivial  task:  Which  price  index  to  focus  on?  How  to  construct  the  index  and  to  measure  price
changes? What are the potential limitations when it comes to interpreting these indices? There
are  no  easy  answers  to  these  questions,  and  it  required  a  lot  of  interaction  between  central
banks, academics, and statisticians to arrive at commonly agreed standards.
The  report  by  the  Boskin  Commission  on  consumer  prices  20  years  ago  was  certainly  a
landmark in this debate. One key finding of the Commission was that commonly used CPI data
overstated inflation by more than 1 percentage point – with important implications for many areas
of public policy, including the calculation of social security contributions. One main reason for the
discrepancy was a substitution bias: Individuals shift their expenditures across goods if relative
prices  change.  The  basket  of  goods  considered  thus  needs  to  take  into  account  substitution
away from more expensive goods when relative prices change. By disentangling the adjustment
of expenditure weights from one base year to another, price and quantity effects often move in
opposite directions. This suggests that substitution plays a significant role.
In parallel to discussions about the Boskin report, the ground was being prepared for the launch
of the euro in Europe. A number of key questions needed to be answered: Why did Eurostat
conceptualise  the  HICP  as  a  cost-of-goods  index?  Why  does  the  Eurosystem  define  price
stability as an increase in this index of below, but close to, 2 per cent over the medium term?
Papers presented at the 1999 meeting of the Ottawa Group provided answers.
The  Eurosystem’s  definition  of  price  stability  includes  a  safety  margin  against  deflation.
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Within  any  country  and,  in  particular,  across  the  different  economies  within  a  monetary
union,  there  is  a  need  for  structural  change  and  adjustment  of  relative  prices.  In  the
presence of nominal rigidities, positive inflation allows for the required adjustment of relative
prices. Figure 1 shows that inflation differences in the euro area have been quite significant
in the past 20 years, demonstrating the need for the adjustment of relative prices.
Price indices should be transparent and easy to communicate. The euro area’s HICP is a
pure  price  index  based  on  the  Laspeyres  formula,  which  has  advantages  over  a  cost-of-
living index. A cost-of-living index requires the definition of consumer baskets with the same
standard of living in the context of changing relative prices. This requires a utility framework.
But  how  to  define  and  measure  individual  preferences?  How  to  aggregate  across
individuals? These questions are difficult to answer. Such problems can be avoided with a
pure price index.
Apart from substitution effects, shifts in expenditure weights are explained by other factors such
as income effects. Against this backdrop, HICP weights are updated more frequently in order to
accommodate these changes. In April 2014, the ECB concluded in a Monthly Bulletin Box that,
“[o]n the basis of the available evidence, it is not possible to estimate measurement bias in the
euro  area  HICP".  In  short,  much  remains  to  be  done  for  researchers  and  statisticians  to  re-
examine this important topic in price statistics.
 
3. The impact of digitalisation on price statistics
Digitalisation  obviously  has  an  important  impact  on  price  statistics.  Consumer  behaviour  and
channels of distribution have changed profoundly, and weighting schemes need to take these
changes into account.
Do updates of consumer baskets sufficiently account for the introduction of new ICT goods?
Do  techniques  used  for  quality  adjustment  filter  out  pure  price  changes  in  products  if
performance improves?
Do  reporting  units  reflect  the  relative  importance  of  online  shopping  and  traditional  retail
formats?
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Perhaps surprisingly, the quantitative impact of digitalisation on the overall CPI has so far been
limited. In Germany, the products for which prices have declined the most include audio, photo,
and information devices (Figure 2). In some cases, prices have fallen by more than 10 per cent
annually – against an overall increase in the CPI of less than 2 per cent. One reason for this
discrepancy is that ICT goods such as audio, photo, and information devices account for only 1½
per  cent  of  the  current  consumer  basket.  But  even  if  we  supplement  the  products  of  a
predominantly digital character (eg software, e-books) or consisting mainly of digital components
(eg computers, smartphones) with those goods which are affected by digitalisation to a higher
degree  (eg  technical  household  appliances,  entertainment  equipment,  vehicles),  the  share
increases to no more than 10 per cent.
The widespread use of the internet has altered retail formats. Online shopping and mail-order
trade doubled their share in Germany between 2005 and 2010. Nonetheless, in 2010, less than
10  per  cent  of  all  retail  transactions  were  settled  through  these  channels  (Figure  3).  In  the
meantime, the share has certainly increased markedly, given the evidence that the turnover of
online retailers has continued to rise steeply in the current decade.
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Changes in buying behaviour may pose challenges to statisticians. But digitalisation also offers
potential benefits. Digitalisation enables vendors to change prices at a higher frequency. Nominal
rigidities  which  result  from  the  costs  of  price  changes  (“menu  costs”)  thus  decline.  Dynamic
pricing makes traditional tools for the collection of information on prices very labour-intensive or
even renders them inappropriate. In a digitised world, statisticians are able to apply web-based
tools to gather price information. They can also use IT equipment to store, process, and analyse
vast amounts of data.
At this conference, it will also be discussed how the use of scanner data can facilitate research
on price statistics. The use of scanner data has, for example, revolutionised research on the “law
of  one  price".  Traditional  empirical  work  using  price  indices  had  mostly  found  substantive
violations  of  the  law  of  one  price.  With  the  availability  of  micro  price  data,  however,  the
1
conventional wisdom on purchasing power parity has been under scrutiny.  
At the Bundesbank, we actively explore how the benefits of new data sources and of Big Data
can be harnessed for use in our daily work. Two years ago, we set up a project group with the
aim of examining the potential of unstructured data for statistical purposes as well as economic
and  financial  stability  research.  Recently,  we  started  using  list  prices  of  individual  properties
posted  on  internet  platforms.  I  am  sure  that  this  could  trigger  further  research  in  the  field  of
residential property markets.    
 
4. From price to financial stability: Closing data gaps with regard to real estate markets
One  of  the  lessons  of  the  global  financial  crisis  has  been  that  instabilities  in  markets  for  real
estate can threaten financial stability. In contrast to price stability, there is no generally agreed
metric for “financial stability". Increases in real estate prices may indicate that risks to financial
stability  are  building  up.  But  other  indicators,  reflecting  credit  standards  and  the  build-up  of
housing debt, need to be considered as well. These include the leverage of households, debt
sustainability, amortisation requirements, and loan-to-value ratios.
Traditional statistics often do not reflect these indicators of financial instabilities. The G20 Data
2
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
Gaps Initiative addresses this.
In its first phase, a Handbook on Residential Property Price Indices was published in 2013.
With regard to residential property prices, the bulk of the conceptual work has been done,
and the focus has shifted to compilation and dissemination. Quality adjustment remains a
controversial topic and is still a major source of deviations across residential property price
indices.
The initiative is currently in its second phase. Its main objective has shifted to implementing
the regular collection and dissemination of reliable and timely statistics for policy use.
In Germany, prices of real estate property are available from several official and private providers.
These indicators differ in terms of representativeness, periodicity, timeliness, breakdowns, and
length of the time series. These data show that the prices of both residential and commercial
property  have  risen  considerably  since  2010  (Figure  4).  Owner-occupied  housing  is  currently
about  25  per  cent  more  expensive  than  in  2010,  and  prices  for  multi-family  dwellings  have
increased by about 40 per cent. On average, commercial property prices have also increased by
25 per cent since 2010, driven mostly by prices for office space.
 As  regards  commercial  property  prices,  however,  many  conceptual  issues  still  need  to  be
clarified. For example, while office buildings, retail space, and industrial structures are classified
as “commercial real estate", the classification of multi-family dwellings is not clear and depends
on  whether  one  follows  the  perspective  of  users  or  investors.  Data  availability  remains
challenging,  too.  The  number  of  transactions  is  lower  than  for  residential  real  estate,  and
heterogeneity is more pronounced. In the absence of official data, analysts rely on private data
provided by market observers. Figure 5 depicts deviations in the measurement across indicators
for  price  changes  in  German  property  markets.  With  regard  to  residential  property  prices  in
Germany, analysts may consider four main indicators published by different data providers. In
this case, they are confronted with measurement deviations of about 1 percentage point for the
annual  price  change  of  the  total  market  on  average  (left-hand  column).  For  office  and  retail
space, the mean absolute deviation is considerably larger at 2½ percentage points. This is one
of the underlying challenges of assessing such data.
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Given that real estate prices have increased strongly, are risks to financial stability building up?
Two issues need to be considered.
First,  changes  in  prices  need  to  be  compared  to  changes  in  fundamentals  such  as  income
expectations, demographics, and the macroeconomic environment. These factors may indeed
explain a significant share of the price increases in Germany. But there is still an unexplained
3
component, and that component seems to have increased over time.
Second, risks to financial stability emerge if a strong rise in real estate prices coincides with a
strong  expansion  in  credit  volumes  and  an  easing  of  credit  standards.  The  house  price
momentum has caused credit growth, too, to accelerate since the beginning of the upswing on
the German property market. Housing credit to households increased by 3.7 per cent in 2016.
This is lower than the long-run average: since the early 1980s, the growth rate of housing credit
has been about 5 per cent annually.
It is important to note that Germany currently has no consistent reporting on credit standards, eg
the loan-to-value ratio or the debt service-to-income ratio.
The relevance of and urgent need for progress in the measurement of real estate prices is widely
acknowledged. I am looking forward to the contributions that will be presented at this conference
and encourage the statistical community to push ahead with this strand of research and practical
implementation.
 
5. Summing up
To sum up, what can the conference contribute to these debates? Let me return to the three
questions raised at the beginning.
The  Ottawa  Group  has  a  crucial  role  to  play  in  discussing  and  addressing  current
challenges  for  price  statistics.  Its  contributions  are  important  to  central  banks,  given  their
mandates for monetary policy and financial stability. 
Digitalisation  has  a  profound  two-fold  impact  on  price  statistics.  Digitalisation  changes
product  characteristics  and  alters  consumer  behaviour.  This  is  a  challenge  for  price
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
measurement. Digitalisation also brings with it new data sources. We need to develop new
methodologies and tools to fully exploit this potential for statistics, surveillance, and policy
analysis.
Improving our understanding of developments in real estate markets and their connection
with  financial  stability  is  crucial.  This  is  well  recognised  around  the  globe,  and  several
initiatives, including one launched by the G20, are working on the various aspects of this
issue. The contribution of statisticians is to provide more comprehensive, reliable, and timely
statistics on property markets and financing conditions.
Both the presentations and poster sessions may lay the groundwork for an intensive exchange of
views  among  participants  and  beyond.  This  will  stimulate  further  research  and  foster  better
informed statistical practices.
 References:
Astin, J. (1999), The European Union Harmonized Indices of Consumer Prices, Paper presented
at the 5th Meeting of the Ottawa Group, Reykjavik, 1999.
Boskin, M. J., E. R. Dulberger, R. J. Gordon, Z. Griliches, D. W. Jorgenson (1996), Final Report
of the Commission to Study the Consumer Price Index, U.S. Senate, Committee on Finance,
Washington DC: GPO.
Broda, C., D. E. Weinstein (2008), Understanding International Price Differences Using Barcode
Data, NBER Working Paper 14017.
Destatis  (2013),  Turnusmäßige  Überarbeitung  des  Verbraucherpreisindex  2013,  Wiesbaden,
2013.
Destatis (2016), Auswirkungen der Digitalisierung auf die Preisstatistik, Wiesbaden, 2016.
Deutsche  Bundesbank 
considerations and statistical status quo, Monthly Report, May 2013, pp 53–55.
(2013),  Commercial  property  prices 
in  Germany:  Conceptual
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), Housing prices in Germany, Monthly Report, February 2017, pp
51–53.
ECB (2012), New Standards for HICP Weights, Monthly Bulletin, April 2012, pp 36–39.
ECB  (2014),  Potential  Measurement  Issues  in  Consumer  Price  Indices,  Monthly  Bulletin, April
2014, pp 40–42.
Eurostat  (2013),  Handbook  on  Residential  Property  Price  Indices  (RPPIs),  Luxembourg:
Publications Office of the European Union, 2013.
Hill,  P.  (1999),  COL  Indexes  and  Inflation  Indexes,  Paper  presented  at  the  5th  Meeting  of  the
Ottawa Group, Reykjavik, 1999.
IMF (2016), The Financial Crisis and Information Gaps: Second Phase of the G-20 Data Gaps
Initiative 
September
2016. www.imf.org/external/np/g20/pdf/2016/090216.pdf
Progress 
(DGI-2), 
Report, 
First 
Triplett, J. E. (1999), Should the Cost-of-Living Index Provide the Conceptual Framework for a
Consumer  Price  Index?,  Paper  presented  at  the  5th  Meeting  of  the  Ottawa  Group,  Reykjavik,
1999.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Turvey, R. (1999), True Cost of Living Indexes, Paper presented at the 5th Meeting of the Ottawa
Group, Reykjavik, 1999.
1
2
3
See eg Broda and Weinstein (2008).
For  more 
www.imf.org/external/np/g20/pdf/2016/090216.pdf
information 
on 
the  Data  Gaps 
Initiative, 
see 
the 
IMF 
paper 
at
See Deutsche Bundesbank (2017). 
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
