Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Monetary Policy Report
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press
conference  following  the  release  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Report,  Ottawa,  Ontario,  18  January
2017.
 Good  morning.  Senior  Deputy  Governor  Wilkins  and  I  are  happy  to  be  here  to  answer  your
questions about today’s interest rate announcement and our Monetary Policy Report (MPR). Let
me  elaborate  on  some  selected  issues  that  were  central  to  the  Governing  Council’s
deliberations.
The  uncertainty  we  face  as  forecasters  and  policy-makers  remains  undiminished.  The  MPR
outlines  a  number  of  risks  to  our  projection  in  both  directions.  In  our  discussions,  Governing
Council was particularly concerned about the ramifications of US trade policy, because it is so
fundamental to the Canadian economy. But we cannot capture these in our projections because
they are simply unknown at this point.
We  considered  the  possibility  of  not  incorporating  any  US  policy  changes  in  our  projection.
However, Governing Council felt that some form of fiscal stimulus was likely over our projection
horizon. Accordingly, we have made some reasonable initial assumptions about fiscal initiatives
—specifically, corporate and personal tax cuts that would raise the level of US GDP by about 0.5
per cent in 2018. This assumption could be recalibrated in either direction, but doing the work
now provides a framework for analyzing the situation as it evolves, while also giving us a better
balance of risks over the projection horizon.
According to our analysis, a US fiscal shock of this magnitude would probably have only small
effects here in Canada, boosting GDP by about 0.1 per cent by 2018. This is because there are
three important offsets that would limit the transmission of such a US fiscal shock to Canada.
First,  a  corporate  tax  cut  in  the  United  States  could  adversely  affect  Canadian  export
competitiveness.  This  would  mean  lower  exports  and  investment  in  Canada  than  otherwise.
Although  our Business Outlook Survey (BOS) shows stronger investment intentions, some of
this may be coming from firms with cross-border operations considering new investments in the
United States rather than here in Canada.
Second,  an  important  consequence  of  rising  US  optimism  has  been  an  increase  in  US  bond
yields, some two-thirds of which has been imported into Canada— much more than in many
other  countries.  While  this  reaction  is  consistent  with  past  correlations,  it  is  at  odds  with
Canada’s  macroeconomic  situation  where  there  is  material  excess  capacity,  unlike  the  US
economy.  This  divergence  in  economic  performance  is  mainly  due  to  the  setback  Canada
endured  when  oil  prices  collapsed.  Canadian  5-year  mortgage  rates  have  already  risen  in
response  to  higher  bond  yields,  which  will  act  as  an  additional  drag  on  housing  demand  in
Canada.
Third, the US dollar has moved higher against most other currencies. Because the Canadian
dollar has held its own against the US dollar in this context, largely due to higher oil prices, it has
also  been  rising  against  most  other  currencies.  This  combination  creates  two  additional
headwinds  for  Canadian  exports:  softer  US  exports  will  mean  lower  demand  for  Canadian
components of those US exports; and Canada will lose more competitiveness in the US market
compared with exporters from other countries.
With respect to our export forecast, today we are publishing two new staff discussion papers on
our modelling of exports. The main insight is that our previous model may have put too much
weight on developments in the US economy and not enough on other economies, both in terms
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
of demand growth and in terms of measures of competitiveness. Suffice it to say that the two
new models both explain most of the missing exports we have been talking about—amounting to
some $30 billion to $40 billion—and predict slower export growth in the future than our previous
model. The projections we are laying out today are similar to those from October, because we
were already testing the new models then and used them to form our judgement.
That said, our updated projection—which, I should remind you, is more conditional than usual—
shows  the  Canadian  economy  experiencing  above-  potential  economic  growth  for  the  next
several  quarters.  This  would  imply  a  steady  narrowing  of  Canada’s  excess  capacity  over  the
projection  horizon.  While  some  of  the  recent  data  have  been  encouraging—I  am  thinking  in
particular of the latest data on exports, employment and business sentiment in our BOS—they
do  not  support  a  forecast  of  above-potential  growth  by  themselves.  Rather,  that  projection
continues  to  rely  on  the  expected  effects  of  domestic  fiscal  stimulus.  We  have  already  seen
some early effects from the Canada Child Benefit on household spending, and there have been
some new measures introduced at the provincial level. But the main ingredient in our forecast is
the federal infrastructure program, which is well under way but not yet evident in the economic
indicators we are tracking. In fairness, the best place to see this is in the national accounts data,
which are so far available only through the third quarter of 2016.
All  of  this  matters  because  persistent  excess  capacity  puts  downward  pressure  on  inflation,
raising  the  risk  that  we  will  continue  to  fall  short  of  our  inflation  target.  We  have  recently
introduced three new measures of core inflation, each with its own strengths and weaknesses.
These  are  not  target  variables.  Rather,  they  are  analytical  tools.  They  help  us  to  see  through
shocks  and  give  a  better  guide  to  what  is  happening  to  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation.  In
particular,  they  are  much  more  correlated  with  excess  capacity  than  total  inflation  is,  simply
because total inflation is constantly being buffeted by temporary price disturbances.
Our new measures of core inflation are all below 2 per cent presently, weighed down by excess
capacity in the economy. In addition, food prices have been running below expectations in recent
months, due in part to enhanced competition at the retail level, something we will continue to
monitor. Looking ahead, Governing Council expects inflation to move up to close to 2 per cent in
the  near  term,  mainly  because  of  firmer  energy  prices.  More  importantly,  our  growth  outlook
would  imply  a  narrowing  of  the  economy’s  excess  capacity  over  the  course  of  2017  and  into
2018. So in the absence of any new shocks we would expect all inflation measures to converge
sustainably on 2 per cent in the latter part of our projection horizon.
To  conclude,  in  the  context  of  a  projection  that  is  largely  unchanged,  the  Bank’s  Governing
Council judges that the current stance of monetary policy is still appropriate and maintains the
target for the overnight rate at 1/2 per cent. Governing Council will continue to assess the impact
of ongoing developments, mindful of the significant uncertainties weighing on the outlook.
Thank you for your attention. Now, Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I would be happy to take
your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
