 Riccardo Faini Memorial Conference 
Italy’s lost productivity and how to get it back 
Bank of Italy, Via Nazionale 91 
      Opening remarks 
by Ignazio Visco 
Governor of the Bank of Italy 
            Rome, 13 January 2017 
 I am pleased to welcome all participants to this conference to remember Professor Riccardo Faini. 
I first met Riccardo in 1978 when I presented a paper written with Stefano Micossi in the famous 
monetary workshop held by Franco Modigliani and Stan Fisher at MIT (Riccardo was then a PhD 
student with Giampaolo Galli and Luca Barbone…). We met often in the following years inside and 
outside  of  Italy,  socially  and  professionally,  exchanging  views  and  commenting  on  each  other 
writings. Indeed, issues related to the topic of today’s conference – long-standing poor productivity 
dynamics in Italy – happened to be at the centre of a couple of professional exchanges between us 
in the mid-1990s and early 2000s, which I would like to briefly share with you. 
In 1994, at a seminar on “The New Frontiers of Economic Policy” (Le nuove frontiere della politica 
economica)  organised  by  the  Innocenzo  Gasparini  Institute  for  Economic  Research  (IGIER),  I 
discussed – along with Luigi Spaventa – a paper by Riccardo on wage and productivity differentials 
(Stesso  lavoro,  diverso  salario?,  i.e.  “Same  jobs,  different  wages?”)  between  Northern  Italy  and 
Southern Italy – the Mezzogiorno. The starting point of Riccardo’s analysis was that a convergence 
in  nominal  wages  between  the  two  regions  since  the  late-1960s  had  not  been  accompanied  by  a 
parallel convergence of productivity levels; the ensuing higher unit labour costs in Southern Italy 
were thus contributing to higher unemployment there. 
In  order  to  achieve  more  wage  flexibility  in  Southern  Italy’s  labour  market,  Riccardo’s  main 
proposal  was  to  introduce  a  third  type  of  wage  bargaining  arrangement  –  a  regional  one  –  to 
complement or replace bargaining at the centralised and firm levels, with a view to bringing closer 
wages and productivity levels while addressing higher unemployment in the South.  
In  my  comments  I  raised  some  criticisms,  but  on  one  major  point  we  were  in  close  agreement, 
namely that the issue of lower productivity (and higher unit labour costs) in Southern Italy should 
be addressed not only by reforming the labour market but also by implementing broader structural 
reforms  to  overcome  well-known  distortions  of  the  general  institutional,  economic  and  social 
environment, notably infrastructural gaps, enforcement of property rights, efficiency of the justice 
- 1 - 
system and the public administration. I cannot help but notice that these areas are the same where 
reforms are called for still today for the Italian economy as a whole. 
In 2003 Riccardo and I wrote two papers on the dismal performance of the Italian economy. While I 
was considering a number of structural deficiencies that were risking to have serious consequences 
on  our  growth  capabilities  in  the  years  to  come,  Riccardo  tried  to  put  the  unsatisfactory  Italian 
productivity outcome in  a hystorical perspective.  It is interesting that the titles of our papers had 
two elements in common: the word “decline” (so popular today) and a question mark. [Riccardo’s 
paper: Fu vero declino? L’Italia degli anni Novanta (“Was it truly a decline? Italy in the 1990s”); 
my  paper:  È  veramente  in  declino  l’economia  italiana?  (“Is  the  Italian  economy  really  in 
decline?”).  Also  noteworthy  is  that  later  that  year  a  further  paper  was  published  by  Giacomo 
Vaciago,  with  the  word  decline  in  the  title  but  without  question  mark:  Il  declino  dell’economia 
Italiana, (“The decline of the Italian economy”).] And it is also interesting that in December 2003 
we participated in a conference whose title used exactly these two elements to raise the provocative 
question: L’Italia: un Paese in declino? (“Italy: a country in decline?”). The conference was jointly 
organised  by  Mediocredito  Centrale  and  the  Associazione  Borsisti  Marco  Fanno,  under  the 
leadership of Michele Salvati, critical of the use of the word, and introduced by Mario Draghi, the 
then President of the Association. To be sure, as Mario put it in his introductory words, the risk of 
decline was to be understood not only as Italy-specific but rather as a broader European issue. 
Riccardo and I were also both somewhat critical of the use of the term “decline” to define Italy’s 
situation  at  the  time.  But  we  both  argued  that  the  risk  for  the  coming  years  had  not  to  be 
undervalued. I remember pointing out that Italy’s economy was rather undergoing a phase of “long 
and difficult transition” because of the need to adapt and respond to the shocks posed by both the 
“new economy” and technological progress, which had taken the  Italian productive system rather 
unprepared. These issues were already widely debated in the Bank of Italy (where Salvatore Rossi 
was leading work on the “new economy” and Pierluigi Ciocca summarizing Italy’s challenges as a 
“problem of growth”). And they were very much being discussed and analysed in the Economics 
Department of the OECD, that I had been leading, within a wide-ranging and global project on “The 
sources of growth”. 
Therefore,  I  underscored  that  Italy’s  low  growth  was  first  and  foremost  due  to  structural  internal 
causes,  most  notably  low  investment  in  capital  (physical,  human,  knowledge-based)  and 
correspondingly low ability to innovate, which underpinned what still can be seen as the hallmark 
of  Italy’s  fundamental  problems:  the  disappointing  dynamics  of  total  factor  productivity  over  the 
last twenty years or so. 
 - 2 - 
Riccardo too related the increased attention paid to the worsening of Italy’s economic performance 
to the changes in the international economic situation: globalization and the rise of emerging market 
economies, which threatened  Italy’s comparative advantages in sectors of specialization with low 
intensity of both human capital and technology. 
To  counter  the  decline  story,  his  main  argument  was  that  Italy’s  worse  aggregate  growth  in  the 
1990s  in  comparison  with  its  peers  (France,  Germany  and  the  US)  was  biased  by  demographic 
factors: in per capita terms Italy’s growth was only marginally slower (he drew similar conclusions 
in  terms  of  purchasing  power  parity).  Besides,  Riccardo  gave  heavy  weight  to  the  importance  of 
economic developments in the South: in his view, Italy’s decline – to be played down in itself – was 
mainly a Southern Italy’s problem (“un problema meridionale”). 
Contrary  to  what  was  often  stated,  in  Riccardo’s  view  the  1990s  were  not  a  time  that  set  the 
beginning of the decaying phase. Signals of underperformance had indeed appeared even earlier: in 
his paper of 2005 with André Sapir in Oltre il declino (“Beyond the decline”, a book edited by him 
and others well known Italian economists, some of them here today), he underscored that average 
labour productivity growth began to fall in the 1960s and 1970s (a result not limited to Italy and, I 
would say, not unexplainable for a country that had so quickly caught up after WW2 with the most 
advanced world economies). More importantly, he believed that the 1990s had in many respects laid 
the  groundwork  –  in  terms  of  adoption  of  some  initial  structural  reforms  –  for  the  country’s 
economic revenge. He aptly warned of the perils of not continuing the structural reform effort.  
I shared this warning, and to some extent also the observation that we should look deeper into the 
past to understand the present. Somehow, I felt that behind the difficulty to disinflate the economy 
until  the  mid-1990s  and  the  dismal  growth  performance  following  the  establishment  of  the 
monetary union there were common factors, most notably the very low productivity growth in the 
(protected  and  inefficient)  service  sector  of  the  Italian  economy.  This  made  it  very  difficult  to 
disinflate  in  the  former  period,  as  the  increases  in  nominal  wages  that  were  matching  the  rise  in 
productivity  in  the  manufacturing  sector  became  the  benchmark  for  a  service  sector  lacking  the 
ability to produce similar productivity gains, with higher costs for the same manufacturing sector. 
With a single currency, in a much wider area and lacking the necessary investment response, global 
competition and the monetary union were not well responded and resulted in a prolonged period of 
low growth overall.  
Perhaps I was less optimistic than Riccardo, but our views were the closest on a few key issues: the 
structural nature of Italy’s problems, the specific challenges that globalization posed to the country 
 - 3 - 
and  the  “absolute  priority”  for  economic  policy:  strengthening  human  capital  and  investing  in 
education.  
 Italy’s productivity problem today 
It is unfortunate – to say the least – that Italy’s structural problems of today are broadly the same as 
those  of  15  years  ago  and  the  key  question  remains  how  to  resume  Italy’s  growth.  To  this  end, 
getting  back  “lost  productivity”  is  obviously  critical.  Perhaps  the  main  difference  from  past 
discussions  is  that  today  these  challenges  have  to  be  addressed  in  a  more  complex  global 
environment  dominated  by  the  legacies  of  the  global  financial  crisis  and  faster  technological 
progress. 
The former has left most developed economies in a period of sluggish economic growth, spurring a 
lively debate among economists on longer-term  prospects and raising increasing concerns  among 
policy-makers.  Many  scholars  have  highlighted  how  financial  crises  are  characterized  by  slower 
recovery  with  respect  to  non-financial  recessions  because  of  inter  alia  a  larger  decline  in  capital 
accumulation,  the  stronger  impact  of  the  credit  shock  on  young  and  fast-growing  firms,  and  the 
huge  costs  incurred  for  banks’  recapitalization.  Currently,  growth  is  also  held  back  by  financial 
deleveraging, subdued demand, and low inflation (which raises real interest rates). 
Besides these short-term factors, future growth prospects are weakened by the long-term decline in 
productivity  growth  that  is  affecting  all  developed  countries.  Economists  have  pointed  to  several 
factors to explain this slowdown. According to one view, growth in advanced economies may be 
hampered by inadequate aggregate demand, driven by demographic trends, growing inequality and 
raising government debt, resulting in a “secular” decline in interest rates. Others link the slowdown 
to the types of innovation that have emerged overtime: those which took place in the second half of 
the  20th  century  (“general  purpose  technologies”  such  as  electrification)  may  be  much  more 
significant  than  those  that  characterize  the  21st  century  (such  as  ICT  and  the  digital  economy). 
Recent  evidence  based  on  firm-level  data  from  several  OECD  countries  seems  to  show  that 
innovation has not slowed down; rather, the pace at which innovation is spread across the economy 
(“the diffusion machine”) has weakened.  
As I have already underscored in past occasions, technological progress is today’s most powerful 
agent  of  change:  in  the  “second  machine  age”,  as  it  has  been  aptly  defined,  it  poses  distinct 
challenges  at  both  the  economic  and  social  level  because  of  a  few  key  features  of  the  digital 
revolution, first and foremost the greater speed by which new technologies tend to replace labour, 
 - 4 - 
even in fields in which human intervention has so far appeared to be decisive. These developments 
underpin  a  revival  of  the  concept  –  proposed  by  Keynes  in  1930  –  of  “technological 
unemployment”,  which  has  come  to  be  seen  as  a  possible  result  of  the  diffusion  of  automation, 
robotics and digitalization, with the risk of a substantial decline in job opportunities and stagnation 
of wages and incomes in a number of industries and countries. 
To which extent this general background relates to the Italian economy? 
Understanding  the  sources  of  productivity  growth  is  of  utmost  importance  for  Italy.  As  we  have 
seen,  since  the  early  2000s  Italian  productivity  has  been  disappointingly  stagnant,  performing 
significantly worse than other European countries. It remains relevant to distinguish how much of 
this  poor  productivity  growth  is  to  be  related  to  Italy’s  structural  weaknesses  or  rather  due  to 
delayed  adjustment  to  global  changes  that  could  be  overcome  in  due  time,  hopefully  earlier  than 
later: I am sure that today’s debate will help make progress in this direction. 
The work of many Italian economists, some of them are here today including those working at the 
Bank of Italy, has long highlighted the importance of structural factors that are specific to the Italian 
economy and to their interaction with the three fundamental changes that have taken place since the 
second half of the 1990s: globalization, the technological revolution and the demographic transition, 
especially,  but  not  only,  linked  to  population  ageing.  On  top  of  all  this  we  have  had  the 
establishment  of  the  Economic  and  monetary  union  and  the  adoption  of  the  euro.  To  all  these 
changes  the  Italian  economy  has  adjusted  very  slowly,  if  at  all,  and  with  substantial  delay.  The 
result  has  been  the  inability  to  overcome  well  known  structural  weaknesses.  Some  of  these 
weaknesses  are  internal  to  Italian  firms,  which  are,  when  compared  to  those  located  in  other 
developed economies, considerably smaller, older, with a lower propensity to innovate and adopt 
new  advanced  technologies.  Management  skills  and  practices  leave  much  to  be  desired  and  are 
often  old-fashioned.  To  finance  their  activity  firms  rely  on  bank  credit  much  more  than  what 
happens in other advanced countries: in this regard, it is well known that this is not the ideal source 
for financing innovations. 
The capability of Italy’s productive economy to increase sales and create value added has been also 
undermined  by  long-standing  institutional  weaknesses.  Since  2011  Italy  has  undertaken  a  vast 
programme  of  structural  reforms,  aimed  at  creating  a  more  growth-friendly  environment. 
Legislators have approved, in various steps, measures to reduce red-tape, to simplify bureaucratic 
procedures  for  starting  and  running  businesses,  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  the  public 
 - 5 - 
administration  and  the  judiciary  system,  to  prevent  and  fight  corruption,  to  stimulate  innovation, 
and to achieve a more flexible and dynamic labour market.  
The process is still ongoing and far from being concluded, even if in several areas there are first 
effects. The stock of pending civil proceedings is decreasing: our estimates show that some of the 
measures adopted in the past to reduce red tape and to simplify business start-up regulations have 
had positive effects on the entry rate of start-ups. The Jobs Act is a wide-ranging reform, that has 
tackled employment protection legislation, unemployment insurance, wage supplementation funds, 
active labour market policies and other aspects. But while its long-term effectiveness still remains 
to  be  seen,  we  must  understand  the  risks  of  going  backwards,  as  reducing  labour  market 
segmentation is fundamental in the quest to allocate labour from less to more productive uses, and 
to boost aggregate productivity. 
Factors that negatively impinge on aggregate productivity  growth by constraining both efficiency 
gains  at  the  firm-level  and  the  efficiency  of  the  reallocation  of  resources  from  low-  to  high-
productive  firms  have  to  be  decisively  addressed.  More  generally,  in  order  to  overcome  its  low 
productivity problem the Italian economy must improve its ability to fully seize the opportunities of 
the digital revolution while governing the consequences that technological progress is exerting on 
labour  demand  and  the  skills  required  to  current  and  prospective  workers.  So  there  is  a  need  to 
fundamentally improve the environment in which firms are formed, grow and operate, and to invest 
in knowledge, human capital and the new skills needed to succeed in the years ahead. 
To a relevant extent, the current wave of technological progress may have made even more difficult 
to reconcile productivity gains and employment (and wage) growth. This challenge may be greater 
in  Italy  if  one  looks  at  the  past.  As  recalled  by  Riccardo  Faini  in  his  2003  papers,  Italy  did  not 
always  succeed  to  overcome  the  above  potential  conflict:  between  1992  and  1996,  productivity 
growth was satisfactory but employment decreased dramatically; on the contrary, between 1996 and 
2001 rapid employment growth resumed while productivity growth collapsed and its level remained 
stagnant afterwards. 
Avoiding a repetition of these dismal dynamics is perhaps the greatest challenge for policy-makers 
and academics alike.  
 - 6 - 
