Peter  Praet:  The  economic  situation  in  the  euro  area  and  the
implications for monetary policy
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Peter  Praet,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central
Bank, at the IE Business School Leadership Forum, Madrid, 27 March 2017.
 Today I will discuss the macroeconomic situation and monetary policy in the euro area. As a
central  bank  with  a  clear  price  stability  mandate,  we  need  to  ultimately  judge  economic
developments in the light of their implications for price stability. Despite the recent increase in
headline  inflation,  largely  on  account  of  rising  energy  and  food  prices,  underlying  inflation
pressures remain subdued. Furthermore, convincing signs of a self-sustained convergence in
inflation towards levels that are consistent with the Governing Council’s objective of below, but
close to, 2% have yet to materialise. To ensure price stability over the medium term, we must
look through changes in headline inflation to the extent that they are transient. In the near future,
we will have to assess how the forces that are driving prices today can influence the outlook for
price stability in the medium term and help durably stabilise inflation around our goal.
The economic recovery will support domestic price pressures. Indeed, the upswing is continuing
at a steadily firming pace and is broadening across sectors and countries. The recovery has
proven to be resilient against past external shocks and influences. In fact, real GDP growth in the
euro area has expanded for 15 consecutive quarters, growing by 0.4% during the final quarter of
2016. Economic sentiment is at its highest level in nearly six years and unemployment is at its
lowest level in nearly eight years. Looking beyond the euro area, there are signs of a somewhat
stronger  global  recovery  and  increasing  global  trade.  So  overall,  as  economic  conditions  are
improving,  also  the  risks  surrounding  the  euro  area  growth  outlook  have  become  less
pronounced, although they remain tilted to the downside, mainly because of global factors.
Our  monetary  policy  measures  have  been  instrumental  in  these  positive  developments  in  the
euro area economy, as well as in supporting the resilience of the recovery in the face of external
influences and prevailing uncertainties. The comprehensive set of measures introduced since
June 2014 has worked its way through the financial system, leading to a significant easing of
financing conditions for consumers and firms. Together with improving financial and non-financial
sector balance sheets, this has strengthened credit dynamics and supported domestic demand.
Since  June  of  that  year,  bank  lending  rates  for  both  euro  area  households  and  non-financial
corporations have fallen by around 110 basis points. Lending rates for very small loans, which
can be taken as a proxy for loans to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), have declined
by  around  180  basis  points.  The  significant  improvement  in  funding  conditions  for  SMEs  is
especially encouraging as they provide two-thirds of total private sector employment in the euro
area.
1
The sharp reduction in bank lending rates has been accompanied by easier access to funding,
as  recent  surveys  have  shown   These  positive  developments  have  been  supported  by  the
second  series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations,  as  a  result  of  which  banks  are
passing on the favourable funding conditions to their customers. Moreover, these improvements
are not limited to interest rates: bank lending volumes have also been gradually recovering since
early 2014. Market-based funding conditions, too, have improved significantly in response to the
corporate sector purchase programme launched in June 2016.
Looking forward, we are confident that the ongoing economic expansion will continue to firm and
broaden.  Incoming  data,  as  well  as  improving  consumer  and  business  sentiment  indicators,
suggest that the cyclical recovery is gaining momentum. Private consumption growth continues
to  be  a  key  driver  of  the  ongoing  recovery,  which  is  underpinned  by  improvements  in  labour
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
market  conditions,  with  unemployment  steadily  falling  despite  a  rise  in  participation.  These
developments increase households’ real disposable income, which in turn boosts their spending.
Business investment is also expected to continue recovering amid support from better corporate
profitability and the very favourable financing conditions.
As for price developments, after hovering at levels well below 1% for three years, with occasional
dips into negative territory, euro area headline inflation edged higher towards the end of last year
and  reached  2%  in  February.  This  upward  movement  of  inflation  mainly  reflects  increases  in
energy and food prices.
Underlying inflation – which relates more to domestic price pressures – continues to remain very
subdued and has yet to show clear signs of trend inversion as unutilised resources still weigh on
wage and price growth. For example, the annual rate of HICP inflation excluding food and energy
has mostly remained below 1% since late 2013.
Concerning  the  outlook  for  price  developments,  our  latest  staff  macroeconomic  projections
suggest that the strong upward pressures on headline inflation from recent increases in energy
and food price inflation are not expected to fundamentally change the medium-term outlook for
price  stability.  In  fact,  while  the  staff  projections  indicate  that  the  recent  price  pressures  will
cause  a  hump  in  the  inflation  path  in  2017  and  2018  relative  to  the  trajectory  expected  in
December last year, the projection for headline inflation for 2019 has remained largely unaltered.
By  ensuring  accommodative  financing  conditions,  monetary  policy  will  continue  to  support
domestic  demand  by  mobilising  idle  resources.  This  will  lead  to  a  build-up  of  domestic  price
pressures  and  ultimately  pull  underlying  inflation  up  as  remaining  slack  in  the  economy  is
gradually  reabsorbed  and  the  output  gap  narrows  further.  In  turn,  this  will  facilitate  a  durable
return of inflation back to a level that is below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
of 
euro 
Today,  an  important  element  keeping  underlying  price  pressures  subdued  is  muted  wage
dynamics,  which  are  shaped  by  many  factors.  At  this  stage,  besides  weak  productivity
developments, there is still a significant degree of labour market slack that keeps a lid on wage
growth.  Furthermore,  the  process  of  setting  wages  is  to  some  extent  backward-looking  in  a
number 
indexation
mechanisms.  Additionally, the timing of wage negotiations plays a role in postponing the point in
time  when  growing  confidence  that  inflation  is  approaching  the  ECB’s  intended  medium-term
level  starts  to  become  more  visible  in  aggregate  wage  figures.  Moreover,  weak  wage  growth
could also reflect previous downward wage rigidities: difficulties in reducing wages during earlier
stages of the crisis may result, symmetrically, in a slower upward adjustment of wages as labour
3
market conditions improve.
countries, 
reflecting 
informal 
formal 
area 
and 
2
Overall,  while  we  are  certainly  seeing  a  firming,  broadening  and  more  resilient  economic
recovery,  we  still  need  to  create  a  sufficiently  broad  and  solid  information  basis  to  build
confidence that the projected path of inflation is robust, durable and self-sustained. Underlying
inflation  pressures  still  give  scant  indications  of  a  convincing  upward  trend  as  domestic  cost
pressures, notably wage growth, remain subdued. Importantly, the economic recovery and the
outlook for price stability are still predicated on the very favourable financing conditions that to a
large extent depend on continued monetary policy support. Absent that quantum of support, the
progress towards a sustained adjustment that we see in our projections is likely to be slower or
even stall.
Therefore,  we  need  to  look  through  the  recent  surge  in  inflation,  which  is  driven  by  transient
factors  that  will  probably  fade  before  long.  Our  conclusion  that  a  very  substantial  degree  of
monetary  accommodation  is  still  needed  for  underlying  inflation  pressures  to  build  up  and
support headline inflation in the medium term remains valid.
Of course, monetary policy cannot be the only source of support for growth: action from other
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
policy areas is needed to ensure a sustainable economic recovery. Structural reforms can play a
key role in turning the cyclical recovery into a structural recovery and the current low interest rate
environment  makes  it  politically  and  economically  easier  to  implement  them.  Such  reforms,  if
carried out now, will help to promote favourable economic conditions down the road.
1
2
3
See ECB Bank Lending Survey, January 2017, and ECB Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises in the
euro area, April to September 2016.
For further discussion, see “Recent wage trends in the euro area”, Box 2, ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 3 /
2016.
See,  for  example,  “Wage  dynamics  amid  high  euro-area  unemployment”,  Deutsche  Bundesbank  Monthly
Report, December 2016.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
