Simon Potter: New York Fed - strengthening relations with African
central banks
Remarks by Mr Simon M Potter, Executive Vice President of the Markets Group of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, to the Assembly of Governors of the Association of African Central
Banks, South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria, 16 August 2017.
 Mr.  Chairman,  Mr.  Vice-Chairman,  and  honorable  governors  and  heads  of  delegation,  I
appreciate this opportunity for me and my colleagues from the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York  to  speak  before  the Assembly  of  Governors  of  the Association  of African  Central  Banks
(AACB).  Since  its  establishment  in  1963,  the  AACB  has  played  a  vital  role  in  fostering
cooperation  among  central  banks  in Africa,  and  between  central  banks  inside  and  outside  of
Africa. Through my participation in the Symposium yesterday, I got a sense of the challenges and
purpose that drives your agenda in this diverse and dynamic region. The AACB is an important
forum  for  exchanging  views  within  the  region  and  with  international  partners  on  these  shared
challenges and opportunities.
My  colleagues  and  I  have  joined  your  meetings  to  seek  enhanced  dialogue  with  each  of  your
institutions  to  strengthen  our  relationships  and  channels  of  communication.  We  view  this
engagement as an initial step in our long-term commitment to strengthen our ties with African
central banks, and we are pleased to have already met bilaterally with many of you.
Several factors underpin why strengthening relations with African central banks is a high priority
for the New York Fed at this time, as demonstrated by the range and seniority of our delegation.  
First, in the increasingly interconnected global economy and financial markets, the need to better
appreciate dynamics in cross border flows of capital and goods has never been greater in order
to better understand developments in one’s own economy.  This is true in the U.S. as it is in all of
your countries. As Africa has become an increasingly important contributor to global output, with
some of the fastest growing economies in the world over the past two decades, a better shared
grasp of the dynamics in both our economies is very much in all of our interests. Additionally,
with the U.S. dollar serving as the world’s primary reserve currency, we at the Fed have a very
natural and symbiotic relationship with many central banks around the world including those in
Africa.  This is the broader context behind our efforts to enhance our cooperation with African
central banks, building on existing people-to-people exchanges exemplified by the long-standing
participation of African central bankers in the New York Fed’s annual central bank seminar and
specialized training courses, and other Federal Reserve cooperative training arrangements with
African central banks on bank supervision topics. Participation in this gathering will hopefully only
strengthen and deepen these relationships.
Second, the Federal Reserve and African central banks maintain direct operational ties through
the U.S. dollar correspondent and custody accounts that many central banks in this room hold at
the New York Fed.  African countries represent approximately one-quarter of the total number of
the Federal Reserve’s foreign official accountholders, the second largest regional representation,
with some very long-standing account relationships.
Let  me  speak  for  a  moment  about  the  role  of  our  services  to  the  global  central  banking
community.
The Federal Reserve’s provision of U.S. dollar account services to the global official community
stems  from  our  recognition  that  central  banks  around  the  world  have  a  mutual  need  for
correspondent banking and custody services to execute on core central banking functions  in
which the safety, confidentiality, and reliability of service provision is essential. Given the global
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
role  of  the  U.S.  dollar  as  a  reserve  currency,  we  recognize  the  special  role  that  our  account
infrastructure plays in supporting policy implementation by central banks around the world. As
such, we devote significant attention and resources to maintaining a robust operational and risk
management culture. This allows us to continue to provide these services for the benefit of the
global central banking community.
This brings me to the third reason why enhancing relationships with African central banks is a
high priority for us, and that is the need for stronger dialogue on the evolving risk environment in
cross-border payments. Undoubtedly, there has been a significant shift in global perceptions of
the seriousness of cyber threats across the board, be they in the realm of politics, business,
finance, or the media. For financial institutions, while cyber threats at one point may have been
regarded as a relatively minor cost of doing business, it is not an exaggeration to say that they
are now viewed as potential existential threats, not just to individual firms but also to the broader
financial system and critical infrastructures that support it. As central banks with broad mandates
for financial stability, this is certainly a concern for us all.
For the Federal Reserve, a cyber breach at one of our central bank customers last year led to
authenticated yet fraudulent SWIFT messages being sent to us to wire out substantial sums of
money. While neither SWIFT nor Federal Reserve systems were breached, this incident was a
strong reminder that the robustness of our customers’ internal control environment is a matter
that concerns the entire central bank community.
We  recognize  the  challenges  and  complexities  in  strengthening  prevention,  detection,  and
incident response regimes around processing of fraudulent payment instructions. SWIFT users
span the full range of IT sophistication and capacity, and remediating deficiencies in prevention
and  detection  may  require  a  substantial  re-orientation  of  priorities  and  resources  for  some
institutions. Overcoming these obstacles will be no easy task, but so long as there is a weak link
in the cybersecurity chain cybercriminals will seek to exploit it.
Reflecting  the  complex,  systemic,  and  cross-national  nature  of  the  threats,  recent  global
initiatives have been undertaken at multiple levels. At the international level, SWIFT has taken the
lead  through  its  Customer  Security  Program  (CSP).  At  the  core  of  the  CSP  is  promoting
increased transparency concerning the adherence of SWIFT users to best practices on internal
controls, with a related attestation required by the end of this year. At the global standard-setting
level,  the  BIS  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  (CPMI)  initiated  last  year  a
Task Force on Wholesale Payments Security. The Task Force was established to look into the
security  of  wholesale  payments  that  involve  banks,  financial  market  infrastructures  and  other
financial  institutions.  This  effort  builds  on  previous  work  by  the  CPMI  on  cyber  security  and
operational risk and is working to make sure there are adequate checks and balances in place at
each stage of the payments process.
While these international efforts are important and necessary, they are in themselves inadequate
unless there is buy-in at the institutional level for strengthening internal risk frameworks, controls,
and cultures. For some, this may require investing in expanded technical capabilities. But for all,
this is represented by “going back to basics” by continuously reinforcing strong risk management
policies and practices in your work environments. Cyber incidents often originate from an initial
breakdown at the human level, be it inserting an unauthorized USB drive, leaving a token inserted
overnight, clicking on an improper link, or falling prey to social engineering.
As we all move forward to strengthen the global financial system, we stand ready to cooperate
with African central banks, a critical component of which is building strong relationships of trust
and understanding. Our participation in these meetings are an important part of furthering our
partnership  and we look forward to a more comprehensive and sustained engagement going
forward.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
