Carl-Ludwig Thiele: Dinner speech - International Cash Conference
2017
Dinner  speech  by  Mr  Carl-Ludwig  Thiele,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the International Cash Conference 2017, Island of Mainau, 25 April 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen
 It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to Montfort Castle this evening. I hope you enjoyed
today’s conference proceedings. I am particularly honoured to welcome Dr Kurt Pribil, Member of
the Governing Board of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank responsible for payment systems.
Our day has been both informative and enlightening, and what better place to end it than in these
historic surroundings. Montfort Castle, in its present form, was built in the 19th century by King
William I of Württemberg on the site of Count William II of Montfort’s castle ruins. The castle is
thus  named  after  its  first  inhabitant,  who  lived  here  back  in  the  14th  century.  Throughout  the
years, this Moorish-style building has been a palace, a villa, a guest house, a spa house and
even an office building. Among the special features of the castle are the Moorish details, such as
the  striped  effect  created  by  the  yellow  and  red  coloured  brickwork  and  the  terracotta  relief
design  on  the  outside  of  the  building.  The  building  is  a  significant  example  of  the  orientalised
architectural  art  of  the  19th  century.  Montfort  Castle  now  belongs  to  the  municipality  of
Langenargen, which had the castle thoroughly renovated and remodelled in 1978. This Hall of
Mirrors is a rather special setting for the official dinner of our third Cash Conference.
This  conference  once  again  brings  together  central  bankers  and  the  academic  community  of
cash researchers. Like previous conferences, this one will cover a wide range of current topics,
with renowned experts discussing interesting aspects. The title this year is: “War on Cash – Is
There a Future for Cash?"
Cash  is  an  exciting  and  important  field  of  research,  which  has  been  the  subject  of  extensive
debate, especially of late. For various reasons, academics, policymakers, but also other market
players,  such  as  commercial  banks,  card-issuing  companies  and  internet  firms,  have  been
speaking out against cash, with the latter possibly hoping to increase the popularity of cashless
payment instruments for their own benefit.
This  criticism  was  also  a  topic  of  discussion  at  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank’s  Third  Cash
Symposium  last  year.  The  former  president  of  the  German  Federal  Constitutional  Court,
Professor  Hans-Jürgen  Papier,  held  a  speech  that  attracted  a  lot  of  attention  on  whether
statutory  limits  to  cash  payments  were  constitutional.  He  regards  it  as  being  considerably
doubtful that the introduction of a cap on cash payments meets the constitutional requirements of
suitability and proportionality in the narrower sense. To quote: “Legislators should, at any rate, not
be swayed by premature and vague assumptions, since in our free state governed by the rule of
law, the following principle still holds: In dubio pro libertate."
Studies show that the payment behaviour of consumers can vary greatly from country to country.
Germany is one of those countries in which the public likes to use traditional payment methods.
Although a constant – albeit slight – decline in cash as a means of payment can be observed, it
is still used for almost 80 percent of all transactions at the point of sale and thus continues to be
the medium of choice for spending on everyday necessities. But it is not just the payment habits
of  the  public  in  Germany  that  are  subject  to  constant  change.  Driven  by  the  increasing  cost
pressure which the banking industry is facing at present, we are currently observing a shift in the
way in which consumers obtain and dispose of cash. In the future, cash supply and removal
operations  could  shift  from  classic  bank  branches  towards  the  retail  industry,  predominantly
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
supermarkets. For consumers, especially those that live in rural areas where there are no bank
branches and often no ATMs, it will be much easier to obtain and deposit cash. We welcome this
new development; however, it sets us new challenges. For even though this may mean that cash
is returned to banks or central banks less frequently, its quality still needs to be maintained.
In light of these developments, it is important to forge ahead with our research into the use of
cash. Cash is all too often reduced entirely to one supposedly determining factor: cost. However,
I  believe  that  it  is  preferable  to  give  equal  consideration  to  the  benefits  of  cash  and  those
characteristics that make it unique. The key advantages of cash include anonymity, immediate
settlement  of  a  payment  contract  at  the  point  of  sale  and  the  possibility  of  effecting  payment
without requiring any other service providers or technical infrastructure. The latter ensures that
cash can still be used even if cashless payment vehicles are unavailable.
The Deutsche Bundesbank does not issue any recommendations for or against the use of cash.
The driving principle behind our business policy is to support both consumer sovereignty and the
principle  of  contractual  freedom,  and  to  let  the  public  decide  which  method  of  payment  they
prefer.
I believe that cash will therefore remain indispensable as a payment medium in the foreseeable
future.  So  far,  none  of  the  alternative  payment  forms  have  been  able  to  fully  replicate  those
properties  that  have  made  cash  so  successful,  which  is  why  cash  is  and  remains  such  a
fascinating topic of research. Potential developments and dynamics impacting on the future cash
landscape are sure to be the topic of many a conference and research project to come.
On  that  note,  I  wish  you  all  a  rewarding  rest  of  conference,  a  lively  exchange  of  ideas  and  a
pleasant evening.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
