Gent Sejko: Albania's economic and financial developments in 2016
Introductory statement by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, presenting the Annual
Report 2016 to the Parliamentary Committee on Economy and Finance, Tirana, 2 May 2017.
Honourable Chair,
Honourable Members of the Committee,
 I  have  the  pleasure  of  presenting  today  the Annual  Report  of  the  Bank  of Albania  2016.  This
report  is  a  synthesis  of  the  activity  of  the  Bank  in  accordance  with  our  legal  objectives,
obligations that arise from relevant by-laws, and commitments with our international partners.
Overall, I reckon the Bank of Albania has worked with dedication, seriousness and efficiency, in
all  such  aspects.  The  policies,  measures  and  legal  and  regulatory  amendments  we  have
initiated,  and  have  provided  a  substantial  contribution 
to  addressing  macroeconomic
misbalances, bolstering economic activity, enhancing financial stability, and promoting Albania’s
European integration process.
In  parallel  to  complying  with  our  legal  obligation,  the  presentation  of  the Annual  Report  is  an
important  pillar  of  accountability  and  transparency  for  the  Bank  of  Albania.  These  two
commitments accompany and balance our institutional independence.
In  this  context,  I  believe  the  Annual  Report  addresses  many  of  the  recommendations  the
Committee left for us in the Resolution “On the assessment of the activity of the Bank of Albania
for 2015”.
In line with the above-stated overview, the presentation will address the following: (i) activity of the
Supervisory  Council  and  strengthening  corporate  governance;  (ii)  monetary  policy  decisions,
achieved  results  and  future  challenges;  (iii)  measures  taken  to  enhance  financial  stability  and
promote  lending;  (iv)  steps  taken  to  foster  internal  control  and  monitoring  systems  and
procedures;  and,  (v)  work  carried  out  to  strengthen  independence,  accountability  and
transparency.
I would like to start with the activity of the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania and our
work toward good governance.
1. Activity of the Supervisory Council and strengthening institutional governance
The Supervisory Council has performed its activity in line with the competences set out in the
Law “On the Bank of Albania” and the procedures established in the regulation on its organisation
and functioning.
During  2016,  the  Council  met  15  times  and  approved  136  decisions,  of  which  82  were  acts
approved  for  the  first  time,  and  54  were  amendments  to  existing  acts.  Eight  meetings  were
dedicated to monetary policy decisions, four meetings focused on issues related to supervision
and financial stability, and three other meetings were dedicated to control and oversight of the
activity of the institution. The decisions have been thoroughly communicated to the public through
press  conferences,  publication  of  relevant  reports  and  public  explanation,  on  a  case  by  case
basis, of various issues.
Beyond formulating policies and monitoring their implementation, the vision of the Supervisory
Council is to raise the public trust in the Bank of Albania by enhancing the governance of this
institution. In this regard, the Council has paid particular attention to this process, building on the
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
structures and processes that had been established in 2015.
I would like to update you briefly on their progress insofar and introduce you to new developments
for 2016.
Established  in  2015,  the  Audit  Committee  conducted  its  activity  independently  in  2016.
During  the  period,  the  Committee  met  seven  times,  exercising  its  functions  as  the
supervisor and coordinator of internal and external audit functions, with a view to enhancing
their efficiency.
In accordance with the Internal Audit Policy, the Council adopted for the first time the annual
plan of activities of the Inspector General and of the Internal Audit Department. The Audit
Committee,  and  in  turn,  the  Supervisory  Council  have  been  informed  regularly  on  audit
findings  and  recommendations  by  the  Internal Audit  Department,  which  provide  additional
guarantee on the effectiveness and quality of the internal audit systems.
In July, the Supervisory Council adopted for the first time the Operational Risk Management
Policy at the Bank of Albania. The document sets out the objectives, resources and key risk
assessment  principles,  reporting  lines  and  responsibilities  of  the  relevant  units.  On  these
grounds,  in  August,  rules  were  adopted  on  the  organisation  and  functioning  of  the
Operational Risk Management Unit, which is now operational.
Also,  in  July,  the  Council  approved  the  new  budget  regulation,  which  disciplines  budget
drafting,  and  planning  and  control  of  capital  expenditure.  In  December,  the  Supervisory
Council adopted the annual budget for 2017. For the first time, based on the alignment of the
regulatory budgeting framework with the best national and international practices, the budget
included projections for the medium-term horizon (2017 – 2019).
After  the  overview  on  the  activity  of  the  Council,  I  would  like  to  focus  a  little  longer  on  its
monetary policy decisions, in view of conformity with the main mandate of the Bank of Albania. I
would  like  to  start  with  a  short  description  of  the  underlying  macroeconomic  backdrop  for
monetary policy decisions.
2. Albanian Economy and Monetary Policy
In 2016, economic developments were positive and some of the main macroeconomic balances
improved. According to INSTAT data, the Albanian economy grew at 3.5% in 2016, accelerating
against the 2.6% growth rate in 2015. Economic growth was driven mainly by domestic demand,
private investments and consumption, and was reflected, to a larger extent, in the expansion of
the activity in services and construction sectors. In parallel, the unemployment rate fell to 14.2%,
driven  by  the  constant  increase  in  employment,  and  the  economic  agents’  confidence  hit  the
record high of the last five years. Likewise, public debt took a downward turn, for the first time
after six years. Lastly, inflation has been upward, after the low rates recorded in the first months
of the year. It settled at 2.2% in December and IINSTAT publications for the first months of 2017
point to further rise in inflation rates.
For  2017,  we  expect  these  trends  to  consolidate.  The  return  of  the  economy  to  potential  is
accompanied with the strengthening of inflationary pressures and the return of inflation to target
within 2018.
Notwithstanding positive trends, the economic and financial environment has been a challenging
one for the monetary policy. At the year start, we faced a rapid and sharp decline in inflation, as a
result of acute disinflationary shocks from the external environment. Downside risks intensified.
Also, extraordinary events such as Brexit or geo-political tensions in the external environment led
to heightened uncertainty.
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Against  this  backdrop,  the  Bank  of  Albania  reacted  with  determination.  The  policy  rate  was
lowered in two stages, in April and in May, down to 1.25%. The corridor of interbank rates – the
floor is the rate on the overnight deposit and the ceiling is the rate on overnight loan – narrowed to
two percentage points. In addition, the Bank of Albania continued to use the forward guidance to
inform the public on its the monetary policy stance in the future. The use of this instrument was
strengthened  over  the  year,  and  was  enriched  with  time  frames.  These  actions  signalled  the
willingness and capability of the Bank of Albania to fulfill its objective of price stability.
The operational framework of the monetary policy did not undergo significant changes and the
banking system was supplied with liquidity through traditional monetary policy instruments.
The latter were adopted to better satisfy the needs of the banking system for liquidity.
In  our  assessment,  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  has  contributed  to  strengthening
economic growth and creating the necessary conditions for maintaining price stability, through a
number of channels.
First, the accommodative monetary policy has contributed to lowering the interest rates in all
the  products  in  the  financial  market.  The  monetary  stimulus  is  assessed  to  have  been
transmitted completely. The average interest rates on credit, deposits and 12-month T-bills
in ALL were respectively 0.8, 0.5, and 1.5 percentage points lower than in the previous year.
Second,  the  reduction  of  financing  costs  contributed  to  the  expansion  of  credit.  Credit
portfolio in ALL to private sector grew by 10.2%, over 2016, while total credit grew by 3.2%.
The  growth  of  credit  in  the Albanian  lek  is  a  welcomed  development,  as  it  expands  the
monetary policy scope and serves to fostering financial stability, by reducing the economic
agents’ exposure to the exchange rate risk.
Despite this positive development, credit recovery remains sluggish, due to the limited qualitative
demand and the banks’ conservative credit policies. For 2017, we expect a better performance of
lending to the economy.
The  expansion  of  private  demand  is  expected  to  absorb  enterprises’  excess  liquidity,  thus
increasing the incentives for boosting credit demand. Similarly, the credit supply is expected to
rise, in line with the lowering of uncertainties and reflecting the implementation of the action plan
of measures for reducing non-performing loans and measures for Sound Credit Growth.
Third, the low interest rates helped to reduce the service costs of the existing loans and to
lower their re-financing costs. This has facilitated the activity of borrowing enterprises and
households.
Fourth,  the  low  interest  rates  supported  the  increase  of  private  consumption  and
investments  in  the  economy,  through  encouraging  a  behaviour  oriented  more  towards
consumption and less towards savings.
According to our economic models, in the absence of monetary policy effects, economic growth
and inflation for 2016 would have scored respectively 0.5 and 0.4 percentage point lower than
their actual values.
Honourable committee members,
The Bank of Albania is independent in formulating and implementing its monetary policy. It is,
however,  aware  of  the  mutual  impact  between  the  monetary  policy  and  the  fiscal  policy  in
achieving  the  respective  objectives.  Therefore,  for  a  right  combination  of  macroeconomic
policies, we are constantly mindful to coordinate the monetary policy stance with the fiscal policy
stance; similarly, the latter is detailed in the budget per calendar year, and in medium-term draft
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
budgets. As I have said previously, the inclusion in 2016 of specific provisions for guaranteeing
fiscal stability in the Organic Budget Law, established more solid basis for a better coordination
of  the  two  macroeconomic  policies,  as  it  contributes  to  increasing  the  discipline  and
foreseeability of the fiscal policy.
About the latter, the Bank of Albania finds that the fiscal policy has been on a consolidation path
during  in  2016,  reflected  in  the  reduction  of  the  public  deficit  and  public  debt. Although  it  has
injected  a  weak  stimulus  to  the  economy,  the  consolidating  fiscal  policy  has  facilitated  the
accommodative  monetary  policy  pass  through,  by  reducing  the  risk  premia  in  the  economy,
favouring  the  reduction  of  financing  costs,  and  increasing  the  space  for  lending  to  the  private
sector. According to reports from the Ministry of Finance, for the first time after six years, the
public debt was reduced from 72.7% of the GDP in 2015, to 71% in 2016.
The Bank of Albania has been and is certain in the position that efforts for reducing public debt
should continue.
The functioning of the monetary policy pass through mechanism, and factors contributing to or
preventing it, are an integral part of the work of the Bank of Albania. Research efforts in 2016
aimed to assess the ability of the tools used for generating economic projections at the Bank, as
well  as  the  understanding  of  the  functioning  of  monetary  transmission  vis-a-vis  the  current
challenges in the financial system. In this context, I would like to point out that the Bank of Albania
has  identified  two  main  obstacles  in  the  monetary  policy  pass  through  mechanism,  whose
solution requires broader-scale cooperation.
The first obstacle relates to the high level of non-performing loans. To reduce this risk, a
national  action  plan  for  reducing  non-performing  loans  has  been  drafted,  and  is  currently
underway.
The second obstacle relates to the high level of euroisation in the economy, which creates
potential risks in the financial system and renders the monetary policy pass through more
difficult. Preparing a plan for reducing euroisation in our economy is a joint commitment by a
number of authorities and the Bank of Albania is in the process of identifying measures that
may be taken in this regard.
Amid a complex and challenging economic and financial environment, the coordination of the
monetary,  micro  and  macro-prudential  policies  assumes  primary  importance  in  promoting
monetary and financial stability. In 2016, the Bank of Albania has worked with the same intensity
in all three aspects, aiming at an optimum calibration for them. Following, is an overview of our
work for maintaining and promoting financial stability.
3. Promoting financial stability and sound lending
In  accordance  with  its  mandate  and  institutional  responsibilities,  the  Bank  of Albania  is  jointly
responsible for safeguarding financial stability in Albania. It communicates its assessment on the
financial  stability  regularly,  and  coordinates  its  policies  with  other  institutions,  through  the
Financial  Stability Advisory  Group  (FSAG).  With  regard  to  financial  stability,  during  2016,  we
continued  to  work  for  drafting  a  comprehensive  framework  of  the  macro-prudential  policy  and
constructing macro-prudential instruments. This framework is based on recommendations of the
European Systemic Risk Board and standards of the Financial Stability Board.
Moreover, in accordance with its institutional mandate and responsibilities, the Bank of Albania is
tasked with safeguarding the stability of the banking system and addressing potential risks that
may jeopardise it.
The  main  financial  indicators  of  banking  sector  soundness  –  capitalization,  liquidity  and
profitability – show it has full capacity to withstand operational risks under normal conditions, as
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
well as good resilience against shocks.
The share of banking sector assets in the Gross Domestic Product was 95.8% at the end of
2016, up by around 4.5 percentage points from a year earlier. Credit and deposits rose by 2.5%
and 5.2%, respectively. In terms of capitalisation, the capital adequacy ratio stands significantly
above  the  regulatory  requirement.  It  stood  at  15.7%  for  2016,  against  the  12%  regulatory
requirement. Good capitalisation remains a characteristic feature of our banking system; it was
maintained  due  to  continued  positive  values  in  the  net  financial  result.  However,  the  financial
result of the system fell slightly during 2016, mainly reflecting the increase in provisioning for the
credit  risk.  The  increase  was  a  result  of  the  conservative  approach  adopted  by  the  Bank  of
Albania  requesting  banks  to  reclassify  under  non-performing  loans  those  of  certain  large
borrowers facing financial difficulties or a bankruptcy situation. The Return on Assets (ROA) of
the system fell to 0.7% from 1.2% a year earlier, whereas the Return on Equity (RoE) fell to 7.2%
from 13.2%.
In terms of risks, the Bank of Albania deems that the banking system’s exposure to liquidity risk
and market volatility is within acceptable parameters, but the management of such risk requires
on-going attention by the banking industry. In the meantime, credit risk is the main risk to which
the banking sector remains exposed. This risk becomes even more present as a result of its
persistence and continuous problems that banks face in the process of collateral enforcement.
Following the rise in non-performing loans in the first half of the year and their fall in the second
half, the ratio of non-performing loans to total loans fell to 18.2% at the end of 2016, at the same
level as in the previous year.
Therefore, the reduction of non-performing loans and creation of stimuli to boost sound lending
has been and remains a priority issue for us.
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  worked  in  several  aspects  to  address  this  problem. First,  the
assessment of the credit risk and the recoverability of non-performing loans have been subject to
intensive monitoring during our on-site examinations. In parallel, we have maintained a prudent
approach  in  assessing  lending  policies  and  practices  applied  by  banks. Second,  the  Bank  of
Albania has fulfilled its engagements under the National Plan for the Reduction of Non-performing
loans.
In this regard, the Bank of Albania has made regulatory amendments to clarify the concept of
non-performing  loans  write  off  and  the  administration  of  properties  taken  into  ownership  as  a
result of collateral enforcement. Moreover, the Bank of Albania has cooperated with the IMF to
review the regulatory framework about the licencing of companies that purchase bad debt. Third,
we have strengthened the regulatory and reporting requirements for banks as regards the due
management of credit risk, in accordance with European practices. Fourth, we have intensified
the  communication  with  the  banks  to  address  the  credit  portfolio  quality,  concerning  both  the
treatment of non-performing loan borrowers and loss loan write off. Fifth, the coordinative role of
the Bank of Albania has produced results in terms of restructuring borrowers exposed to more
than one bank and will continue in this year to prepare an interbank cooperation platform for a
solution to common borrowers; the Bank of Albania is drafting it in cooperation with World Bank’s
FinSAC project.
In our judgement, the steps taken insofar for resolving non-performing loans will contribute to a
fruitful  environment  to  boost  sustainable  and  sound  lending.  This  is  a  major  priority,  which
requires a multidimensional action matrix and a broad cooperation between state authorities and
the banking system.
In this aspect, the Bank of Albania drafted and promoted the signing of a joint Memorandum of
1
Understanding for the Sound Growth of Credit in Albania .
In the supervisory process, the Bank of Albania has supported the pursuit of pro-active policies
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
against potential risks, with regard to both the quality of the risk analysis performed by banks, and
the creation of adequate provisions.
internal  practices  and  capacities.  The  regulatory 
This new approach, introduced a year ago, has required amending the regulatory framework, as
well  as 
framework  and  respective
methodologies  are  drafted  pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  Basel  II,  and  in  accordance  with
European  Union  directives. About  regulatory  amendments,  I  would  like  to  highlight  two  of  the
most important ones, which have now taken the form of a law: The Law on the Functioning of
Savings and Loan Associations and their Unions and the Law on Recovery and Resolution in
Banks.  The  first  provided  for  a  comprehensive  revision  of  the  regulatory  framework  for  the
supervision  of  savings  and  loan  associations,  which  consists  in  respective  regulations  on
licencing and risk management in these institutions, as well as the reporting system about their
financial activity.
The second provides the Bank of Albania with the attributes of the Resolution Authority, through a
set  of  legal  instruments.  This  law  is  an  important  qualitative  step  towards  guarantees  for
safeguarding financial stability in Albania.
Moreover, in response to the negative events in the previous year, when the security related to
transportation  and  keeping  monetary  values  was  affected,  the  Bank  of Albania  has  urged  the
cooperation between banks and law enforcement authorities to take measures for eliminating the
deficiencies; it has added on-site inspections to examine the probability of occurrence of a risk;
and, has strengthened the regulatory framework for establishing criteria on the minimum physical
security.
Lastly, a good functioning of the financial system in general and the banking sector in particular
has been endorsed by efficient payment systems. The national payment systems operated by
the Bank of Albania have operated uninterruptedly and correctly. During 2016, we intensified our
work  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  electronic  payment  instruments,  and  reduce  the  use  of
cash  in  the  economy.  For  that  purpose,  in  accordance  with  EU  directives,  the  regulatory
framework on electronic payment instruments was revised.
Moreover, to fulfil the recommendations of the National Payments System Committee, a project
was finalised on the standardisation of the payment-order; meanwhile, the implementation of the
Interbank Direct Debit project is underway. It is aimed at increasing the use of this instrument by
the clients of all banks, contributing thus the reduction of cash in the economy.
In our judgement, the coordination of the monetary policy with the micro and macro-prudential
measures by the Bank of Albania has contributed to promoting monetary and financial stability.
4. Fostering internal control and monitoring systems and procedures
The last two years have seen important changes in terms of fostering internal control systems, in
order to bolster risk prevention. The internal audit at the Bank of Albania is an independent activity
from the management, ensured through the Inspector General, appointed by the Parliament. It
also contributes to a smooth operation and accountability at the Bank of Albania, assessing both
the control over processes and the efficiency in the use of resources.
The practices in control systems are approximated with international audit standards, and are
adopted to address recommendations by international institutions.
One of the recurring recommendations from these institutions pertains to the implementation of
the operational risk management at bank level. Started in the previous year, the realisation of this
project was finalised in 2016. Now, the Bank of Albania has an Operational Risk Management
Policy,  which  sets  out  the  core  principles  for  the  identification,  assessment,  control,
management and follow-up of the operational risk as an integrated process at bank level. We
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
have  also  established  a  dedicated  unit  for  evaluating  and  making  recommendations  for
addressing vulnerabilities.
The internal audit function acts also as a consultant service for the Supervisory Council. The
audit  engagements  focused  on:  (i)  issuing  opinions  on  the  sufficiency  of  internal  audits
established  by 
including  supportive
applications for the activities; (ii) issuing opinions on the accuracy and completeness of financial
data in periodic reports; and (iii) other audit and non-audit engagements, ad hoc, upon special
request by the Administrators or other institutions outside the Bank.
functions/processes, 
the  Management 
for  audited 
With added prudence on designing work processes by Bank units, at the beginning of 2017, a
project  started  on  the  implementation  of  the  Programme  on  the  Business  Continuity
Management  at  the  Bank  of Albania.  The  realisation  of  this  project  ranks  the  Bank  of Albania
among the banks applying best practices on institutional good governance.
5. Medium-term strategy and strengthening of independence, accountability and transparency
The  medium-term  development  strategy  of  the  Bank  of Albania  for  2016–18  was  launched  in
2016  to  activate  the  entire  potential  of  the  Bank  of  Albania.  This  document  sets  out  the
institutional objectives throughout a three-year period, 2016–2018, and identifies the measures
and sources needed to accomplish these objectives. The fulfilment of these objectives depends,
first of all, on how understandable we are to the public, how responsible we are in our policies
and actions, and how trustworthy we are to the public. Hence, enhancing the Bank of Albania’s
independence  is  always  considered  related  to  the  strengthening  of  transparency  and
accountability.
In terms of accountability, the Bank of Albania has regularly fulfilled the accountability obligations
to the Parliament, the financial system and the public. Also, information on the activity and results
of  the  Internal  Audit  Department  is  attached  to  the  Annual  Report  2016.  Also,  the  financial
statements and the opinion of the external independent auditor were an integral part of the Annual
Report,  in  compliance  with  the  International  Audit  Standards.  The  approval  of  the  financial
statements in compliance with the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS Standards)
was among the most important priorities of the Bank of Albania for 2015. The implementation of
this  priority  over  2016  met  the  legal  requirements  and  observed  the  internal  and  external
recommendations.
Transparent communication is an important pillar in Bank of Albania’s activity for both fulfilling the
responsibility  for  maximum  transparency  about  decision-making  and  its  effects,  and  raising
public confidence in the central bank. Following are some statistics:
Our official website is a place where the public may find complete and updated information
on the Bank of Albania, as well as on the economy and finances in Albania. During 2016, the
website  had  about  720  000  visitors,  who  viewed  our  page  around  2.100.000  times  and
browsed in total about 4.310.000 items.
Also, the Museum of the Bank of Albania was visited by 1900 visitors; while 1180 textbooks
“Personal finance in your hands”, were distributed in eight high schools.
Since the beginning of 2016, in compliance with Article 7 of the Law No. 119/2014 “On the right of
access  to  information”,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  compiled  and  published  the  Transparency
Program on its website. In this regard, we have assigned a coordinator and answered 65 official
requests and 120 requests delivered via electronic mail.
For nearly a decade now, the Bank of Albania has been committed to expanding and deepening
financial literacy of the public, focusing on the younger generation.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Although, the financial education of the public is not a legal obligation of the Bank of Albania, we
are  confident  on  the  positive  return  of  this  investment.  Two  are  the  main  goals  of  the
programmes,  activities  and  special  educational  publications  prepared  by  the  Bank  of Albania:
introducing the central bank, its functions and role to the public; and cultivating and strengthening
the financial literacy in society. In our view, financial literacy has become a necessity, taking into
consideration not only the level of economic, banking and technological development, but also
the importance and significance of information in today’s global setting.
Honourable Chair,
Honourable Members of the Committee,
 In conclusion, I would like to highlight that, over 2016, the Bank of Albania has showed initiative
and devotion in addressing the challenges we have faced. The positive results of our work show
that we are on the right direction.
Nevertheless, I think that for successful institutions there is always something more to do. They
are  guided  by  the  medium  and  long-term  objectives;  they  invest  to  enhance  the  professional
standards and increase their capacities though the preparation, strengthening of independence,
accountability,  transparency  and  good  governance.  This  credo  of  ours  will  be  a  guide  for  our
action plans in the future.
Thank you for your attention!
1
This Memorandum was signed by the Bank of Albania, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Economic Development,
Tourism, Trade and Entrepreneurship and the Albanian Association of Banks.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
