Viral  V  Acharya:  The  unfinished  ageda  -  restoring  public  sector
bank health in India
Speech by Dr Viral V Acharya, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 8th R K
Talwar Memorial Lecture, organised by the Indian Institute of Banking and Finance, Mumbai, 7
September 2017.
  I would like to thank Vaibhav Chaturvedi, B Nethaji and Vineet Srivastava for valuable inputs, as
well  as  my  co-authors,  Tim  Eisert,  Christian  Eufinger  and  Christian  Hirsch  (parts  of  the
Japanese and the European stories are based on joint work with them). All errors remain my
own. Views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the Reserve Bank of India.
Good  evening,  friends.  I  am  grateful  to  the  Indian  Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance  (IIBF)  for
inviting me to deliver the 8th R K Talwar Memorial Lecture. Every institution must remember,
venerate and celebrate the immense contributions of those who helped lay down and solidify its
character for future generations to build upon. Principles, careers and lives such as those of Mr
Talwar inspire us, as in Henry Wadsworth Longfellow’s The Psalm of Life:
Lives of great men all remind us
We can make our lives sublime,
And, departing, leave behind us
Footprints on the sands of time;
Footprints, that perhaps another,
Sailing o’er life’s solemn main,
A forlorn and shipwrecked brother,
Seeing, shall take heart again.
I hope that I can do some justice today to the rich legacy left behind by Mr Talwar, considered as
the State Bank of India (SBI)’s greatest Chairman, the father of Small Scale Industries in India, a
banker ahead of his times who put tremendous emphasis on a comprehensive credit appraisal
culture at SBI, and someone who had the courage to stand up against political pressure on his
bank to undertake targeted lending to undeserving borrowers (an episode recollected in a booklet
by another stalwart of Indian banking, Mr Narayanan Vaghul).
I was originally planning to speak on “Monetary Transmission in India: Issues and Possible
Remedies”, but I have since had a change of heart. The Reserve Bank’s internal committee on
improving monetary policy transmission will be finishing its report by the last week of September.
I should neither pre-judge nor pre-announce its findings. Therefore, and at the cost of belabouring
some  of  my  remarks  earlier  in  the  year,  I  will  focus  on  what  remains,  to  my  mind,  the  most
important  unfinished  agenda  in  the  journey  we  have  embarked  upon  to  resolve  our  stressed
assets problem, viz., that of restoring public sector bank health in India. I will indirectly end up
conveying why bank credit growth and transmission are weak at the present.
I would like to contend that a primary cause for the recent slowdown in our growth is the stress
on  the  banking  sector’s  balance-sheet,  especially  of  public  sector  banks.  As  Figures
A and B show using the Reserve Bank’s data, the stress in bank assets has been mounting
since  2011  and  has  now  materially  crystallized  in  the  form  of  non-performing  assets  (NPAs).
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Some  banks  are  under  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Prompt  Corrective Action  (PCA)  having  failed  to
meet asset-quality, capitalization and/or profitability thresholds; others meet these thresholds for
now but are precariously placed in case the provisioning cover for loan losses against their gross
non-performing assets (Figure C) is raised to international standards and made commensurate
with the low loan recoveries in India.
When bank balance-sheets are so weak, they cannot support healthy credit growth. Put simply,
under-capitalized banks have capital only to survive, not to grow; those banks barely meeting the
capital requirements will want to generate capital quickly, focusing on high interest margins at the
cost of high loan volumes. The resulting weak loan supply (see in Figure D, the steady decline in
loan  advances  growth  since  2011  for  public-sector  banks),  and  the  low  efficiency  of  financial
intermediation, have created significant headwinds for economic activity.
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
A decisive and adequate bank recapitalization, options for which I will lay out (again) at the end of
my remarks, is a critical intervention necessary to address this balance-sheet malaise.
In a recent study from the Bank for International Settlements, Leonardo Gambacorta and Hyun-
Song Shin (2016) document that bank capitalization has a strong effect on bank loan supply: a
one percentage point increase in a bank’s equity-to-total assets ratio is associated with a 0.6
percentage  point  increase  in  its  yearly  loan  growth.  In  fact,  if  a  banking  system  remains
systematically undercapitalized and new lending is not kept under a tight supervisory watch, then
the economy can suffer significantly from a credit misallocation problem, now commonly known
as  ‘loan  ever-greening’  or  ‘zombie  lending’.  In  particular,  undercapitalized  banks  have  an
incentive to roll over loans from financially struggling existing borrowers so as to avoid having to
declare  these  outstanding  loans  as  non-performing.  With  these  zombie  loans,  the  impaired
borrowers  acquire  enough  liquidity  to  be  able  to  meet  their  payments  on  outstanding  loans.
Banks  thus  avoid  the  short-run  outcome  that  these  borrowers  might  default  on  their  loan
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
payments, which would lower their net operating income, force them to raise provisioning levels,
and  increase  the  likelihood  of  them  violating  the  minimum  regulatory  capital  requirements.  By
ever-greening  these  loans,  banks  effectively  delay  taking  a  balance-sheet  hit,  while  taking  on
significant risk that their borrowers might not regain solvency and remain unable to repay, now
even larger loan payments. While unproductive firms receive subsidized credit to be just kept
alive, loan supply is shifted away from more creditworthy firms.
Adequate bank, more generally, financial intermediary, capitalization is thus a pre-requisite for
efficient  supply  and  allocation  of  credit.  Its  central  role  in  supporting  economic  growth  is
consistent with what other economies and regulators have experienced in the past episodes of
banking sector stress. I will cover briefly the Japanese crisis in the 1990s and early 2000s, and
the European crisis since 2009. Professor Ed Kane (1989), Boston College, had reached similar
conclusions for the United States based on the Savings and Loans crisis of the 1980s.
The Japanese story
In the early 1990s, a massive real estate bubble collapsed in Japan (see Figure 1). This caused
problems for Japanese banks in two ways: first, real estate assets were often used as collateral;
second,  banks  held  the  affected  assets  directly,  so  that  the  decline  in  asset  prices  had  an
immediate  impact  on  their  balance  sheets.  These  problems  in  the  banking  system  quickly
translated into negative real effects for borrowing firms along the lines I laid out above.
Subsequently, the Japanese government introduced several measures to stabilize the banking
sector and spur economic growth. Among these measures were a series of direct public capital
injections  into  impaired  banks,  mostly  in  the  form  of  preferred  equity  or  subordinated  debt.
However, as conclusively shown by Table 1from Takeo Hoshi and Anil Kashyap (2010), bulk of
the  injections  came  after  1999,  close  to  a  decade  after  the  collapse;  the  economic  scale  of
earlier recapitalizations was small relative to that of banking sector’s real estate exposure so that
these half-hearted measures failed to adequately recapitalize the Japanese banking sector.
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
In turn, this misallocation of loans translated into significant negative effects for the real economy.
Because  zombie  lending  kept  distressed  borrowers  alive  artificially,  the  respective  labor  and
supply markets remained congested; for example, product market prices were depressed and
market wages remained high. Sectoral capacity utilization also remained low, which destroyed
the  pricing  power  and  attractiveness  of  investments  for  healthy  firms  competing  in  the  same
sectors. Ricardo Caballero, Takeo Hoshi and Anil Kashyap (2008) showed that, as a result of
these spillover effects, healthy firms that were operating in industries with a high prevalence of
zombie  firms  had  lower  employment  and  investment  growth  than  healthy  firms  in  those
industries that did not suffer from zombie firm distortions. They estimated that due to the rise in
the number of zombie firms, typical non-zombie firm in the real estate industry experienced a
9.5% loss in employment and a whopping 28.4% loss in investment during the Japanese crisis
period.Joe Peek and Eric Rosengren (2005) were among the first to provide evidence that this
inadequate  recapitalization  of  the  Japanese  banking  sector  had  major  consequences  for  the
allocation of credit to the real economy. Specifically, they showed that firms were more likely to
receive additional loans if they were in fact in poor financial condition. They interpreted this finding
as  being  consistent  with  the  ‘zombie  lending’  incentives  of  undercapitalized  banks.  Figure
2 shows that the percentage of zombie firms increased from roughly 5% in 1991 to roughly 30%
in 1996. In related work, Mariassunta Giannetti and Andrei Simonov (2013) found that banks that
remained weakly capitalized after the introduction of the recapitalization programmes provided
loans to impaired borrowers, while well-capitalized banks increased credit to healthy firms. The
authors  estimated  that  the  credit  supply  to  healthy  firms  could  have  been  2.5  times  higher  in
1998 if banks had been recapitalized sufficiently.
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
The European story
In recent years, the Eurozone has been following a similar path to that of the Japanese economy
in the 1990s and early 2000s. Starting in 2009, countries on the periphery of the Eurozone drifted
into a severe sovereign debt crisis. At the peak of the European debt crisis, in 2012, anxiety over
excessive levels of national debt led to interest rates on government bonds issued by countries in
the European periphery that were considered unsustainable. For instance, from mid-2011 to mid-
2012, the spreads of Italian and Spanish 10-year government bonds increased by 200 and 250
basis points, respectively, relative to German government bonds. Since this deterioration in the
sovereigns’ creditworthiness fed back into the financial sector (Acharya et al, 2015), lending to
the  private  sector  contracted  substantially  in  Greece,  Ireland,  Italy,  Portugal,  and  Spain  (the
‘GIIPS’ countries), as shown in Figure 3. In Ireland, Spain, and Portugal, for example, the volume
of newly issued loans fell by 82%, 66%, and 45% over the 2008–13 period, respectively.
However, the impact of the European debt crisis on bank lending is more complex than in the
case of the Japanese banking crisis, which was mainly caused by the bursting of an asset price
bubble and the resulting impairment of banks’ financial health. While the European debt crisis
also  caused  a  hit  on  banks’  balance  sheets  due  to  the  substantial  losses  on  their  sovereign
bond-holdings, in addition it created gambling-for-resurrection incentives for weakly capitalized
banks  from  countries  in  the  European  periphery.  These  banks  sought  to  increase  their  risky
domestic sovereign bond-holdings even further as they were an attractive bet to rebuild capital
quickly  given  zero  risk-weights.  This  incentive  led  to  a  crowding-out  of  lending  to  the  real
economy, thereby intensifying the credit crunch (Acharya and Steffen, 2014).
This vicious cycle of poor bank health and sovereign indebtedness became a matter of great
concern for the European Central Bank (ECB), as this cycle endangered the monetary union as
a whole. As a result, the ECB began to introduce unconventional monetary policy measures to
stabilize the Eurozone and to restore trust in the periphery of Europe. Especially important in
restoring  trust  in  the  viability  of  the  Eurozone  was  the  ECB’s  Outright  Monetary  Transactions
(OMT) programme, which ECB President Mario Draghi announced in his famous speech in July
of 2012, saying that “the ECB is ready to do whatever it takes to preserve the euro. And believe
me, it will be enough.”
There  is  now  ample  empirical  evidence  that  the  announcement  of  the  OMT  programme
significantly lowered sovereign bond spreads, as shown by Figure 4. By substantially reducing
sovereign  yields,  the  OMT  programme  improved  the  asset  side,  the  capitalization,  and  the
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
access to financing of banks with large GIIPS sovereign debt holdings.
Due to its positive effect on banks’ capital, it was expected that the OMT announcement would
lead to an increase in bank loan supply, thus benefiting the real economy. However, when Mario
Draghi reflected on the impact of the OMT programme on the real economy during a speech in
November 2014, he noted that “[T]hese positive developments in the financial sphere have not
transferred  fully  into  the  economic  sphere.  The  economic  situation  in  the  euro  area  remains
difficult.  The  euro  area  exited  recession  in  the  second  quarter  of  2013,  but  underlying  growth
momentum  remains  weak.  Unemployment  is  only  falling  very  slowly. And  confidence  in  the
overall economic prospects is fragile and easily disrupted, feeding into low investment.”
An important reason why the positive financial developments did not fully transfer into economic
growth  is  as  follows: An  indirect  recapitalization  measure  like  the  OMT  programme  produced
Treasury gains for banks (much like our policy-rate cuts do); such a measure allows the central
bank to benefit banks that hold troublesome assets, but it does not tailor the recapitalization to
banks’ specific needs. As a result, some European banks remained significantly undercapitalized
from an economic standpoint even post-OMT.
In joint work with Tim Eisert, Christian Eufinger and Christian Hirsch (Acharya et al, 2016), I have
confirmed that zombie lending is indeed the likely explanation for why the OMT programme did
not fully translate into economic growth. Our study shows that banks that benefited more from
the announcement but remained nevertheless weakly capitalized, extended loans to existing low-
quality  borrowers  at  interest  rates  that  were  below  the  rates  paid  by  the  most  creditworthy
European  borrowers  (high-quality  public  borrowers  in  non-GIIPS  European  countries,  e.g.,
Germany), a strong indication of the zombie lending behaviour.
Such lending did not have a positive impact on real economic activity of the zombie firms: neither
investment,  nor  employment,  nor  return  on  assets  changed  significantly  for  firms  that  were
connected to the under-capitalized banks. Similar to the spillovers during the Japanese crisis, the
post-OMT rise in zombie firms had a negative impact on healthy firms operating in the same
industries  due  to  the  misallocation  of  loans  and  distorted  market  competition.  In  particular,
healthy firms in industries with an average increase in the proportion of zombie firms invested up
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
to  13%  less  capital  and  experienced  employment  growth  rates  that  were  about  4%  lower
compared  to  a  scenario  in  which  the  proportion  of  zombies  stayed  at  its  pre-OMT  level. At
extremis, for an industry in the 95th percentile increase in zombie firms, healthy firms invested
up to 40% less capital and experienced employment growth rates up to 15% lower.
The Indian story: Can we end it differently?
In many ways, the problems experienced in Japan and Europe have been rather similar. Both
regions went through a period of severe banking sector stress (although triggered by different
causes)  and  failed  to  adequately  recapitalize  their  struggling  banking  sectors.  Bank  and  other
stressed balance-sheet problems were neither fully recognized nor addressed expediently.
In Japan, a likely explanation for the cautious introduction of recapitalization measures is that the
authorities were afraid of strong public resistance when announcing large-scale recapitalization,
as  initial  smaller  support  measures  had  already  caused  public  outrage.  In  addition,  Japanese
officials generally feared sparking a panic on financial markets when disclosing more transparent
information about the health of banks.
In Europe, introducing proper recapitalization measures has been challenging due to the political
circumstances and constraints of the Eurozone. In contrast to a single country like Japan, 19
member  states  have  to  come  together  in  the  Eurozone  and  decide  on  a  particular  policy
measure. In addition, even if a particular policy is helping the Eurozone as a whole, it might not
be optimal for each individual country experiencing divergent economic outcomes.
While our initial conditions look ominously similar to these episodes and there are many parallels
with how things have played out at our end, we may be fortunate in not having many of these
constraints. Hence, I believe we can, we should, and in fact, we must do better. We are at a
substantially lower per-capita GDP than these countries and a sustained growth slowdown has
the potential to really hurt economic prospects of the common man.
With this overall objective, let me first turn to what I consider the positives of the balance-sheet
resolution agenda that the Reserve Bank and the Government of India have embarked upon. I will
then  highlight  the  unfinished  part  of  this  agenda  –  its Achilles’  heel  –  the  lack  of  a  clear  and
concrete plan for restoring public sector bank health.
Resolution of stressed assets
To address cross-bank information asymmetry and inconsistencies in asset classification, the
Reserve Bank created the Central Repository of Information on Large Credits (CRILC) in early
2014. To end the asset classification forbearance for restructured accounts, the Reserve Bank
announced  the Asset  Quality  Review  (AQR)  from April  1,  2015.  The  objective  was  to  get  the
banks  to  recognize  the  hitherto  masked  stress  in  their  balance  sheets.  The  AQR  is  now
complete. The Reserve Bank is neither denying the scale of the NPAs nor trying to forbear on
them. Instead, it is fully focused on resolving the assets recognized as NPAs.
In the absence of an effective, time-bound statutory resolution framework, various schemes were
introduced  by  the  Reserve  Bank  to  facilitate  viable  resolution  of  stressed  assets.  While  the
schemes were designed, and later modified, to address some of the specific issues flagged by
various stakeholders in individual deals, the final outcomes have not been too satisfactory. The
schemes were cherry-picked by banks to keep loan-loss provisions low rather than to resolve
stressed assets. It is in this context that enactment of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC)
in December 2016 can be considered to have significantly changed the rules of the game. It is
still early days but the number of bankruptcy cases which have been filed by operational as well
as financial creditors is encouraging. Many cases have been admitted and the 180 day clock
(extendable by further 90 days) for these cases to resolve has already started.
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
The promulgation of the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Ordinance 2017 (since notified as an
Act) and the subsequent actions taken thereunder, have made the IBC a lynchpin of the new
resolution framework. There were legitimate concerns that if the Reserve Bank directs banks to
file accounts under the IBC, it would enter the tricky domain of commercial judgments on specific
cases.  However,  the  approach  recommended  by  the  Internal  Advisory  Committee  (IAC)
constituted  by  the  Reserve  Bank  for  this  purpose  has  been  objective  and  has  allayed  these
misgivings.  The  IAC  recommended  that  the  Reserve  Bank  should  initially  focus  on  stressed
assets  which  are  large,  material  and  aged,  in  that  they  have  eluded  a  viable  resolution  plan
despite being classified as NPAs for a significant amount of time. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank
directed banks to file insolvency applications against 12 large accounts comprising about 25% of
the total NPAs. The Reserve Bank has now advised banks to resolve some of the other accounts
by December 2017; if banks fail to put in place a viable resolution plan within the timelines, these
cases also will be referred for resolution under the IBC.
The Reserve Bank has also advised banks to make higher provisions for these accounts to be
referred under the IBC. This is intended to improve bank provision coverage ratios (see Figure C)
and to ensure that banks are fully protected against likely losses in the resolution process. The
higher  regulatory  minimum  provisions  should  enable  banks  to  focus  on  what  the  borrowing
company  requires  to  turnaround  rather  than  on  narrowly  minimizing  their  own  balance-sheet
impacts. This should also help transition to higher, and more countercyclical, provisioning norms
in due course.
Going  forward,  the  Reserve  Bank  hopes  that  banks  utilize  the  IBC  extensively  and  file  for
insolvency proceedings on their own without waiting for regulatory directions. Ideally, in line with
international  best  practice,  out-of-court  restructuring  may  be  the  right  medicine  at  ‘pre-default’
stage, as soon as the first signs of incipient stress are evident or when covenants in bank loans
are tripped by the borrowers. Once a default happens, the IBC allows for filing for insolvency
proceedings,  time-bound  restructuring,  and  failing  that,  liquidation.  This  would  provide  the
sanctity that the payment ‘due date’ deserves and improve credit discipline all around, from bank
supply  as  well  as  borrower  demand  standpoints,  as  borrowers  might  lose  control  in  IBC  to
competing bidders.
Whither are we headed on restoring public sector bank health?
So far so good. Oft when on my couch I lie in vacant or in pensive mood, the realization that we
have put in place a process that not just addresses the current NPA issues, but is also likely to
serve as a blueprint for future resolutions, becomes the bliss of my solitude! A whole ecosystem
is  evolving  around  the  IBC  and  the  Reserve  Bank’s  steps  have  contributed  to  this  structural
reform. I smile and rest peacefully at night with this thought… But every few days, I wake up with
a sense of restlessness that time is running out; we have created a due process for stressed
assets to resolve but there is no concrete plan in place for public sector bank balance-sheets;
how  will  they  withstand  the  losses  during  resolution  and  yet  have  enough  capital  buffers  to
intermediate well the huge proportion of economy’s savings that they receive as deposits; can
we end the Indian story differently from that of Japan and Europe?
to  52  per  cent 
The  Government  of  India  has  been  infusing  capital  on  a  regular  basis  into  the  public  sector
banks,  to  enable  them  to  meet  regulatory  capital  requirements  and  maintain  the  government
stake in the PSBs at a benchmark level (set at 58 per cent in December 2010, but subsequently
lowered 
the  Government  announced
the “Indradhanush” plan to revamp the public sector banks. As part of that plan, a program of
capitalization  to  ensure  the  public-sector  banks  remain  BASEL  –  III  compliant  was  also
announced. However, given the correctly recognized scale of NPAs in the books of public sector
banks and the lower internal capital augmentation given their tepid, now almost moribund, credit
growth, substantial additional capital infusion is almost surely required. This is necessary even
after tapping into other avenues, including the sale of non-core assets, raising of public equity,
in  December  2014). 
In  2015, 
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
and divestments by the government.
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs has recently authorised an Alternative Mechanism
to take decision on the divestment in respect of public sector banks through exchange-traded
funds or other methods subject to the government retaining 52% stake. Synergistic mergers may
also  be  part  of  the  broader  scheme  of  things.  The  Union  Cabinet  has  also  authorized  an
Alternative  Mechanism  for  approving  amalgamation  of  public  sector  banks.  The  framework
envisages 
the  Bank  Boards  based  on  commercial
considerations, which will be considered for in-principle approval by the Alternative Mechanism.
This could provide an opportunity to strengthen the balance sheets, management and boards of
banks and enable capital raising by the amalgamated entity from the market at better valuations
in case synergies eventually materialize.
initiation  of  merger  proposal  by 
All of this is good in principle. There are several options on the table and they would have to work
together to address various constraints. What worries me however is the glacial pace at which
all this is happening.
Having embarked on the NPA resolution process, indeed having catalysed the likely haircuts on
banks, can we delay the bank resolution process any further?
Can  we  articulate  a  feasible  plan  to  address  the  massive  recapitalization  need  of  banks  and
publicly announce this plan to provide clarity to investors and restore confidence in the markets
about our banking system?
Why  aren’t  the  bank  board  approvals  of  public  capital  raising  leading  to  immediate  equity
issuances  at  a  time  when  liquidity  chasing  stock  markets  is  plentiful?  What  are  the  bank
chairmen waiting for, the elusive improvement in market-to-book which will happen only with a
better capital structure and could get impaired by further growth shocks to the economy in the
meantime?
Can the government divest its stakes in public sector banks right away, to 52%? And, for banks
whose losses are so large that divestment to 52% won’t suffice, how do we tackle the issue?
Can the valuable and sizable deposit franchises be sold off to private capital providers so that
they can operate as healthy entities rather than be in the intensive care unit under the Reserve
Bank’s Prompt Corrective Action (PCA)? Can we start with the relatively smaller banks under
PCA as test cases for a decisive overhaul?
These questions keep me awake at nights. I fear time is running out. I worry for the small scale
industries  that  Mr  Talwar  cared  the  most  about,  which  are  reliant  on  relationship-based  bank
credit. The Indradhanush was a good plan, but to end the Indian story differently, we need soon a
much more powerful plan – “Sudarshan Chakra” – aimed at swiftly, within months if not weeks,
for restoring public sector bank health, in current ownership structure or otherwise.
References
Acharya, V.V., T. Eisert, C. Eufinger, and C.W Hirsch (2015), ‘Real effects of the sovereign debt
crisis in Europe: Evidence from syndicated loans’, CEPR Discussion Paper No 10108.
Acharya, V.V., T. Eisert, C. Eufinger, and C.W. Hirsch (2016), ‘Whatever it takes: The real effects
of  unconventional  monetary  policy’,  Working  Paper,  New  York  University  Stern  School  of
Business.
Acharya, V.V. and S. Steffen (2014), ‘The greatest carry trade ever? Understanding Eurozone
bank risks’, Journal of Financial Economics 115, 215–36.
Bain & Co and Institute of International Finance (IIF) (2013), Restoring Financing and Growth to
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Europe’s SMEs, Washington, DC.
Caballero, R.J, T. Hoshi, and A.K. Kashyap (2008), ‘Zombie lending and depressed restructuring
in Japan’, The American Economic Review 98(5), 1943–77.
Gambacorta, L. and H.S. Shin (2016), ‘Why bank capital matters for monetary policy’, Working
Paper.
Giannetti, M. and A. Simonov (2013), ‘On the real effects of bank bailouts: Micro evidence from
Japan’, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5, 135–67.
Hoshi, T. and A.K. Kashyap (2010), ‘Will the U.S. bank recapitalization succeed? Eight lessons
from Japan’, Journal of Financial Economics 97, 398–417.
Kane,  E.J  (1989),  The  S  &  L  insurance  mess:  how  did  it  happen?  Washington,  DC:  Urban
Institute.
Peek,  J.  and  E.S.  Rosengren  (2005),  ‘Unnatural  selection:  Perverse  incentives  and  the
misallocation of credit in Japan’, American Economic Review 95, 1144–1166.
Wilcox, J.A. (2008), ‘Why the US won’t have a “lost decade”’, Working Paper.
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
