Yves  Mersch:  Remarks  on  the  future  of  economic  governance  in
Europe and the euro
Introductory  address  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central  Bank,  at  the  panel  “The Agenda  for  Europe”,  at Ambrosetti's  Finance  Forum  on  “The
Outlook for the Economy and Finance”, Villa d’Este, Cernobbio, 8 April 2017.
 In a year of anniversaries – the sixtieth anniversary of the Rome Treaty and the twenty-
fifth anniversary of the Maastricht Treaty –, our Union finds itself amidst a debate about
its raison d’être and its future.
Earlier this week, the EU commission discussed in Strasbourg “a road map towards a complete
Economic and Monetary Union in 2025” as part of a “reflection paper”.
In January, the high-level group on own resources (HLGOR) chaired by Mario Monti has been
presented  in  the  European  Parliament  and  in  the  Council.  It  is  reflecting  on  finding  more
transparent, simple, fair and democratically accountable ways to finance the EU.
And  we  are  approaching  the  second  stage  of  the  “Five  Presidents’  report”  with  the  aim  of
completing the architecture of Economic and Monetary Union.
As a central banker, I will focus on the state of economic governance in Europe. I will first share
some considerations on what has been achieved so far. I will then discuss how we could further
improve the functioning of our Economic and Monetary Union in the future and invigorate trust
and support from European citizens.
The key role of monetary policy in stabilising the euro area economy
As the central bank issuing the euro, we are responsible for the stability of the single
currency. Our monetary policy measures played a key role in stabilising the European economy.
The  European  Central  Bank  acted  decisively  by  deploying  a  range  of  conventional  and
unconventional  monetary  policy  measures,  allowing  to  reduce  financial  fragmentation,  avoid
deflation, and support price stability and thereby the economic recovery.
While  an  effective  lower  bound  for  short-term  interest  rates  exists,  monetary  policy,
shifted  to  steering  medium  to  long-term  rates  despite  of  its  higher  dependency  on
international  capital  markets. The ECB employed non-standard measures including forward
guidance and asset purchases to deal with the lower bound constraint. These instruments have
been effective in narrowing spreads (term and liquidity premia) and lowering the exchange rates,
thus supporting the ongoing recovery.
Shortcomings in other policy fields delayed the recovery
The  economic  outlook  has  significantly  improved  since  the  peak  of  the  crisis.  The
recovery has strengthened and broadened across sectors and countries and the balance of risks
is within a whisker of being called balanced. Growth of GDP per capita was in fact higher in the
euro area last year than in any other major advanced economies in the G7. And unemployment
has declined to 9.5% in February 2017, the lowest level since May 2009. The output gap should
be closing within the policy horizon; NAIRU at the same time has been revised downwards – for
those who love unobservables.
But to reap the full benefits of our monetary policy, it needs to be complemented by
sound economic and fiscal policies at national and European level. To the extent that fiscal
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
and  economic  policies  did  not  provide  the  necessary  cyclical  support  and  tackle  decisively
enough structural drivers of the crisis, the monetary policy reaction is more extended and forceful
with  the  negative  consequences  as  would  have  been  the  case  in  a  healthier  environment.
Therefore,  there  is  a  need  to  improve  economic  and  fiscal  policies.  This  implies  both  more
decisive action by national governments and full implementation of the strengthened institutional
framework of Economic and Monetary Union.
The improved financial and economic architecture of EMU
Since the onset of the crisis, many of the shortcomings in the financial and economic
architecture of Economic and Monetary Union have indeed been overcome.
Economic  governance  has  been  strengthened  by  enhancing  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact
whilst  introducing  a  framework  for  macroeconomic  surveillance  to  identify  and  address
macroeconomic imbalances as well as declining competitiveness through the so-called six-pack
and two-pack. Further steps were also taken towards improving budgetary coordination among
Member States. However, the preventive arm of the Stability and Growth Pact has proven to be
dysfunctional.
The creation of the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) provided a tool for crisis resolution at
European level.
The  establishment  of Banking Union  was  a  further  essential  step  for  safeguarding  financial
stability in Europe.
Regarding  the  regulatory  treatment  of  sovereign  exposures,  it  was  agreed  to  await  the
outcomes of the Basel Committee. Following the work of the Basel Committee the Council
will consider possible next steps in the European context.
In the long run we certainly need to realize that a zero-risk weight for sovereign cannot hold a
reality check.
Moreover, the acknowledgement of sovereign debt restructuring as a real possibility requires
deeper reflections on sovereign debt restructuring mechanism for the euro area and would
underpin  the  credibility  on  of  the  no  bailout  clause.  As  experience  has  shown,  “the
constructive  ambiguity”  with  respect  to  the  market  interpretation  of  the  no  bailout  clause
embedded in the Treaties has not really been effective. The ESM could play a larger role in
this respect.
Capital Markets Union is a natural complement to the Banking Union. It aims at promoting
financial integration and enhancing shock absorption via financial markets by facilitating private
risk-sharing whilst reducing opportunities for regulatory arbitrage. CMU should also support the
smooth and homogenous transmission of monetary policy.
A  number  of  concrete  measures  are  listed  in  the  Commission’s  Action  Plan  to  strengthen:
Securitisation,  insolvency  regimes,  and  tax  legislation  need  to  be  prioritised.  Cross-border
barriers to clearing and settlement should be removed.
I welcome the commission’s communication on accelerating the CMU. Swift implementation is of
the essence.
Implementation of promises and adherence to new rules is key
As a result of these measures, our economic and monetary union is considerably more
resilient today than it was at the peak of the crisis. The strengthening of the recovery in the
past  year,  in  spite  of  challenges  on  several  fronts,  is  testimony  to  that.  Yet  the  strengthened
framework  can  only  deliver  stability  over  the  longer  term  if  national  governments  keep  their
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
promises and adhere to the rules. For economic and fiscal policies this means:
Structural  reforms  are  necessary  to  raise  productivity  and  improve  the  business
environment. Fiscal policies should be designed so that they support the economic recovery
by focussing on productivity-enhancing measures.
At the same time, fiscal rules need to be respected to build confidence in the sustainability of
national finances.
More decisive action by national governments and respect for the rules that we have
commonly  agreed  on  is  essential  for  a  stronger  and  safer  Economic  and  Monetary
Union. It is also a vital prerequisite for any further move towards shared fiscal sovereignty in the
euro area.
The Five Presidents’ report has outlined a vision for improving the architecture of EMU
and provides a roadmap for completing political and fiscal union. Let me share with you
some considerations on frequently floated ideas:
In  the  long  run,  sound  fiscal  policies  at  national  level  could  be  accompanied  by  the
establishment of a euro area fiscal capacity with own resources, central control of spending
and  democratic  control  on  the  European  level.  This  would  provide  a  European  automatic
stabiliser and could allow financing European public goods. This would lead in the direction
of the practice of federations, where spending on functions such as defence or R&D is to a
large extent centralised. This however would require Treaty changes and raises the question
about a Transfer Union. For both, the appetite of governments and people is currently very
low.
Furthermore, a pooling of  fiscal  resources,  whatever  their  nature  and  size  might  be,  only
works  if  solidarity  goes  hand  in  hand  with  shared  responsibility.  Likewise,  greater  risk
sharing  in  the  fiscal  realm  presupposes  sufficient  economic  convergence  among
participating countries and the sustainability of public finances.
And  where  competences  are  assigned  to  the  European  level,  they  should  be  part  of  the
Union  method,  with  clear  executive  powers,  full  democratic  accountability  and  rigorous
judicial  arrangements.  Conversely,  we  should  avoid  creating  the  wrong  impression  about
what the Union can do: loose coordination at European level may give the impression that a
competence  has  been  passed  to  the  European  level,  when  in  fact  it  continues  to  be
dominated by the power play among Member States which is a pattern that has consistently
failed to pacify the European continent. This perceived ineffectiveness further contributes to
the  loss  of  trust  and  credibility  of  EU  institutions.  Therefore,  responsibilities  and
accountability  should  be  more  clearly  defined  and  aligned,  similar  to  the  monetary  policy
framework.
I am aware that the attention of our policy-makers currently lies more on security needs
than completing Economic and Monetary Union. Some of these proposals may also require
Treaty change for which there may be little appetite at the moment.
But we should also not forget that Europe will be better able to protect itself if it has a
strong  economy  allowing  it  to  address  the  concerns  of  Europeans.  Ultimately,  stability,
prosperity and security are interlinked. Not only between these three objectives of the Union but
also  across  European  countries.  We  have  common  interests  –  and  also  common  values  –,
which  means  there  is  no  reason  we  should  not  see  our  identity  and  sovereignty  as  also
European.
Thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
