François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  European  Central  Bank  monetary
policy and the resilience of the eurozone
Speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  Columbia
University, New York City, 19 April 2017.
Accompanying slides.
 I am grateful to P. Antipa, L. Py, T. Mouakil, F. Haas, Ph. Andrade, B. Mojon and M. Dujardin for
their assistance in preparing these remarks.
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  Columbia  University  and  your  School  of  International  and  Public
Affairs (SIPA). Columbia University is well-known as an institution of excellence. What might be
less well-known is that Columbia has a unique relationship with France and with my institution,
the Banque de France. Let me say from the outset that I will not comment on the current events
in  France  and  on  our  presidential  election:  I  would  just  like  to  remind  you  that  there  are  two
rounds, the first one on Sunday and the second one on 7 May. Especially in moments like these,
it is worth looking past the present, with a long-term view.
The Maison Française on the campus was created 100 years ago. Your French department is
one of the best in the United States. Moreover, the Banque de France has always followed very
closely and valued Columbia academic production, including two concepts that I will use today:
the research of Robert Mundell on Optimal Currency Areas and the research of Mike Woodford
on Forward Guidance. Lastly, Patricia Mosser, now a Senior Research Scholar here at SIPA,
used  to  work  at  the  New  York  Fed,  and  a  number  of  Banque  de  France  staff  have  had  the
privilege  of  working  with  her  over  the  years.  So,  Patricia,  allow  me  to  thank  you  warmly  for
organising  this  lecture  on  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  and  the  resilience  of  the  Eurozone.  In
Europe, the euro construction process is pretty well-known, while the ECB monetary policy is
often debated. In the United States, it may be the reverse: the monetary policy is often better
understood than the euro construction process. Thus I will deal successively with both issues
before turning to the future and a call for action in Europe.
1. The euro has strong foundations.
Political foundations
As you know, the single currency was officially launched with the Maastricht Treaty in 1992 and
introduced  in  1999.  But Maastricht  and  the  euro  are  naturally part of a broader history:  the
history of Europe, and its singular achievement of making the transition from war to peace. As
early as 1946, Josef Müller, who was a leading figure in the German resistance to the Nazis and
the  founder  of  the  Bavarian  CSU,  acknowledged  that  “we  need[ed]  a  European  currency,
because countries that share a currency will never be at war”. The euro has indeed provided us
with  a  strong  symbol  of  unity  among  European  nations. It  is  true  that  there  is  currently  some
euro-skepticism and a surge of populism, but, [slide] a clear majority of euro area citizens
support the euro today. This is the case in all member states despite the severe economic
downturns  that  some  countries  have  experienced.  From  12  at  the  start,  the  number  of
participating countries has risen to 19 today. 7 additional countries have decided to join the euro
since 1999 – the most recent one being Lithuania in 2015 –, and none has wanted to leave it. The
euro is not a technocratic utopia: it is a political and democratic decision, supported 25 years on,
with hindsight, by a clear majority of citizens.
Economic and institutional foundations
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Our foundations are partly political; but the European edifice has also sound economic and
institutional foundations.
When  reflecting  on  the  euro  at  Columbia  University,  the  first  thinker  who  comes  to  mind  is
naturally Robert Mundell and his theory of Optimal Currency Areas which has been used by
numerous  economists  to  analyse  the  European  Monetary  Union  and  its  chances  of  success.
Mundell  himself  has  remained  an  ardent  supporter  of  the  euro.   He  put  forward  a  number  of
theoretical arguments to respond to the critics – including financial integration and capital mobility
–, although recognising that  the  EMU  remains  suboptimal  (like,  to  some  extent,  the American
monetary union). As Mundell said in 2012: “The euro is more than just the icing on the cake on
the single European market and the European Union (EU), it is the glue that keeps the core of
Europe together.”
1
Still,  an  argument  frequently  heard  against  the  euro  is  that  a  currency  cannot  exist  without  a
state. True, the government prerogative of coinage came to be accepted as an essential attribute
of sovereignty, tying the state to the money supply; but actually the state may manipulate the unit
of  account  to  the  benefit  of  its  own  finances,  for  instance  by  monetising  the  debt,  and  such
manipulations  were  not  always,  to  say  the  least,  in  the  interest  of  the  people. As  a  result,  it
seems to me that the key ingredient of monetary stability is not the state but the independence
and credibility of the issuing institution: the central bank – and this principle is firmly established in
the euro area, as well as in French law for the Banque de France.
However, safeguarding our independence requires more than a series of legal provisions. As any
political construct, the euro will thrive if and only if the citizens of the euro area member states
are convinced that the Eurosystem delivers, year after year, on its mandate, which is to preserve
price  stability.  This  is  also  the  reason  why  we  are  subject  to accountability rules,  requiring
regular testimonies to the representation of EU citizens, namely the European Parliament and
the  National  Parliaments,  and  the  publication  of  our  minutes  and  our  results.  In  a  nutshell,
independence ensures that the ECB can act in line with its mandate. Accountability ensures that
the ECB does act in line with its mandate.
Economic benefits of the euro
The fact is the euro has already delivered material benefits. Let me mention three of them.
First,  in  line  with  our  mandate,  inflation  has  been  kept  under  control.  This  directly  benefits
household purchasing power and helps build confidence in the value of the currency. Let us take
a  historical  perspective.  [slide]  In  the  18  years  preceding  the  introduction  of  the  euro  (1981–
1998), inflation gradually declined but remained at 4.6% on average, with major disparities across
countries.  In  the  18  years  since  the  euro  (1999–2016),  inflation  has  been  much  more  stable,
averaging 1.7%, and the disparities across countries have narrowed.
Second [slide], better controlled inflation means a lower cost of financing, because it reduces risk
premia. All economic players benefit from lower interest rates: households, when they purchase
a property, companies when they invest, but also governments and hence taxpayers. Spreads
may temporarily react to political uncertainties, but remaining in the euro continues to be our best
protection against such fluctuations.
Third,  the  euro  has  helped  consolidate  the  European  single  market,  by  eliminating  currency
fluctuations for corporates, simplifying day-to-day life for citizens and promoting capital market
integration. Moreover, the economic size of the euro area and the stability of its currency have
enabled  the  euro  to  play  an  important  international  role.  Today,  the  euro  accounts  for  20%  of
international  reserves,  second  only  to  the  dollar.  An  internationally  recognised  currency
generates  economic  gains:  financial  markets  are  more  attractive  to  domestic  and  foreign
investors, more liquid, and thus more efficient. But it also carries a political weight: when Mario
Draghi  speaks  at  the  G20,  the  whole  world  listens  to  Europe  attentively,  just  as  when  Janet
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Yellen speaks for the United States.
Overall,  this  list  of  benefits  is  impressive,  particularly  when  you  think  that  the  euro  is  only  18
years  old.  More  importantly,  we  have  come  this  far  despite  the  global  financial  crisis,  which
triggered the deepest recession in three generations, and despite the euro area sovereign debt
crisis a few years later.
2. Let me now turn to monetary policy: the euro has passed the stress test of the crises.
a. Monetary policy
Successful crisis management
The Eurosystem has deployed an innovative and resolute monetary policy strategy, which
has helped stabilise the euro area economy and reduce the costs of crises. Let me briefly recall
what we have done [slide]. We had first to face, like you, the consequences of the collapse of
Lehman  Brothers.  Like  many  other  central  banks,  we  reacted  promptly  by  offering  unlimited
liquidity  to  financial  intermediaries,  sharply  lowering  our  main  refinancing  rate  and  providing
international swap lines. Yet, this was only our first challenge. The Lehman episode paved the
way for the euro  area  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  its  amplification  through  the  “bank-sovereign”
nexus. To counter these centrifugal forces, we notably launched an unlimited provision of liquidity
for a maturity of three years at our main refinancing rate and against a larger range of eligible
collateral  in  December  2011.  Proof  of  our  credibility  in  keeping  Mario  Draghi’s  word  to  do
“whatever it takes to preserve the euro” (July 2012), the simple announcement of our Outright
Monetary Transactions programme was sufficient to alleviate financial market strains.
More recently, beginning 2014, we had to react to the risk of sliding into deflation, which was
due to a combination of factors: the slowdown in global growth, the collapse of commodity prices
and the persistent weakness in domestic demand. That is why we implemented a set of vigorous
measures, including three main ingredients: asset purchases, forward guidance – both of which
are measures that the Fed also put in place – and negative interest rates. The asset purchase
programme – or QE – included first private debt instruments and then also public sector debt.
Since April 2017, and till December 2017, purchases amount to EUR 60 billion per month, having
been  reduced  from  EUR  80  billion.  The  perhaps  most  unconventional  policy  is  the  use  of
negative interest rates. I emphasise this measure as the most unconventional because for most
people, as well as in all economic models that I am aware of, nominal interest rates are positive.
The ECB’s Governing Council made the decision to put in place negative interest rates on their
deposit facility (DFR) in June 2014 and to lower them to their current level of –0.4% in order to
further ease monetary and financial conditions.  Perhaps  precisely  because  taking  such  steps
was unusual, they helped us convince markets that our commitment to our mandate was very
firm. On the other hand, negative interest rates clearly have limitations: they are difficult to accept
by households and SMEs, and so impossible in practice to pass through to them. And thus they
are  believed  by  many  to  deteriorate  the  profitability  of  financial  intermediation.  We  monitor
carefully that maintaining our DFR at its current level does not lead banks to reduce their supply
of credit.
What effects?
I very much believe that our package of non-standard measures has worked and still continues
to do so. Inflation is gradually recovering towards our target of below but close to 2% over the
medium term: as of March 2017, the year on year euro area HICP inflation is 1.5%. It was only
0.2%  in  2016. Financial  conditions  have  eased  considerably [slide].  According  to  our  in-
house assessment, our monetary policy has contributed to a decline of about 100 bp in long-
term interest rates. This is very significant. In normal times, we could have needed a cumulated
decline in the short-term interest rate of about 3%  to bring about such a reduction in the long
2
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
term interest rate. We have also seen a significant cut in bank retail interest rates combined with
a rise in loan volumes. Since 2014, bank lending rates to firms have dropped by more than 100
bp on average in the euro area [and by as much as 130 bp in Italy; and the spread between Italy
and France decreased by 60 bp between January 2014 and February 2017]. The growth rate of
bank loans to non-financial corporates has increased from –4% in late 2013 to +2% today. Bank
loans  to  households  have  also  gone  from  negative  to  positive  growth  rates.  In  addition, the
economic recovery is currently firming and broadening. Growth has been steady for, as I
speak, 14 quarters in a row and 5 million jobs have been created since mid-2013 in the euro
area, although unemployment is still too high at 9.6%. This recovery is neither fast nor vibrant
enough but it has prevailed in spite of a number of global and domestic shocks. [slide] Growth in
the euro area was slightly higher than in the United States in 2016, and should not be very far off
in 2017.
Next steps for monetary policy
So what should we do next? It is clear that the current macroeconomic environment does not
call for a recalibration. Our current monetary policy stance remains fully appropriate based
on current information, as Mario Draghi has stressed, and should not be adjusted before we
see more concrete signs that inflation can be sustained at levels closer to our target. For the
future,  on  the  most  appropriate  way  to  reduce  the  intensity  of  our  accommodation  when  it
becomes  warranted,  two  principles  should  in  my  view  guide  us:  these  are prudence  and
effectiveness.
We need to be prudent, because the recovery is still fragile. This amounts to asking whether the
adjustment of inflation towards our target of below, but close to, 2% would continue without our
monetary  stimulus. At  present,  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  does  not  think  this  is  the  case.
Underlying inflation, without oil and food prices, remains below 1% and should, according to our
forecasts, gradually pick up to 1.8% in 2019 according to the pace of wage increases.
We also need to be effective, in the sense that, among our combination of various instruments,
we should withdraw last the measures that are mostneeded to secure a sustained adjustment in
the path of inflation consistent with our target. We will continue to assess the situation with great
pragmatism. There is no predefined split between the doves and the hawks on the Governing
Council, as is sometimes claimed. I am confident that our future strategy, as the present one, will
be the result of a collective discussion and a cohesive decision.
b. Institutional framework
In  parallel,  the  institutional  framework  of  the  euro  area  has  been  improved  in  response  to  the
crisis. Member states have secured key steps to reinforce the resilience of the euro area for the
future. With the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) introduced in October 2012, they have
established  a  powerful  crisis  management  mechanism  for  the  euro  area.  With  its  effective
lending capacity of EUR 500 billion, this backstop gives euro area countries in distress time to
implement measures to restore fiscal sustainability, competitiveness and financial stability in the
medium  term.  Besides  the  ESM,  the Banking  Union  is  a  major  progress  towards  further
European  financial  integration  and  therefore  a  more  performant  currency  union.  It  is  now
operational,  based  on  two  pillars.  The  first  one,  since  end  2014,  is  the Single  Supervisory
Mechanism. It gives the ECB the responsibility, in cooperation with the national supervisors, to
oversee  banking  supervision  in  the  euro  area,  and  ensure  the  consistent  application  of
regulations  across  the  region.  The  second  pillar,  since  January  2016:  the Single  Resolution
Mechanism. It ensures that banks across the euro area can be resolved according to the same
rules and with minimal costs for taxpayers and to the real economy. 
Yet, we also have to look at what is still to be done. Further important steps for the Banking Union
are under discussion, with a priority to completing an efficient resolution pillar. Moreover, there
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
are still some issues with certain banks, in particular regarding non-performing loans in Italy and
Portugal. These are manageable but now need to be addressed seriously and quickly. That said,
we should not judge the European financial sector only on the basis of its difficult cases, or those
“trailing at the rear”. Overall the euro area banking system is now far more resilient: in terms of
capital for instance, the Common Equity Tier 1 ratio of significant euro area banking groups has
risen from less than 7% in 2008 to more than 14% today. In this context, and within the banking
union framework, we need to allow more cross-border bank mergers. These will enable banks to
better shift savings across national borders towards where investment needs are. And obviously
we should preserve and complete international financial regulation on both sides of the Atlantic.
Cooperation  on  regulation  has  been  a  win-win  game.  Competition  on  regulation  would  be  a
destructive one.
3. How I see the future of the euro area: a call for action.
This leads me to the question of the future of the euro area. Let me be blunt here: I see it as
promising, if we act. Obviously there are challenges today, be they domestic – euroskepticism
and unemployment – or global – uncertainty in the West (US and UK) as well as in the East. But I
am convinced that the answer to the current challenges is not “less Europe”. Less Europe would
be a mistake if we want to remain in control of our common destiny. That said, there is room for
further improvement, for a “better Europe”. Twenty-five years ago, we spoke of an “Economic
and Monetary Union”. Since then, we have made a success of Monetary Union, but we have not
been very effective with regard to Economic Union. The rather good economic performance in
the  euro  area  on  average  still  conceals  individual  heterogeneities.  [slide]  And  so,  first  and
foremost, some countries, like France and Italy, need to accelerate domestic structural reforms
to  improve  the  functioning  and  flexibility  of  their  economies. And  let  me  be  clear,  it  is  in  our
national interest: we currently have lower economic growth and employment than some of our
neighbours, such as Germany, Spain and the Netherlands, which have succeeded in carrying
out the necessary reforms.
In order to achieve a “better Europe”, we need to complete these domestic reforms with what I
call the “growth triangle” [slide]. It calls, at European level, for two concrete projects, in addition to
domestic  reforms:  a  “Financing  Union  for  Investment  and  Innovation”  (FUII)  and  a  collective
economic strategy.
The  first  project,  to  be  started  immediately,  is a  “Financing  Union  for  Investment  and
Innovation”,  because  the  financial  crisis  has  led  to  a  persistent  “investment  crunch”  at  the
European  level. And yet it is not for lack of resources: the euro area has a savings surplus of
more than EUR 350 billion, equivalent to more than 3% of GDP. That is huge. Several initiatives
are  already  in  place: the  investment  Plan  of  the  European  Commission  (“Juncker  plan”),  the
Capital  Markets  Union  and  the  Banking  Union  which  is  now  underway;  but  they  do  no  deliver
sufficient results. It is now necessary to make these initiatives converge into the FUII. Europe
needs  a  better  sharing  of  private  sector  risk,  in  order  to  channel  its  abundant  savings  more
effectively  towards  productive  investment.  And  the  equity  financing  of  businesses,  across
European borders, must be a priority. Europe is lagging far behind in this area: such financing
only represents 67% of GDP in the euro area compared with 125% in the United States.
The second project, on which we could make progress after the French and German elections
that will take place this year, is a collective economic strategy in the euro area. Growth and
employment will be stronger in Europe if we combine more structural reforms where they are a
priority – in France and Italy for instance –, and more fiscal or wage support in countries with
room for manoeuvre – Germany and the Netherlands.In practice, for such a collective economic
strategy to exist, the euro area needs to overcome the current sense of distrust; it needs what I
would  call  “a  trust  deal”.  This  is  why  I  have  proposed,  as  have  others,  the  creation  of  an
institution to foster confidence, which could consist of a euro area “finance minister”.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Let me conclude. Jacques Delors, who was President of the European Commission in the late
1980s  –  early  1990s,  used  to  say  that  in  Europe  “we  don’t  just  need  firefighters,  we  need
architects”. The Eurosystem has been a very efficient firefighter during the crisis and is doing its
best to contribute, within its mandate, to building a more dynamic growth path for the euro area,
through  its  monetary  policy.  However,  the  success  of  monetary  policy  still  needs  to  be
complemented with a genuine economic union to achieve the European project. This is now the
responsibility of the architects, including the next governments in France and Germany.
1
2
business.financialpost.com/fp-comment/robert-mundell-euro-is-here...
If we take the rule of thumb once used by John Williams, the President of the SF Fed.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
