Stephen S Poloz: Unveiling of Commemorative Bank Note marking
the 150th Anniversary of Canada
Remarks  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  unveiling  of  the
Commemorative Bank Note Marking the 150th Anniversary of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 7 April
2017.
 We  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  are  proud  to  have  produced  this  special  note  commemorating
Canada’s 150th anniversary. We’ve only ever produced three other such bank notes in our 82-
year history, so believe me when I say this is a big deal.
Developing  any  bank  note  is  a  long  and  involved  process,  especially  so  with  this  one.  We’ve
been  working  on  it  since  2014,  and  more  than  5,000  individual  Canadians  have  fed  into  the
process. We asked them if they wanted to see the past, the present or the future on the note. In
true Canadian form, the answer to this question was “All three.”
The design was inspired by that input and carefully incorporates many of the ideas we heard on
how to best represent the 150th anniversary of Confederation.
Isn’t it amazing how much history you can fit onto a little piece of polymer?
All of the historical elements in the note’s design show why this year calls for a big celebration!
This bank note not only reflects the pride we feel about our country and its accomplishments, it
also, we hope, instills in Canadians a different kind of confidence.
The Bank is responsible for the design, production and distribution of Canada’s bank notes. And
while bank notes reflect Canada’s society, culture and history, it’s also our job to ensure that they
are durable and difficult to counterfeit—in short, so that Canadians can have confidence in their
money.
From  a  design  perspective,  when  we  asked  Canadians  what  they  wanted  to  see,  more  than
anything else, they said Canada’s landscapes. So if we look at the back of the note, we will see
several images of Canada’s natural beauty, seamlessly woven together—from sea to sea to sea.
From  left  to  right,  we  start  in  the  west  with  the  Lions—or  the  Twin  Sisters,  as  the  Squamish
people know them—the peaks of the North Shore Mountains, which overlook Vancouver. In the
foreground, we can see Capilano Lake.
Moving  east,  we  come  to  the  Prairies.  We  see  wheat,  the  iconic  crop  of  Canada’s  Prairie
provinces  and  one  of  the  most  important  cultivated  crops  in  Canada.  This  image  reminds
Canadians of the importance of the role family farms played in the expansion of our country and
of the Prairies as the breadbasket of our nation.
Then the note takes us to the Canadian Shield, that ancient mass of rock that covers roughly half
of the total land area of Canada. This is a view that many Ottawans may find familiar: forest, rock
and water, minus the blackflies. The image used on this bank note is inspired by a photograph
taken at the soon-to-be-created parc national d’Opémican in the Abitibi-Témiscamingue region of
Quebec. The Kipawa River pictured here flows out of the park and into the Ottawa River. Those
waters eventually run past our doorsteps here and down to Montréal, where they merge with the
St. Lawrence.
Moving  right,  we  go  to  the  east  coast  of  Canada  and  an  image  of  Cape  Bonavista  in
Newfoundland and Labrador. This may very well have been the view that John Cabot saw when
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
he landed in 1497.
Above these images of Canada, we see the northern lights as they would appear if we were in
Wood Buffalo National Park, home to the world’s largest dark-sky preserve.
Now some of you may be old enough to remember the Centennial bank note produced by the
Bank of Canada in 1967. Many people still have some of them tucked away.
I know I will be keeping one of these new notes. We have produced 40 million of them, just more
than enough for every Canadian. They will be available as of June 1st.
As all of you celebrate Canada’s big birthday this year, I encourage you to take a close look at
this  special  note.  It  will  be  a  little  piece  of  history.  I  hope  this  bank  note  captivates  your
imagination and instills pride in who we are and how far we have come as a nation. It celebrates
our land, our history and our culture.
It’s a bank note that reminds us of how much we have to celebrate as Canadians.
Thank you. Merci beaucoup.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
