Philip  R  Lane:  European  financial  integration  –  implications  of
Brexit
Remarks by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at Barclays European
Financial Capital Summit, London, 28 March 2017.
 Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to address this conference, especially at
a time when the future of the European financial system is the subject of so much discussion
and debate. In my remarks, I will first discuss some of the main issues in this debate before
turning to a brief description of the regulatory perspective of the Central Bank of Ireland on Brexit.
In  addition  to  generating  myriad  practical  and  logistical  challenges,  the  impending  EU-UK
negotiations  also  pose  an  intellectual  challenge  in  terms  of  thinking  about  the  nature  of
international  financial  integration  and  international  financial  regulation  in  post-Brexit  Europe.  In
particular, it forces all participants to think hard about the differences between a single market in
financial services versus cross-border financial trade between distinct jurisdictions.
To add a further layer of complexity, the appropriate analytical framework also should recognise
the incomplete nature of the single market in financial services, with banking union and capital
markets  union  in  Europe  at  varying  stages  of  development  and  differences  in  supervisory
systems across banks, non-bank intermediaries and financial markets. In addition, it is essential
to recognise that the European financial system is not a closed loop but is extensively integrated
with the wider global financial system.
In  addition  to  the  long-standing  interconnections  between  the  US  and  European  financial
systems, the increasing share of emerging economies in world GDP and world financial assets
means that extent and nature of financial trade between the UK and the EU in part depends on
alternative  global  configurations,  with  trade  diversion  as  well  as  trade  destruction  part  of  the
potential fallout from barriers to financial trade between the UK and the EU. The interconnections
between  asset  categories  (including  across  different  currencies)  as  well  as  between  different
types  of  financial  intermediaries  mean  that  a  holistic  perspective  in  required  in  evaluating
alternative trading arrangements in the post-Brexit environment.
In assessing the implications of the new organisational configurations that will be triggered by
Brexit, the lessons from the global financial crisis remain fresh in the minds of the international
regulatory  community.  In  particular,  the  importance  of  a  stringent  approach  to  prudential
supervision  is  widely  accepted,  such  that  the  post-Brexit  evolution  of  the  European  financial
system cannot involve any dilution in the capacity of supervisors to ensure effective regulation of
international financial firms, in relation both to firm-specific and systemic risk.
Similarly, it is essential that regulatory authorities and central banks have sufficient oversight of
the  operation  of  financial  markets  and  financial  market  infrastructures  in  order  to  be  able  to
monitor and interpret market shocks and adequately evaluate the desirability of any intervention
policies during periods of market distress. Accordingly, an important criterion in assessing the
stability of a reconfigured European financial system will be the implications for crisis prevention
and crisis management policies. In parallel, it is also essential that there are credible recovery
and resolution plans for newly-reconfigured financial entities.
As financial firms work out strategies to manage the implication of Brexit, it is important for the
policy community to ensure that regulatory arbitrage does not play a material role. This applies in
relation to locational choices and also in relation to options in terms of organisational structures.
In  relation  to  the  former  consideration,  the  role  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  in  bank
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
supervision ensures that a level playing field will apply in relation to banks. Although there is more
national autonomy in relation to other types of financial intermediaries and market infrastructures,
national  regulators  operate  within  the  broad  framework  of  the  European  System  of  Financial
Supervision  and  there  is  significant  (if  incomplete)  convergence  in  supervisory  approaches
across  member  states.  With  a  broadly-similar  regulatory  framework  across  member  states
within the EU, the primary focus of firms in relation to Brexit planning should be on non-regulatory
geographical criteria such as the existence of local clusters of financial expertise, legal systems,
the availability of a skilled workforce, the quality of relevant infrastructure, cost factors and related
considerations.
1
In relation to the latter consideration, it is worth highlighting the points made by ECB Executive
Board member and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the SSM Sabine Lautenschläger in
some recent speeches.  In particular, she noted that the banks under SSM supervision will be
closely  monitored  in  relation  to  the  risks  that  result  from  different  group  structures  and  from
relations  between  different  entities  of  the  same  group.  She  also  raised  the  possibility  that  EU
regulations might need to be adapted so that the largest investment firms are supervised in the
same way as banks. In addition, she underlined the importance of sufficient local staff, sufficient
local risk management and operational independence. Finally, it is essential that the resolvability
of the euro area entity is demonstrable.
Taken together, these points suggest that the European regulatory system will suitably evolve in
order to ensure that Brexit-induced corporate reorganisations do not compromise the ability of
supervisors to hold firms to account in terms of regulatory expectations and maintain financial
stability in an effective manner.
Of course, the ultimate impact of Brexit will depend on the outcome of the negotiations between
the EU and the UK. In addition to obtaining clarification on the nature of the new steady-state
framework for trade in financial services between the EU and the U.K., it will also be important to
specify  transition  arrangements,  especially  given  the  long-term  nature  of  many  financial
contracts. It follows that the provisional Brexit plans that are currently being formulated may have
to be revised over time, if the course of these negotiations take unexpected twists. The value of
optionality is high in the current environment: as the negotiations unfold, some options will lose
value, while others will gain.
Accordingly, both firms and regulators will need to be pragmatic in recognising the inevitability of
periodic revisions to business plans during this phase and the importance of a transitional period
to  avoid  potentially-disruptive  cliff  effects  in  the  workings  of  the  financial  system.  The  recent
speeches by Sabine Lautenschläger have described some of the guiding principles in the context
of transitioning of firms, for example in relation to the conditional use of existing internal models.
Finally,  turning  to  the  regulatory  approach  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  we  have  adopted  a
consistent position in relation to Brexit-related supervisory queries. Our regulatory approach is in
line with sound practices being agreed across Europe; our responsibility is to ensure that firms
authorised to operate from Ireland demonstrate compliance with EU requirements. To this end,
we seek to ensure that an entity will be substantively run from Ireland and that the setup permits
effective  supervision,  with  local  management  accountable  for  decision  making.   From  a
supervisory perspective, it is simply not sustainable to entertain proposals that fall short of these
basic requirements.
2
We  are  committed  to  providing  transparency,  consistency  and  predictability  in  our  regulatory
decisions. Since Ireland is already home to a large-scale international financial services centre,
we have considerable experience in dealing with authorisation of financial firms. We are setting
up new teams in order to manage Brexit-related authorisation queries across banking, insurance,
investment firms, investment funds and financial market infrastructures. This is part of a broader
initiative to expand staffing levels in the Bank in view of the expansion of our mandate in recent
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
years,  the  increase  in  the  size  of  the  international  financial  services  sector  and  the
implementation of our pro-active supervision and inspections model.
A substantial proportion of Brexit-related queries at this stage relate to a further scaling up of
already-sizeable lines of activity or an expansion of the range of activities of currently-licensed
financial  entities.  That  said,  Ireland  is  likely  to  become  a  host  to  new  categories  of  financial
services. Accordingly, we stand ready to expand our range of supervisory activity as required, in
close collaboration with our international regulatory colleagues within the European System of
Financial Supervision.
Thank you for your attention. 
1
2
 “The European Banking Sector – Growing Together and Growing Apart,” LSE, 2nd March 2017; “Caution Should
be the Life of Banking,” AFME Board of Directors, 22nd March 2017.
For an extensive description of our approach to authorisations, see Gerry Cross, “Responding to the Post-Brexit
Environment,” Finance Dublin, January 2017.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
