Peter Praet: Towards Banking Union
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in the
session "(Do Not) Break It: Today's Europe at Full Speed" of the LUISS International Conference
on "Europe 2017: Make it or Break it", Rome, 24 January 2017.
 I would like to thank Sander Tordoir and Malte Jahning for their contributions to this speech.
Today’s conference title ‘Europe 2017: Make it or break it’ brings forth the notion that Europe is at
a crossroads. It reflects an increasing polarization between the proponents and the detractors of
European integration. Polarization does not do justice to the policy responses and the institutional
reforms that have strengthened our Economic and Monetary Union in the aftermath of the crisis.
Today I would like to do justice to the significant progress towards Banking Union. In less than
half a decade, the European Union moved from decentralized banking supervision and resolution
to the Single Supervisory Mechanism and the Single Resolution Mechanism. The fact that more
needs to be done to complete the Banking Union should not come as a surprise. The concept of
Banking  Union  is  simple    a  European  bank  should  be  able  to  operate  in  the  Banking  Union
exactly  as  it  operates  in  its  domestic  market,  but  its  implementation  is  complex.  This  entails
fungibility of capital and liquidity, simplified governance structures, and lower operational costs.
The  institutional  framework  should  create  an  environment  fostering  a  more  geographically
diverse, more resilient banking system. There still are a number of legal, institutional, political and
even cultural problems to overcome before we can declare this ambitious undertaking achieved.
The direction of progress is clear, its speed less so.
Banking Union is not an end in itself, but a backbone of the single currency. First, for money to be
truly single within a currency area there has to be full substitutability between its different forms,
including full fungibility of deposits across border. Second, risk sharing channels are particularly
important for countries in a monetary union, because the single monetary policy cannot cater to
cushion  asymmetric  shocks.  The  financial  system  is  a  central  channel  of  adjustment.  In  a
mature  monetary  union  like  the  United  States,  empirical  evidence  suggests  that  the  bulk  of
shocks to individual states are smoothed through the financial system  and that the contribution
of the federal budget to income smoothing is comparatively small. The financing of the economy
has traditionally been market-based in the United States, and bank-based in the European Union.
In the light of this, progress towards the Banking Union and the Capital Markets Union emerges
as a priority for Europe.
1
The financial crisis taught us that the quality of financial integration matters. Risk sharing through
the financial system can go into reverse, and banks can amplify and propagate rather than tame
economic  disturbances.  This  is  what  happened  during  the  crisis,  when  cross-border  capital
flows  dried  up  suddenly.  The  euro  area  saw  itself  confronted  with  financial  instability  and
fragmentation , which severely challenged the single monetary policy. Overall, the crisis has led
to  a  profound  re-thinking  of  the  financial  system.  Sound  financial  integration  relies  on  a  well-
designed institutional framework, in particular a regulatory regime reducing the pro-cyclicality of
banks. This is essential for them to perform well their role of shock absorber, to support the real
economy throughout the business cycle, and ensure financial stability.
2
Several dimensions need to be taken into account in the institutional design of well-functioning
risk-sharing  arrangements.  First,  private  versus  public  risk  sharing.  The  financial  system  is  a
private risk sharing device, but we have learned the lessons from the financial crisis in terms of
budgetary costs, when excessive risk-taking in the private sector was eventually borne by the
public sector. Not to revert to the old world of implicit government guarantees for risky behaviour
of financial institutions entails risk reduction in bank balance sheets through a more resilient loss-
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
absorption capacity throughout the cycle. This makes banks equally liable across countries for
the amount of risk they want to take into their respective balance sheet.
That  is  not  to  deny  that  creating  a  certain  level  of  public  risk  sharing  is  necessary  to  create
confidence in the overall financial system and thereby unlock the potential of private risk-sharing.
Even well-capitalised banks can fall victim to runs and contagion. This is why central banks act
as  lender  of  last  resort  to  illiquid,  yet  solvent  banks  in  times  of  stress.  Fiscal  backstops  are
equally  essential  for  ensuring  trust  in  the  stability  of  the  financial  sector,  thereby  supporting
financial  stability.  The  existence  of  fiscal  backstops,  however,  does  not  mean  that  taxpayers
have to end up paying the bill for individual bank failures. In Europe, significant progress to protect
taxpayers’ money has been made over the past few years: the Bank Recovery and Resolution
Directive and the Regulation establishing the Single Resolution Mechanism provide for common
rules how to deal with failing banks while minimising the recourse to public funds.
The principle of the new European rules is to absorb bank losses by bailing-in shareholders and
uninsured creditors. This does not mean that bail-out is fully excluded, as the new rules contain
sufficient  flexibility  to  deal  with  exceptional  situations  where  public  money  may  be  required  to
stabilise the banking system.
This brings me to the second important dimension of risk-sharing in the Banking Union, which is
national versus euro area risk sharing. The debate on moving forward on EMU is held back by a
standoff  between  the  risk  reduction  and  risk  sharing  camps.  In  theory,  risk  reduction  in  the
banking sector and public risk sharing in a banking union should work in unison. Non-performing
loans, however, are one of the major roadblocks on the road towards further public risk-sharing.
Following up to the 2014 comprehensive assessment, when for the first time the assets of banks
were  assessed  with  the  same  yardstick  across  the  euro  area,  the  Single  Supervisory
Mechanism is preparing guidance to banks on non-performing loans. This forms a sound basis
for the supervisor to evaluate banks’ handling of NPLs and for banks to tackle this problem in a
decisive way. While risk reduction is essential to provide the right incentives to banks and protect
taxpayers’ money, a common fiscal backstop remains key to increase the systemic resilience of
the euro area banking system.
While supervisory decisions are taken at European level, the relevant risk-sharing mechanisms
such as deposit insurance schemes are still at national level. Supervision is common, but the
consequences of potential bank failures are still predominantly national. National considerations
therefore  continue  to  affect  supervisory  decisions.  This  is  not  without  consequences  for  the
incentives for banks to become more European. Let me just develop some concrete examples.
First, the current institutional framework has not yet reached a sufficient degree of harmonization
in  the  underlying  rules  and  standards.  Since  the  aim  is  to  create  a  single  European  banking
system, it is essential that credit institutions face a single set of rules and conditions regardless
of the location of their activities. This was the intention of the Single Rulebook but it is not yet the
reality,  also  because  of  national  divergences  in  the  transposition  of  directives  or  the  non-
harmonised exercise of so-called Options and National Discretions (ONDs). A second example
relates to a lack of fungibility of liquidity. Still prevailing liquidity ring-fencing reflects the fact that
the interests of a banking group management, which is responsible for the allocation of liquidity
within the group, is often not aligned with the public interests of the Member States where the
subsidiaries  are  established . A  third  example  is  the  methodology  to  identify  G-SIBs  (Global
Systemically  Important  Banks),  which  includes  size,  interconnectedness,  subsituability  and
infrastructure,  complexity  and  cross-jurisdiction.  The  euro  area  is  not  considered  as  a  single
jurisdiction,  which  may  result  in  applying  higher  capital  buffers  to  euro  area  G-SIBs.  This
environment  contributes  to  the  persistence  of  banking  systems  overly  exposed  to  their  own
national economy.
3
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  institutional  underpinnings  of  the  Banking  Union  do  not  yet  meet  the  requirements  of  a
genuine single financial market with free financial flows. Nevertheless, significant progress has
been achieved over the past years. The creation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism has been
a leap forward in the establishment of a coherent regulatory framework. One of the first priorities
of the Supervisory Board has been to promote integration through harmonized implementation of
ONDs,  thereby  evening  the  level  playing  field  in  the  euro  area.  It  is  an  ongoing  process  that
started with intensive efforts to identify ONDs in a complex web of legislation. Regarding liquidity
requirements,  the  Single  Supervisory  Board  can  grant  waivers  at  national  as  well  as  cross-
border  level  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  Waiving  liquidity  requirements  could  increase  financial
interconnectedness  and  lead  to  possible  contagion  effects  in  a  framework  where  the
consequences  of  bank  failures  are  still  mainly  national. At  the  same  time,  ring-fencing  has  a
direct impact on cross-border banking and the free flow of funds in the Banking Union. In the
current institutional context, where the free flow of liquidity within the same banking group but
across border could be impeded, a prudent supervisory approach has led the ECB’s Supervisory
Board to still maintain a floor on the liquidity requirements of significant subsidiaries.
Whereas the uniform application of prudential law by the Single European Supervisor contributes
to financial integration, further progress in the institutional framework is needed. Both supervisory
responsibility  and  the  fiscal  backstop  need  to  be  at  European  level,  to  underpin  durably
confidence  in  the  area-wide  financial  system.  A  major  step  in  this  direction  has  been  the
establishment  of  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  in  2016,  with  national  compartments  and  a
mutualised compartment available to fund capital and liquidity needs. Currently, the backstop for
national  compartments  consists  of  national  credit  lines.  Looking  ahead,  it  will  be  essential  to
establish  a  common  fiscal  backstop  to  ensure  that  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  has  sufficient
resources to support any necessary resolution measures taken by the Single Resolution Board.
Just as necessary is the establishment of a European Deposit Insurance System (EDIS), with a
credible  backstop,  as  the  degree  of  harmonisation  recently  introduced  under  the  Directive  on
national deposit schemes still present differences that may affect the choice of group structure
between subsidiaries and branches in other countries and limit banks’ appetite for cross-border
banking in the euro area.
Let me conclude. Overall, the banking landscape still resembles too much a collection of banking
systems  highly  exposed  to  their  domestic  economies,  with  limited  cross-border  private  risk-
sharing. At the same time, unprecedented institutional progress has been achieved in a relatively
short  time  span  since  the  establishment  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism.  One  should
recognise  that  banking  union  is  both  an  objective  and  a  process  of  fundamental  structural
changes in the euro area’s financial architecture. Today we certainly are more than midway, but
this does not imply that one can step back and wait. The next steps are clearly set out in the
ECOFIN  roadmap  to  complete  the  Banking  Union.  It  is  now  urgent  to  agree  on  an  ambitious
timetable  for  its  implementation.  This  would  foster  financial  integration  in  the  euro  area  and
contribute to the smooth functioning of our Economic and Monetary Union.
1
2
3
One estimate suggests that the standard deviation of income growth uncertainty is reduced through financial
markets by as much as 35% across U.S. states (see Stefano G. Athanasoulis and Eric van Wincoop, (2001),
“Risk Sharing Within The United States: What Do Financial Markets And Fiscal Federalism Accomplish?,” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(4), pp. 688–698. According to a recent IMF paper, cross-country risk
sharing in the euro area is not only more limited (roughly half that seen in existing federations), but also falls
sharply  in  severe  downturns.  See  “Fiscal  Risk  Sharing:  New  Evidence  for  the  Euro Area”,  IMF  Technical
Background Note, September 2013. This is largely in line with recent evidence contained in the ECB’s annual
report  on  financial  integration,  which  stresses  that  risk  sharing  in  the  euro  area  has  increased  with  the
introduction of the euro, but remains at relatively low levels. It also suggests that risk sharing is particularly
fostered through various forms of equity holdings, underlining the importance of the capital markets union and
its emphasis on equity markets. See ECB (2016), “Financial Integration in Europe”, April 2016.
See  Special  Feature  A  entitled  “Financial  integration  and  risk  sharing  in  a  monetary  union”  in  Financial
integration in Europe report, April 2016.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
See Special Feature B entitled “National options and discretions in the prudential regulatory framework for
banks” in Financial integration in Europe report, April 2016.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
