Rameswurlall Basant Roi: Regulatory challenges in a fast-evolving
banking system
Speech by Mr Rameswurlall Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the conference
hosted  by  the  Mauritius  Commercial  Bank  Limited  for  Le  Club  des  Dirigeants  de  Banques  et
Etablissements de Credit d'Afrique (Club of Leaders of Banks and Credit Institutions in Africa),
Balaclava, 21 July 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen
 It’s always a great pleasure for me, as a career central banker, to be in the midst of bankers.
Thank  you  Mr  Pierre  Guy  Noel  for  inviting  me  to  address  this  august  audience  of  prominent
bankers from our Continent this morning.  
In  such  a  gathering  of  bankers,  I  cannot  find  a  more  relevant  subject  to  speak  on  than
“Regulatory Challenges in a Fast Evolving Banking System”. As you must be aware, regulators
have  been  challenged  by  episodic  currency  crises,  debt  crises,  banking  crises  and  financial
crises in general over the past few decades.  Let me begin with an analogy drawn from history.
For centuries, nation states were meant to be sovereign in their territory. Authorities from outside
had virtually no role in a nation’s domestic affairs. Sovereignty was sustained through a system
of  borders,  armies,  guards,  gates  and  guns.  Mobility  of  people  in  and  out  of  the  country  was
controlled. Movements of goods and services across countries were controlled through customs
and structures established for the purpose. We have lost that kind of sovereignty today. It’s an
online  world.  Bits  and  bytes  flow  freely  across  borders  without  restrictions.  Compare  a  bank
robbery decades ago with the infamous 1994 Internet bank robbery carried out by a single person
from  his  apartment  in  St  Petersburg,  Russia.  That  person  was  accused  of  hacking  the  bank
accounts of the corporate customers of a large US bank. He had left no fingerprints, no DNA
evidence at all, no trace whatsoever. Just a mouse and a keyboard did the job. Which country
had jurisdiction over the case? Is it the US where most of the victims lived or Russia from where
the crime was allegedly committed? We still have the physical borders as in the past. Yet, we
have to do with a borderless world in our profession. Many of the barriers of the earlier world
have  been  dismantled.  One  can  imagine  the  formidable  challenges  that  regulatory  authorities
world over are faced with.
In  the  post-Bretton  Woods  system  era,  the  banking  and  finance  industry  has  innovated
considerably  and  is  technologically  mutating.  The  ubiquitous  manifestations  of  a  new  banking
reality have been with us for quite some time now. Throughout the world, the banking sector has
undergone  game-changing  transformations,  both  in  coverage  and  scope.  Some  changes,
propelled by the forces of de-regulation in the 1980s, were revolutionary and some are driven by
regulatory  overhauls  triggered  by  episodic  financial  meltdowns  in  some  of  the  world’s  major
economic  hotspots.  Quite  some  radical  innovations  have  been  prompted  by  the  inexorable
inroads  made  by  digital  and  other  technological  breakthroughs  into  banking  activities.  Our
financial  industries  in  Africa  have  certainly  not  been  impervious  to  the  game-changing
transformations.This is an area where Africa has conspicuously not played absent.
The  paradigmatic  changes  that  have  swept  the  world’s  financial  landscape  have  engendered
compelling forces requiring regulatory authorities to construct new regulatory structures and to
come up with new regulatory and supervisory toolkits. The transformations have been so fast
that  even  the  toolkits  have  had  to  be  updated  again  and  again  as  evidenced  by  the  Basel  I
followed  by  Basel  II  and  further  followed  by  Basel  III.  Central  banks  that  fail  to  appreciate  the
importance of adapting their regulatory and supervisory toolkits in line with the new exigencies of
the banking business have often been left to repair the financial and reputational damages they
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
suffered in the aftermath of some form of financial crisis.
Topping the list of central banks’ preoccupations about regulatory and supervisory implications of
banking sector transmutations are the following:
i.  financial engineering and complex risk transfer mechanism,
ii.  complexity and opacity resulting from banks operating under the aegis of banking
groups or conglomerates,
iii. the role of financial technology in morphing the nature of the banking business, and
iv. enhanced macroeconomic sensitivity of banking activities.
Each  of  the  aforesaid  developments  creates  opportunities  as  well  as  threats  to  banks.  It
becomes imperative for discerning central banks to develop the required foresight to protect the
banking system with the right suite of toolkits – such as robust risk-based supervisory and stress
testing frameworks. Before outlining what we, at the Bank of Mauritius, have been doing in these
areas, let me elaborate each of these elements in some finer details.
Financial engineering and complexity
The 2008 financial crisis demonstrated, in no ambivalent terms, that the range and scope of the
banking business has become unprecedentedly multi-faceted and highly complex. Partly driven
by a desire to exploit regulatory loopholes across borders, banks had increasingly engaged in
networks  of  overlapping  contractual  claims  with  other  financial  institutions  domestically  or
abroad. A poignant reminder of this is the repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act in the US in 1999 that
coaxed banks to indulge into non-bank activities, including investment banking and insurance.
The incursion of banks into financial market activities, including concocting financially engineered
products,  constituted  one  aspect  of  the  new  banking  order  that  gave  awful  headache  to
regulators. Opacity in many of banks’ activities – including creation of off-balance sheet Special
Purpose  Vehicles  (SPVs)  –  and  the  addition  of  collateralized  obligation  terminologies  had
mushroomed and escaped scrutiny by regulators worldwide. I believe, as bankers, you know as
much as I do in this area. The urgency of building international rules as a firewall against banks’
mounting risk-taking appetite and of developing supervisory capacity to assess, detect, pre-empt,
and  monitor  such  behaviour  rapidly  became  the  cause  for  concern  to  central  bankers  and
regulators.    In  the  years  that  immediately  followed  the  2008  financial  crisis,  concrete  actions
finally superseded rhetoric and the new Basel rules were developed.
Cross-border expansion and affiliates of Holdings
In the wake of the fall of barriers between countries, banks have been quick at tapping into the
enormous opportunities offered by cross-border banking. As you must be aware, cross-border
banking  activities  within  the African  continent  have  intensified.  The  challenges  posed  by  this
development  are  more  daunting  than  it  used  to  be  in  the  past.  The  lack  of  proper  regulatory
oversight  of  many  bank  holding  groups  on  the  continent  is  often  inimical  to  consolidated
supervision.  While  many  of  cross-border  operations  take  the  shape  of  separately  capitalised
subsidiaries, the issue of contagious transmission of a crisis from the subsidiary to the parent
bank  is  not  completely  suppressed.  Consolidated  supervision  is  important  for  proper  risk
assessment of banks expanding across borders, either through subsidiaries or branches.
In  a  world  fraught  with  risks  it’s  imperative  to  have  a  framework  for  ensuring  effective
coordination with host countries through properly defined Memoranda-of-Understanding (MOUs).
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  signed  MOUs  with  seven  domestic  authorities  and  with  thirteen
overseas regulators where local banks conduct business. More than MoUs, what we need to do
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
in Africa is to have appropriately designed regional regulatory structures. In my personal opinion,
this  would  be  a  bold  attempt  and  an  effective  way  forward  that  our  regional  and  pan-African
political and other official organisations need to take on board aggressively. I would urge you to
give  a  push  to  this  idea  because,  after  all,  risks  are  clear  and  present  and  increasingly  so.  I
cannot help mentioning that one of the biggest challenges is to have an effective and efficient
crisis  resolution  framework  –  one  that  duly  takes  into  account  rules,  laws  and  by-laws  of  the
home-host countries.
Enhanced macroeconomic sensitivity
The nexus between the macro-economy and the banking sector has become more intricate and
intensively  inter-twined.  Banks  lend  to  sectors  whose  performances  are  linked  to  overall
economic activity (e.g., construction, trade, manufacturing, tourism, GBC etc). For instance, the
relatively  high  degree  of  euro-centricity  of  the  Mauritian  economy  makes  it  vulnerable  to  a
protracted  period  of  slower  growth  in  Europe  and  to  the  vicissitudes  of  any  shocks  that  are
peculiar to Europe. As a result, tourism and trade, as well as FDI, could all take a hit, should a
shock materialise in Europe (e.g., fallouts of Brexit or European banking crisis).
Similarly,  geopolitical  events  affect  international  commodity  prices  and  consequently  influence
domestic inflation and the exchange rate. Such a setback can spark off worries for banks that
have lent to economic sectors for which the exchange rate, for instance, is a critical element.
 Indeed, while micro-surveillance of the banking system remains essential, it needs to be topped
up by macro-surveillance mechanisms, including macro-prudential policy measures,  aimed  at
reinforcing the battery of defence mechanisms available to central banks.
Economic convention has often stressed on the impact of banks on the macro-economy as the
‘financial  accelerator’  which  creates  financial  cycles  that  may  not  be  in  sync  with  traditional
business cycles. On the other hand, macroeconomic measures (e.g., interest rate policy) may
create new avenues for financial fragility, including the so-called ‘risk channel’ of monetary policy.
 Central banks have given attention to the relationships between monetary policy and financial
stability and have frontloaded this interface in designing monetary and financial policies.
Initiatives taken by the Bank of Mauritius
The Bank of Mauritius has, over time, deployed an array of stringent prudential and regulatory
rules, leveraging its supervisory capabilities, to protect the banking sector and consolidate the
reputation  of  the  Mauritian  jurisdiction.   At  an  early  stage  in  the  post  2008  financial  crisis,  the
Bank  of  Mauritius  was  mindful  of  the  importance  of  aligning  its  capital  regulatory  toolkit  with
international best practices. The Bank of Mauritius phased in the Basel III capital requirements,
the  regulatory  framework  for  Domestic  Systemically  Important  Banks  and  macro-prudential
measures in 2014.  
Not only do Basel III standards contain dampeners that stymie excessive risk-taking behaviour by
banks, but it also carries a sound macro-prudential overlay in the form of capital conservation
buffers and countercyclical capital buffers.
Our supervisory capacity is currently being reinforced to embrace a more risk-based approach.
  Going  forward,  our  levers  for  conducting  supervisory  work  will  carry  more  risk-sensitive
elements.  Macro-prudential  measures  are  helping  to  contain  excessive  risk-building  among
banks and borrowers, with limits on the loan-to-value ratio and debt-to-income ratio, and higher
portfolio provisioning risk weights for certain categories of exposures. These measures coalesce
to cement the resilience of banks.
The importance of addressing the systemic importance of banks in funding activities of groups to
which they belong, had been flagged in the aftermath of the East Asian crisis of 1997. The so-
called Korean ‘Chaebols’ or Japanese ‘Keiretsus’, generic terms to describe complex systems of
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
conglomerates with interlocking contractual arrangements and shareholdings, were brought to
the limelight in view of the profligacy displayed by some banks in lending to these groups in the
absence of prudential regulation and supervision in these countries.  More recently, in Mauritius,
we witnessed an event that was reminiscent of the Chaebol–Keiretsu saga: the demise of the
BAI group in April 2015, amid unbecoming practices by the group’s flagship bank, the defunct
Bramer  Banking  Corporation  Limited,  which  also  served  as  the  group’s  pivotal  purveyors  of
funding.
The Bank more determined than ever to end such malfeasance. In September 2016, a number of
amendments were brought to the Banking Act 2004 and Bank of Mauritius Act 2004 to empower
the  Bank  of  Mauritius  to  discharge  effective  conglomerate  and  consolidated  supervision.    The
Bank of Mauritius is now empowered to request information from any financial entity with a view
to  conducting  in-depth  analysis  for  financial  stability  purposes.  Further  initiatives  are  in  the
process of implementation to enhance consolidated and conglomerate supervision.
In  recent  years,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  made  great  strides  in  enhancing  its  prudential
guidelines with updated regulatory elements in line with international best practices. For financial
stability purposes, the Bank of Mauritius came up with a guideline for dealing with systemically
important banks in 2014. Five banks have been identified as being systemically important on the
basis  of  a  number  of  metrics,  namely  size,  interconnectedness,  exposure  to  large  groups,
complexity and substitutability. These banks are now required to maintain a capital surcharge
ranging from 1.0 to 2.5 per cent for their systemic importance, effective 1 January 2016. The
surcharge will have to be met over a four-year period. Liquidity requirements under Basel III are in
the process of being applied in Mauritius. The draft guideline on Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR)
has  already  been  released  to  the  banking  industry  for  consultation  and  will  be  issued  to  the
industry this year.
The  credibility  of  a  financial  jurisdiction  depends  on  a  host  of  factors  such  as  the  regulatory
regime, reporting systems of licensees, transparency, disclosure standards, and accountability.
Malfeasance practices can easily undermine confidence in such a manner that it can shatter a
jurisdiction’s  reputation.    Promoting  transparency  and  fortifying  the  anti-corruption  toolkit  are
mandates of central banks keen to preserve the integrity of the banking sector. Indeed, robust
anti-money laundering rules and managing risks associated with politically exposed persons are
important  elements  of  a  sound  regulatory  regime.  These  are  usually  topped  up  by  a  robust
system of corporate governance and by measures designed to stimulate a culture of integrity in
banks.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  travelled  a  long  way  in  the  endeavour  to  combat  money
laundering.  We  have  aligned  our  AML/CFT  and  our  corporate  governance  guidelines  with
international best practices. Since 2016, the Bank has established a dedicated team to monitor
AML/CFT  issues  and  it  will  shortly  start  conducting  specialised  on-site  inspection  of  financial
institutions.
Against a backdrop of heightened risks associated with an increasingly challenging environment,
the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  established  a  distinct  financial  stability  division  with  the  aim  of
conducting macro-based surveillance, macro-prudential policies, and carrying out micro as well
as macro-based stress testing of banks. The stress testing framework is assisting the Bank of
Mauritius to assess whether individual banks and the banking system as a whole is adequately
capitalized to withstand shocks. Results from the Bank’s stress testing model indicate that the
Mauritian  banking  system  as  a  whole  is  relatively  robust  to  credit  losses  resulting  from
macroeconomic shocks.  
The  Bank  has  also  embarked  on  the  following  main  projects  aimed  at  containing  build-up  of
vulnerabilities and at enhancing resilience of the financial system:
i.    a  complete  review  of  the  banking  legislation  and  the  inclusion  of  a  crisis
management and resolution framework within the revamped legislation;
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
ii.  a deposit insurance scheme;
iii. the setting up of an Asset Management Company to strengthen the balance sheet
of banks, and
iv. a national payments system legislation.
At the start of this address, I referred to cyber-risks. The more banks, like individuals, are plugged
to  the  global  information  grid,  the  more  vulnerable  they  become  to  criminals  familiar  with  the
underlying  technologies.  When  everything  is  connected,  everyone  is  vulnerable.  The  cyber
underworld  is  not  short  of  people  conversant  with  the  art  and  craft  of  digital  criminality.  The
financial sector is an appealing target for cybercriminals, the more so given that they can access
the core systems of financial institutions even from far removed places in the world.  Payment
systems  are  increasingly  relying  on  sophisticated  IT  platforms  for  clearing  and  settlements. 
Systemic risks are very much present, with potential loss of confidence of the public at large
should anything go wrong with the payment systems. These risks do pose a genuine threat to
the very foundation of a financial institution and to financial stability in general. Regulatory and
supervisory  authorities  worldwide  have  taken  measures  to  address  cyber  risks.  But  they  are
never adequate. The digital underworld is an ever growing threat to financial stability. Prevention
of cyber-attacks is a constant challenge for both the bankers and the regulatory authorities.
Ladies and Gentlemen, no matter how elaborate, effective and comprehensive our regulatory and
supervisory firepower will be, there will always be some element of residual risk that will defy our
endeavours to contain them.
The Mauritius Commercial Bank Ltd hosts events elegantly.  I am sure you will be pampered
amply by the bank’s proverbial hospitality. I wish you all a pleasant and memorable stay with us.  
Thank you for your attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
