    CEPS Forum: Reconstructing the Union 
EMU governance: a reality check 
Address by Dr Mario Vella 
Governor of the Central Bank of Malta 
Brussels, 23 February 2017 
 The  Five  Presidents’  Report  on  Completing  Europe’s  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  argues  that 
economic and political convergence underpinning EMU needs to go deeper if it is to ensure prosperity 
for all its members and fairer outcome for its citizens. 
In the first phase, which was meant to be completed in June, the report envisages a number of steps 
including: 
−  a  new  boost  to  convergence,  employment  and  growth,  through  the  creation  of  a  euro  area 
system  of  competitiveness  authorities  and  stronger  implementation  of  the  Macroeconomic 
Imbalance Procedure; 
the completion of the banking union and the launch of the capital markets union; 
the establishment of a new advisory European Fiscal Board; 
− 
− 
−  a  reorganisation  of  the  European  Semester,  with  greater  parliamentary  control  and 
accountability. 
The Commission should soon be publishing a related White Paper on the future of Europe.  
Before  moving  forward,  let’s  see  what’s  been  achieved  so  far.    In  the  twenty-five  years  since  the 
Maastricht  Treaty  was  signed,  the  euro  has  been  established  a  successful  currency.  It  is  widely 
accepted as a medium of exchange and store of value, not only within the euro area itself, but also 
beyond it.  It enjoys popular acceptance and support.  Although the process of financial integration in 
the  euro  area  was  heavily  disrupted  in the  aftermath of  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008  and the 
sovereign debt crisis in the euro area in 2011, the single currency area has held together.  These gains 
should not be lightly discarded. 
1 
But the double shock of the financial crisis and the subsequent fiscal crisis has hit EMU hard.  The 
euro area economy is currently in a moderate, gradual recovery that has been under way since the 
second quarter of 2013.  However, in some member states that were hit the hardest by the sovereign 
debt  crisis,  output  remains  considerably  below the levels  registered  in  2008.  Unemployment  rates 
diverge  considerably  across  the  euro  area,  ranging  from  over  20%  in  Greece  to  below  4%  in 
Germany.  
The euro area is facing pressure along four different fault lines.  First, there is the tension between 
euro area member states that are in different cyclical and, in some cases, secular positions and yet face 
the  same  nominal  interest  rate  and  exchange  rate.    Second,  there  is  the  related  tension  between 
monetary policy that is determined at the level of the euro area as a whole and fiscal policy which has 
remained, in effect, largely national.  Third, there are tensions that arise from the fact that the single 
currency is embedded in an incomplete single market, including only a partial banking union.  Finally, 
at the institutional level, there is the tension between the nation state and supra-national bodies that 
partly  stems  from  the  fact  that  the  euro  area  is  a  monetary  union  which  is  not  under-pinned  by  a 
common Treasury. 
These tensions are reflected in the rise of political movements and parties that oppose and want to 
reverse the admittedly complex and difficult process of European integration that emerged from the 
ashes of the Second World War, and threaten the single currency itself.  These tensions are the source 
of the governance issues that EMU faces and which still have to be resolved. 
I would like to examine three aspects of EMU in turn: monetary policy, fiscal policy and economic 
integration. 
I believe that as far as the monetary dimension of EMU is concerned, many issues have been settled.  
The Governing Council of the ECB pursues a clear mandate to maintain price stability, defined as a 
rate of inflation below but close to 2%, and it has consistently run monetary policy in pursuit of this 
goal.  However, monetary policy is facing the constraints of operating at the zero interest rate bound.  
An  institutional  set-up  that  was  designed  to  fight  inflation  has  had  to  react  to  an  unprecedented 
situation characterised by the absence of inflationary pressures.  In my view, some design features – 
such as the asymmetric response to deviations from the ECB’s target – ought to be reviewed. 
On the fiscal front, compliance with the existing governance framework has fallen far short of the 
original expectations.  Initiatives to strengthen the rules and the related institutional framework, such 
as the establishment of national fiscal councils and the European Fiscal Board are helpful.  But they 
are probably insufficient. 
2 
It is my contention that we will not resolve problems related to fiscal governance in the euro area 
solely by adjusting the rules and strengthening the institutional set-up.   
The Five President’s Report moves in the direction of a single fiscal policy, with a euro area wide 
budget  that  is  large  enough  to  contain  in-built  automatic  stabilising  mechanisms  that  allow  for  a 
transfer of resources from those regions in the euro area that are doing relatively well to other regions 
that have been hit by adverse shocks.  But if the will to abide by the existing rules was weak, there 
seems  to  be  even  less  appetite  for  further  integration  on  these  lines.    On  another  view,  one  could 
recognise that events have shown that fiscal policy remains a vital shock absorber at the national level 
and that, therefore, it may be necessary to increase, rather than reduce, flexibility in the conduct of 
fiscal policy.   
Given  that  the  objective  of  a  common  fiscal  policy  and  a  common  Treasury  remains  politically 
unrealisable,  one  needs  to  explore  other  interim  solutions  which,  without  creating  risks  of  moral 
hazard,  introduce  an  element  of  solidarity  between  EMU  members  that  go  beyond  bail-outs  and 
austerity.  In the end there can be no longevity in a monetary union where members are moving at 
very different economic tempos and sometimes even in different directions.  
Another  aspect  of  EMU  governance  is  strengthening  the  economic  part  of  EMU.    This  requires 
structural  reforms  aimed  at  enhancing  potential  growth,  reducing  structural  unemployment  and 
increasing  national  economies’  resistance  to shocks.    While  many  euro  area  countries  undertook  a 
wave of reforms during the crisis, today, across much of the area reforms have stalled.  This is not a 
uniform picture.  Malta is enjoying robust economic growth despite regional headwinds, largely as a 
result  of  reforms  implemented  in  recent  years  that  stimulated  the  development  of  new  areas  of 
economic  activity  and  increased  labour  participation.    Malta  has  also  taken  full  advantage  of  its 
membership of the EU and its adoption of the single currency. 
Resilience to shocks can also be built up through deeper economic integration.  Indeed, as the Five 
Presidents’ report argues, financial integration helps to share risk across EMU member countries.  The 
completion of a Banking Union, which will strengthen the European banking sector, is a key objective 
in  this  regard.    In  this  area,  success  so  far  has  been  partial.    The  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism 
involving  the  ECB  via  the  Supervisory  Board  and  the  national  supervisory  authorities  is  up  and 
running,  following  a  comprehensive  health  check  of  the  euro  area  banks.    The  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism is also operational and is being funded according to plan.  As regards the third pillar of 
Banking  Union,  the  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  (EDIS),  negotiations are  still  under  way.  
We believe that EDIS is will increase confidence in banks across the euro area. 
In sum, we are still far from completing the steps envisaged in the first phase of the Five Presidents’ 
roadmap.  Achieving and maintaining responsible fiscal policies at national and euro area level still 
3 
seems beyond our grasp and while certain elements of the Banking Union are now in place, more 
needs to be done.  Overall, the timetable is ambitious.  We must also be realistic and admit that further 
integration is running against headwinds of popular discontent with integration and liberalisation. 
We need, therefore to be more open about what we are doing, to fully engage all our citizens and to 
build a case for a stronger EMU that can enjoy broad popular consensus rather than being imposed 
from above. 
4 
