August  2,  2017
Bank  of  Japan
Economic Activity, Prices,
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Sapporo 
Yukitoshi Funo 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
 I. Recent Economic and Price Developments 
A. Overseas Developments 
I  would  like  to  begin  my  speech  by  talking  about  developments  in  overseas  economies. 
Business  sentiment  of  manufacturing  firms  has  been  on  an  improving  trend  on  a  global 
basis, and the world trade volume has been recovering. In this situation, overseas economies 
have continued to grow at a moderate pace on the whole. 
 
As  for  the  outlook,  the  growth  rates  of  overseas  economies  are  expected  to  increase 
moderately. According to the World Economic Outlook Update, released in July 2017 by the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), the global growth rate is projected to increase from 3.2 
percent in 2016 to 3.5 percent in 2017, and to 3.6 percent in 2018. 
 
Looking  at  developments  by  major  region,  the  U.S.  economy  has  continued  to  recover 
firmly, mainly in household spending, owing to a steady improvement in the employment 
and income situation. As for the outlook, the economy is expected to continue to see firm 
growth driven by domestic private demand. 
 
The European economy has continued to recover steadily, albeit at a moderate pace, mainly 
in the household sector. As for the outlook, the economy is projected to follow a moderate 
recovery trend, while uncertainty -- associated with political issues such as those regarding 
negotiations  on  the  United  Kingdom's  exit  from  the  European  Union  (EU)  and  with  the 
European  debt  problem,  including  the  financial  sector  --  is  likely  to  be  a  burden  on 
economic activity. 
 
The Chinese economy has continued to see stable growth on the whole, partly due to the 
effects  of  authorities'  measures  to  support  economic  activity.  As  for  the  outlook,  the 
economy is likely to broadly follow a stable growth path as authorities conduct fiscal and 
monetary policy in a timely manner. 
 
Emerging economies other than China and commodity-exporting economies have picked up 
on  the  whole.  As  for  the  outlook,  their  growth  rates  are  likely  to  increase gradually,  due 
 1 
mainly to the spread of the effects of steady growth in advanced economies and the effects 
of the economic stimulus measures. 
 
Risk factors to the overseas economic outlook are wide ranging, as exemplified by (1) the 
U.S. economic policies and their impact on global financial markets, (2) developments in 
emerging and commodity-exporting economies, (3) negotiations on the United Kingdom's 
exit  from  the  EU  and  their  effects,  (4)  prospects  regarding  the  European  debt  problem, 
including the financial sector, and (5) geopolitical risks. I hold the view that it is important 
to stay vigilant regarding these risk factors, especially now that the growth rates of overseas 
economies are rising. 
 
B. Japan's Economy and Prices 
1. Economic activity 
I will now discuss the economic situation in Japan given the overseas developments I have 
just outlined. Japan's economy is expanding moderately, with a virtuous cycle from income 
to  spending  operating.  For  the  first  time  in  about  11  years,  real  GDP  registered  positive 
growth  for  five  consecutive  quarters,  through  the  January-March  quarter  of  2017;  by 
component,  demand  both  at  home  and  abroad  has  increased  and  the  economy  has  been 
growing  at  a  pace  slightly  above  its  potential,  which  is  estimated  to  be  in  the  range  of 
0.5-1.0 percent.1 
 
With regard to the outlook, Japan's economy is likely to continue its moderate expansion. 
Through fiscal 2018, domestic demand is likely to follow an uptrend, with a virtuous cycle 
from income to spending being maintained in both the corporate and household sectors, on 
the  back  of  highly  accommodative  financial  conditions  and  fiscal  spending  through  the 
government's large-scale stimulus measures. Meanwhile, exports are expected to continue 
their  moderate  increasing  trend  as  the  growth  rates  of  overseas  economies  increase 
moderately. In fiscal 2019, the economy is expected to continue expanding, supported by 
external demand, although the growth pace is projected to decelerate due to a slowdown in 
                                                   
1  Under  a  specific  methodology,  Japan's  potential  growth  rate  is  estimated  to  be  in  the  range  of 
0.5-1.0  percent.  However,  the  estimate  of  the  potential  growth  rate  varies  depending  on  the 
methodologies employed and could be revised as the sample period becomes longer over time. Thus, 
it should be regarded as being subject to a considerable margin of error. 
 2 
domestic demand.2  According to the July 2017 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices 
(hereafter the Outlook Report), released by the Bank of Japan, the medians of the Policy 
Board members' forecasts of the economic growth rate are 1.8 percent for fiscal 2017, 1.4 
percent for fiscal 2018, and 0.7 percent for fiscal 2019.   
 
2. Prices 
Next, I will talk about price developments. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer 
price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food is in the range of 0.0-0.5 percent. The rate of 
increase  for  all  items  less  fresh  food  and  energy  had  remained  on  a  decelerating  trend, 
following the peak of 1.2 percent in winter 2015; recently, the rate of change has been at 
around 0 percent. 
 
With regard to the outlook, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items less fresh 
food  is  likely  to  continue  on  an  uptrend  mainly  on  the  back  of  the  improvement  in  the 
output gap and the rise in medium- to long-term inflation expectations. The rate will likely 
reach around 2 percent in around fiscal 2019. Specifically, the medians of the Policy Board 
members' forecasts of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items less fresh food 
presented in the July 2017 Outlook Report are 1.1 percent for fiscal 2017, 1.5 percent for 
fiscal  2018,  and,  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the  scheduled  consumption  tax  hike,  1.8 
percent for fiscal 2019.3 
 
                                                   
2  It  is assumed that the consumption tax will be raised to 10 percent in October 2019 and that a 
reduced tax rate will be applied to food and beverages -- excluding alcohol and dining-out -- and 
newspapers. 
3  The  consumption  tax  hike  scheduled  to  take  place  in  October  2019  --  to  10  percent  --  and  the 
reduced  tax  rate  to  be  applied  to  food  and  beverages  --  excluding  alcohol  and  dining-out  --  and 
newspapers  are  incorporated  in  the  forecasts,  but  individual  Policy  Board  members  make  their 
forecasts of the CPI based on figures excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike. The 
forecasts for the CPI for fiscal 2019 that incorporate the direct effects of the consumption tax hike 
are  constructed  as  follows.  First,  the  contribution  to  prices  from  the  tax  hike  is  mechanically 
computed on the assumption that the tax increase will be fully passed on for taxable items. The CPI 
will be pushed up by 0.5 percentage point. Second, this figure is added to the forecasts made by the 
Policy Board members. 
 
 3 
II. Keys to Assessing the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices 
In  what  follows,  I  will  discuss  several  points  that  I  think  deserve  particular  attention  in 
terms of realizing the outlook that I mentioned earlier. 
 
A. Employment and Income Situation 
First,  I  will  talk  about  developments  in  the  employment  and  income  situation. 
Supply-demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market  have  continued  to  tighten  steadily  and 
employee  income  has  increased  moderately.  The  rate  of  increase  in  the  number  of 
employees  has  remained  at  around  1  percent.  Against  this  backdrop,  the  active  job 
openings-to-applicants ratio, which has followed a steady uptrend, has exceeded its highest 
figure  during  the  bubble  period  in  the  first  half  of  the  1990s,  and  a  perception  of  labor 
shortage suggested by indicators related to employment has heightened. The unemployment 
rate  has  continued  on  a  moderate  declining  trend,  albeit  with  some  fluctuations,  and  has 
been  around  3  percent  recently.  It  is  expected  that  the  number  of  employees  will  keep 
increasing and that the supply-demand conditions in the labor market will further tighten. 
 
On  the  wage  side,  the  rise  in  hourly  cash  earnings  has  generally  accelerated,  albeit  with 
fluctuations.  Specifically,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  hourly  cash  earnings  of 
part-time  employees  recently  registered  relatively  high  growth  in  the  range  of  2.0-2.5 
percent.  With  regard  to  the  outlook,  the  pace  of  increase  in  full-time  employees'  cash 
earnings is expected to accelerate moderately, with that in base pay accelerating as the rise 
in inflation expectations becomes more evident. 
 
In  light  of  these  prospects  for  employment  and  wages,  employee  income  is  expected  to 
increase at a moderate pace, and its pace of increase is expected to be slightly above the 
nominal GDP growth rate in the second half of the projection period of fiscal 2016-2019. 
However, there is a risk that firms will remain cautious with their decisions, particularly on 
wage  setting.  In  this  context,  I  am  paying  attention  to  firms'  wage-setting  stance  going 
forward. 
 
 4 
B. Private Consumption 
Next, I will discuss developments in private consumption, which has increased its resilience 
against  the  background  of  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation. 
The consumption activity index has continued to increase. Looking at private consumption 
by  type,  durable  goods  have  been  on  a  moderate  uptrend,  mainly  due  to  replacement 
demand for automobiles and household electrical appliances. Nondurable goods had seen 
somewhat  weak  developments  for  a  prolonged  period,  particularly  in  clothes,  but  have 
started  to  pick  up  recently.  Meanwhile,  services  consumption  has  continued  to  increase 
moderately,  albeit  with  fluctuations,  reflecting  a  trend  rise  in  communications  charges  as 
well as medical, health care, and welfare fees.   
 
With regard to the outlook, private consumption is expected to follow a moderate increasing 
trend  --  albeit  with  fluctuations  due  to  the  scheduled  consumption  tax  hike  --  supported 
mainly by an increase in employee income and replacement demand for durable goods. 
 
C. Business Fixed Investment 
Let  me  now  explain  developments  in  business  fixed  investment,  which  has  been  on  a 
moderate  increasing  trend  as  corporate  profits  have  improved.  Business  fixed  investment 
plans  for  fiscal  2017,  especially  those  of  large  enterprises,  show  firms'  solid  stance. 
Specifically,  on  a  year-on-year  basis,  firms'  fixed  investment  increased  by  0.4  percent  in 
fiscal 2016, and investment plans for fiscal 2017 project an increase of 5.9 percent. 
 
As for the outlook, business fixed investment is likely to continue increasing moderately on 
the  back  of  (1)  an  improvement  in  corporate  profits,  (2)  extremely  stimulative  financial 
conditions, such as low interest rates and accommodative lending attitudes, (3) the effects of 
fiscal measures including projects conducted under the Fiscal Investment and Loan Program 
and  tax  reductions  for  capital  investment,  and  (4)  moderate  improvement  in  growth 
expectations. 
 
 5 
D. Prices 
Next, I will discuss the output gap and inflation expectations, which are the main factors 
that determine inflation rates. First, the output gap -- after turning slightly positive in the 
July-September quarter of 2016 -- has continued to improve, and it has expanded somewhat 
within positive territory recently. With regard to the outlook, it is projected to widen further 
within  such  territory  in  fiscal  2017;  thereafter,  it  is  projected  to  continue  expanding 
moderately  within  positive  territory  both  on  the  capital  and  labor  sides,  reflecting  the 
increase in demand at home and abroad. In the second half of fiscal 2019, although such 
expansion is likely to pause due to the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike, the 
output gap is expected to remain substantially positive. 
 
Second, medium- to long-term inflation expectations have remained in a weakening phase; 
however,  some  indicators  show  a  rise  in  such  expectations  recently.  As  for  the  outlook, 
medium- to long-term inflation expectations are likely to follow an increasing trend on the 
back of the following: (1) in terms of the adaptive expectation formation mechanism, firms' 
stance is likely to gradually shift toward raising wages and prices with the improvement in 
the output gap, and (2) in terms of the forward-looking expectation formation mechanism, 
the Bank will pursue monetary easing through its strong commitment to achieving the price 
stability target. 
 
III. Conduct of Monetary Policy 
Let me now turn to the Bank's monetary policy. 
 
In January 2013, the Bank announced that it would aim to achieve the price stability target 
of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI at the earliest possible 
time,  and  in  April  of  that  year,  it  decided  to  introduce  Quantitative  and  Qualitative 
Monetary Easing (QQE) as a necessary measure to underpin this commitment. The Bank 
took  several  measures  thereafter,  and  in  September  2016  it  conducted  a  comprehensive 
assessment of the developments in Japan's economic activity and prices as well as policy 
effects  since  the  introduction  of  QQE,  and  decided  to  introduce  QQE  with  Yield  Curve 
Control. 
 
 6 
The framework of QQE with Yield Curve Control consists of two major components. The 
first  is  yield  curve  control  in  which  the  Bank  facilitates  the  formation  of  short-  and 
long-term interest rates that are considered most appropriate for maintaining the momentum 
toward  achieving  the  price  stability  target,  taking  account  of  developments  in  economic 
activity and prices as well as financial conditions. Specifically, at present, according to the 
guideline for market operations, the Bank sets the short-term policy interest rate at minus 
0.1 percent and purchases Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that 10-year JGB yields 
will  remain  at  around  0  percent.  The  second  component  is  an  inflation-overshooting 
commitment in which the Bank continues with the monetary easing framework, aiming to 
achieve the price stability target, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a 
stable  manner.  On  this  point,  the  Bank  makes  clear  that  it  will  continue  expanding  the 
monetary  base  until  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  observed  CPI  (all  items  less 
fresh food) exceeds 2 percent and stays above the target in a stable manner. 
 
As shown in the comprehensive assessment, I consider that the main factor that hampers 
achieving the price stability target of 2 percent is as follows. In the course of the Bank's 
attempt to raise inflation expectations, observed inflation rates declined due to a variety of 
exogenous factors such as a substantial fall in crude oil prices. Under these circumstances, 
inflation  expectations  declined,  as  the  adaptive  mechanism  has  been  playing  a  relatively 
large role in the formation of inflation expectations in Japan. Taking this into consideration, 
the  Bank  decided  to  adopt  a  commitment  that  allows  inflation  to  overshoot  the  price 
stability  target  so  as  to  strengthen  the  forward-looking  mechanism  in  the  formation  of 
inflation expectations, enhance the credibility of achieving the price stability target among 
the public, and raise inflation expectations in a more forceful manner.   
 
As for the future conduct of monetary policy, the Bank will continue with QQE with Yield 
Curve  Control,  aiming  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  as  long  as  it  is 
necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. In Japan, there is some argument 
that the Bank does not need to aim at 2 percent inflation. However, when adverse shocks hit 
the  economy,  it  becomes necessary  to  lower  real  interest  rates  sufficiently  to  support  the 
economy effectively. Therefore, it is important to aim at achieving the price stability target 
of  2  percent  in  order  to  secure  sufficient  room  for  a  reduction  in  real  interest  rates  by 
 7 
keeping the inflation rate stable at around 2 percent and anchoring inflation expectations at 
2  percent.  Currently,  the  momentum  toward  achieving  the  price  stability  target  is  being 
maintained, and the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is expected to increase toward 2 
percent. Nevertheless, this momentum is not yet sufficiently firm, and we are only halfway 
to  achieving  the  price  stability  target.  Considering  the current  developments  in economic 
activity and prices as well as financial conditions, I believe that it is important that the Bank 
continue to steadily pursue powerful monetary easing under QQE with Yield Curve Control. 
 
IV. Challenges for Japan's Economy 
I would now like to express my thoughts regarding the current situation of Japan's economy 
from a longer-term perspective. 
 
The Bank aims to achieve price stability that is sustainable. I recognize that the inflation 
rate consistent with sustainable price stability will rise as efforts by a wide range of entities 
toward strengthening the competitiveness and growth potential of Japan's economy make 
progress. Based on this recognition, the Bank sets the price stability target at 2 percent in 
terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI -- a main price index. 
 
To strengthen the competitiveness and growth potential of the economy, a structural reform 
that will lead to an increase in productivity is necessary.  In implementing such a reform, 
from the viewpoint of the management of firms, it is important to adjust supply to the trend 
in demand. In an economy with a declining population, as is the case in Japan, demand is 
expected  to  decrease  for  many  goods  and  services;  therefore,  it  will  be  important  to 
adequately adjust supply capacity; that is, employees and production capacity to meet such 
a  decreasing  trend.  In  Japan,  there  is  room  for  enhancing  productivity  relative  to 
international  standards.  Firms,  regardless  of  whether  they  are  in  manufacturing  or 
nonmanufacturing,  are  faced  with  an  uneven  distribution  of  employees  and  production 
capacity, as well as excessive inventories and discounts. It is necessary to adequately correct 
such uneven distribution and reduce excessiveness in all areas. 
 
In  order  to  make  progress  with  such  a  structural  reform  smoothly  while  easing  the  pain 
arising from the reform, a growth strategy that will foster new areas with growth potential is 
 8 
essential. That is, it is necessary to develop and provide goods and services that will explore 
new  demand,  and  at  the  same  time  expand  the  channels  for  capturing  demand  in 
neighboring economies. Japan's economy has made progress toward this end for many years 
despite  the  severe  situation  for  the  management  of  firms,  and  has  exhibited  strong 
compatibility. It is expected to make continued progress in the future. 
 
Currently, financial conditions are highly accommodative and labor market conditions are 
tight. It is a good time to proceed with the structural reform and growth strategy, and we 
should not miss this chance. I consider that the private sector, which plays the main role in 
the economy, should take the initiative to enhance productivity and create demand in a more 
proactive manner. Financial institutions are expected to provide consulting services to their 
counterpart  firms  making  these  efforts.  In  particular,  in  rural  areas,  financial  institutions, 
which are endowed with information, knowledge, and experience, not to mention personnel, 
are expected to take such initiative. 
 
Moreover, it is a highly difficult task to increase labor input in the current situation where 
labor  shortages  are  becoming  severe.  However,  given  that  the  tightness  in  labor  market 
conditions varies by industry, the current moderate tightness can be regarded as a chance to 
increase  mobility  in  the  labor  market  --  including  inter-industry  labor  reallocation  --  in 
wider areas. Each firm will need to retrain its management staff to enhance their ability and 
adjust their mindset. Also, measures should be taken to change the decision-making process 
and reduce operations that do not produce value-added, such as duplicated operations, as 
well as excessive services. Progress toward improving the operation process that will lead 
to utilization of the workforce of women and the elderly also should be made. In this regard, 
the  Bank  conducted  a  survey  on  firms'  efforts  toward  promoting  women's  labor  force 
participation  by  region  and  released  the  results  as  the  annex  to  the  Regional  Economic 
Report in June 2017.4  According to this annex, women's labor participation is increasing in 
many regions and has led to improvement in business performance and productivity. 
 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                   
4  The annex to the Regional Economic Report is available only in Japanese. 
 9 
