   31.07.2017 
The European economy and monetary policy 
Inauguration of La Granda courses 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
  Mr Chairman of the La Granda courses, Mr Rector of the University of Oviedo, Mr Mayor of 
Gozón, Mr Secretary of the La Granda Courses, Authorities, dear colleagues: 
Let  me  begin  by  thanking  Professor  Velarde  for  his  invitation  to  me  to  participate  in  the 
inauguration of the thirty-ninth edition of the now-classic La Granda courses.  
But  first  I  should  like  to  congratulate  Professor  Velarde  on  the  Menéndez  Pelayo 
International Prize he has recently received and which is just one in a long list of accolades. 
Juan Velarde is much more than an eminent academic. He is a true humanist whose work, 
anchored  in  different  areas  of  the  economy,  has  always  included  historical  and  social 
concerns where his deep-seated and – I would say – benign liberalism prevails. Professor, 
my warmest congratulations on your Menéndez Pelayo prize.  
The European economic recovery  
Moving on to the subject of my address today, I should like to share with you some thoughts 
on the euro area economy and monetary policy. I shall begin by reviewing the key features 
of the current expansionary phase in the European economies and the fundamental role that 
monetary  policy  has  played  in  providing  for  its  take-off.  I  shall  then  refer  to  the  main 
challenges over the course of these difficult years for the European economy and to the 
need to complete the institutional architecture of the monetary union.  
After  several  years’  moderate  growth,  the  euro  area  has  arrived  at  a  favourable  cyclical 
juncture. On the latest available figures, annual output growth is currently running at almost 
2%. This rate exceeds the European Commission’s estimates of potential growth, which 
stand at around 1%. 
The soundness of the economic recovery is beginning to be reflected in the more dynamic 
behaviour  of  private  investment.  That  breaks  with  a  long  period  over  which  companies’ 
plans to increase capital were checked by uncertainty over future growth and the need to 
reduce their high levels of debt.  
Moreover, the recovery is extensive to the entire euro area, since all countries, including 
Greece, have attained positive growth rates.  
The improvement in economic activity has also enabled unemployment levels to be reduced 
to rates close to 9%, down from the levels of 13% observed at the worst points of the crisis.  
Significantly,  this  improvement  in  activity  has  come  about  against  a  difficult  political 
background, marked by the start of the Brexit process and the rise in certain trends that are 
against free trade and the free circulation of people, freedoms that are the bedrock of the 
European project, and this without forgetting the permanent threat of terrorism.  
Returning to the positive economic developments, we should not forget two central matters.  
Firstly,  these  developments  are  largely  the  consequence  of  the  extraordinary  stimulus 
received  from  monetary  policy.  Secondly,  monetary  union  still  has  a  long  way  to  go  to 
achieve sounder governance that will reduce the union’s vulnerability to shocks, provide for 
better coordination of its economic policies and promote the reforms needed to encourage 
and to be able to sustain long-term growth.  
 3/7 
  The role of monetary policy  
I shall first address the role that monetary policy has played and is continuing to play in the 
recovery.  
The confluence of the financial and sovereign crises in a European monetary union whose 
institutional architecture was incomplete meant that the ECB had to assume a pivotal role 
in the economic policy response.  
Initial measures took the form of a gradual reduction in interest rates and the granting of 
practically  unlimited  amounts  of  liquidity  to  banking  systems,  at  increasingly  longer 
maturities, with greater flexibility in the attendant collateral policies.  
In 2012, amid a second recession in the euro area and financial turmoil, the possibility of 
purchasing the public debt of countries subject to financial pressures was introduced. While 
this possibility was not actually activated, it contributed to staving off the threat of the single 
currency breaking up.  
Yet by mid-2014, and despite the fact that the most acute episodes of the crisis had been 
overcome, the euro area was immersed in a scenario of low growth and deflation risks in 
which various external and internal factors were at play.  
On the external front, the weakness of global growth and the collapse of commodities prices 
accentuated the downside pressures of producer prices.  
In  the  euro  area  economies,  the  high  unemployment  levels  and  the  need  to  reduce 
significant  debt  ratios  curbed  the  expansion  of  demand,  while  the  fragility  of  banking 
systems hampered the transmission of monetary policy measures to the real economy.  
These  factors  obliged  the  ECB  to  take  a  different  tack  and  turn  to  so-called  non-
conventional measures.  
Firstly,  the  interest  rates  on  ordinary  monetary  policy  operations  were  successively  cut, 
placing the deposit facility rate at a negative level of -0.4%, which currently remains in place.  
Secondly, the ECB introduced a new long-term financing facility for the banking system, 
which was linked to the granting of loans to households and firms.  
Thirdly,  in  2015,  the  ECB  took  the  historic  step  of  launching  a  quantitative  easing 
programme by means of the large-scale purchase of public and private assets. Currently, 
purchases are being made at a monthly pace of €60 billion, and this is expected to continue 
at  least  until  next  December,  whereby  at  the  end  of  the  current  year  the  scale  of  asset 
purchases will be drawing close to 22% of euro area GDP.  
Lastly,  communication  has  become  a  most  important  instrument  for  influencing  agents’ 
expectations  and  heightening  the  effectiveness  of  measures.  Specifically,  the  ECB  has 
incorporated  forward  guidance  on  interest  rates  and  the  purchase  programme  into  its 
communication.  
4/7 
  To offer an overall view of the scale of the measures adopted by the ECB, the size of the 
Eurosystem’s  balance  sheet  has  more  than  tripled  since  the  crisis  broke  in  2008,  up  to 
figures close to 40% of GDP. The scale of its balance sheet currently exceeds that of the 
Federal Reserve and the Bank of England, although it is far below the size of the Bank of 
Japan’s balance sheet, namely 90% of GDP.  
This  extensive  range  of  measures  has  been  effective  in  easing  financial  conditions,  in 
reducing financial fragmentation, i.e. the existence of greatly differing financing conditions 
in different jurisdictions for borrowers presenting similar risks, and in preventing the period 
of  negative  inflation  rates  that  the  European  economies  experienced  from  turning  into  a 
deflationary spiral.  
Our estimates indicate that the package of monetary policy measures adopted since mid-
2014 will have had a cumulative effect in the 2015-2017 period, for the euro area as a whole, 
of  1.7  pp  on  the  level  of  GDP  and  of  1.5  pp  on  the  level  of  prices.  According  to  these 
calculations, the monetary policy measures may be viewed as responsible for around 50% 
of the nominal GDP growth recorded in this period.  
In sum, for the first time in the 10 years that have elapsed since the international financial 
crisis broke, we may declare the current cyclical juncture of the euro area to be sound and 
that we have left the risks of deflation behind. 
Prices and wages in the international economy  
But  there  are  still  areas  of  risk  in  the  international  context,  associated  mainly  with  the 
uncertainty over the course of US economic policy, with the imbalances building up in the 
Chinese  economy  and  with  the  unfavourable  data  emanating  from  the  United  Kingdom, 
which is apparently beginning to feel the effects of its exit from the EU. In the euro area the 
solvency and profitability of the banking sector must be improved and the level of NPLs 
lowered, as they weaken the impact of the monetary impulses on productive activity.  
Furthermore, there are still no firm signs that inflation has moved onto a rising trajectory 
drawing it permanently closer to our objective of 2%. This can be seen in the measures of 
core inflation, which strip out the more volatile components of prices and which are sound 
indicators of the latent inflationary pressures in the economy. These measures of inflation 
have remained anchored around 1% over the last three years.  
Behind this inflationary behaviour are, among other factors, highly contained wage growth 
in the euro area as a whole – and I insist, the euro area in its entirety – that contrasts with 
the improvement in employment. Compensation per employee has sustained increases of 
close to 1.2% since mid-2014, far below its historical average which is at slightly over 2%.  
This  fact  has  attracted  the  attention  of  analysts,  who  point  to  the  confluence  of  various 
factors to explain why the response by wages to the fall in unemployment is not following 
the usual patterns.  
First, it is pointed out that the number of workers who are employed part-time, involuntarily, 
increased notably after the crisis and has scarcely fallen with the improvement in economic 
activity.  
 5/7 
 In  parallel,  there  has  also  been  an  increase  in  the  weight  of  some  groups  that  are  not 
included  in  the  habitual  definition  of  unemployment,  such  as  economically  inactive 
individuals whose reason for not seeking a job is because they believe they will not find one; 
or who do not seek a job for whatsoever reason, but are available and wish to find a job; or 
who, although they are seeking employment, are not available to immediately take up a new 
job.  
The measure of the unemployment rate that were to include these groups would, for the 
euro  area  as  a  whole,  stand  at  around  18%  of  the  labour  force,  practically  double  the 
habitually  estimated  rate.  In  terms  of  their  influence  on  wage  bargaining,  these  workers 
could exert downward pressure on wages.  
Additionally,  the  excess  supply  of  unskilled  labour,  which  in  some  cases  is  amplified  by 
immigrant  inflows,  may  also  reduce  upward  pressure  on  wages;  and,  moreover,  there  is 
some evidence of changes in wage-setting mechanisms which, against a background of 
low growth in prices, would be setting greater store by past or actual inflation, as opposed 
to expected inflation.  
True, this situation also arises in other developed economies that are ahead in the cycle, as 
is the case of the United States, where the latest inflation figures have been surprisingly on 
the downside and wage pressures are also low. But in the euro area an added difficulty is 
the  absence  of  mechanisms  that  provide  for  the  support  of  other  economic  policies  to 
monetary policy. And on this point we must look at fiscal policy.  
Fiscal policy in the EU  
In the case of fiscal policy, it is true that despite the improvement recorded in the euro area 
in recent years, the high levels of public debt leave little leeway in various countries to pursue 
an  expansionary  policy.  These  economies,  Spain  among  them,  should  see  through  the 
process of fiscal consolidation, harnessing the room for manoeuvre that may result from 
changes  in  the  composition  of  taxes  towards  figures  more  conducive  to  growth  and  a 
greater gearing of public spending towards investment, education and innovation.  
But  nor  are  there mechanisms  in  the European  framework to  encourage  economies  that 
have a favourable budgetary situation and fiscal space to use them if the circumstances of 
the area as a whole so require.  
Euro area-wide fiscal policy is, at present, the result of the sum of national policies. When 
designing policy conduct, there are no mechanisms conducive to countries internalising the 
benefits  of  achieving  a  suitable  economic  policy  mix  for  the  area  as  a  whole;  and  this 
especially  at  a  time,  such  as  the  present,  when  the  existence  of  a  very  accommodative 
monetary  policy  means  that  both  the  national  effects  and  the  impact  on  other  countries 
associated with a specific fiscal impulse are greater.  
Against this backdrop, and as highlighted in the recent discussion paper on the deepening 
of EMU published by the European Commission, it would be necessary in the medium term 
to  develop  a  fiscal  capacity  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  that  contributed  to  supporting 
monetary policy.  
6/7 
  The estimates detailed in this year’s Annual Report of the Banco de España suggest that a 
study could be conducted of a common fiscal instrument, managed at the supranational 
level, but which does not entail permanent transfers between countries and which, without 
committing a high volume of funds (around 1% of GDP), provides the euro area with a fiscal 
stabilisation capacity similar to that other federal states have.    
It  also  appears  necessary  to  seize  the  opportunity  afforded  by  the  favourable  economic 
juncture  and  the  overcoming  of  some  of  the  political  risks  to  complete  the  reform  of 
European governance, along the lines considered by the Five Presidents’ Report published 
in 2015 and the recent discussion paper by the European Commission.  
Likewise,  further  headway  would  be  needed  in  reducing  sovereign-banking  links,  which 
contributed notably, as is known, to heightening the severity of the crisis in the euro area.  
In this connection, the banking union requires supranational support that would increase 
the financial capacity of the Single Resolution Fund in the event of a systemic crisis and 
which  would  afford  it  greater  power  during  the  transition  process  established  for  its  full 
constitution. The European Commission’s proposal that the European Stability Mechanism 
should provide this support might be an appropriate solution.  
It is also necessary to create a common deposit guarantee scheme whereby depositors’ 
confidence in banks is irrespective of the health of their Public Treasuries.  
Progress  on  the  set  of  initiatives  encompassing  the  Capital  Markets  Union  would  also 
contribute to achieving greater financial integration, diversifying sources of financing and 
empowering  to  a  greater  extent  private  mechanisms  geared  to  sharing  the  risks  that 
originate through these markets.  
Conclusions 
In any event, it should be stressed that, although the recovery is providing for the correction 
of some imbalances, some fallout from the crisis remains at large.  
The high levels of unemployment and of public and private debt, low productivity growth 
and the weakness of the capitalisation process pose challenges that require greater reform-
minded ambition. Along with the initiatives being developed to modernise and harmonise 
insolvency  procedures  and  to  tackle  the  vulnerability  arising  from  the  scale  of  the  non-
performing loans still on bank balance sheets, the euro area economies must reinstate a 
reform  agenda  geared  to  enhancing  productivity  and  to  improving  both  the  flexibility  of 
product and factor markets and the business environment.  
Over recent years the monetary union and the European integration project have overcome 
the difficulties that called into question its existence. At present, there is some consensus 
on how to proceed in order to strengthen the project and to enable the ensuing benefits to 
be clearly perceived by all European citizens. European governments and institutions have 
a clear responsibility to heed the lessons learnt and to provide the appropriate economic 
policy responses.  
Thank you for your attention. 
 7/7 
