William C Dudley: Improving the culture of financial service
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Culture  Imperative  - An  Interbank  Symposium,  New  York  City,  11
January 2017.
As prepared for delivery
 I very much appreciate having the opportunity to participate in today’s program. Improving the
culture  of  financial  services  is  an  important  issue  for  me  and  my  colleagues  at  the  Federal
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  as  well  as  for  many  senior  policymakers  both  domestically  and
abroad. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the
1
Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.
Why  should  we  seek  better  culture  in  the  financial  services  industry?  We  do  this  to  achieve
better outcomes in terms of conduct and behavior—and, with that, greater trustworthiness in our
nation’s financial system. Greater trustworthiness will make it easier for the financial industry to
perform 
living  standards.  Greater
trustworthiness will also make it easier to attract top talent into the industry. Without that, the
industry will suffer.
in  supporting  economic  activity  and  rising 
its  role 
The focus of today’s event is the role you can play as future leaders of the industry. Your firms
selected  you  to  attend  because  of  your  career  success  thus  far  and  your  potential  for  senior
leadership. It is timely, therefore, for you to consider what type of leader you want to be, what
type of firm you want to lead, and what type of industry you want to work in and influence. I have
some views on all three, which we will get to in a moment.
I am encouraged that members of the industry have convened here today to engage on these
issues.  I  think  it  is  important  that  the  industry  tackle  this  together.  You  can  learn  from  one
another. And, given the scandals of recent years, you really do have to sink or swim together.
Before  the  recent  spate  of  conduct  problems,  there  were  times  when  one  might  be  secretly
happy when a competitor stumbled through some sort of misconduct. All the better if such a
stumble generated negative publicity and headlines. Today, the situation is vastly different. When
each  new  scandal  emerges,  the  industry  is  painted  with  the  same  broad  brush.  This
underscores the importance of taking both individual and collective responsibility for reform. You
have a personal stake in improving bank culture. Your firms have a stake too. And so does the
industry.
There are three messages I am going to focus on today:
First, stay in banking and be good role models of the behaviors and conduct that we all want to
see.  It’s  important.  The  banking  industry  needs  your  talents. And,  if  done  the  right  way,  it  will
result in a fulfilling career.
Second, banking does not have its own ethics—nor should it have its own ethics. The qualities
that you value in other aspects of your life should be the same qualities you apply at work and
encourage in your colleagues.
Third, candid assessment is critical to improving culture. I invite you to think in particular about
the incentives and norms of behavior within your organizations. Do they support or impair the
qualities and principles that guide you and that your firm espouses?
Before expanding on those points, let me explain why I believe that reforming culture is important,
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
and justifies the time and effort of not only of today’s program, but of the ongoing work at your
institutions and collectively across the industry.
The manipulations of LIBOR and foreign exchange rates prompted the New York Fed’s work on
culture.  Of  course,  widespread  misconduct  did  not  originate  with  either  episode.  The  timing,
however, was significant. Despite the near-death experience of the financial crisis, new rules and
regulations, and―in some cases―large fines and penalties, the LIBOR and FX events made
clear that serious ethical and behavioral problems had persisted in the industry. I was particularly
struck by how the manipulation of foreign exchange rates occurred even after the LIBOR fixing
was widely known. The appropriate lessons from the LIBOR scandal did not seem to have been
learned. That was both surprising and profoundly disappointing to me.
The  LIBOR  and  FX  collusions  were  not  occasional  atonalities  in  an  otherwise  harmonious
financial system. They were not two remote tail risks that both happened to materialize, or just a
bad coincidence. There have been too many examples of other misconduct to list. Wells Fargo
is the most recent example, but serious misconduct is not confined to a single jurisdiction or a
business  model.  The  evidence,  which  now  stretches  over  a  decade,  has  only  reaffirmed  my
initial belief that there is an industry-wide problem.
In  light  of  these  continuing  and  widespread  failures,  my  colleagues  and  I  recognize  the
importance of culture—that is the unwritten norms and accepted practices of an organization.
The culture of each firm will necessarily be its own. But the pervasiveness of problems—across
firms and countries—points to common, industry-wide norms that need attention.
An industry-wide problem needs an industry-wide solution. I also think that, when the problem is
cultural, any solution must be industry-driven. It is the public sector’s job to establish and enforce
rules, but rules face some inherent limits in shaping conduct and behavior. It is natural to adapt to
the behaviors that we observe around us. A common illustration of this point is the speed limit.
Most drivers move with the flow of traffic. They pay less attention to a number posted on a sign.
This is not to deny the necessity and importance of regulation, or to criticize any of the particular
rules  imposed  in  response  to  the  financial  crisis.  But,  we  also  must  recognize  that  it  is
impossible  to  create  a  rule  for  every  situation.  Also,  rules  tend  to  be  reactive  rather  than
proactive.  Rulemakers—whether  they  be  members  of  Congress,  regulators  or  judges—are
almost always responding to events. And, even if rules could cover every situation, having a rule
does  not  mean  that  people  will  always  follow  it.  In  many  recent  examples,  the  behaviors  we
observed violated rules already on the books. Thus, more rules and penalties alone will not cure
the industry’s underlying problems. They are necessary, but not sufficient.
What’s  more,  establishment  of  too  many  brightline  rules  may  prove  counterproductive  in
encouraging  a  good  culture.  For  one  thing,  intricate  and  detailed  rules  can  be  construed  as
implying  that  the  responsibility  for  good  conduct  rests  with  supervisors  and  regulators.  For
another,  rules  may  create  opportunities  or  incentives  for  legal  or  regulatory  arbitrage—finding
creative ways around rules. And this activity may, in itself, have insidious effects on culture.
As I see it, the problem occurs when an organization’s culture equates “what is right” with what is
legally  permissible,  and  when  “what  is  wrong”  becomes  equivalent  to  what  is  legally
impermissible. The technical legality of the rule, not the propriety of our conduct, becomes the
arbiter of our actions. A proliferation of rules may prompt us to ask first what we can do, not what
we should do. Legal arbitrage is intellectually energetic, but ethically lazy.
And, as U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York Preet Bharara has observed, if you
spend your time thinking about how close to the line you can get, it is inevitable that you will at
some point cross that line. No one gets the arbitrage right 100 percent of the time.  When you
make that mistake, you will not only have a bad culture, but you will also have to deal with Preet
Bharara’s office.
2
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Therefore, what’s needed is a better culture. Culture can help to fill in the spaces between and
beyond rules. Culture also shapes our attitude toward rules. A strong, ethical culture is one in
which individuals within an organization demonstrate to each other a commitment to certain first
principles. These principles must align with both the private purpose of the organization and the
public rules governing its operations.
Of course, it is possible for principles to conflict. When that occurs, determining the right course
will be difficult. But, the more you wrestle with that conflict, the better you will become at resolving
ethical quandaries. Aristotle called this aspect of ethics “habit,” but I prefer to think of it as ethical
muscle  memory.  The  more  practice  you  have  in  thinking  about  it,  the  better  you  will  be  at
determining what is right.
Bankers will be more likely to think about what is right, as opposed to what is merely legal, the
more  often  they  observe  their  colleagues  doing  the  same.  I  doubt  that  rules  alone  can
accomplish this. Telling people to be ethical doesn’t make it so. Seeing others engage in ethical
decision-making is, by contrast, quite powerful.
With that prologue, let me turn to my first message: Stay in banking. This might be a surprising
message in light of my introduction. Nonetheless, banking is important work. Society relies on its
financial system to “create substantial value for our society.”  As investor and author John Bogle
has written:
3
“[Banking and finance] facilitate the optimal allocation of capital among a variety of
users;  it  enables  buyers  and  savers  to  meet  efficiently;  it  provides  remarkable
liquidity; it enhances the ability of investors to capitalize on the discounted value of
future  cash  flows,  and  other  investors  to  acquire  the  right  to  those  cash  flows;  it
creates financial instruments [. . . ] that enable investors to assume additional risks,
4
or to divest themselves of a variety of risks by transferring those risks to others.”
 To  fulfill  its  potential  for  creating  value  for  society,  the  financial  system  needs  talented  and
dedicated people at the helm. This is especially true for banks, which are indispensable to our
economic system.
5
As  the  philosopher  Onora  O’Neill  has  observed,  banking  requires  more  than  just  technical
competence.  Bankers must reproduce their efforts and results with reliability. And, above all,
bankers  must  be  honest.  They  must  do  what  they  say  and  say  what  they  mean.  This  is
necessary  for  the  financial  system  to  be  viewed  as  trustworthy.  Without  that,  the  financial
industry cannot be effective in performing its key roles.
Cultivating these three traits emphasized by Onora O’Neill—competence, reliability and honesty
—will help enable you to have a personally fulfilling career. The best doctors or lawyers do their
work not only because it pays well, but because it is interesting and contributes an important
service to society. I hope you feel the same about what you do. And if you don’t, I urge you to
consider how your industry can become more professionally fulfilling. What is needed for you to
feel better about your work, to sleep more soundly, to worry less about the risk posed to your
business by potential misconduct?
Your professional fulfillment will grow if you also contribute to promoting these qualities in others
—that  is,  by  helping  to  improve  the  culture  of  financial  services.  It  is  easier  to  be  smart,
dependable  and  trustworthy  when  you  are  surrounded  by  other  people  who  also  fit  that
description.
My second message is to reject the idea that a separate regime of ethics or morality applies in
banking. I’m sure you have heard this, or perhaps even thought this, at some point in your career.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let it end there. We often teach our children by asking them if they would engage in that type of
behavior at home. This is good professional advice as well.
Bankers  have  been  criticized  for  their  ethical  and  moral  shortcomings.  That  criticism  has
legitimate grievances at its roots. There have been far too many instances in which bankers have
not lived up to expectations. But it is also true—and I’m sure you have experienced this—that you
have advanced in your careers because you have demonstrated personal attributes that anyone
would be proud to possess. I mentioned before honesty, competence and reliability. You could
add to that list hard work, perseverance and responsiveness.
Moreover, if you are like me, your careers will have benefitted from teamwork—the good fortune
to work with capable colleagues. Individual effort is essential, but success often depends as well
on the contributions of others.  Whatever list you have come up with, make sure that teamwork
is among your core personal principles.
6
I would also like to make a slightly different observation on banker ethics. What’s missing is not
so  much  a  personal  commitment  to  good  conduct,  but  rather  a  commitment  to  call  out  bad
conduct observed in others. You might think it is a paradox or a contradiction to praise teamwork
in  one  breath,  and  then  in  the  next  breath  to  call  for  raising  the  red  flag  when  you  see  bad
conduct in others. I do not see it that way.
We hear often that integrity is a corporate value. I think what is often meant by this is honesty—
doing what you say, and saying what you mean. But integrity, to me, has an additional meaning. It
means operating according to a single, internally consistent set of principles. If you are honest
only in some places or circumstances, but not others—or only with some people, but not others
—then honesty is hardly integral or integrated into your life and work.
The importance of this particular meaning of “integrity” was made apparent to me on a recent
visit I made to the United States Military Academy at West Point. The faculty and students there
believe that strong individual ethics are what make large organizations like the U.S. armed forces
succeed. The commitment of cadets to living the ideals of the institution was impressive and
humbling. They embodied the word integrity—alignment of word and deed in all aspects of life.
Another  lesson  that  I  took  from  West  Point  is  that  cadets  commit  to  integrity  because  their
careers—and, in combat, their lives—depend on others. We are in this together—this city, this
industry, this country. And if we’re in it together, we all have to behave in ways that benefit the
group.  We have to behave in ways that merit the trust of others.
7
Whether we are citizens or soldiers, the most important relationships in our lives are built on
trust. In our personal lives, we take action when our trust has been betrayed. To reform financial
services, we need to bring the same expectations of trust—and the consequences of a breach of
that trust—to the office each day. If you would not tolerate a practice in your personal life, do not
tolerate it in the office.
Calling  out  bad  conduct  is  not  easy.  Let  me  share  with  you  another  observation  from  Preet
Bharara. A common element in many of the frauds his office has prosecuted is the failure of
colleagues  to  call  out  bad  conduct  by  raising  their  hands.  This  is  so  telling  of  a  culture  that
condones or promotes misconduct. People see something, but do not say something. And, it is
so shortsighted. It prevents problems from being addressed while they are small. By not raising
their hands, these colleagues are “quietly adding risk to your books [and] invisibly enlarging your
liabilities.”  They are also tacitly encouraging bad conduct by skewing incentives.
8
There  may  be  many  reasons  for  choosing  silence  over  raising  your  hand.  You  may  face  a
conflict of loyalties. It’s uncomfortable to tell on a colleague. You may think that the problem will
just  go  away,  or  that  calling  attention  to  a  problem  will  harm  the  firm.  Raising  your  hand  is
difficult. But, it is also absolutely necessary. As rising leaders in the industry, you need to lead by
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
example. In doing so, you will make it easier for others to follow your lead.
My final message is a request that each of you commit to a candid assessment of yourselves,
your  firms  and  your  industry.  For  Adam  Smith,  candid  observation  was  a  cornerstone  of
economic behavior:
“We  suppose  ourselves  the  spectators  of  our  own  behavior,  and  endeavor  to
imagine what effect it would, in this light, produce upon us. This is the only looking
glass by which we can, in some measure, with the eyes of other people, scrutinize
9
the propriety of our own conduct.”
 Candid self-assessment is essential to knowing where you stand and how you are progressing
toward your goal. Industry groups here and in other financial centers are working on useful ways
to  measure  culture—consistent  with  the  maxim,  “if  it’s  important,  you  will  measure  it.”  But,
assessment  cannot  stop  there,  and  it  cannot  be  the  job  of  someone  else—such  as
management, compliance, audit or a regulator. Each of us must also be reflective about our own
faults. We must also commit to do better going forward.
When  it  comes  to  making  a  candid  assessment  of  your  group,  your  firm  and  your  industry,  I
would like to suggest that you devote significant attention to incentives. I believe that incentives
shape behavior, and behavior drives culture. If you want a culture that will support your long-term
business strategy, you need to align incentives with the behaviors that will sustain your business
over the long haul.
There  are  many  ways  of  encouraging  certain  behavior  through  incentives.  Promotion  is  quite
powerful,  as  is  compensation.  They  are  powerful,  in  part,  because  they  convey  values  and
community esteem. People work hard to earn money. But, most also work hard to earn the trust
and respect of colleagues, peers, subordinates and seniors. If you want to know what behaviors
are valued or esteemed in reality, look to see who is promoted and well-compensated and the
behaviors that they embody. Do the results match what is said? Do they match your expectation
of  fairness?  Do  you  aspire  to  be  one  of  these  individuals,  not  because  of  their  status  and
compensation alone, but because of the esteem you hold for them and their values?
Over  the  long  haul,  the  economy  needs  a  vibrant  and  trustworthy  financial  sector  in  order  to
thrive, just as the financial sector needs a vibrant economy to thrive as well. You are the rising
leaders of your firms. You can help accomplish these aims. A strong and ethical culture in the
banking  industry  will  make  it  more  trustworthy,  and  therefore  more  effective  in  performing  its
mission. It will also help the industry be held in higher esteem and this will help attract the talent
needed to sustain the industry. I am encouraged by today’s gathering, and hope you will take
heart that an improved culture in the financial services industry is both necessary and possible.
Thank you for your continued efforts and your kind attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Stephanie Chaly, James Hennessy, Thomas Noone, Joseph Sommer and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing
these remarks.
See Criminal Accountability and Culture, Remarks by Preet Bharara, Reforming Culture and Behavior in the
Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue, October 20, 2016.
See John C. Bogle, Enough: True Measures of Money, Business, and Life, 45 (2009).
See Bogle, 45–46.
See What is Banking For? Remarks by Onora O’Neill, Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services
Industry: Expanding the Dialogue, October 20, 2016.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
7
8
9
See generally Robert H. Frank, Success and Luck: Good Fortune and the Myth of Meritocracy (2016).
See generally Dan Awrey, William Blair, and David Kershaw, “Between Law and Markets: Is There a Role for
Culture and Ethics in Financial Regulation?” 38 Del. J. Corp. L. 217 (2013) (discussing the need for “other-
regarding” norms in finance).
See Criminal Accountability and Culture, Remarks by Preet Bharara, Reforming Culture and Behavior in the
Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue, October 20, 2016.
See Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, Section III.1.5.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
