  “The risks and prospects  
for the global economy and capital markets in 2017” 
Keynote address by  
Professor John (Iannis) Mourmouras* 
Deputy Governor, Bank of Greece 
at AMUNDI - OMFIF Asset and Risk Management Seminar  
entitled “Risk and yield management for official asset managers in a 
multicurrency system” 
 London, 24 January 2017 
        1 
                                                            
* Disclaimer: Views expressed in this speech are personal views and do not necessarily reflect those of the 
institutions I am affiliated with. 
   Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Today, as policies and capital markets seem to be moving from the “Unconventional 
Era” and “Great Distortion” towards “Gradual Normalisation”, I would like to discuss 
not only the prospects, but also the challenges we face head-on.  
Let me start by offering my own insights into the global market outlook. 
 1.  GLOBAL ECONOMIC OUTLOOK FOR 2017 
The world economy 
2017 will be very different from 2016, in many respects. If 2016 will be remembered 
as  the  year  of  Brexit  and  Donald  Trump’s  election,  2017  I  foresee  may  well  be 
remembered  for  developments  in  the  European  continent.  I  refer  to  the  national 
elections and the associated political uncertainty that may trigger further changes in 
the eurozone and the broader European Union, as we know it today. Two other key 
topics will be the new US economic policy under President Trump and the end of the 
dominance of central banks, which will pass the torch to fiscal policy across the globe. 
In 2016, performance in the world’s major capital markets has been low by historical 
comparison, reflecting the salient events over the course of the previous year. I will 
show you only one figure depicting 2016 in six charts and refrain from any further 
comments  about  last  year,  as  the  Bank  of  England’s  Chris  Salmon  will  provide  a 
thorough overview of financial market developments in 2016 later this evening. 
   2 
Figure 1. 2016 in six charts 
  
The IMF’s latest macroeconomic projections, released last week, suggest that recovery 
is on the way† this year once again. A pick-up in global real GDP growth is expected, 
from 3.1% in 2016 to 3.4% in 2017, driven mostly by a rise in emerging markets’ 
growth (4.1% in 2016 to 4.5% in 2017) and secondarily by a pick-up in advanced 
economies’ growth (1.6% in 2016 to 1.9% in 2017) (see Figure 2). Also, headline 
consumer  price inflation in advanced economies is forecast to increase to 1.7% in 
2017, up from 0.7% in 2016, mainly on account of higher oil prices and in line with 
the rebound in world economic activity.  
 
 
                                                            
† IMF, World Economic Outlook, January 2017. 
 3 
Figure 2. Real GDP growth (year-on-year) in major economies 
  The most astonishing fact about the world economy is that it has grown every single 
year since the early 1950s. It has very rarely grown by less than 3% since the early 
1950s and only four times by less than 2% - in 1975, 1981, 1982 and 2009. The first 
three were the result of oil price shocks, triggered by  wars in the  Middle East and 
Federal Reserve disinflation. The latter was caused by the Great Recession after 2008’s 
global financial crisis. 
The following slides summarise the IMF’s January predictions for this year about the 
major blocks of the world economy. Let’s start with the US. 
 
The US outlook 
Output growth is projected to rise to 2.3% in 2017 and 2.5% in 2018. Both business 
and consumer confidence are at their 15-year peak, suggesting that the US economy 
is buoyant at the end of the Obama administration. In addition, after the latest FOMC 
meeting, the Fed’s expectations for CPI inflation in 2017 are at 1.8%-1.9%, slightly 
higher than the previous forecast of 1.7%-1.8%. 
 
 4 
The eurozone outlook 
Focusing on the economic  developments in the euro area, the economic sentiment 
indicator for the euro area rose to 107.8 in December 2016, reaching the highest since 
June of 2011, while consumer confidence remains at negative territory of -5.10, but in 
the highest level the last 20 months. As far as inflation data concerned, according to 
Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation had continued to rise in December 
2016, to 1.1%, after 0.6% in November, while core inflation (flash estimate) increased 
to 0.9% in December, up from 0.8% in November. Inflation expectations, as measured 
by the five-year inflation-linked swap rate, edged up to 1.77% at the beginning of 
December, close to the values recorded at the beginning of this year, slightly higher 
than prior to the start of the PSPP last year. Moreover, the December 2016 Eurosystem 
staff projections foresee the euro area HICP inflation at 0.2% in 2016, and 1.3% in 
2017, while real GDP growth is foreseen at 1.7% in both 2016 and 2017 and at 1.6% 
in both 2018 and 2019, broadly unchanged from previous estimates. 
 
The UK outlook 
As far as the UK is concerned, stronger-than-expected performance during the 
latter part of 2016, led the IMF to revise upwards its real GDP forecasts for 2017 to 
1.5%, from 1.1% previously. The average forecast for UK growth in 2017is now just 
1.3%, down from 2%  in 2016 and 2.2% in 2015. This reduction is due to the forecast 
impact of Brexit. But the average conceals a wide range underneath. At the optimistic 
end, growth is predicted to reach 2.7% while, at the pessimistic end, it is predicted to 
be just 0.6%. But the majority of forecasters seem to expect a significant slowdown 
next year a hard UK exit from the EU in 2019 is now a plausible scenario. Due to 
concerns over the general economic outlook, consumer spending is expected to slow 
significantly in 2017, amid weakening fundamentals.  
Living  standards  are  also  likely  to  fall,  after  two  relatively  good  years.  One 
reason  is  the  slowing  economic  growth.  This  would  mean  declining  growth  of 
employment and possibly an outright decline. Furthermore, weak sterling and rising 
inflation will erode real wages. Growth of real earnings is forecast at around, or below, 
zero in the second half of 2017. High inflation will also aggravate the freeze on the 
 5 
nominal value of welfare benefits. A number of other factors may give rise to downside 
risks for the UK output. First, the UK is running an enormous current account deficit, 
forecast at 5.7% of GDP in 2016. Second, public sector net debt is forecast to hit 90% 
of  GDP  in  2017-18,  which  suggests  a  diminishing  margin  of  manoeuvre.  Third, 
productivity growth remains too weak. Finally, business investment remains too weak 
to shift the adverse productivity trend. The consensus of forecasters for consumer price 
inflation in 2017 is 2.5%, up from a mere 0.7% in 2016. 
 The Japan outlook 
With regard to the Japanese economy, IMF has also revised upwards its real GDP 
forecasts to 0.8% for this year and to a relatively stable pace of around 1% in the years 
to come. According to the Bank of Japan, this is a rather moderate expansion with 
rising domestic demand, based on a rising domestic demand large-scale fiscal stimulus 
and growing exports. Inflation in Japan remains close to zero, almost four years after 
the Bank of Japan began an enormous monetary stimulus, as low oil prices and a period 
of yen strength dragged down prices. “The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer 
price index is likely to be slightly negative or about 0% for the time being,” said the 
Bank of Japan. 
 Emerging market economies (EMEs) 
As regards emerging economies, economic activity is projected to reach 4.5 percent for 
2017, around 0.1 percentage point weaker than previously forecasted. China’s economy 
is expected to have met the government’s target of at least 6.5% growth of GDP for 
2016. It is expected to continue to grow at a slightly slower rate (6.2%) also next year. 
Two main risks are threatening such a robust economic performance by the Chinese 
economy,  which,  if  materialized,  will  result  in  a  sharp  slowdown  in  the  Chinese 
economy, will have effects that will be felt globally. Commodity exporters, like for 
instance Brazil, Australia and South-East Asia, would then be hardest hit. The first one 
arises  from  the  high  level  of  debt  overhang.  China’s  total  corporate  debt  load  had 
reached 255% of GDP by the end of June, up from 141% in 2008 and well above the 
 6 
average  of  188%  for  emerging  markets,  according  to  the  BIS.  The  second  one  is 
China’s troubled shadow banking system, which lacks financial sophistication. They 
look  at  the  yield,  and  they  don’t  pay  attention  to  the  risk.  A  hypothetical  series  of 
defaults  would  shatter  the  assumption  of  an  implicit  guarantee,  sparking  a  run  that 
would leave dozens of banks exposed to a funding crisis. 
Finally  for  2017,  watch  out  for  India,  which  by  the  way  marks  70  years  since  its 
independence from the British Empire. For the past two consecutive years, India has 
outpaced China in terms of growth rates and is expected to do so this year as well. The 
growth forecast for 2017 is 7.2%. Indeed, India seems to have gained a momentum 
despite  the  temporary  negative  consumption  shock  induced  by  cash  shortages  and 
payment disruptions associated with the recent currency note withdrawal initiative. 
 
Table 1 Real GDP and CPI Forecasts for Major World Countries 
Indicator 
Year  
United States 
Japan 
Euro Area 
UK 
China 
India 
Real GDP (YoY%) 
2016 
1.6 
0.7 
1.7 
1.3 
6.5 
6.6 
2017 
2.3 
0.8 
1.7 
1.5 
6.2 
7.2 
CPI (YoY%) 
2016 
1.3 
-0.2 
0.2 
0.7 
2.0 
5.0 
2017 
1.9 
0.0 
1.3 
2.5 
2.2 
4.7 
Source: IMF, ECB, Fed, Bank of Japan, Bank of England, and Bloomberg. 
     2.  RISKS TO THE GLOBAL ECONOMIC OUTLOOK 
A.  US policy uncertainty due to new fiscal and trade policy 
7 
In the final months of 2016, financial markets responded to Donald Trump’s election 
in textbook fashion - not only at asset class level, with upward movements in stocks 
and government bond yields, but also within asset classes. Markets were responding to 
prospects for higher growth, inflation and market inflows following the US president-
elect’s policy announcements  on  deregulation, 
reform  and  spending  on 
infrastructure. Even more impressive, this occurred in a remarkably orderly fashion, 
with little evidence of distress among investors. 
tax 
Trumponomics  will  remain  an  important  market  influence  this  year,  with 
investors particularly interested in two things: the transition from announcements to 
detailed  design  and  sustained  implementation;  and  outcomes,  particularly  when  it 
comes to the  mix between higher growth and inflation. The anticipation  of a  more 
active fiscal policy is based on the assumption that President Trump will reinvent the 
package of policies known as Reaganomics. Not without reason. Most importantly, 
during much of his first administration loose fiscal policy collided with a tight monetary 
stance as Paul Volcker’s Federal Reserve sought to squeeze inflation out of the system. 
This resulted then in a seriously overvalued dollar. 
The strength of the dollar since the Trump election is justifiably based on that historic 
analogy.  It  seems  that  there  are  two  differences,  however,  between  the  Reagan 
administration and the Trump one. Reagan was fortunate in taking office in 1981 just 
after the second oil crisis tipped the economy into recession. As well as a strong cyclical 
recovery, the economy received a windfall as the oil price collapsed. As inflation came 
under control, policy interest rates came down, laying the foundation for a 35-year bond 
bull market. 
President Trump, by contrast, makes his entrance at the tail-end of a mature, though 
fragile, expansion. Wages are rising and there is little slack in the economy. On some 
estimates,  the  potential  growth  rate  is  as  low  as  1.5%.  In  other  words,  the  risk  of 
witnessing more inflation than growth is real. Secondly, there are debt levels. Reagan 
started a long surge in public-sector debt. Yet gross public debt today, at nearly 105% 
of GDP, is more than twice its size when Reagan left office in 1989 - a level not seen 
before outside the context of war.  
 8 
On the external front, there is the question of foreign policy, both in terms of trade and 
geopolitical  issues.  There  is  a  heightened  risk  on  “trade  protectionism”  under  the 
Trump administration. For several Asian economies, as well as Canada and Mexico 
with strong trade ties to the US, including the emerging markets, open borders and free-
trade  agreements  are  of  paramount  importance.  But  also,  for  the  rest  of  the  world, 
protectionism will have serious implications that will impact on the performance of 
their economies. Overall, a surge of protectionist measures would not only undermine 
the  recovery  in  global  trade,  it  would  also  disrupt  global  supply  chains  and  limit 
international factor movements, for both labour and capital. A protectionist backlash 
would not just have an adverse near-term cyclical impact, but also a negative long-term 
structural impact on potential growth. 
Finally,  two  cautious  remarks  on  the  US  economy:  (1)  A  skyrocketing  dollar  may 
inhibit growth. The dollar is up 25% against the euro since 2014. (2) The recent big fall 
in real US yields (for 10-year Treasury notes to 0.38% today, from 0.74% one month 
earlier) may suggest that investors moderate their expectations for Trump’s economic 
agenda. Clearly, when optimism towards the economy brightens, investors typically 
demand a higher real yield to hold treasury debt, and the reverse also holds. 
 
B.  Europe’s politics 
Political risks to the European order are on the rise after the UK vote to leave the EU 
and the unprecedented wave of migration from war-torn countries in the Middle East 
and North Africa that has fueled the rise of nationalist politics and populism and a 
backlash  against  mainstream  politicians  and  political  and  financial  elites. 
Euroscepticism  is  now  a  strong  sentiment  in  Europe.  Populist  parties  are  in 
government or in a ruling coalition in nine (9) countries of the EU. This is an alarming 
figure. Elections this year in the Netherlands, France, Germany, and maybe Italy, four 
of the founding members of the European Economic Community back in the 1950s, 
are critical as they may provide gains to populist parties that would result in increased 
Euroscepticism across Europe and as political risks seem to come ahead of economics. 
But what exactly does populism mean? And why markets should care about it? There 
are  three  reasons.  First  of  all,  there  is  anti-globalism  and  blaming  of  free-trade 
 9 
agreements and global finance. Second is an embrace of state activism in the economic 
field, which implies less structural reforms, undoubtedly inhibits long-run growth and, 
in  turn,  jeopardises  public  debt  sustainability  which  is  at  the  heart  of  the  south  of 
Europe’s economic troubles. Third, populists are averse to policymaking based on 
rules and in favour of discretionary policymaking and interventionist policies.  
 
In short, the risk with the multiple elections and possibly a mushroom of referenda in 
Europe  is  that  we  cannot  rule  out  that  voters  will  once  again  turn  against  the 
mainstream parties, shifting towards less international cooperation, away from free 
trade and away from open borders and migration. Brexit is perhaps the best example. 
Prime Minister May’s powerful speech on 17 January set the agenda for a hard Brexit, 
on the ground that no deal is better than a bad deal, regardless of the short-term cost 
to the economy. Effectively, the Prime Minister will not seek for the UK to remain in 
the single market, but will negotiate a customs agreement and, in exchange, regain 
control  over  UK  borders.  Hopefully  there  won’t  be  any  upsets  and  further 
complications from today’s decision by the Supreme Court of Appeal on whether the 
UK government can formally initiate Article 50 without parliamentary approval [the 
High Court has ruled that parliamentary approval is required]. If Article 50 is triggered 
in March I hope that at least part of the negotiation will be careful not to jeopardise 
the City of London’s role as a leading global financial centre. 
 
C.  Geopolitical and other risks 
A third set of risks is geopolitical. To name briefly a few, the coming friction between 
President Trump’s US and China, but also Germany; friction between Iran and Saudi 
Arabia, and the real threat of ISIS hitting Western democracies. 
Last  but  not  least,  underlying  vulnerabilities  remain  among  some  large  emerging 
market economies, with high corporate debt, weak bank balance sheets, and thin policy 
buffers,  implying  that  these  economies  are  still  exposed  to  tighter  global  financial 
conditions,  capital  flow  reversals,  and  the  implications  of  sharp  depreciations, 
especially as a result of an unprecedented strength of the US dollar. All this heightens 
their exposure to severe external shocks. Indeed, the last time emerging economies 
 10 
faced monetary tightening and fiscal loosening in the US (in the early 1980s), many of 
them (notably in Latin America) slid into a lost decade.  
 
3.  CENTRAL BANKS’ MONETARY POLICIES  
In the beginning of 2017, it seems that the major advanced economies monetary easing 
cycle may be ending soon. Since August 2007, the average advanced economies’ policy 
rate has fallen by 377bp, ranging today from -0.75% in Switzerland to +1.75% in New 
Zealand. In addition, advanced economies’ central bank balance sheets have expanded 
dramatically, from an average of 11% of GDP in mid-2007 to 34% of GDP by end-
2016. Balance sheet increases were largest in Japan (from 22% of GDP to 91%) and 
Switzerland (19% to 111%) (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. Advanced Economies’ - Quarterly Average Policy Rate (%) and Central 
Bank Balance Sheet Size (% of GDP), 2000-2018 (Forecast) 
  
Fed 
In  response  to  the  US’s  strengthening  labour  market  and  moderate  expansion  in 
economic activity, the Fed announced last December its widely anticipated increase in 
the federal funds rate target to 0.5%. The Fed has indicated that future increases would 
soon follow, possibly three times by the end of 2017. 
 11 
Federal Reserve Bank president Janet Yellen suggested that the Fed would need to 
“have time to wait and to see what changes occur” under President Donald Trump’s 
administration  to  factor  those  into  the  Fed’s  future  decision-making.  At  present, 
markets are priced for only two rate increases this year, one in the end of the first half 
of 2017 and another by the end of the year, while the market-implied probability for a 
rate hike in March is around 25% (Figure 4).  
 
Figure 4. FOMC projections and current market expectations 
In short, the Fed probably will not alter its gradual monetary normalisation plans until 
there is more clarity about the profile of US fiscal policy.  
 ECB  
It is true that the critical indicator for the ECB remains core inflation. Indeed, core 
inflation has been incredibly persistent in the euro area, stuck below 1%, while inflation 
forecasts  until  2019  remain  under  the  target  with  downside  risks,  as  I  said  earlier. 
Hence, at least for the first half of the year, the ECB’s stance remains accommodative 
as more evidence that inflation is self-sustaining is needed. Against this background, 
taking  into  account  that,  as  I  predict,  the  Fed  will  continue  its  monetary  policy 
normalisation by raising key policy rates gradually, the so-called monetary policy 
divergence among G-4 central banks will remain a key theme in the 1st half of 
2017. 
 12 
However, higher oil prices could feed into a gradual increase in inflation, (Figure 5). 
When inflation expectations are on the rise, the ECB’s forecasts could soon point to 
opportunity for the ECB to rebalance its stimulus by tapering QE and rely more on 
liquidity provision. Hence, any upcoming reductions in the APP could be seen as a 
gradual tapering. In this context, communication will be crucial, while to protect the 
periphery  from  what  may  be  seen  as  a  reopening  of  credit  risk  (sovereign  debt  is 
substantial), banks may be given another liquidity injection (TLTRO). We all recall the 
financial  market  effects  from  the  Fed’s  tapering  in  spring  2013,  which  largely 
contributed to a sell-off that drove the 10-year Treasury bill from just above 1.60% in 
early May 2013 to 3% only four months later.  
 
Figure 5. Euro forward inflation linked swaps (1-year-1-year & 5-year-5-year) 
Source: ECB. 
 
In the eventuality of such QE tapering, less monetary divergence between G-4 central 
banks will be on the cards for the second half of the year (Figure 6). 
 
Figure 6. Less QE from ECB, less monetary policy divergence 
 13 
BoJ 
 Source: US Fed, Bank of Japan, ECB, and SG Cross Asset Research/Global Asset Allocation. 
 
Bank of Japan 
As you know since last September the Bank of Japan introduced a new monetary policy 
framework best known as “QQE with yield curve control” and shifted its key policy 
target from quantity (i.e. asset purchases) to interest rates, thus preparing the ground 
for its own QE tapering. While inflation is likely to remain much lower than the Bank 
of Japan’s 2% inflation target in coming years, (2017 Forecast: 0.6%), it is not expected 
by the markets any more monetary easing during Governor Kuroda’s term (ending in 
April 2018). 
 
Bank of England 
Although spot inflation will likely move higher over the coming year, (according to 
BoE’s forecasts, inflation will rise to 2.7% in 2017), the BoE has clearly stated that its 
stance now is neutral. However, there are enhanced concerns over the impact of the 
Brexit  referendum  on  growth,  together  with  the  potential  shock  to  real  incomes 
expected as price pressure begins to build over Q1. At present, the market prices a 35% 
chance of a 25bp rise to Bank Rate by the end of 2017. Finally, Table 2 shows in detail 
the monetary policy front from the G-4 central banks in the year ahead and Figure 7 
shows their median inflation forecasts. 
 
Table 2. Fed, ECB, BoJ, BoE monetary policies in 2017 
 14 
Source: Bloomberg. 
Note: 1.The ECB announced that QE purchases would continue beyond March 2017 until end-2017, 
at €60 billion per month (dropping from €80 billion currently). Purchases are unlikely to stop altogether 
at that stage; rather, the ECB would announce a gradual phasing out of QE. 2. YCC: 10-year yield 
target of zero, negative policy rate. 
 
 
  15 
Figure 7. CPI Inflation (% YoY) and Central Bank Median Inflation Projections, 
2010-2019 
Source: Bank of Japan, ECB, US Federal Reserve, Bank of England, and Bloomberg. 
 In a nutshell, my verdict on monetary policy in the year ahead is: more monetary policy 
divergence in the first half and less monetary policy divergence in the second half of 
the year, which, in terms of the financial market’s jargon, means less distortion from 
unconventional monetary policies, a gradual return to monetary policy normalisation 
and steepening yield curves. 
 4. FINANCIAL MARKETS PROSPECTS IN THE YEAR AHEAD 
 THE US DOLLAR DOMINATES FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS 
A. 
I turn now to foreign exchange (FX) prospects for 2017. 2016 was the year that shook 
up currencies: sterling took a beating, while the dollar continued to march ahead; in 
real effective terms it has appreciated by more than 6% since August (Figure 8). This 
year it is predicted that the dollar will once again dominate the FX markets.  
 
 
 
•  Against the euro: Parity is on the way 
 16 
The main question is: How far can the USD run? The extent of monetary divergence 
between the Fed and the ECB will be the major driver for US dollar strength, together 
with a higher-than-expected budget deficit as a result of fiscal stimulus, which with 
higher long-term government bond yields will attract new capital inflows. In addition, 
a busy electoral calendar in Europe will be another source of concern for investors in 
light of the recent rise of populist movements and euro scepticism as the European 
political agenda looks busy in 2017. As a result, the dollar’s strength is expected to 
remain with the euro against the dollar to move near to parity and could break it 
by year-end. 
 
Figure 8. EUR-USD and real yields 
Source: Bloomberg. 
 
 •  Against the British pound: The Brexit risk overshadows everything 
The US dollar rose against the pound by more than 16% on a yearly basis last year. 
Downside risks for sterling remain significant this year, while periods of spikes are 
expected considering the recent sterling behavior after Prime Minister Theresa May  $ 
announced the UK’s hard-line negotiating position. On Tuesday, 17 January, right 
after Prime Minister May’s speech, the sterling rose by almost 3% against the US 
dollar and by 2% against the euro, recording its biggest gains against the US dollar 
since 1993, to above US$ 1.24 (Figure 9). 
   17 
Figure 9. GBP-USD Spot Exchange Rate (above) and GBP-USD 3-month ATM 
Implied Volatility 
Source: Bloomberg. 
 
 •  Against the yen: further appreciation ahead 
As the market is expecting a notably more restrictive US monetary policy, whereas 
the Bank of Japan will remain rather expansionary, the outlook for both USD-JPY and 
EUR-JPY currencies is to appreciate during this year.  
 
•  Against CNY: Weakness abroad 
The  CNY  has  depreciated  by  more  than  3%  against  the  US  dollar  since  the  SDR 
inclusion in October and by around 10% on a yearly basis. A managed depreciation 
remains the key theme for the CNY in the foreseeable future as one of the Chinese 
authorities’ priorities is the currency credibility due to China’s aspirations for the CNY 
to become a global reserve currency. 
 
B.  Sovereign  bonds:  more  than  usual  volatility  /  rebuilding  term  premia/ 
steepening yield curves 
As the global policy mix is evolving towards more fiscal easing and less monetary 
easing, there is intrinsic uncertainty because effective implementation of such a policy 
shift is still very much an open issue. This would lead to higher yields, more volatility 
and  higher  term  premia,  especially  on  the  long-end  of  the  yield  curve,  which  is 
 18 
overbought over the last few years due to low-for-long interest rates (Figure 10). As a 
result, the themes of rebuilding term premia in long maturity rates and steepening yield 
curves are gaining ground.  
Figure 10. Interest rates on, 2-year and 10-year sovereign bonds in the US, 
Germany, Italy, Spain, Japan, and the UK 
 US government bonds market 
 Increasing term premia effectively means that there is room for a steeper yield curve 
for a given level of short rates. The degree of US government yield curve steepening 
will depend on the pace of policy normalisation by the Fed, on the depth of tax cuts 
and  the  level  of  infrastructure  spending.  All  this  could  lead  to  higher  inflation 
expectations and a sharp repricing of term premia.  
Euro area government bonds market 
The  outlook  for  European  fixed  income  in  2017  requires  a  careful  balancing  act 
between expectations of less monetary policy support on the one hand and structural 
factors, on the other hand, such as unresolved banking sector issues as well as political 
developments (Figure 11). 
 
 19 
Figure 11. US-German Government 2-year and 10-year bonds spread (in basis 
points)  
 Source: Bank of Greece and Bloomberg. 
Any widening in periphery spreads will depend on country-specific politics, the long-
standing issue of economic non-convergence, but also given that the ECB’s APP will 
run throughout the year. Hence, a rise in the yields in the europeriphery is quite 
likely  and  the  spread  between  core  and  peripheral  yields  will  fluctuate 
throughout the year. 
 
•  Equities 
Finally, one word about equities. Watch out once again for the correlation between 
bond yields and returns on equities. Since the 2008 crisis, this correlation has been 
systematically negative due to drastic non-standard measures with a few exceptions 
(Fed’s  tapering  in  2013  and  the  Bund  tantrum  in  2015,  during  which  bonds  and 
equities  prices  abruptly  corrected).  In  my  view,  the  bond-yield/equity  market 
correlation will remain negative as a trend once more this year, albeit less pronounced 
and more volatile (Figure 12). 
 
 
 
 
 20 
Figure 12. Interest rate/ US equity market correlation (26-week moving average) 
vs. Fed cycle  
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  
 
Thank you very much for your attention! 
  21 
