 NATIONAL BANK OF SERBIA  
Governor’s opening remarks at the presentation of 
the Inflation Report – May 2017 
Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor 
         Belgrade, 19 May 2017 
Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
Welcome to the presentation of the May Inflation Report. As always, we will give an overview of the 
current monetary and macroeconomic developments and our expectations for this and the following 
year.  
Inflation within the target tolerance band 
First,  I  would  like  to  underline  that  since  the  beginning  of  2017,  inflation  has  moved  within  the 
bounds  of the  new,  lower  target  tolerance  band.  We  anticipated  that  inflation  would  move  within 
the target tolerance band this year and announced this trend at presentations of the Inflation Report 
last  year  as  well  as  at  the  previous,  February  presentation.  As  in  other  countries,  inflation  in  this 
period was  affected by the  recovery  in global oil prices in the latter half of 2016 as was expected; 
however, adverse weather conditions early this year resulted in a higher than expected increase in 
the prices of fruit, vegetables and firewood. That this is an impact of one-off factors on inflation is 
suggested  by  low  and  relatively  stable  core  inflation,  which  hovered  at  around  2%  year-on-year. 
According to our latest projection, over the two-year horizon covered by the projection we  expect 
inflation to move within the bounds of the target tolerance band of 3±1.5%.  
You will hear a more detailed elaboration on the projection of inflation and its factors later on in the 
conference. I would like to take a look at developments in the international environment which for 
quite a while have posed a challenge to Serbia, as well as to all small and open economies, which is 
why it is important that we preserve macroeconomic stability and improve our business ambience.  
In  the  prior  period,  the  international  environment  was  marked  by  uncertainty  –  uncertainty 
regarding  the  pace  of  global  recovery,  uncertainty  regarding  the  character  of  monetary  policies  of 
the  leading  central  banks  and  uncertainty  in  terms  of  movements  in  the  prices  of  primary 
commodities, notably oil.  
The  uncertainty  in  the  international  financial  market  originates  primarily  from  the  diverging 
monetary  policies  pursued  by  the  Fed  and  the  European  Central  Bank.  Taking  stock  of  the  US 
economy, the  Fed  continued  to raise  its  fed  funds  rate  in  2017.  By  contrast,  the  European Central 
Bank’s  decision  to  extend  the  quantitative  easing  programme  at  least  until  the  end  of  2017  will 
mitigate the negative effects of the Fed’s monetary policy normalisation. These decisions affect not 
only their economies, but also global markets and capital flows to emerging economies, which in turn 
inevitably  affects  the  pace  of  Serbia’s  trade  growth  and  financial  cooperation  with  the  rest  of  the 
world. 
The  recovery  in the global market  of primary commodities is largely attributable to the favourable 
outlook  for  global  economic  growth  which  is  gaining  speed  and  showing  signs  of  sustainability, 
whereas volatile prices of these commodities are under the impact of specific factors – from weather 
conditions, through compliance with agreements of oil producers to geopolitical tensions.  
1 
 It appears that the uncertainty on this account will persist in the period ahead. However, the results 
we achieve and anticipate when it comes to the narrowing in internal and external imbalances and 
implementation of structural reforms will determine the extent to which this uncertainty will reflect 
on  us.  Therefore  I  would  like  to  particularly  emphasise  that  owing  to  reduced  macroeconomic 
imbalances  Serbia  is  now  much  more  resilient  to  potential  adverse  impacts  from  the  international 
environment. 
Lower fiscal deficit and stronger external position are our response to external shocks 
Thanks  to  consolidation,  the  fiscal  deficit  was  reduced  to  1.3%  of  GDP  in  2016,  while  positive 
movements continue into the current year. I wish to remind you that in the first quarter, the general 
government  recorded  a  surplus  of  1.2%  of  GDP,  and  the  share of  public  debt  in  GDP  was  reduced 
further. At the same time, the current account deficit was reduced further in 2016 to 4.0% of GDP 
and was fully covered by foreign direct investment, which is likely to continue in the coming period. 
This is helpful for strengthening the country’s external position, thereby increasing our resilience to 
external shocks. 
The National Bank of Serbia’s contribution to faster and sustainable economic growth and increase 
in employment will continue through price stability and relative stability of the exchange rate, with 
lower costs of private sector financing 
A  key  fact  regarding  economic  growth  is  that  the  current  account  deficit  was  reduced  owing  to 
outstanding  export  results  of  the  Serbian  economy,  which  was  also  facilitated  by  the  activation  of 
earlier  investment  and  the  recovery  of  external  demand.  Also,  greater  product  and  geographical 
diversification of exports reduces the dependence on developments in individual markets and in turn 
makes  Serbia’s  exports  and  economic  growth  sustainable.  The  sustainability  of  growth  is  also 
confirmed by positive financial results of the economy over the past two years, which the National 
Bank of Serbia supported by ensuring price stability and relative stability of the exchange rate, with 
lower  costs  of  private  sector  financing.  Such  results,  coupled  with  further  improvement  in  the 
business and investment ambience and continued structural reforms, create conditions conducive to 
faster economic growth. This year we expect GDP growth to step up to around 3% and then further 
up to 3.5% the following year, supported by continued favourable movements in the labour market. 
Reduction in interest expenses and negative  exchange rate differences – factor of the economy’s 
success  
Based  on  data  of  the  Business  Registers  Agency,  in  2016  the  financial  result  of  our  economy 
improved by over RSD 360 bln compared to 2014.1 In the same period, as a result of monetary policy 
easing by the National Bank of Serbia, a reduction in the country risk premium (resulting from more 
favourable  macroeconomic  performances  of  our  economy)  and  monetary  accommodation  by  the 
                                                           
1 The difference between the net loss of RSD 131.8 bln in 2014 and net gain of RSD 229.3 bln in 2016. Net gain 
of RSD  67.2 bln was achieved in 2015. 
2 
 European Central Bank, interest expenses declined from RSD 145 bln in 2014 to RSD 99.3 bln in 2016.  
This means that the corporate sector paid to creditors RSD 45.8 bln less in 2016 than in 2014. At the 
same  time,  owing  to  the  stability  of  the  dinar,  which  is  the  result  of  successful  implementation  of 
macroeconomic  policies,  and  thus  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia’s  policy  as  well,  negative  exchange 
rate differences fell by RSD 157.6 bln – from RSD 246.3 bln in 2014 to RSD 88.8 bln in 2016. In total, 
in  respect  of  both  these  factors,  the  income  statement  of  the  corporate  sector  improved  by  RSD 
203.4 bln in 2016 relative to 2014.    
Given that the corporate sector has interest-bearing receivables, calculating positive exchange rate 
differences  on  FX  receivables,  the  effect  of  savings  in  these  two  items  on  the  profitability  of  the 
corporate sector equals RSD 148.4 bln in this period.   
This makes us satisfied not only because of the volume of savings, but primarily because of the fact 
that this opens room for the corporate sector to engage in its regular business activities and to plan 
its  development  in  more  predictable  circumstances.  Of  course,  we  are  satisfied  also  because  this 
confirms the soundness of the National Bank of Serbia’s policy and gives us an incentive to continue 
with its implementation.  
Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues,  
Serbia’s  improved  macroeconomic  outlook  and  the  results  achieved  in  terms  of  the  narrowing  in 
internal  imbalances  and  implementation  of  structural  reforms  have  for  quite  some  time  been 
positively assessed by international financial institutions and rating agencies. Let me remind you that 
recently – in March to be precise – Moody’s raised Serbia’s credit rating. During the assessment, the 
agency took into account all of the results achieved in terms of  reducing imbalances and achieving 
macroeconomic  stabilisation,  as  well  as  the  results  of  implementation  of  the  dinarisation  strategy 
and the resolution of non-performing loans. The risk premium, which since the start of the year has 
fallen in Serbia more than in the neighbouring countries, touching its ten-year low, also reflects the 
growing confidence in the Serbian economy. 
In  addition,  the  projections  of  key  macroeconomic  indicators  for  Serbia  prepared  by  relevant 
institutions  run  close  to  our  forecasts.  They  also  assess  that  inflation  will  move  within  the  target 
tolerance band both this and the next year, and expect further acceleration of GDP growth similar to 
our projections. 
All the above factors indicate that our economy is now much more capable to respond to challenges 
–  which  is  an  additional  incentive  to  us  to  preserve  the  stability we  have  ensured  and  to  continue 
with structural reforms and improvements in the investment ambience.  
You may rest assured that the National Bank of Serbia will continue to closely monitor and assess the 
developments and tendencies in the domestic market and the international environment. As so far, 
we will continue to apply all available instruments in order to maintain low and stable inflation in the 
 3 
medium run, which, combined with the preservation of financial stability, will contribute to economic 
growth on sustainable grounds. 
Thank you for your attention. I now give the floor to my colleagues.  
 4 
