William  C  Dudley:  Household  borrowing,  student  debt  trends  and
homeownership
Opening remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Economic Press Briefing on Household Borrowing, Student
Debt Trends and Homeownership, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 3 April
2017.
 Andrew  Haughwout,  Joseph  Tracy  and  Wilbert  van  der  Klaauw  assisted  in  preparing  these
remarks.
Good morning, and welcome to the New York Fed’s Economic Press Briefing.  Today, we will
focus on recent developments in household borrowing, with special attention on student debt.  As
always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open
Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.
Following a period of steady deleveraging that began during the Great Recession, households
have  gradually  increased  their  borrowing  during  the  past  three  years.    Later  this  year,  total
household debt is expected to reach its previous peak, from the third quarter of 2008.  Given past
experience, one might wonder whether this level of indebtedness is sustainable or a reason for
concern.  Answering this question requires a fuller consideration of household balance sheets
and a deeper analysis of who is indebted.  The increase in liabilities in recent years has been
accompanied  by  significant  improvements  in  the  value  of  assets  held  by  households,  due  to
strong growth in housing and stock prices.  Moreover, household incomes have been rising at a
moderate pace due to sturdy job gains and modest wage increases.  As a result, the household
sector’s financial condition today is in unusually good shape for this point in the economic cycle. 
In relative terms, household indebtedness is low, and—thanks in part to low interest rates—debt
service burdens relative to household income have fallen to levels not seen since at least the
early 1980s.
As we will show in today’s presentation, compared to 2008, a greater proportion of overall debt
today  is  now  held  by  older  households  that  have  higher  and  more  stable  incomes  and  more
experience  as  borrowers,  on  average.    Consequently,  a  much  larger  proportion  of  debt  is
currently held by borrowers with higher credit scores.  The resulting higher overall debt quality is
reflected in historically low overall delinquency rates.  Transition rates into new delinquency are
below the levels of the early 2000s, and foreclosure and bankruptcy rates in 2016 are the lowest
since our data series began in 1999.
important  underlying  changes 
Notwithstanding  this  overall  rosy  picture,  the  improvement  in  aggregate  debt  quality  and
performance  conceals 
that  could  be
consequential,  with  implications  for  the  housing  market  and  for  consumer  spending  over  the
longer term.  While older borrowers hold more debt of all types, there has been a significant shift
among younger people toward student debt and away from mortgage and other debt.  Student
debt has increased more than fivefold over the past 14 years, with more young adults taking out
loans and borrowing larger average amounts.  And, while debt delinquency rates overall have
fallen, those for student debt have remained elevated.
in  debt  holdings 
Since 2012, the New York Fed has devoted considerable attention to the rapid growth in student
debt levels and delinquencies by publishing a number of reports.  The findings in these reports
were largely based on data from our Consumer Credit Panel (CCP), a nationally representative
dataset sourced from Equifax credit reports.  This unique dataset has enabled us to provide new
insights into the overall state of the student loan market and into individual student loan borrowing
and repayment behavior not available from other data sources.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Today,  we  will  first  provide  a  brief  overview  of  aggregate  household  debt  and  its  borrowers,
followed  by  a  presentation  based  on  new  research  on  student  debt,  which  focuses  on
delinquency and repayment rates.  We find that recent cohorts of college students are defaulting
at a lower rate than those who left higher education during the recession.  But, at the same time,
their repayment rates are also lower.  Despite an improving labor market, overall delinquency
rates on student debt remain stubbornly high, and repayment progress has slowed further, likely
reflecting the recent introduction of more accommodative payment plans.  Payment progress is
particularly low for those with larger debts and for those from lower-income areas.
Much remains to be learned about the causes of the observed expansion of debt burdens and
repayment problems among recent college graduates.  Over the past two decades, there has
been  a  significant  change  in  the  financing  of  higher  education—with  state  and  local  funding
covering a smaller share, and students and their families bearing a greater proportion of rising
college  costs.    While  the  federal  student  loan  program  has  undoubtedly  helped  mitigate  the
impact  of  higher  costs  on  college  enrollment,  more  students  now  leave  college  with  higher
amounts of debt.  At the same time, college dropout rates remain stubbornly high, and empirical
evidence indicates that graduates from some colleges have had trouble finding good-paying jobs.
Another important question concerns the consequences of growing student debt for the overall
economy.  To investigate this question further, we linked our CCP dataset to student enrollment
records from the National Student Clearinghouse in order to analyze the relationship between
homeownership, educational attainment and student debt.  Not surprisingly, our research shows
a  strong  positive  association  between  educational  attainment  and  homeownership,  consistent
with  the  fact  that  higher  educational  attainment  is  associated  with  higher  average  earnings. 
Interestingly, this relationship appears to hold irrespective of family background, suggesting that
colleges  may  be  successful  in  “leveling  the  playing  field”  across  students  from  different
socioeconomic backgrounds.
At the same time, our analysis reveals that those with significant student debt are much less
likely to own a home at any given age than those who completed their education with little or no
student debt.  This finding is consistent with other past and ongoing research here at the New
York  Fed  that  points  to  the  potential  longer-term  negative  implications  of  student  debt  on
homeownership  and  other  types  of  consumer  spending.    Of  course,  homeownership  is  more
than just consumption—it has historically been an important form of wealth accumulation.  For a
large share of households, housing equity is the principal form of wealth.  Thus, changes in the
way  we  finance  post-secondary  education  could  also  have  important  implications  for  the
distribution of wealth.
Before  turning  it  over  to  my  colleagues,  I  would  like  to  comment  briefly  on  the  importance  of
college  costs,  financing  and  access  to  higher  education.    It  is  well  known  that  the  average
earnings  premium  from  having  a  college  education  is  high  and  has  risen  over  the  past  few
decades,  in  part  because  of  a  decline  in  real  average  earnings  for  those  without  a  college
degree.    In  addition  to  higher  earnings,  a  college  education  is  associated  with  increased
homeownership, as I just discussed.  The economic and social returns to having a well-educated
and  skilled  labor  force  are  also  well  documented.    However,  I  would  like  to  highlight  another
important role of higher education: it is a pathway to and engine of upward income mobility.
I believe that income mobility—the degree to which individuals or families can move up or down
in the income distribution over time—is a foundational element for a well-functioning society and
indicates  the  ability  of  an  economy  to  provide  opportunities  for  all.    As  I  have  discussed
previously, important research by Stanford economist Raj Chetty and his co-authors has shown
that intergenerational income mobility in the United States—a child’s chances of moving up in the
income  distribution  relative  to  his  or  her  parents—has  remained  stable  over  the  past  half
century.       However,  because  of  the  increase  in  income  inequality  and  stagnant  or  declining
incomes  for  the  least  well-off,  the  consequences  of  being  born  to  low-  versus  high-income
1
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
parents are greater today than in the past.  These trends have contributed to a steady decline in
“absolute” upward income mobility in the United States, as defined by the share of children who
earn more in real terms than their parents.  This fraction has fallen from 90 percent to 50 percent
over the past half century.
Recent work by Chetty and his co-authors has investigated the importance of higher education in
achieving upward mobility.  They find that many highly qualified lower-income students do not
attend selective colleges, while those low- and middle-income students who do—despite facing
greater  challenges—fare  almost  as  well  as  affluent  students  who  attend  the  same  colleges. 
Their research also indicates that some colleges are better engines of upward income mobility
than others, and that colleges that offered the largest number of low-income students pathways
to upward mobility have become less accessible to them during the 2000s.  As a result, higher-
education’s contribution to increasing intergenerational mobility has diminished.
It is unclear why access has fallen to colleges with relatively high mobility rates.  One possibility
is  that  recent  budget  cuts  may  have  forced  these  colleges—which  tend  to  be  mid-tier  public
institutions—to raise tuition and change their admissions policies more than other institutions,
such as less budget-constrained elite private institutions.  Empirical evidence points to a greater
sensitivity to college costs in the higher education decisions of low-income populations.  As a
result,  continued  increases  in  college  costs  and  debt  burdens  could  inhibit  higher  education’s
ability  to  serve  as  an  important  engine  of  upward  income  mobility.    In  my  view,  these
developments are important and deserve increased attention.
Thank you for your kind attention.  I will now turn it over to Wilbert van der Klaauw, who will give a
brief overview of the current state of household debt.
1
See Economic Opportunity and Income Mobility, Remarks at the Association for Neighborhood and Housing
Development Annual Community Development Conference, April 11, 2016.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
