XXXI Adolfo Beria di Argentine Symposium 
La banca nel nuovo ordinamento europeo: luci e ombre 
    Ideas for the future of  
Italy’s financial system 
Salvatore Rossi 
Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy and  
President of IVASS 
         Courmayeur, 23 September 2017 
 1 
     CONTENTS 
Italy’s banks in the new European system 
 The problems besetting the ‘business of banking’ today 
 The transition of the Italian financial system 
 The rules are changing 
Technology and its uses are changing 
The system’s transition  
 2 
  Italy’s banks in the new European system 
 Italy’s  economy  was  already  weak  when  the  2007-08  global 
financial crisis struck. Its productive system was structurally incapable of 
delivering  innovation,  efficiency  and  genuine  development;  its financial 
system  was  overly  reliant  on  banks.  The  old  dinosaur  that  was  its 
banking system had already begun to stir back to life, but many banks 
lagged  behind  as  a  result  of  ingrained  bad  habits  in  governance  and 
management. These weaknesses fed on each other and were decried at 
conferences and publicly condemned. Given that they were also deeply 
rooted in the country and its history, at least its recent history, a solution 
appeared remote.      
   If  you  get  a  raging  temperature  when  already  under  the  weather, 
you run a serious risk, as Italy did in these years. The country is only 
now  coming  round  and  while  not  yet  decisive, 
the  signs  are 
encouraging.     
What  happened  outside  our  borders  in  recent  years  –  worldwide 
efforts to draw up new regulations for finance, banking union in Europe 
and  its  first  faltering  steps  –  will  be  analysed  by  future  historians. 1 
Europe’s  banking  union  is  here  and  we  must  ensure  it  functions 
smoothly,  starting  with  the  Single  Supervisory  System  (SSM)  and  the 
Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM)  established  in  Frankfurt  and 
Brussels. I will return to this point shortly. 
 1For an overview of these events from Italy’s perspective, see I. Visco, speech at the 23rd ASSIOM 
FOREX  Congress,  Modena,  28  January  2017;  S.  Rossi,  ‘The  Banking  Union  in  the  European 
integration  process’,  delivered  at  the  conference  on  European  Banking  Union  and  bank/firm 
relationships, CUOA Business School, Altavilla Vicentina, 7 April 2016. 
 3 
From  a  legal  perspective,  banking  union  formally  rests  on 
numerous and complex legislative acts, which I will refer to using their 
English acronyms. For the euro area only, there are the two SSMR and 
SRMR Regulations establishing the new bodies tasked with supervision 
and banking resolution, dating from 2013 and 2014 respectively; for the 
European  Union  as  a  whole,  we  have  CRD 
IV  (the  Capital 
Requirements  Directive),  followed  by  the  CRR  (Capital  Requirements 
Regulation),  both  from  2013;  finally,  there  is  the  BRRD  (Banking 
Recovery and Resolution Directive), from 2014, and the DGSD (Deposit 
Guarantee Schemes Directive), also dated 2014. Several of these acts 
are still being revised and refined.    
On  the  question  of  banking  resolution,  a  vital  component  in  the 
overall project for banking union, the European Commission’s July 2013 
Communication  updated  its  own  earlier  interpretation  of  the  rules  on 
State aid in the banking sector. Taken together, the BRRD, DGSD and 
this  Communication  have  played  an  important  role  in  the  case  of  the 
failing Italian banks that were wound up, placed under resolution or sold 
to other banks.    
Banking union makes sense if markets and investors believe that 
Europe’s banks are European first and foremost, and only then Italian, 
German or French. It follows that if a bank is in difficulty, it must be a 
matter  for  Europe,  not  just  for  the  country  in  which  that  bank  is 
headquartered.  This  implies  the  sharing  of  risks,  both  at  private  and 
public  level,  a  concept  that  many  countries  have  yet  to  accept.  For 
several good reasons, I might add. However, one point must be clear: 
banks run many risks that have to do with how they are managed, but 
they  also  share  with  the  State  in  which  they  are  established  –  and 
whose  government  bonds  they  hold  in  their  portfolios  –  what  is 
commonly  termed  sovereign  risk.  In  the  euro  area  today  this  is  a 
 4 
reflection  not  only  of  idiosyncratic  factors  in  that  State, but  also of the 
possibility – which the markets continue to entertain, though much less 
than in 2011 – of a euro break-up and the redenomination of credits into 
renascent national currencies. This element of risk must be eliminated 
by driving the message home at every opportunity: whatever happens, 
the euro will endure.  
Proceeding  with  banking  union  necessarily 
implies  sharing 
banking risks: all countries must work to make this a reality.   
 The problems besetting the ‘business of banking’ today 
What  problems do  Italian  banks face  today,  now  that  the  fall-out 
from  the  crisis,  specifically  the  ratio  of  non-performing  loans,  is  slowly 
diminishing?  Essentially,  our  banks  generate  too  little  profit,  even 
excluding the cost of bad loans. To understand why, it helps to look at 
what has happened internationally. 
Over  the  last  five  years  the  return  on  capital  and  reserves, 
namely the return on equity (or ROE), of our banks has been virtually 
nil, while in the euro area ROE has been just under 2 per cent and in 
the United Kingdom it has hit 3; in the United States it has reached as 
much as 9 per cent.  
Italian banks have not only had to make enormous write-downs 
of non-performing loans on their balance sheets, they have also had 
to  bear  higher  costs  than  in  other  countries.  Up  to  now,  traditional 
lending, especially when concentrated around smaller customers, has 
obliged banks to allocate a large amount of human resources per unit 
of  revenue;  moreover,  for  our  major  banks  labour  productivity, 
expressed  as  the  value  added  per  employee,  is  modest,  averaging 
 5 
€124,000  over  the  last  five  years,  compared  with  €170,000  for  a 
sample of large European groups with similar business models. 
The  low  interest  rate  environment,  created  the  world  over  by 
monetary policies, has squeezed interest margins and reduced profits. 
Although  this  is  a  global  phenomenon,  Italian  banks  have  suffered 
more than those of other countries owing to their traditional business 
model:  for  several  years  their  ROE  has  been  much  lower  than  the 
cost  of  capital,  which  does  not  make  it  easy  for  them  to  find  new 
funding on capital markets. 
As we see, Italy’s entire financial structure is in difficulty. Despite 
the  progress  made  in  recent  years,  we  still  have  companies  that  are 
poorly  capitalized  (as  well  as  too  small  on  average)  and  a  bloated 
banking sector within the financial system.  
And yet the overall size of Italy’s financial sector is no greater than 
that  of  other  advanced  countries.  On  the  contrary!  At  the  end  of  last 
year, the financial debt of the private sector (excluding banks and other 
financial  entities)  was  below  120  per  cent  of  GDP,  compared  with 
around  160  per  cent  in  the  euro  area,  the  United  Kingdom  and  the 
United States. 
But,  for  our  companies,  equity  finance  accounts  for  only  46  per 
cent of their total liabilities, compared with an average of 53 per cent in 
the  euro  area.  Moreover,  they  turn  mainly  to  banks  rather  than  to 
financial  markets  or  non-banking  intermediaries:  bank  loans  represent 
more  than  60  per  cent  of  firms’  financial  debts,  while  the  euro-area 
average is not even 40 per cent and in the United States and the United 
Kingdom it is one third.  
 6 
As a result, Italian banks, even the largest ones, have specialized 
in  retail  lending  to firms.  They  are therefore  more  exposed to  adverse 
cyclical conditions. 
 The transition of the Italian financial system 
 The rules are changing 
The  response  of  governments  and  supervisory  authorities  to  the 
global financial crisis has focused on two key concepts: ‘more capital in 
banks’  and  ‘no  more  taxpayer-funded  bail-outs’.  This  is  not  all:  action 
has  been  taken  on  liquidity,  securitizations  and  off-balance-sheet 
transactions.  Limits  on 
leverage  have  also  been  recognized  as 
necessary supplements to risk-based capital requirements. Even stricter 
rules  have  been  envisaged 
financial 
institutions. Instead, less attention has been paid, at least so far, to two 
extremely  important  non-banking  topics:  the  shadow  banking  system 
and over-the-counter derivatives transactions.  
for  systemically 
important 
Has the pendulum swung too far towards rules for banks? Many 
institutions  have  naturally  begun  to  think  so.  The  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking  Supervision  is  where  the  world’s  supervisory  authorities  are 
now  debating  this  question,  during  the  negotiations  on  the  proposed 
Basel  III  reform  package,  which  should  reinforce  and  refine  banking 
supervision  rules.  I  have  three  observations  to  make,  in  line  with  the 
stance adopted by the Bank of Italy. 
First  observation.  A  period  of  adjustment  for  the  reforms  will  be 
needed to produce a stable legal framework, otherwise uncertainty will 
increase, as will risks and the costs of banking. We must allow the rules 
to  settle  into  place  and  then  look  at  their  effects  on  business  conduct 
 7 
and  models.  The    burdens,  especially  for  smaller  banks,  need  to  be 
reduced where possible, though how this is to be done is a subject for 
discussion. 
Second observation. The desire for a period of stability is not to be 
confused with an easing of the rules, and the USA is currently wrestling 
with  this  problem.  The  Fed  has  defended  the  reforms  it  made  in 
response  to  the  global  financial  crisis  by  showing  how  they  have 
strengthened  the  banking  system  without  limiting  economic  growth. 
However,  the  new  administration  has  yet  to  define  its  negotiation 
strategy.  This  uncertainty,  which  can  occasionally  be  seen  in  the 
position  taken  by  American  representatives  in  some  international 
forums,  deprives  the  entire 
international  community  of  important 
leadership.  
Third observation. Work is ongoing in the euro area on regulatory 
and  institutional  reforms.  This  is  a  good  thing  as  banking  union  is  still 
incomplete.  Yet  in  Europe,  we  also  need  to  consolidate  what  has 
already  been  achieved,  starting  with  the  SSM  and  the  SRM,  the  two 
organizations responsible for the supervision and resolution of euro-area 
banks. Practices need to be harmonized by taking the best from each 
national  system  without  prejudice.  Progress  is  under  way,  including  a 
contribution from Italy, and must be continued.  
Rules can contribute to forging the business model for all banks. If 
the rules change, banks must take this into account when deciding on 
their identity and strategy. We hope that the uncertainties in the global 
and  European  regulatory  framework  will  be  dispelled  as  soon  as 
possible, because banks, especially in Italy, must reinvent and redefine 
themselves; and do so also in the light of new technologies. 
  8 
Technology and its uses are changing 
 FinTech is the new buzzword at the centre of any debate on the 
future of banking. FinTech companies make use of existing technology, 
and  of  new  technology  as  it  becomes  available,  to  offer  financial 
products  to  their  customers  that  up  to  a  few  years  ago  could  only  be 
purchased  through  a  bank.  This  business  is  expanding  rapidly  in  the 
markets  for  loans,  payment  services,  and  financial  advice  and  has 
managed to attract substantial funding from venture capital and private 
equity  firms:  last  year  such  firms  invested  more  than  $13 billion  in 
FinTech.  This  is  still  a  trifling  amount  compared  with  the  trillions  of 
dollars involved in global finance, but its growth is exponential.  
Until  very  recently,  the  banks  benefited  from  being  the  main 
gateway to the financial world for most of the population. By providing a 
simple but fundamental product like the current account, they were able 
to reach a vast client base and make profits. Today, FinTech companies 
are  trying  to  unpack  the  bundle  of  financial  services  offered  by  the 
banks, leaving the latter with only the least profitable ones.  
FinTech  uses 
innovative  data  analysis 
techniques  (artificial 
intelligence and machine learning) to process efficiently the information 
that individuals and companies put online, sometimes unknowingly (big 
data). Using this data, algorithms calculate the creditworthiness of those 
applying  for  a  loan  and  the  result  is  available,  on  digital  platforms  not 
requiring  a  bank  to  act  as  intermediary,  to  the  savers  who  directly 
disburse  the financing.  The  method  seems  particularly  profitable  when 
an  individual  or  a  small  company  is  asking  for  a  loan:  in  this  case, 
according to the advocates of FinTech, an algorithm based on big data 
is far more efficient than an office peopled by bank clerks.  
 9 
FinTech  companies  are  radically  changing 
the  relationship 
between  clients  and  financial  service  providers,  even  in  terms  of 
usability.    They  mainly  meet  the  needs  of  younger  people,  enabling 
them  to  conduct  financial  transactions  at  any  hour  of  the  day  or  night 
using their mobile devices.  
This  poses  a  serious  threat  to  traditional  banks.  The  only  factor 
that  keeps  borrowers  and  lenders  tied  to  a  traditional  bank  is  trust, 
based on familiarity with other human beings behind a counter or even 
based  purely  on  a  brand.  This  is  an  imponderable  factor,  one  that  is 
difficult  to  predict.  Certainly,  the  banks  will  have  to  give  much  more 
importance to the digital distribution channels and radically alter the way 
that  client  data  are  analysed  and  stored.  Substantial  investment  in 
technology and human capital will be necessary.  
Another  option  for  traditional  banks  is  to  acquire  one  or  more 
FinTech companies, as seems to be happening with payment services. 
Smaller  banks  could  team  up  with  FinTech  companies  and  outsource 
some of their own business, as has happened in many English-speaking 
countries.  
FinTech also raises questions and problems for those with a public 
responsibility as financial regulators and supervisors. There is a risk, for 
instance,  of  enlarging  the  boundaries  of  shadow  banking,  that  is 
financial entities that elude any kind of supervision. Progress cannot be 
stopped,  but  it  should  be  pointed  in  the  right  direction  in  the  public 
interest. We are already considering the best approach to take.  
 The system’s transition 
The financial crisis, the global reaction that widened and hardened 
the  perimeter  of  banking  regulation,  the  tumultuous  developments  in 
 10 
technology and in the market and, in the case of Italy, the long-standing 
problems  in  the  structure  of  the  economy  require  that  our  financial 
system  be  transformed.  The  changes  are  already  under  way,  and  the 
system is in a state of transition.  
Throughout the euro area, the banking system has progressively 
consolidated  since  the  crisis.  At  the  end  of  last  year,  the  number  of 
banks was just over 5,000, a drop of 25 per cent compared with eight 
years ago, while the number of residents per bank branch has grown by 
more than 30 per cent. In Italy,  the first figure is in line with the euro-
area average, while the second is lower (19 per cent), but nonetheless 
considerable.  
Similarly, the productive capacity of Italy’s banking industry is no 
more excessive than that of the euro area. At the end of last year, the 
number of residents per bank in Italy was about 100,000, much higher 
than  the  average  of  67,000  in  the  euro  area  and  48,000  in  Germany, 
even if the number of residents per bank branch was lower: about 2,000 
compared with 2,300 in the euro area and 2,600 in Germany.   
However,  the  future  does  not  so  much  hinge  on  the  number  of 
banks and bank branches, as on the composition of the financial system 
and the types of activities that banks undertake. 
I  mentioned  earlier  that  our  financial  system  perceives  firms  as 
being overly indebted, especially towards banks but without them having 
benefited in terms of profitability. In order to increase the profitability of 
the Italian banking system and make it sounder, counterintuitive events 
are  necessary:  firms  must  increase  their  capital  and  diversify  their 
sources of financing in order to reduce the role played by banks in the 
financial system. 
 11 
Signs  of  this  are  already  apparent.  The  moderate  expansion  in 
bank lending to firms in recent years, despite its recent recovery, is also 
a result of this process. From 2012, firms’ leverage (the ratio of debt to 
debt plus equity) has fallen, the share of bonds in total financial debt has 
increased  and  the  share  of  bank  lending  has  diminished  in  equal 
measure.  Changes  in  the  composition  of  financing  sources,  initially 
limited to large industrial groups already active in the bond market, are 
now being seen among smaller firms as well.    
Over  the  past  few  months  individual  savings  plans  (PIR  funds) 
have been introduced, i.e. instruments offering tax breaks and designed 
to channel investment directly towards Italian firms. The experiment has 
thus  far  been  a  success,  attracting  a  net  amount  of  approximately  €5 
billion.  Special  Purpose  Acquisition  Companies  (SPAC)  are  another 
relatively new addition to the market, with growing success: in essence 
they are small private equity funds that gather resources from a limited 
number of investors solely on the basis of the personal reputation of the 
promoters.  The  resources  are  used  to  purchase  equity  in  a  target 
company,  to  be  acquired  within  a  set  time  limit  after  the  vehicle  has 
been established. SPACs are listed companies and serve to accelerate 
the listing of the target company. 
 It is not enough for Italy to change the composition of its financial 
structure. Banks must advance their business model by accepting and 
facilitating a narrowing of their traditional role. 
In  the  long  run,  regulatory  and  technological  changes  make  the 
Italian  model  of  banking  that  prevailed  in  the  ten  years  prior  to  the 
global financial crisis no longer sustainable. However, the transition to a 
new model is far from being free of obstacles and risks. For example, 
 12 
the  immediate  repercussions  on  employment  of  a  rebalancing  of  the 
financial structure that lowers the share of the banking sector must be 
considered carefully, and tools to upgrade the skills of redundant staff 
must be set up – as we have already begun doing. 
There  is  no  one  solution.  Each  bank  is  a  unique  case  and 
generalization must be avoided. Some banks might increase the supply 
of  bond  or  share  placement  services  to  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises, leveraging the wealth of information gathered over time: in 
short, this would translate into less direct credit but greater support and 
the provision of collateral for firms seeking access to financial markets. 
Other banks might remain totally retail-oriented but enhance their use of 
digital 
the 
transactions and services available through them. 
their  online  channels  and  expanding 
tools,  boosting 
Such decisions are up to the banks. Analysts and supervisors can 
only try to glimpse the trends and prospects that, interspersed with risks, 
lie  in  the  mist  that  always  clouds  the  future.  Of  one  thing  we  can  be 
certain: the financial and banking systems cannot remain as they are if 
we want our country to return to a path of growth as it has done in the 
past. 
  13 
