Andreas Dombret: Monetary integration - lessons from Europe
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the 2017 Symposium "Monetary Integration Prospects in Africa: Lessons from the Experience
of the European Monetary and Financial Integration", Pretoria, 15 August 2017.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
It is a pleasure to be in South Africa once again – it is definitely one of my favourite destinations in
the world. And today’s conference shows that there are many topics that Europe, South Africa
and Africa share as a whole. In fact, many people outside of Africa are not sufficiently aware of
Africa’s quite rich experience with economic and monetary integration, and with existing as well
as planned monetary unions across the African continent. In the next 20 minutes or so, let me do
my part in an exchange of lessons learnt from monetary integration.
You could write the idea of a monetary union on the back of an envelope. And to list its potential
costs and perils, you might manage with a one-pager. But when it comes to documenting the
workings of an actual monetary union like the European project, this means many thousands of
pages  of  strategy  papers,  political  compromises  and  new  regulations,  not  to  mention  the
changes it brings to people’s lives. The project of monetary integration in Europe turned out to be
not only a number of steps, but rather a journey.
I guess that all of you here at this conference have made similar experiences across African
countries and across existing currency unions.
Where does this complexity derive from? And what could be valuable lessons for future steps of
monetary integration elsewhere?
Let me spend the next 20 minutes or so on a high altitude flight over the European monetary
union and both its structural impediments as well as its reform challenges.
2. Economic perspective: Between asymmetries and convergence
People  still  have  vivid  memories  of  the  crisis  in  the  euro  area.  Just  picture  all-night  meetings
between  national  leaders,  emotional  debates  in  the  European  Parliament,  European  citizens
queuing in front of closed banks, central bankers in many conference calls or young workers
leaving their country to escape unemployment. These images somehow point – amongst others
– to unsolved issues of European monetary integration.
But the problem with those images is that they always tend to give only a partial and situational
account of the problems. The actual issues of a monetary union are a lot less visible and a lot
more abstract. So it is part of our job as central bankers and international economists to explain
these phenomena – also by giving technocratic speeches that aren’t much fun to listen to. And
as we’re still at the beginning of this conference, I’ll try to concentrate on the very fundamentals.
In economic terms, we have to deal with asymmetries – imbalances that exist for a longer time
or that build up slowly over time. There may be differences in economic development, but we
should  not  abstract  from  differences  in  infrastructure,  institutions,  and  political  and  economic
philosophies. All of those differences across borders are quite common.
You may be thinking of specific regional disparities among African countries right now. But also in
the  euro  area,  “convergence”  was  a  key  word  from  day  one.  Even  today,  although  almost  all
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
member states in the euro area are experiencing an economic upturn by now, economic cycles
are not synchronous. And unemployment rates are highly divergent, standing at over 22 percent
in Greece and below 7 percent in Ireland. So even 25 years after we initiated a far-reaching treaty
of European integration, and after 18 years of sharing a common currency, we are not marching
in step.
Those  asymmetries  and  structural  differences  between  neighbouring  countries  are  not
necessarily  a  bad  thing.  But  in  a  monetary  union,  dissimilar  developments  have  extensive
implications  for  two  important  challenges:  first  and  well-known  to  everyone  here  in  this  room,
given its construction, a monetary union is more prone to imbalances because there is no longer
a  national  currency  with  a  floating  exchange  rate  as  a  means  of  countering  imbalances  and
regional economic shocks. However cruel a sudden revaluation may be for some parts of an
open economy, it is very useful as an automatic response to crises. Without nominal exchange
rate flexibility, economies need to adjust through adjustments of the real exchange rate which is
much more painful in practice.   
As  a  second  challenge,  in  a  monetary  union  the  community  may  ultimately  bear  the
consequences for imbalances that have emerged on the level of sovereign member states. This
has been an unequivocal lesson from the crisis in the euro area.
To describe how asymmetries became imbalances, let me briefly recap that large capital flow
imbalances had built up for several reasons in the run-up to the crisis. Then, suddenly, a mistrust
overburdened  regional  financing,  the  economy,  and  especially  fiscal  cushioning  powers.  But
there is no need here for details about the ultimate causes that led to the crisis. To understand
structural flaws in the euro area, it is more important to concentrate on what followed. Because
what  the  course  of  the  crisis  quickly  revealed  is  that  the  euro  area  was  unprotected  against
spillovers and contagion.
So, with hindsight, one can argue that Europe had underestimated the ways in which economic
and structural asymmetries transgress borders and challenge European institutions. There were
multiple  channels,  such  as  financial  risks,  economic  risks,  political  risks,  and  even  euro  area
monetary policy appeared as a last resort – because former national lenders of last resort no
longer existed.
Let me add a side note. People sometimes wonder why the discussions around the euro area
have  not  really  followed  the  line  of  economic  textbook  logic.  My  first  comment  on  that  is  that
sudden external shocks haven’t played a major role in the wake of the crisis. Second, ordinary
channels  that  are  meant  to  dampen  the  magnitude  of  negative  developments  have  not  been
central to developments. For example, we have witnessed a temporary net flow of workers from
countries hit hard by the crisis to countries with stronger economies. But another channel, that of
capital flow, has even aggravated imbalances to some extent. Cross-border capital turned out to
be volatile, especially with respect to countries struck by crisis. We have even witnessed pro-
cyclical behaviour with respect to savings and indebtedness.
So, because economic burdens could not be absorbed within their supposed boundaries, the
euro  area  community  was  found  to  be  ultimately  accountable  for  the  imbalances.  The  chief
diagnosis therefore was, and still is, a mismatch between instruments and responsibilities.
How  to  resolve  this  problem?  Let  me  present  the  basic  modules,  on  which  I  sense  an
overarching consensus in all parts of the euro area. To be frank, there are also disagreements
about reforms in the euro area, and I will turn to those later on.  
Without a national lender of last resort and without the option of immediate fiscal stabilisation,
there was a need for an effective euro area crisis response. Mechanisms were established to
contain  liquidity  shortages.  We  also  saw  a  determined  monetary  response.  But  of  course,
immediate crisis response mechanisms tend to favour short-term containment over long-term
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
effectiveness.  We  are  currently  still  debating  incentive  structures  of  immediate  crisis
management. But it was clear from the beginning that we would have to move from proximate to
ultimate fixes as soon as possible.
An important next step was to tackle amplifiers and aggravators of the crisis. Let me specifically
refer to banks in the euro area. Banks were involved in capital flows between member states,
and  they  were  involved  in  government  lending,  which  fed  into  the  so-called  sovereign-bank
nexus. This is the unhealthy relationship between governments and their banks, whereby banks
lend on a large scale and without a capital charge to their home countries, while governments
simultaneously find they must support struggling banks in order to prevent an immediate crisis.
Apart  from  the  vicious  circle  I  have  just  described,  the  bank  crisis  amplified  adverse
developments through various channels like overall bank mistrust, contagion effects as well as
fire sales.
The basic lesson was – and is – that the health of the euro area very much depends on healthy
banks. While it is a hypothetical question whether sounder bank behaviour could have prevented
the crisis entirely, we can be certain that a sound banking system that is equipped with more
capital and is incentivised in a healthier way makes crises a lot less likely. A major consequence
of the crisis has therefore been the so-called banking union – a change in rules and institutions
governing euro area banks. Of the various reforms the euro area has witnessed in the last years,
I find that these reforms have had the greatest impact so far. Even though the European banking
system is still recovering from severe shocks, larger capital cushions have been built up and
there is much greater emphasis on risk management today.
But  of  course  this  doesn’t  answer  the  question  whether  the  union  with  all  of  its  rules  and
institutions  could  –  after  leaving  the  crisis  behind  –  become  inherently  stable  in  the  future.
Asymmetries  and  structural  differences  will  remain  a  potential  source  for  imbalances  in  the
future as well. Or as the famous American Air Force engineer Edward A Murphy put it: “Anything
that can go wrong will go wrong."
Therefore, we are still confronted today with the task I mentioned earlier, namely that of resolving
the mismatch between instruments and responsibilities in the euro area. Whatever the solution
will be, it has to be somewhere in the spectrum of either transferring more responsibility to the
EU level or filling all of the gaps in national responsibilities. There are plenty of reform options
under discussion right now in Europe.
In  any  case,  straightening  out  the  relationship  between  individual  countries  and  the  monetary
union  should  not  be  the  sole  focus.  The  euro  area  also  needs  to  continue  its  work  towards
strengthening market functioning and market discipline.
Because whatever institutional setup a monetary union has, markets remain part of the story.
They need to exert their power effectively and responsibly – in good times and in bad. It follows a
simple logic: once losses occur, someone has to accept responsibility for these losses. In the
euro-area crisis, markets – understandably – put a lot of effort into evading their responsibilities.
We  are  still  struggling  to  make  markets  and  banks  a  reliable  cushion  in  times  of  economic
distress.
3. The reform perspective: Bridging differences
Ladies and gentlemen
So far I have attempted to give a high-level summary of structural flaws affecting the European
project. These may well be valuable lessons for further economic and monetary integration in
Africa. But that is only part of the story. As you may well imagine, there is an all-too-easy storyline
of first identifying structural flaws and then invoking a comprehensive reform.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
There are two obstacles I wish to address in that context. They have so far played a role in the
euro area, but they probably apply at a fairly general level, too. The first is essentially that we are
not on a green field where we can implement reforms without constraints. In Europe, it was well-
known  in  advance  that  monetary  policy  would  not  become  a  cure-all  and  that  problems  like
national  fiscal  overload  were  likely  to  emerge.  But  legal  provisions  have  so  far  simply  lacked
reliable enforcement. Therefore, an important lesson of the euro area is that common rules need
to be credible at all times.
However, we now have to live with the fact that the fragilities that fed into the crisis partly continue
to exist. Whether a flourishing regional economy, fiscal solidity or the financial resilience of banks
– they all interact systemically – in good and in bad times. So how much patience should we
have for each of the patients? Europe will have to continue walking a thin line, balancing short-
term expediency and long-term efficiency of reforms.
But  the  green  field  for  reforms  doesn’t  exist  for  another  reason,  and  that’s  because  actual
consensus  on  reform  options  is  not  entirely  clear.  This  is  the  second  obstacle  to  reforms.  It
doesn’t only relate to the long-term path of the union, but to crisis resolution options as well. This
is  because  all  of  these  matters  somehow  interfere  with  the  economic  and  political  sphere  of
national states – which unsurprisingly want to retain their influence. Thus, whatever institutional
compromise  is  aimed  at  on  the  European  level,  it  will  touch  on  delicate  national  economic
doctrines. This has been even labelled the “battle of ideas” about the euro.  It comes about quite
naturally:  reform  solutions  are  built  on  narratives  about  causalities.  And  narratives  about
causalities  quickly  lead  to  responsibilities.  In  Europe,  quite  resilient,  opposed  narratives  have
evolved in parallel to divergent economic realities. And in keeping with the confirmation bias, it
tends  to  be  easiest  to  find  evidence  for  one’s  own  theory.  This  is  why  consensus  about  the
scope  of  European  responsibilities  is  still  a  matter  of  debate  beyond  those  about  restraining
national  powers.  For  example,  the  EU  as  a  centralised  entity  that  could  mitigate  imbalances
would require a common understanding of good economic policy. So the challenge is not only
about  bridging  differences  in  economics,  but  also  about  bridging  gaps  in  ideas  and  political
attitudes.
4. Conclusion: Easy to explain, tough to maintain
1
Ladies and gentlemen
Monetary integration is easy to explain, but tough to maintain. It usually comes with additional
necessities, for each participating country and for the community as a whole. During my speech,
I have emphasised both structural and reform challenges in the euro area.
But of course, you won’t be presented with the full picture of the European project even from a
central banker. This is because even though it is not (yet) a political union, it is to a great extent a
political project. Its worth can hardly be measured in economic terms alone. In fact, economists
have frequently been surprised at the determination of integrationists. In all parts of Europe, the
union is not only seen as part of the problem, but usually also as part of the answer. Recently,
amidst a wave of euro-scepticism, people in my town of Frankfurt held weekly demonstrations in
support of Europe.
In this respect, the monetary union contributes to a search for common solutions as an – if you
want to call it that – “automatic response” to political isolation. Our union compels us to seek
common solutions instead of separate policies.
Being here in Pretoria I of course wonder what role this drive towards common solutions could
play in Africa in the future.
If you ask me, it does not make structural challenges any easier. But if a currency union is not
just a number of steps but a journey, I find it very comforting to see the determination and strong
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
will of all the travellers on that journey.
Concerning the future path of monetary integration in Africa, my hope is that this conference will
become a memorable signpost. 
Thank you very much for your attention.
1
Brunnermeier, James and Landau 2016: "The Euro and the battle of ideas".
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
