Sabine Lautenschläger: Monetary policy – what's next?
Statement  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central  Bank  and  Vice-Chair  of  the  Supervisory  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the
Eurofi Financial Forum, Tallinn, 15 September 2017.
 Monetary  policy  has  changed  significantly  since  the  financial  crisis.  For  many  years  we  have
pursued  a  highly  expansionary  monetary  policy  stance.  During  that  time,  monetary  policy  has
also  become  quite  unconventional;  we  have  deployed  a  range  of  different  non-standard
measures.
But now, markets, banks and savers are waiting for it to become more conventional again. And
there’s no doubt that monetary policy will return to normal. The question is when.
That is the first challenge. We need to find the right moment. The conditions are all in place for
inflation to reach a stable trend towards our goal: below, but close to, 2% in the medium term.
The conditions for that are all in place. Growth has returned to the euro area, and so have jobs.
We can look back on 17 quarters of economic growth and an unemployment rate that has fallen
from  around  12%  to  around  9%.  This  has  given  a  boost  to  demand;  people  have  started
spending again. And the recovery is not confined to a few countries; it has taken hold across the
euro area.
Given all of that, inflation should pick up. And it is picking up, but less quickly than one would
expect. So what is holding it back?
Well,  there  are  a  couple  of  things  –  oil  and  commodity  prices,  for  instance.  They  suppress
headline inflation and make it more volatile. And they also affect core inflation.
And there is another issue: the headline unemployment rate seems to miss some of the slack in
the  labour  market.  So  the  economy  might  be  a  bit  further  away  from  full  potential  than  would
appear to be the case at first sight. That, of course, holds inflation down.
At the same time, a long period of low inflation has an impact on how wages and prices are set.
This is particularly problematic when prices and wages are indexed to inflation. This effect should
wash out over time, though.
In any case, we can conclude that inflation is taking a bit longer than usual to pick up. So some
monetary accommodation is still needed to bring inflation back on a stable trend towards our
goal.  But  to  a  large  extent,  this  accommodation  is  being  provided  by  the  standard  monetary
policy  measures  and  by  the  stock  of  bonds  that  we  have  already  bought.  So  even  when  we
phase  out  our  net  purchases  of  bonds,  the  accommodation  will  still  remain  in  place  and  be
sufficient to ensure the necessary support to growth.
The buoyant growth coupled with the monetary accommodation will take us back to an inflation
rate  which  is  in  line  with  our  goal.  There’s  little  doubt  about  that.  Hence,  it  is  time  to  take  a
decision now on scaling back our bond purchases at the beginning of next year.
And  this  point  leads  to  a  second  challenge.  We  need  to  think  about  how  to  bring  our
unconventional measures to an end. We need to look ahead and discuss what the exit might look
like.
I am aware that this requires us to communicate very carefully. On the one hand, we must help
markets to get an idea of what the exit will look like. On the other hand, we mustn’t confuse them
with vague or ambiguous ideas.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
It’s a delicate balance we have to strike. And in my view, we need to find this balance now.
Thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
