J u n e   1 ,   2 0 1 7 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
Economic Activity, Prices, 
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Gifu 
Yutaka Harada 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
Introduction 
Thank you for giving me this opportunity to exchange views with you and for having taken 
the time to be here despite your busy schedules. It is indeed a great honor to be here today. 
Please  allow  me  to  express  my  gratitude  for  your  great  cooperation  with  the  business 
operations of the Bank of Japan, particularly of the Nagoya Branch. 
 The Bank has implemented quantitative and qualitative monetary easing -- or QQE for short 
-- since April 2013 and introduced various additional measures such as the negative interest 
rate  policy  and  yield  curve  control,  all  with  the  aim  of  achieving  the  inflation  target  of  2 
percent. 
 As  a  result  of  these  measures,  Japan's  economy  has  been  improving.  According  to  the 
Reference  Dates  of  the  Business  Cycle  released  by  the  Cabinet  Office,  the  economy  has 
continued to improve for 55 months, from November 2012 -- when the economy was at the 
bottom of the business cycle -- until this June. In addition, in April 2017, the Bank revised 
its  economic  assessment  upward,  stating  that  the  economy  "has  been  turning  toward  a 
moderate  expansion."  I  know  that  some  argue  that  although  the  economy  is  said  to  be 
improving, they are not feeling the effects of this improvement; however, the improvement 
is clear even when looking at the employment situation. 
 Today, I would like to explain monetary policy measures conducted by the Bank and what 
they have achieved, and then discuss what to make of arguments circulating with respect to 
the purported dangers of bold monetary policy.   
 I. Monetary Easing Measures   
Table 1 presents an outline of the monetary  policy  measures  conducted by the Bank since 
the start of 2013. 
      1 
 I would like to look at developments in monetary indicators as a result of these measures by 
looking at two graphs. As can be seen in Chart 1, the monetary base, which is the money 
that  the  Bank  can  control  directly,  and  the  balances  in  current  accounts  held  by  financial 
 2 
institutions at the Bank have increased rapidly since April 2013. In line with this, the money 
stock and lending have been growing.1 
                                                    
1  Comparing the annual rates of change in the money stock and lending in the four years before and 
after the introduction of QQE  in April 2013 (specifically, comparing March 2009-March 2013 and 
April  2013-April  2017) shows  that these were plus 2.8  percent  and minus 0.3 percent respectively 
before  QQE  and  plus  3.7  percent  and  plus  2.5  percent respectively  after  the  introduction  of  QQE. 
Shioji  has  shown  that  QQE  did  have  a  quantitative  effect  --  albeit  a  small  one  --  on  the  rate  of 
increase  in  the  money  stock  and  lending.  See:  Shioji  Etsuro,  "Zero  kinrika  ni  okeru  nihon  no 
shin'you souzou," [Japan's credit creation under zero interest rates], chap. 2 in Gendai keizaigaku no 
chōryū  2016  [Currents  in  modern  economics  2016],  ed.  Teruyama  Hiroshi  et  al.,  (Tokyo:  Toyo 
Keizai Inc., 2016). 
 3 
Moreover, as shown in Chart 2, due to the decline in nominal interest rates and the rise in 
inflation  expectations,  real  interest  rates  --  nominal  interest  rates  minus  expected  inflation 
rates -- have greatly declined. 
 The decline in real interest rates has stimulated investment, boosted stock prices in Japan, 
and  led to  a  depreciation of  the  yen.  Rising  stock  prices  further  raise investment and  lead 
households  to  increase  their  consumption  expenditure.  In  other  words,  economic  activity 
has started to improve through these channels. 
 However,  unfortunately,  there  are  some  who  argue  that  these  kinds  of  monetary  policy 
measures are dangerous. That is, they argue that regardless of how much monetary easing is 
conducted,  nothing  will  happen  for  a  while,  but  at  some  point,  such  easing  will  suddenly 
give  rise  to  hyperinflation,  a  surge  in  interest  rates,  a  collapse  of  the  yen,  and  so  forth. 
Moreover,  the  argument  goes,  low  interest  rates  depress  banks'  operations,  actually 
impeding banks' financial intermediation function, thus obstructing the effects of monetary 
 4 
easing;  or,  banks,  faced  with  squeezed  profits,  will  take  excessive  risk,  threatening  the 
stability of the financial system. However, essentially, whatever one does, there are always 
risks. The reason for doing something even if there are risks is that it produces some sort of 
result.  And  looking  at  the  Bank's  monetary  policy,  it  certainly  has  produced  results. 
Therefore, before considering the purported risks in more detail, let us first have a look at 
the achievements of monetary easing. 
 II. The Achievements of Bold Monetary Easing 
Chart  3  shows  developments  in  employment  and  the  unemployment  rate.  Although  it  has 
been  widely  said  that  the  only  employment  that  has  been  growing  is  non-regular 
employment,  the  share  of  part-time  employees  in  the  total  number  of  employees  actually 
peaked  in  2017.2  Moreover,  the  unemployment  rate  has  fallen  substantially.  The  chart 
shows that the unemployment rate at the end of the 1990s stood at 5 percent, while Japan's 
structural  unemployment  rate  in  the  2000s  was  said  to  be  around  3.5  percent.3  Some  had 
argued  that  a  structural  unemployment  rate  of  3.5  percent  implies  that  monetary  policy 
measures  that  would  reduce  unemployment  below  this  level  would  stir  inflation  and  give 
rise to a speculative bubble and should therefore be avoided.4  However, the unemployment 
rate  currently  stands  at  2.8  percent,  and  there  is  no  inflation  or  a  bubble.  Thus,  if  we 
understand the argument that Japan's structural unemployment rate is around 3.5 percent as 
implying that a drop in unemployment below this rate would give rise to inflation, this was 
incorrect.5 
                                                   
2  According to  the Labour Force Survey  by  the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, 
the share of non-regular employees peaked in 2014. 
3  The  following  publications  suggested  that  the  structural  unemployment  rate  was  in  the  range  of 
about  3.0-3.5  percent  using  unemployment-vacancy  analysis:  (1)  Analysis  of  the  Labour  Economy 
2015 by the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare; (2) Annual Report on the Japanese Economy 
and Public Finance 2015 (Summary) by the Cabinet Office; and (3) Outlook for Economic Activity 
and Prices by the Bank of Japan. 
4  Shirai  has  argued  that  "Japan  is  not  suffering  from  a  shortage  of  demand.  Looking  at  the 
unemployment rate and the capital utilization rate, there is almost no slack" (translated by the Bank 
of Japan). See Noguchi Asahi and Shirai Sayuri, "Herikoptā manē no shōtai: Gekitotsu taidan" [The 
true meaning of helicopter money: A heated debate], Shūkan Ekonomisuto, August 2, 2016. 
5  For instance, Hayakawa argues that "although the rate of wage increases is still low, it has started 
to gradually rise since the unemployment rate reached 3.5 percent. This suggests that the relationship 
that  the  structural  employment  rate  ≒  the  natural  unemployment  rate  ≒  3.5  percent  generally 
 5 
 QQE began in April 2013, but these developments indicate that if it had started earlier, the 
unemployment  rate  in  Japan  without  doubt  would  have  remained  at  3  percent  or  below 
throughout. Given that the unemployment rate from the mid-1990s to 2012 on average was 
roughly  4.5  percent,  unemployment  was  almost  2  percent  higher  than  it  could  have  been. 
This implies that, because 2 percent lower of workers could not find a job, the GDP level 
was on average slightly less than 2 percent lower than it would have been. In fact, the loss 
in  GDP  may  have  been  even  greater  than  that.  What  I  mean  is  that  an  increase  in  the 
unemployment  rate  by  1  percent  may  reduce  GDP  by  more  than  1  percent.  The  reason  is 
that if there is a recession and output decreases, firms do not decrease employment in line 
with the decrease in output but instead try to maintain employment levels. In addition, when 
                                                                                                                                                     
holds" (translated by the Bank of Japan). See Hayakawa Hideo, "Kinyū seisaku no 'gokai': 'Sōdai na 
jikken'  no  seika  to  genkai."  [The  'misunderstandings'  of  monetary  policy:  Achievements  and 
limitations of the 'great experiment'] (Tokyo: Keio University Press, 2016). 
 6 
there is a recession, the desire to work decreases, the number of people seeking employment 
declines,  the  number  of  unemployed  people  falls,  and  the  unemployment  rate  does  not 
increase to the extent that employment has decreased.6 
 Moreover,  the  deterioration  in  the  employment  situation  during  the  period  before  QQE 
began may have caused the subsequent long-term stagnation. As shown in Chart 3, the rise 
in the unemployment rate was particularly pronounced among the young. If new graduates 
cannot get a good job, they will not receive sufficient vocational training and their human 
capital will decline, which will eventually lead to lower GDP growth rates.7   
 Given  this,  it  may  be  possible  to  correct  past  mistakes  through  accommodative  monetary 
policy. If the labor market tightens, those who were previously unable to find a job will be 
able  to  find  one,  while  those  who  involuntarily  took  up  employment  as  non-regular 
employees can find regular employment; as a result, they will receive sufficient job training 
and have more job opportunities, labor quality will rise, and productivity will grow. In other 
words, it is possible that through a prolonged situation of labor market tightness, the labor 
force  participation  rate  will  rise,  there  will  be  active  human  capital  accumulation, 
productivity will grow, and the real GDP growth rate will accelerate.8   
 A particular problem in Japan's case is the issue of young people who were looking for a job 
during  the  so-called  "employment  ice  age."  While  there  is  no  clear,  generally  accepted 
definition of the "employment ice age" period, some have defined it as the period from the 
mid-1990s  to  the  mid-2000s,  whereas  others  also  include  a  few  years  after  the  global 
                                                   
6  The coefficient regarding how much the real GDP growth rate changes if the unemployment rate 
changes  by  1  percent  is  called  Okun's  coefficient,  which  in  Japan  is  about  3.  See  Harada  Yutaka, 
Nihon  wo  sukutta  rifure-ha  keizaigaku  [Reflationism:  The  economics  that  saved  Japan]  (Tokyo: 
Nikkei Publishing Inc., 2014), 117-118. 
7  Nakano  Akihiro  and  Kato  Ryo,  "'Chōki  teitai'  ron  wo  meguru  saikin  no  giron:  'Rireki  kōka'  wo 
chūshin ni" [The recent debate on "long-term stagnation": Focusing on the "hysteresis effect"], Bank 
of  Japan  Review,  no.  2017-J-2,  March  2017,  http://www.boj.or.jp/research/wps_rev/rev_2017/data 
/rev17j02.pdf. 
8  Janet  L.  Yellen,  "Macroeconomic  Research  After  the  Crisis,"  (speech,  "The  Elusive  'Great' 
Recovery:  Causes  and  Implications  for  Future  Business  Cycle  Dynamics"  60th  annual  economic 
conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, MA, October 14, 2016). 
 7 
financial  crisis.9  This  was  a  period  of  recession  in  which  it  was  very  difficult  for  new 
graduates to find employment. Many could not find regular employment and instead, out of 
necessity, became non-regular workers, taking on part-time jobs or temporary work.   
 If  these  people  were  to  become  regular  employees,  wages,  productivity,  and  tax  revenues 
including  social  insurance  contributions  would  rise.  This  is  desirable  not  only  for  them 
individually, but also for Japan as a whole. 
 Of  course,  if  we  set  too  much  store  by  the  "high-pressure  economy"  argument  --  which 
suggests  that  labor  market  conditions  should  be  kept  tight  through  monetary  easing  -- 
monetary policy may be tightened too late despite signs of inflation, potentially leading to 
intolerably  high  inflation.  While  I  think  that  the  "high-pressure  economy"  argument  is 
probably  correct,  in  actual  monetary  policy  conduct,  we  should  prioritize  the  2  percent 
inflation target and regard further improvements in employment and increases in the growth 
rate as desirable to the extent that they can be achieved. 
 Furthermore, the fiscal situation is also improving. Chart 4 shows the fiscal  balance of the 
general government divided by nominal GDP. As can be seen in the chart, the government 
deficit relative to GDP deteriorated sharply to 8 percent in the wake of the global financial 
crisis in 2008. It remained at that level for a while, but has improved by 6 percentage points 
since 2013 and now stands at about 2 percent relative to GDP. Part of the improvement of 
course  is  due  to  the  consumption  tax  hike  in  2014,  but  the  tax  hike  accounts  for  only  8 
trillion yen or 1.5 percentage points of GDP; the remaining 4.5 percentage points are due to 
the economic growth brought about by economic measures such as QQE.10   
 Moreover, the amount outstanding of government debt relative to nominal GDP, as shown 
in  the  chart,  peaked  in  2014  and  has  been  declining  since.  The  improvement  in  the  fiscal 
                                                   
9  Genda Yuji et al., Shūshoku hyōgaki sedai no keizai, shakai eno eikyō to taisaku ni kansuru kenkyū 
iinkai hōkokusho [Report of the study group on the effects of the employment ice-age generation on 
the economy and society as well as countermeasures] (Tokyo: Japanese Trade Union Confederation 
Research Institute for Advancement of Living Standards, October, 2016). 
10  Ministry of Finance, Nihon no zaisei kankei shiryō [Japan's Fiscal Condition], April 2017, 22. 
 8 
situation  to a  considerable  extent  also  owes  to the improvement  in the economic  situation 
due to economic measures including QQE. 
 As discussed so far, the Bank's bold monetary easing has produced excellent results. 
 III. What Are the Dangers of QQE? 
Given  that  QQE  has  clearly  produced  results,  criticism  of  the  Bank's  monetary  policy 
naturally has shifted to the argument that "although nothing has happened so far, there is a 
danger that a serious problem may arise in the future." I call this kind of argument the "big 
rock theory." As illustrated in Chart 5, the "big rock theory" holds that there is a big rock on 
the  slope  that  blocks  the  way.  However,  if  one  tries  to  move  the  rock  out  of  the  way,  it 
hardly moves at first, but once it does get rolling, it will not stop. The argument  therefore 
maintains  that  it  is  better  not  to  try  to  move  the  rock  out  of  the  way.  Turning  back  to 
monetary policy, this implies that no matter how much monetary easing is pursued, nothing 
 9 
happens for a while, but suddenly at some point it will give rise to hyperinflation, a surge in 
interest rates, and a collapse of the yen. For this reason, the theory argues, monetary easing 
should not be pursued. In my opinion, such fears are groundless.11 
 The  criticism  leveled  by  "big  rock  theory"  proponents  seems  to  have  converged  on  the 
dangers  associated  with  the  exit  from  monetary  easing.  I  think  the  reason  is  that 
hyperinflation and the collapse of the yen are unlikely to happen and the proponents of the 
"big rock theory" have realized that their warnings will not convince the public. 
 "Exit" here refers to the Bank's termination of monetary easing followed by an increase in 
interest rates and a reduction of the monetary base because achieving 2 percent inflation is 
in sight as a result of monetary easing. Actually, if you think about it, the "big rock theory," 
which focuses on dangers related to the exit, assumes that, as a result of monetary easing, a 
situation arises in which prices increase and monetary policy must be tightened. Therefore, 
the proponents of the theory do not hold the view that nothing will happen no matter how 
much  monetary  easing  is  pursued;  rather,  they  recognize  the  effectiveness  of  QQE.  From 
                                                   
11  See Harada Yutaka, Kataoka Goushi, and Yoshimatsu Takashi, eds., Abenomikusu wa shinkasuru: 
Kin'yu  ganseki  riron  wo  tou  [Abenomics  strides  ahead:  Questioning  the  financial  big  rock  theory] 
(Tokyo: Chuokeizai-sha, Inc., 2017). 
 10 
my  perspective,  this  is  a  welcome  argument,  since  it  recognizes  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary easing. 
 At the exit, the Bank will have to raise interest rates. There are two possible ways to do so: 
by abandoning the negative interest rate policy currently carried out by the Bank and raising 
the interest rate applied to excess reserves; or by selling Japanese government bonds (JGBs) 
held by the Bank. While the Bank at the moment has not decided anything  with regard to 
the exit, what I would like to explain is easier to understand by focusing on an increase in 
the interest rate applied to excess reserves, so let me do so here. According to proponents of 
the  "big  rock  theory,"  the  Bank  will  make  large  losses  when  it  raises  the  interest  rate  on 
excess reserves because of the low interest rates on JGBs purchased by the Bank in the past. 
It is of course possible that the Bank may register losses because it will receive low interest 
rates while paying high interest rates. Proponents of  the "big rock theory" argue that if the 
Bank  does  indeed  make  losses,  confidence  in  the  currency  would  be  undermined,  there 
would be hyperinflation, the yen would collapse, and interest rates would surge. 
 However,  please  think  about  it  carefully.  Essentially,  does  anyone  use  money  paying 
attention to whether the central bank makes a profit or a loss? Moreover, the central bank, in 
return  for  purchasing  government  bonds  in  the  market,  supplies  currency,  that  is,  the 
monetary  base.  While  yields  even  on  JGBs  at  present  are  around  0  percent,  they  were  3 
percent until around the middle of the 1990s. The reason is that back then the real economic 
growth rate was high and prices were rising somewhat. If prices rise, interest rates will also 
rise  eventually.  This  means  that  it  will  be  possible  to  purchase  higher  yielding  JGBs.  Of 
course,  until  that  time,  the  Bank  will  have  to  hold  low  yielding  JGBs  while  paying  high 
yields to banks in order to prevent an overheating of the economy. However, in the end, the 
central  bank  will  always  make  a  profit  in  the  long  run,  since  it  buys  high  yielding  JGBs 
using cash and current account deposits that carry almost no costs. Thus,  the Bank will not 
make a loss in the long run that could pose a danger.12 
                                                    
12  Yoshimatsu Takashi, "Chūō ginkō no deguchi no kiken towa nanika" [What are the dangers of a 
central bank exit?], chap. 9 in Abenomikusu wa shinkasuru: Kin'yu ganseki riron wo tou [Abenomics 
strides  ahead:  Questioning  the  financial  big  rock  theory]  ed.  Harada  Yutaka  et  al.,  (Tokyo: 
Chuokeizai-sha, Inc., 2016). 
 11 
Another  criticism  that  has  been  leveled  against  QQE  is  that  it  has  a  negative  impact  on 
banks' operations. Both real and nominal interest rates have declined as a result of the bold 
monetary  easing  measures.  While  low  interest  rates  support  the  long-term  economic 
recovery, some argue that they also undermine the operations of banks, which impedes the 
effects  of  monetary  easing.  Because  banks'  profits  are  based  on  the  difference  between 
deposit  interest  rates  and  the  loan  rates  they  charge  and  it  is  difficult  for  them  to  impose 
negative  deposit  interest  rates,  it  is  certainly  the  case  that  as  loan  interest  rates  approach 
zero, banks' profit margins necessarily decrease. However, the decline in interest rates is not 
only due to the Bank's policy measures. To start with, the decline in real interest rates is also 
due to a decline in the long-term growth potential of Japan's economy as well as structural 
changes in the supply of and demand for funds. This structural change in the supply of and 
demand  for  funds  is  due  to  the  fact  that  firms  have  become  excessive  savers  and  do  not 
borrow  money.  Meanwhile,  the  decline  in  nominal  interest  rates  is  due  to  the  decline  in 
prices. As prices rise, nominal interest rates will eventually also rise.13  Therefore, in order 
to raise interest rates, it is necessary to continue with bold monetary easing and achieve the 
2 percent price stability target. 
 Moreover,  as  the  economy  improves,  the  number  of  people  unable  to  repay  loans  will 
decrease, the number of people who want to borrow money will increase, and banks will be 
able to raise lending rates again. 
 IV. Why Has the Price Stability Target Not Yet Been Achieved? 
As  mentioned  earlier,  the  monetary  easing  measures  have  been  effective  and  warnings  of 
the dangers of these measures make little sense. The only thing that the  measures have not 
achieved is an increase in prices. 
 Let me start by looking at developments in prices and then consider why the price stability 
target of 2 percent has not yet been achieved.   
                                                    
13  On the link between monetary policy, structural changes in the financial environment, and interest 
rates, see Harada Yutaka, "Naze nihon no kin'ri wa hikuinoka" [Why are Japan's interest rates low?], 
Keiki to saikuru, no. 62, November 2016. 
 12 
Chart  6  shows  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  on  a 
quarterly basis. The chart may give the impression that achieving the price stability target of 
2  percent  is  a  long  way  off.  However,  in  order  to  grasp  the  underlying  trend  in  consumer 
prices,  it  is  necessary  to  look  at  the  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  excluding  fresh  food  and 
energy,  since  the  CPI  excluding  fresh  food  but  including  energy  is  affected  by  temporary 
fluctuations in oil prices. The important thing to note when looking at these indexes is that 
their  underlying  trend  was  negative  from  the  mid-1990s  onward,  but  following  the 
introduction of QQE the rate of change in the CPI excluding fresh food and energy turned 
positive and since then has continued to be on an uptrend.14 
                                                   
14  While  the  average  annual  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  excluding  fresh  food  and  energy  between 
April 1999, when it first turned negative, and April 2013 was minus 0.5 percent, it has been plus 0.6 
percent between the start of QQE in April 2013 and April 2017 (excluding the 2 percent increase in 
the CPI as a result of the consumption tax hike). 
 13 
 Next,  let  us  have  a  more  detailed  look  at  developments  in  prices.  Immediately  after  the 
introduction of QQE in April 2013, the rate of change in the CPI excluding fresh food and 
energy  increased  from  around  minus  0.5  percent  to  around  plus  1  percent.  After  losing 
momentum in the wake of the consumption tax hike in April 2014, the rate of change turned 
upward  again  with  the  expansion  of  QQE,  but  then  started  to  decline  once again  in  2016. 
However,  as  I  will  explain  later,  I  believe  that  the  rate  of  change  will  likely  turn  upward 
once more due to the expected decline in the unemployment rate and other factors. 
Certainly,  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  has  not  yet  been  achieved.  Moreover,  many 
argue  that  even  though  the  economy  is  said  to  have  improved,  increases  in  incomes  are 
minimal,  and thus  they  do  not  feel much improvement.  The  Bank  of  course  also  does  not 
want prices to rise just for the sake of it but because the economy is improving. That is, the 
Bank conducts monetary policy based on the premise that deflation is detrimental because it 
leads to economic stagnation and that if we escape from deflation and achieve the 2 percent 
price stability target, the economy will also improve. 
 So, why has the economy not recovered that much? Let me consider why the 2 percent price 
stability target has not been achieved. Analyses by the Bank suggest that a major reason for 
this is the decline in inflation expectations, and that the following two factors have played a 
major role in the decline in inflation expectations. First, (1) the decline in crude oil prices, 
(2) the weakness in demand following the consumption tax hike in April 2014, and (3) the 
slowdown  in  emerging  economies  and  volatile  global  financial  markets,  have  lowered  the 
observed  inflation  rate.  And  second,  amid  this  decline  in  the  observed  inflation  rate, 
inflation  expectations  --  after  having  been largely  flat  --  weakened,  reflecting  the  fact that 
expectations  formation  in  Japan  is  largely  adaptive,  that  is,  backward-looking.15  Among 
these factors, let me focus on  the consumption tax hike  and the sluggishness in the global 
economy.   
                                                    
15  Bank of Japan, "Comprehensive Assessment: Developments in Economic Activity and Prices as 
well  as  Policy  Effects  since  the  Introduction  of  Quantitative  and  Qualitative  Monetary  Easing 
(QQE)," September 2016, http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements /release_2016/k160921b.pdf. 
 14 
Chart 7 shows developments in real consumption before and after the consumption tax hike. 
The chart indicates that following the consumption tax hike, consumption, as measured by 
the  consumption  activity  index  compiled  by  the  Bank,  has  remained  weak  for  more  than 
two years, although it is now finally showing signs of recovery. The consumption tax hike 
from 5 percent to 8 percent had the effect of raising consumer prices by 2 percent. Thus, if 
we exclude the  increase in consumption due to  frontloading and the subsequent decline in 
response,  real  consumption  should  have  fallen  by  2  percent  and  then  continued  along  the 
trend  observed  before  the  tax  hike.  While  the  chart  depicts  such  a  trend,  actual  growth  in 
consumption  has  declined  considerably  and  has  fallen  drastically  below  this  trend 
particularly since the end of 2015. Moreover, although wages have not grown very much, if 
we  exclude  the  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike,  real  employee  income  --  i.e.,  wages 
multiplied  by  the  number  of  employees  --  has  consistently  grown,  since  employment  has 
been consistently improving during this period. Thus, even though real income is increasing, 
the situation continues that consumption is not increasing.   
 15 
Why is consumption not increasing? One potential explanation is that, given that there had 
been  plans  to  further  raise  the  consumption  tax  to  10  percent  after  the  hike  to  8  percent, 
people  already  responded  in  their  consumption  behavior  as  though  the  tax  rate  was  raised 
by  5  percentage  points  to  10  percent.16  In  that  case,  it  would  be  no  surprise  that  real 
consumption  expenditure  declined  by  3.5  percent.  However,  even  if  we  draw  the  trend 
based on this assumption, consumption has fallen further behind the trend since the end of 
2015. Moreover, if the explanation that people already responded to an expected 10 percent 
consumption  tax  hike is  correct,  the  next  consumption  tax  hike  to  10  percent  should  have 
little effect on consumption, which I find hard to believe. 
 In any case, if real consumption decreases, demand will decline and prices will be subject to 
downward pressure. While it is difficult to know exactly how large this downward pressure 
is, it is certain that such pressure will exist. 
 Another factor that should be mentioned is trends in the global economy. As shown in Chart 
7,  it is  clear  that the  stagnation  in  global trade  since  2015  has  cooled consumer  sentiment 
through  a  decline  in  exports  and  stock  prices,  and  has  delayed  the  recovery  of  Japan's 
economy. 
 However,  the tightening  of  the  labor  market  seen in  the  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate 
shown in Chart 3 should lead to a rise in wages and eventually in prices. There are already 
signs  of  this  happening.  In  this  context,  it  is  useful  to  look  at  the  Phillips  curve,  which 
shows  the  link  between  the  unemployment  rate  and  the  inflation  rate.  Chart  8  shows  the 
Phillips  curve  for  Japan.  In  the  chart,  the  inflation  rate  is  shown  on  the  vertical  axis,  the 
unemployment  rate  on  the  horizontal  axis,  and  the  Phillips  curve  is  given  by  the 
downward-sloping  curve. As  can  be  seen,  prices  only  rise  gradually  as  the  unemployment 
rate  falls,  but  once  the  unemployment  rate  approaches  2  percent,  prices  rise  quickly.  The 
unemployment rate has already fallen to 2.8 percent. Therefore, there is no doubt that prices 
will eventually rise as the unemployment rate continues to fall.   
                                                   
16  Unayama Takashi, "Keizai kyoshitsu 2014-nen shouhizouzei no kyōkun" [Economics class: What 
the 2014 consumption tax hike taught us], Nikkei, May 23, 2016. 
 16 
 Concluding Remarks 
As stated so far, the Bank's monetary policy measures have produced excellent results so far 
and with regard to prices, at least a situation in which there is no longer deflation has been 
achieved. 
 Finally,  I  would  like  to  say  that  the  argument  that  economic  growth  is  inhibited  by  a 
shortage of labor is incorrect. The argument essentially states that what  impedes economic 
growth is the shortage of labor brought about by monetary easing  measures. The argument 
therefore  implies  that  monetary  easing  should  not  be  carried  out.17  However,  because 
monetary easing measures have increased employment, they have boosted economic growth. 
Moreover, as a result of the shortage of labor, wages will rise. It is highly productive firms 
                                                   
17  For  instance,  in  the  Mainichi  Shimbun  (April  4,  2017,  morning  edition),  referring  to  the 
improvement in the diffusion index for employment conditions in the Tankan (Short-Term Economic 
Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan),  it  was  stated  that  labor  shortages  were  becoming  more  severe, 
giving rise to concerns that such shortages might impede the recovery. 
 17 
that  can  pay  high  wages,  while  firms  with  low  productivity  can  only  pay  low  wages. 
Therefore, if wages increase, highly productive firms will survive, and labor productivity in 
the economy overall will increase as well. In other words, rising wages due to a shortage of 
labor will promote productivity growth. 
 On  the  other  hand,  some argue  that  low  interest  rates  impede  the economic  metabolism.18 
They argue that, as a result of the decline in interest rates, firms' interest burden decreases, 
firms  that  should  exit  the  market  do  not  do  so,  and  the  productivity  of  the  economy  as  a 
whole  declines.  However,  what  happens  if  firms  exit  and  unemployment  surges? 
Productivity per person employed may increase, but output overall will decrease. Although 
it  might  be  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  this  would  result  in  a  surge  in  unemployment  and 
social  instability,  it  would  inevitably  lead  to  problems.  On  the  other  hand,  firm  turnover 
caused by labor shortages does not cause such problems. 
 I think that there is no one now who would answer yes when asked "Are you a deflationist, 
thinking that it is better for prices to fall?" In that sense, we are all reflationists now, hoping 
that  prices  will  rise  and  the  economy  will  improve.19  That  is  why  the  Bank  continues  to 
pursue its monetary easing policy. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
                                                    
18  For example, Shirakawa stated that "we may have to take into account the risk that a continuation 
of  low  interest  rates  will  affect  the  productivity  of  the  overall  economy  and  lower  the  potential 
growth  rate  endogenously."  See  Shirakawa  Masaaki,  "Central  Banking:  Before,  During,  and  After 
the  Crisis,"  (remarks,  Conference  Sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  and  the  International 
Journal  of  Central  Banking,  Washington,  D.C.,  March  24,  2012),  http://www.boj.or.jp/en 
/announcements/press/koen_2012/ko120326a.htm/. 
19   Harada  Yutaka,  "Wareware  wa  mina  rifure-ha  dearu"  [We  are  all  reflationists],  Shūkan 
Ekonomisuto, January 24, 2017. 
 18 
