Vítor Constâncio: We need a coordinated European NPL strategy.
How to deal with Europe’s market for lemons?
Opinion piece by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, 5 July 2017.
 One of the most pressing issues for euro area banks is the nearly €1 trillion of non-performing
loans  (NPLs)  on  their  balance  sheets.  While  the  average  euro  area  NPL  ratio  has  declined
gradually from a peak of 8% in 2013, it still remains at 6% and differences across countries are
marked: six countries still have NPL ratios of more than 10%, significantly more in some cases.
This  is  not  just  a  problem  for  banks.  The  flip  side  of  NPLs  is  over-indebtedness  among
households and firms, and this poses a macroeconomic challenge – banks restrict credit supply
and distressed firms curtail investment, which in turn hampers economic growth.
Asset  quality  issues  were  exacerbated  by  the  global  financial  crisis.  When  the  crisis  hit,  the
surge in NPLs blocked the ability of many banks to deal with distressed debt.
NPL resolution, though not a panacea for all banking problems, could bring significant benefits. It
is  not  easy  to  estimate  the  effects  of  resolving  NPLs.  However,  scenario-based  analysis
indicates  that  replacing  NPLs  with  performing  assets  could  increase  the  aggregate  return  on
equity of euro area banks by more than 1 percentage point, with some countries’ banking sectors
gaining up to 5 percentage points.
It is therefore essential to find a solution to the NPL problem, but we must recognise that it will
take  time  and  no  single  instrument  is  likely  to  be  a  “magic  bullet”.  Rather,  it  will  require  a
comprehensive strategy involving a panoply of instruments. The ECB is already working on this
and has issued clear guidance to the banks it directly supervises. But supervisory action is not
enough on its own. The private sector and national and European authorities also have roles to
play.
Several significant impediments affect the prices of NPLs, to varying degrees across euro area
countries. The market for distressed debt can be characterised as a “market for lemons”. This is
a situation where investors demand a premium to protect themselves from the uncertainty that
better-informed banks will try to sell them assets whose credit quality is worse than it may seem
on the surface. This results in limited market activity, as the prices that investors are prepared to
pay for NPLs are much lower than the prices banks would be prepared to sell them for.
Structural inefficiencies in debt and collateral enforcement also contribute to the lack of market
turnover. The legal procedures for collecting a simple claim take too long and cost too much in
many euro area countries. On the demand side, investors are also deterred by high uncertainty
around recoveries and their timing, and by barriers to entry such as licensing requirements.
These  symptoms  of  market  failure,  aggravated  by  legal  constraints,  call  for  a  public  policy
response.  European  and  national  authorities  should  launch  a  comprehensive  strategy  that
combines a range of suitable tools to deal effectively with Europe’s NPL problems. A key aspect
of that strategy will be aligning incentives between the parties involved: banks, investors and the
authorities.
A number of tools look particularly promising. National asset management companies (AMCs), if
designed correctly, have been successful in relieving banks’ NPL burdens and recovering asset
value. A blueprint for national AMCs in the euro area – essentially, a manual for setting up an
AMC – would save authorities time and money. In addition to clarifying in detail how AMCs can be
made compatible with the EU legal framework, such a blueprint should identify international best
practices for key aspects of AMCs such as eligible asset classes, participation requirements,
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
asset valuation, capital and funding structures and governance.
Apart from AMCs, securitisation schemes also have the potential to kick-start the NPL secondary
market, but may require public intervention to signal that governments are determined to follow
through  with  structural  reforms  that  will  improve  asset  valuations.  NPL  trading  platforms  or
clearing  houses  should  also  be  fully  explored,  even  at  euro  area  level,  to  increase  NPL
transparency and stimulate transaction activity.
To  be  successful,  however,  all  of  these  options  require  a  considerable  push  for  structural
reforms related to debt enforcement and a reduction of information asymmetries.
If  these  measures  become  credible,  investors  will  recognise  the  shift  in  policy  and  should
ultimately  be  willing  to  pay  higher  prices  for  NPLs.  The  European  Commission  has  recently
announced  that  it  will  come  forward  with  a  proposal  for  a  comprehensive  and  coordinated
strategy to deal with NPLs, including a blueprint for national AMCs. It will be then imperative that
all  relevant  authorities  act  rapidly  and  decisively  to  implement  the  necessary  measures  to
overcome the NPL problem thereby strengthening the ongoing European recovery. Much hard
work is needed, on many fronts, to deliver these benefits. But neither partial solutions, nor further
delays, are viable options if we want to tackle the NPL burden and avoid a renewed build-up of
NPLs in future cyclical downturns.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
