Sabine Lautenschläger: Stability and growth in the euro area - who
plays the leading role?
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, at the IEP
(Institut für Europäische Politik) Mittagsgespräch, Berlin, 30 June 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 Most of us probably go to the theatre from time to time. And we are all aware that theatre is more
than just entertainment; often it deals with the fundamental questions of life, with major conflicts
and their resolution. Theatre holds a mirror up to life. In classical drama, this always follows the
same structure. The story evolves over the course of four acts and is then resolved in the fifth
act.
And when we look at the story of the euro area, we see this very same structure – it is just the
fifth act that remains to be written. But let us begin by taking a look at the first four acts.
The first act of a drama is the exposition. The audience is introduced to the characters and the
circumstances in which they live. In the case of the euro area, this act is quite long – it lasted
from 1999 to 2008.
In the second act, the tension rises. In the autumn of 2008, the global financial crisis hits the euro
area;  barely  one  and  a  half  years  later,  Greece  gets  into  difficulties  –  the  beginning  of  the
sovereign debt crisis. The pace of the story picks up as it heads towards its climax.
The climax comes in the third act. We are in the year 2012, and it is no longer just about the
banking system. The sovereign debt crisis has spread to several euro area countries, and even
some of the larger ones are under pressure. Some market participants and politicians are no
longer ruling out the possibility that the euro area might break up.
In the fourth act, the pace of the action begins to slow. The crisis has passed and the economy
begins to recover. But in this act there is always a final moment of suspense. The action falters
and tension rises again – think of the elections in France.bond
And what now, ladies and gentlemen? What is going to happen in the fifth act? How will the story
of the euro area continue? Let us spend some time thinking about that question.
Who plays the leading role – the ECB or policymakers?
The first thing we need to have, of course, is a main character. Everyone would probably agree
that the ECB is currently playing the leading role. However, there would no doubt be differences
of opinion regarding the nature of that role.
Some would say that the ECB is a villain who picks savers’ pockets, who redistributes risk and
wealth. Others would say that the ECB is a reluctant hero: when others fail, it reluctantly steps in
and saves the world – or at least the euro area.
In my view, the ECB plays neither of these two roles. In fact, the ECB is allowed to play one role
only,  and  that  role  is  clearly  defined.  The  ECB  has  to  safeguard  price  stability.  To  be  more
precise: in the medium term, inflation should be below, but close to, 2%.
I admit that it has been a challenge to live up to that role in recent years. The weak economy and
low inflation have obliged the ECB to pursue a very loose monetary policy. This includes the use
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
of some unconventional instruments – bond purchases, for instance.
Even though I am critical of some of these instruments, an expansionary monetary policy stance
was generally appropriate in order to fulfil our role.
Nonetheless, I consider it imperative that monetary policy should return to normal as soon as can
be justified. This is because unusually loose monetary policy does not just have the intended
effect, it always has undesired side-effects too. Among other things, it increases the risk of asset
price  bubbles. And  with  time,  these  undesired  risks  become  larger,  while  the  desired  effects
wear off.
Against  this  backdrop,  monetary  policy  has  to  adjust  at  the  right  time,  which  is  as  soon  as
inflation is on a stable path towards our objective. We therefore look at how inflation is evolving
over the medium term, not at temporary blips in one direction or the other.
Even if no stable trend is visible as yet, it is important to prepare for different times, for there is
reason to be optimistic.
The euro area economy is recovering. For the past four years, it has been growing slowly but
steadily.  And  the  recovery  has  become  more  broad-based,  while  risks  to  growth  are  now
balanced. Funding is becoming easier and easier for companies, more loans are being granted
and  more  investments  are  being  made.  The  mood  among  businesses  and  consumers  is
correspondingly good – relevant indicators are at their highest levels since the crisis started in
2008.
Thus, although inflation is not yet on a stable path towards our objective, all the conditions are in
place. It is just a question of time and patience. That is why monetary policy should already be
making  preparations  for  a  return  to  a  normal  stance. And  it  should  adapt  its  communication
accordingly.
To sum up, the role of the ECB is to safeguard price stability. That is important, but it is not
enough for a leading role. That part is for others to play.
And those others are to be found in the field of politics. I am referring to the national parliaments
and governments in the euro area and to the European Union’s institutions – the Commission,
the Council and the European Parliament. They are the main characters, particularly in the fifth
act. Only they can take the story of the euro area forward in a way that is beneficial for all.
It is only they who can bring about the much-needed reforms, and it is only they who have the
democratic mandate to do so. For that reason alone, it is politicians who have to play the leading
role. And  it  is  you,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  you,  the  voters  in  the  euro  area,  who  stand  behind
them. You elect the people who will decide how this story continues.
The fifth act – how will the story continue?
Regarding elections, for some time we have had to watch as the mood of voters going to the
ballot box has become increasingly critical towards Europe. But, looking at the recent elections in
France, it seems that this has now changed – and rightly so.
After  all,  a  united  Europe  and  a  single  currency  have  more  to  offer  than  some  people  may
believe.  And  here,  I  am  not  only  thinking  of  the  economic  benefits,  but  also  of  the  political
benefits.
In particular, I am thinking of global politics. The global stage is dominated by large countries,
such as the United States, China and Russia. If we Europeans want to continue playing a role on
that stage, and if we want to be heard, then we have to speak as one. From climate change to
security policy, we have to speak with one voice – ideally with the voice of reason.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
From this perspective, a united Europe does not look like an unnecessary luxury; instead, it looks
like a fundamental necessity in order to ensure that the people of Europe have the ability to act.
And  then  there’s  the  economic  side  of  a  united  Europe.  The  single  market  gives  companies
access to around 500 million consumers. This allows them to reap economies of scale and to
lower costs. At the same time, greater competition ensures lower prices, which in turn benefits
consumers. That is the basic idea of the single European market.
The euro takes this idea one step further: a single currency for a single market. Companies can
do business across the entire euro area without having to worry about exchange rate risk. And I
am  sure  that  each  of  us  appreciates  being  able  to  travel  through  Europe  without  having  to
change money.
And it’s not just about travelling. In a united Europe, anyone can live where he or she wants.
Ladies and gentlemen, as you may already sense, if I were able to write the fifth act of the euro
area’s  story,  it  would  be  very  European.  The  citizens  of  Europe  would  seize  the  opportunity
provided by the crisis and the new global situation. They would reflect on their similarities and
move closer together.
True, that is easier said than done. After all, Europe is very diverse: different languages, different
cultures,  different  perspectives.  But  should  that  keep  us  from  coming  closer  together  and
becoming a bit more European?
I don’t think so. Diversity enriches life – bringing together different perspectives and experiences
broadens our horizons. It also helps us to solve problems – both our own problems and those we
share with others. It is no coincidence that the motto of the EU is “united in diversity”.
When  we  look  at  the  economy,  however,  diversity  becomes  more  tricky,  particularly  in  a
monetary union. And the countries of the euro area are indeed very diverse. They are diverse in
terms  of  the  specialisation  and  orientation  of  their  economies  –  and  this  is  certainly  an
advantage.  But  they  are  also  diverse  in  the  sense  that  their  economies  differ  in  terms  of
efficiency and resilience.
That  can  cause  problems.  The  crisis  is  a  case  in  point:  while  some  countries  weathered  it
relatively  well,  others  were  hit  quite  hard. And  if  one  member  of  a  monetary  union  gets  into
trouble, it affects all the others as well. In that regard, we are all in the same boat. The question is
how to deal with it?
Naturally, the first step is to try to prevent crises from happening in the first place. Euro area
countries have to become more efficient, and they have to become more resilient. Even then, no
one can rule out the possibility that a country might be hit by a crisis.
And that leads us to the question of how we deal with this risk, of who should bear what risks. In
essence, there are two options. First, such risks could be shared via the public sector. That is
what happened during the crisis: European taxpayers stepped in to help those countries that had
been hit the hardest. Second, such risks could be shared via the market – this would certainly be
the better option for taxpayers.
Let us take a closer look at all these things.
The architecture of the euro area – the ingredients for a successful fifth act
The first step is clear: the countries of the euro area have to become more resilient.
But  there’s  a  twist:  members  of  a  monetary  union  lack  a  crucial  tool  with  which  to  offset
economic shocks. They lack an exchange rate of their own. While countries outside a monetary
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
union can devalue or revalue their currency to rebalance their economy, those inside a monetary
union need to make adjustments through other channels.
However,  many  countries  first  have  to  open  up  those  channels.  They  have  to  make  their
economies  sustainable  and  more  competitive  with  the  aid  of  structural  reforms.  Take  labour
markets, for example. In many countries, labour markets are rigid Flexible labour markets could
help to mitigate shocks. They ensure that crises do not lead to persistently high unemployment.
At the same time, flexible labour markets help the economy to grow. They facilitate the change
that is needed to reap the benefits of a united Europe and a globalised world.
But if the benefits of flexible labour markets are truly to reach the people, there is something else
that we need. We need a good system of education and training – one that starts in kindergarten
and accompanies people for the rest of their lives. The better this system is, the more flexible
labour markets can be.
As well as labour markets, the banking system also plays an important role. Only sound banks
can cope when loans go bad in a downturn. And in a downturn, only sound banks can provide
funds to promising companies and thus prepare for the next upturn.
And here, a lot has been done since the crisis – even though some banks still need to do more
homework. All in all, banks in the euro area now hold much more capital and liquidity than they
did  prior  to  the  crisis  –  they  have  become  much  more  stable. At  the  same  time,  European
banking supervision ensures that banks across the euro area are supervised according to the
same high standards.
But  of  course  all  this  cannot  stop  banks  from  failing.  And  nor  is  it  supposed  to.  In  a  well-
functioning market, companies with a business model that no longer works must exit the market
– this is just as true for banks as it is for other companies. And banks can fail, as we have seen
in recent weeks. So we have at least come one step closer to a true market.
Alongside labour markets and the banking system, public finances also have an important role to
play. They too can help to mitigate economic shocks. One example is automatic stabilisers. In a
downturn, the tax burden goes down – thanks to progression. At the same time, social spending
goes up. The former relieves the burden on the people, the latter supports them. Together, these
effects help the economy. They help the economy just as growth-enhancing measures by the
government do.
All this requires sound public finances. That’s why we always call upon the euro area countries to
consolidate their public finances. And that’s why we always emphasise how important the rules
of the Stability and Growth Pact are. Their purpose is to keep countries from taking on too much
debt. Since the crisis, these rules have been strengthened – now it is important to apply them.
To sum up, countries with flexible labour and product markets, stable banks and sound public
finances are in a good position; they are resilient, and they are efficient.
But,  as  I  have  already  said,  even  such  countries  can  get  into  difficulties.  Not  all  risks  can  be
eliminated, and not all shocks can be fully absorbed. And when 19 countries share one currency,
all are affected if one gets into difficulties.
And this brings us to the question of how we should deal with those risks. As  I  have  already
mentioned, one option is to share risks via the public sector – using taxpayers’ money. This was
done during the crisis, and led to heated debates on the architecture of the euro area.
While  we’re  on  the  subject  of  the  architecture  of  the  euro  area,  there  is  indeed  scope  for
improvement here. For example, a European finance minister with strong powers could help to
bring about national fiscal policies that are also in the interest of all European citizens. Such a
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
finance minister should then not just have a coordinating role. He or she should be able to take
action  if  Member  States  deviate  from  the  agreed  path.  The  minister  could  thus  serve  as  an
anchor for deeper economic union.
But irrespective of the things that could be improved in the public sector, we should not forget the
private sector when it comes to the question of how we deal with risks.
Risks can also be shared via the private sector, through the market. Then, if a country got into
difficulties, it would not be European taxpayers who would bear the risks; it would be those who
invested in the country – whether they invested in the state itself or in private companies.
To make this work, investors would have to be able to absorb the potential losses. And here,
there are still a few things we need to do. Take banks and public finances, for example.
Governments often rely on domestic banks for funding. If the government cannot service its debt,
many credit institutions may also end up in crisis. The market is thus not in a position to bear the
losses without getting into difficulties. During the crisis, this led to a situation in which taxpayers
had to step in.
To resolve this problem, we have to take a look at the rulebook for banks. Currently, government
bonds are treated as risk-free. Thus, banks do not have to hold capital against them. This might
tempt banks to hold too many of their own government’s bonds – given the associated risks.
But we all know now that government bonds are not risk-free. So it is high time that the rules
were adjusted. We have to ensure that government bond holdings are backed up with capital.
The  higher  the  risk  and  the  more  bonds  of  an  individual  government  a  bank  buys,  the  more
capital it would need to hold against them. Banks would then hold fewer government bonds in
total and fewer bonds of any individual government, and they would have bigger buffers to absorb
losses. If a country were to get into difficulties, the market would then be able to bear the losses
without putting the burden on taxpayers.
At the same time, banks would develop an interest in sound public finances. Public finances that
were not sound would be punished by the market – it would demand higher interest rates, for
example. This would then force governments to keep their finances in order.
And we can pursue the logic of this further. A capital markets union would offer the possibility to
share risks – and to do so across borders. In a truly European capital market, risks could be
borne  by  many  shoulders.  In  this  context,  I  am  not  only  thinking  of  governments,  banks  and
bonds.  I  am  also  thinking  of  private  companies,  savers  and  shares. A  truly  European  capital
market would make the monetary union more stable.
But the main aim of the capital markets union is of course a different one. First and foremost, the
capital markets union would help the economy to grow. Companies would no longer be restricted
to  domestic  banks  for  funding.  They  could  access  sources  of  equity  and  loans  throughout
Europe. At the same time, savers would have more options to invest their money. All in all, it
would be possible to fund the economy more efficiently and allow it to grow faster.
For  all  these  reasons,  a  European  capital  markets  union  is  currently  being  built.  This  is  not
something  that  can  be  done  in  a  day.  Capital  markets  are  complex  and  diverse.  Exchanges,
central counterparties, tax law, insolvency law – these and much more play a role. Creating a
European  capital  market  thus  requires  many  different  measures  to  be  taken. And,  more  than
anything, it requires time. Still, that is no reason not to do it. The capital markets union has been
an important project from the beginning, and, since Brexit, it has become even more important.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
The first four acts of the euro area’s story have been written. Now it’s all about the fifth act. It’s
about putting the crisis behind us for good, resolving the conflicts and arriving at a happy ending.
In my speech, I have talked a lot about how we can deal with risks in the euro area. But it’s not
just  about  risks  and  stability,  of  course.  It’s  also  about  opportunities;  it’s  about  growth  and
prosperity. Here too, Europe offers the best possible conditions.
And more and more citizens are beginning to realise that. According to a recent poll, support for
the European Union is on the rise.  That is a good sign but no reason to relax, because another
poll shows that there are still differences.  According to that poll, the average citizen does not
feel that he or she benefits from Europe. Our goal should therefore be to ensure stability and
prosperity for all citizens of the euro area.
1
2
We have to achieve that goal. It may not be easy, but it is possible, and it will be worthwhile. In
my speech, I listed a few of the things we can do to get closer to our goal. The important thing
now is to make a start and to begin writing the fifth act of the euro area’s story.
As the German playwright  Friedrich  Hebbel  said,  “Drama  should  not  present  new  stories,  but
new situations”.
Many thanks for your attention.
1
2
Stokes, B., Wike, R. and Manevich, D., “Post-Brexit, Europeans More Favorable Toward EU”, Pew Research
Center, June 2017, available at www.pewglobal.org
Raines, T., Goodwin, M. and Cutts, D., “The Future of Europe: Comparing Public and Elite Attitudes”, Chatham
House  Research  Paper,  The  Royal 
International  Affairs,  June  2017,  available  at
www.chathamhouse.org
Institute  of 
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
