  Road Map: 
Monetary and Financial Sector Policies for 2017 
and Beyond 
           Delivered by 
Dr. Indrajit Coomaraswamy 
Governor 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
3 January 2017
        1. Introduction 
Your Excellencies, Members of the 
So, let me warmly welcome you to the 
Monetary Board, Deputy Governors and 
presentation of this year’s Road Map.  
Officials of the Central Bank, 
Distinguished Invitees, Ladies and 
Gentlemen, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, as you aware, the 
core objectives of the Central Bank are 
the attainment of economic and price 
The presentation of the Road Map is a 
stability and the maintenance of 
very important tradition that was 
financial system stability with a view to 
initiated by the Central Bank in 2007 and 
this is the 10th statement in that tradition 
encouraging and promoting the 
development of productive resources of 
that we are presenting today. It is our 
Sri Lanka. We attach the highest priority 
belief that sharing our policy direction 
to delivering collectively on the 
would make our policies for the medium- 
mandates given to us. The considerable 
term more predictable and transparent, 
resources of the Central Bank of Sri 
and would help you in shaping your own 
Lanka are focused on achieving these 
plans and operational modalities in the 
objectives on a sustained basis and on 
future. It will also ensure greater clarity 
performing the important agency and 
regarding our policies and actions. 
ancillary functions bestowed upon us 
In this context, we believe that 
effectively. 
harmonisation of purpose and better 
During 2016, we have implemented 
coordination among private sector and 
several proactive policy measures in 
public sector operations would enhance 
order to ensure economic and price 
the effective implementation of our 
stability. These policies have helped curb 
policies and measures, thereby helping 
demand pressures in the economy and 
to achieve our common development 
maintain inflation at a low level. At the 
goals. 
same time, we have introduced several 
policies related to the financial sector 
with the view of strengthening 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 2 
 institutions and ensuring effective and 
to strengthen the delivery of credit to 
active markets as well as safe and sound 
the agriculture sector and to small and 
payment mechanisms.   
medium scale enterprises as well as the 
In addition to our core functions related 
to the key objectives I have just outlined, 
we have performed a number of agency 
and ancillary functions, thus 
contributing to enhance the overall 
microfinance sector, thus facilitating 
greater financial inclusion. Also, as the 
sole authority for issuing currency, the 
Bank has continued to ensure that all 
cash transactions take place smoothly.  
performance of the economy.  
We consider that communication is an 
The Central Bank manages the Public 
Debt to ensure that the government's 
financing needs and its payment 
obligations are met at the lowest 
possible cost over the medium- to long- 
term, consistent with a prudent degree 
of risk. The Exchange Control 
Department also initiated a number of 
measures in order to create a more 
conducive environment for both local 
integral part in pursuing policy actions 
and discharging our responsibilities.  
Considering the utmost importance of 
clear communication and enhanced 
transparency, we attach priority to 
formulating our policies in a forward 
looking manner, which will help 
economic agents to make their 
economic decisions in a more informed 
manner.  
and foreign investors. The new Foreign 
Ladies and Gentlemen, today, we are 
Exchange Act is designed to effect 
living in a challenging world. Sri Lanka is 
further improvements in this regard. A 
gradually transforming to an upper 
number of measures will be taken in the 
middle income economy. However, the 
medium term to further relax foreign 
objectives of the government and the 
exchange transactions. The Central Bank 
aspirations of the people cannot be met 
is also the manager of the Employees’ 
through “business as usual” on the part 
Provident Fund, which is the largest 
of the public and private sectors. 
superannuation fund in the country. 
Government policy making needs to be 
Through the activities of the Regional 
proactive. It has to be more data driven 
Development Department and the 
and less influenced by short-term 
provincial offices, the Central Bank seeks 
political expedience. Equally, the private 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 3 
 sector needs to recalibrate its risk 
When we review Sri Lanka’s post-
appetite and take advantage of 
independence economic performance, it 
opportunities generated by improving 
is clear we could have done better. In 
macroeconomic policies and a more 
the Central Bank’s context, the 
conducive, enabling environment for 
perennial excess aggregate demand in 
business. We would all like progress to 
the economy, created by large fiscal 
be faster but the direction of travel is 
deficits, has complicated monetary and 
clearly positive. There is also the 
exchange rate policies. 
likelihood that, as the reforms gain 
momentum, the pace of change will 
accelerate, provided there is the 
commitment to persist with the 
measures that are necessary to place the 
economy on a higher trajectory of 
growth, employment generation and 
incomes. 
As the Central Bank, we have a pivotal 
role to play while being at the heart of 
this much needed transformation. The 
government is putting forward many 
new initiatives to develop the country. 
This is happening at a time when the 
global economy is undergoing yet 
another transitional period. Hence, this 
is truly a challenging time, which calls us 
to be proactive and focused on clear 
outcomes.  
However, I believe Sri Lanka now faces 
one of its best chances since 
independence, to correct this situation. 
In particular, the country does not have 
a drag in terms of an internal conflict or 
regressive policies. 
Today, Sri Lanka is poised for a fresh 
leap of development. In that context, it 
is the responsibility of the Central Bank 
to provide a stable foundation to 
leverage the country’s excellent 
geographical location and favourable 
international relations to attract 
investment to foster more robust and 
sustainable growth and employment 
generation. Sri Lanka is twenty miles 
from the fastest growing large economy, 
India; in the middle of China’s Maritime 
Silk Route; and fortunate to have 
At this juncture, I would like to share 
excellent relations with a number of 
some of my thoughts on the Sri Lankan 
capital surplus countries in the world.  
economy in a broader perspective.  
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 4 
 As I have repeatedly emphasised, 
We have to establish a solid foundation 
sustained growth requires 
for the nation to meet the imperatives of 
strengthening macroeconomic 
a new economic growth model, built on 
fundamentals, implementing structural 
the core tenets of high value-added 
reforms that increase the 
entrepreneurship, creativity and 
competitiveness of the economy, and 
innovation to generate benefits for all 
improving the business environment.  
Sri Lankans. 
The challenge that we are having right 
The country has a number of structural 
now is to put in place policies that give 
problems that have been amplified over 
us sustained stabilisation of 
the years by the large fiscal and trade 
macroeconomic fundamentals in the 
deficits, which are the core weaknesses 
country, amidst uncertain global 
of the Sri Lankan economy. Being a twin 
conditions.  
deficit country increases vulnerability in 
It is important to recognise that 
stabilising the economy after decades of 
an uncertain and volatile global 
economic environment.   
fundamentally unstable macroeconomic 
Unsustainable budget deficits boost 
policies cannot be achieved without 
excess and untenable demand in the 
discipline. This will inevitably result in 
economy. When there is excess demand, 
some pain in the short-term. However, 
it leads to inflationary pressures and 
there is every possibility that a more 
higher nominal interest rates in the 
promising future can be realised 
economy and there is also a higher 
through the policies and programmes 
propensity to import, given the 
that are already in the pipeline. For this 
limitations in domestic supply. That in 
to happen, consensus must be built 
turn, exerts pressure on the balance of 
among politicians, policy makers and 
payments and the exchange rate.  
the general public on the need for 
cohesive reforms around the three 
pillars of robust macroeconomic 
fundamentals, improving 
productivity/competitiveness and the 
improved business environment.  
This has been the Sri Lankan experience 
over several decades, which stands in 
marked contrast to the policies of the 
successful East and South East Asian 
countries. Those countries achieved 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 5 
 robust fiscal outcomes, low inflation, 
encouraging that it has commenced.  
low interest rates and competitive 
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
exchange rates.  
We cannot continue with repeating stop-
go cycles, with each successive trough 
becoming more dangerous. We have to 
change with vigour in order to achieve 
our objectives. We have missed enough 
opportunities and we cannot afford to 
miss them repeatedly. We need decisive 
policy initiatives implemented with 
commitment. More importantly, we 
need to take a longer term view and act 
accordingly. 
It is naïve to believe economics can be 
separated from politics. No country, no 
society has been able to achieve this.  
However, we need to ask why Sri Lanka, 
which was second to Japan in Asia, on 
most socio-economic indicators, has 
slipped so far behind today.    
We need to ask why this is. In what is 
often termed the Asian century, Sri 
Lanka is the only country, other than 
Afghanistan, in the Asia/Pacific region 
with an IMF programme – having an IMF 
programme is the economic equivalent 
to being in hospital. We are not in the 
ICU but clearly in hospital. The remedial 
treatment is known and it is 
itself has recognised that progress has 
been made in stabilising the economy. 
Improved fiscal performance has been 
at the heart of this improvement.  
Honourable Finance Minister and his 
team deserve credit for this.  However, 
the continuing challenge is to have the 
clarity of purpose, focus and 
determination to implement the 
necessary changes.  It has to be a 
national effort.   
The potential for accelerated 
development is clearly evident.  The 
government’s plans, programmes and 
projects, as set out in the Honourable 
Prime Minister’s Statement and the 
Budget Speech have sign-posted the 
way ahead.  However, the task now is to 
continue to turn the good intentions 
into reality.  This journey ahead also 
requires a rebalancing of economics and 
politics in economic decision-making, if 
we are to stay on course. 
The government has commenced a 
strong revenue-based fiscal 
consolidation programme.   
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 6 
 Trade and investment policies are also 
  Section 2: Review of the 
being changed to harness our untapped 
developments in the economy along 
potential. 
We at the Central Bank, are changing 
and upgrading many of our processes 
and policies.   
Frameworks are being developed for 
proactive monetary and exchange rate 
with the progress in the real, fiscal, 
external, monetary and financial 
sectors during 2016 
  Section 3: An analysis of the Central 
Bank’s monetary policy strategy and 
policies for 2017 and beyond 
policymaking on a data driven basis. 
  Section 4: A discussion on the Central 
In this context, the Road Map 2017 
reviews developments in the economy 
and the policy actions that have been 
Bank’s policies related to the 
financial sector performance and 
stability in 2017 and beyond 
pursued during the past year. More 
  Section 5: Key policies related to 
importantly, it seeks to enunciate 
strengthening the broader economy 
policies and programmes for the 
through the Central Bank’s agency 
forthcoming period.  
and ancillary functions 
Accordingly, the outline of the Road 
  Section 6: Concluding remarks
Map 2017 is as follows:       
              Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 7 
   2. Developments in the Economy in 2016 
The Sri Lankan economy achieved a 
Inflation continued to remain at low 
moderate growth rate of 4 per cent 
levels although there were some upward 
during the first nine months of 2016. 
pressures during 2016. Supply side 
Among major sectors, Agricultural 
pressures due to adverse weather 
activities remained subdued, driven 
conditions and revisions to the 
mainly by the contraction in the value 
government tax policy partly 
addition of rice, tea and rubber. Adverse 
contributed to the increase in inflation 
weather conditions during the second 
during the year. The relaxed monetary 
and third quarters of the year and 
policy stance pursued in the past and the 
subdued demand conditions in the major 
increase in wages in the economy also 
export destinations affected this 
exerted some demand pressures on 
growth. Industry-related activities grew 
prices. Accordingly, headline inflation, as 
substantially in 2016 with considerable 
measured by the year-on-year change in 
contribution from the recovery of the 
the Colombo Consumers’ Price Index 
construction sector. Notable growth 
(CCPI, 2006/07=100), was 4.1 per cent in 
was also witnessed in manufacturing,   
December 2016 compared to 2.8 per 
and mining and quarrying activities.  
cent in December 2015. Headline 
Meanwhile, the growth in Services 
inflation, as measured by the year-on 
activities also remained buoyant, 
year change in the National Consumer 
supported by improvements in financial 
Price Index (NCPI, 2013=100), was 4.1 per 
services, and wholesale and retail trade 
cent in November 2016 compared to 4.2 
activities. Based on these developments 
per cent at end 2015. Accordingly, overall 
so far, it is projected that the economy 
inflation has been contained within our 
would grow by around 4.5 – 5.0 per cent 
mid-single figure target of 4 – 6 per cent. 
in 2016.  We anticipate a growth of       
Meanwhile, core inflation continued its 
5.5 – 6.0 per cent in 2017.  
upward trend in 2016, reflecting the 
firming up of demand conditions in the 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
8 
   economy and the revisions made to the 
eleven months of 2016, an increase of 
tax structure in the latter part of the 
14.7 per cent over the previous year. 
year. Core inflation, based on CCPI, 
Workers’ remittances recorded a 
increased to 6.3 per cent, year-on-year, 
moderate growth of 3.1 per cent during 
at end 2016 in comparison to 4.5 per 
the first eleven months of 2016 and 
cent at end 2015, while NCPI based core 
amounted to around US dollars 6.6 
inflation was 6.8 per cent,  year-on-year, 
billion. With these developments, there 
in November 2016.  
was a narrowing of the savings – 
In response to preemptive monetary 
policy measures, monetary aggregates, 
which expanded at a high rate, 
decelerated, while growth of credit to 
the private sector showed some 
slowdown, mainly reflecting the impact 
of increased market interest rates. 
Sri Lanka's external trade performance 
was modest during 2016, although some 
improvement was observed towards the 
latter part of the year. Earnings from 
exports declined by 2.6 per cent during 
the first ten months of 2016, while the 
expenditure on imports increased 
marginally by 0.2 per cent. As a result, 
the cumulative deficit in the trade 
account increased by 3.7 per cent to US 
dollars 7.2 billion during the first ten 
months of 2016. Supporting the external 
sector, earnings from tourism is 
estimated to have increased to around 
US dollars 3.0 billion during the first 
investment gap as reflected in the lower 
current account deficit during the first 
nine months of 2016. Foreign 
investment in the government securities 
market saw a net outflow, while long-
term loans to the government recorded 
a net inflow. Meanwhile, during 2016, Sri 
Lanka entered into a three year 
Extended Fund Facility (EFF) of SDR 1.1 
billion (approximately US dollars 1.5 
billion) with the IMF to strengthen the 
external position of the country and to 
support the government’s broad 
economic reform agenda. Reflecting 
these developments, the level of gross 
official reserves is estimated to be 
around US dollars 6.0 billion by end 2016. 
Moreover, despite considerable 
depreciation pressure on the rupee 
during some months, the rupee 
remained relatively stable in 2016 
compared to the previous year.  It has 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 9 
 depreciated by 3.8 per cent during the 
During 2016, several policy measures 
year.   
Fiscal policy in 2016 has been directed 
towards strengthening the fiscal 
consolidation process. Reflecting the 
positive impact of the strenuous efforts 
of the government, fiscal performance 
has indicated an improvement during 
2016. Government revenue has 
continued its increasing trend while 
were implemented by the Central Bank, 
in line with international standards and 
best practices, to strengthen the 
regulatory and supervisory framework 
pertaining to licensed banks. Key 
banking sector indicators remained at 
healthy levels, while the nonbank sector 
performed despite stringent fiscal and 
macroprudential measures.  
maintaining expenditure at the desired 
Meanwhile, the national payment 
level. The government is certain that the 
systems of the country operated 
announced budget deficit of 5.4 per cent 
smoothly without any major disruption 
of GDP will be achieved in 2016, and it 
while facilitating the growing and 
will be reduced further to 4.6 per cent in 
changing payment needs of the financial 
2017. 
sector with improved efficiency and 
safety.
   Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
10 
           3. Monetary Policy Strategy and Policies for 2017 and Beyond
A coherent and clear macroeconomic 
macroeconomic policy framework in 
framework, is important to achieve our 
the country, built upon three key areas. 
objectives.  
The government is in the process of 
Among the key elements of the overall 
taking decisive measures to address the 
macroeconomic framework, price 
long felt deficiencies in its budgetary 
stability is an important pillar. Price 
operations through a new fiscal 
stability is interpreted to mean low, 
framework, aimed at strengthening 
stable and predictable levels of inflation, 
fiscal sustainability in the medium-term. 
which is conducive for fostering 
This framework is embedded in the IMF-
sustainable long-term economic growth 
EFF arrangement. 
and employment in a country. Price 
stability is instrumental in keeping 
nominal interest rates low, thereby 
enabling an economy to exploit its 
growth potential, while both consumers 
and producers can make economic 
decisions with confidence and certainty. 
Therefore, modern central banks 
predominantly focus on achieving price 
stability as a pre-condition for 
sustainable growth.  
In this context, I would like to indicate 
that the Central Bank and the 
government are working towards 
establishing a well-designed 
These efforts will complement the 
expected improvements of the Central 
Bank with regard to two key policy 
frameworks in relation to monetary 
policy.  
a.  The conduct of monetary policy will 
be strengthened through the move 
towards a flexible inflation targeting 
(FIT) framework.  
b.  A properly designed and widely 
accepted framework for exchange 
rate management will also be 
introduced to establish a market- 
based exchange rate system in the 
country. 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 11 
 The broad-based reform actions under 
towards new frameworks, such as 
the EFF arrangement with the IMF will 
inflation targeting.  
complement these efforts. 
In line with this global tendency, the 
The Central Bank, since the 1980s, has 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka has also been 
been pursuing monetary targeting (MT) 
improving its monetary policy 
as its monetary policy framework to 
framework over the years.  
achieve price stability. Under this 
framework, monetary aggregates were 
used as a key nominal anchor in the 
conduct of monetary policy and the final 
objective of price stability was expected 
to be achieved by influencing money 
aggregates. Reserve money was 
considered the operating target and 
broad money was used as the 
intermediate target of monetary policy 
under this framework.  
Nevertheless, monetary targeting has 
become a less meaningful framework for 
monetary policy conduct, given issues 
such as the instability in the money 
demand function amidst financial 
innovations and the weakening 
relationship between money and 
inflation.  
Hence, countries, which were 
dependent on monetary targeting 
frameworks, have been moving away 
In particular, the Central Bank has 
officially announced that the monetary 
targeting framework would be gradually 
replaced by migrating towards a flexible 
inflation targeting framework.  
Under this enhanced monetary policy 
framework, the Central Bank would 
focus on stabilising inflation in mid-
single digits over the medium-term, 
while supporting growth objectives and 
flexibility in exchange rate management.  
Generally, an inflation targeting 
framework is characterised by an 
announced numerical inflation target, a 
medium-term inflation forecast, which 
facilitates forward looking monetary 
policy decision making and a higher 
degree of transparency and 
accountability.  
Inflation targeting is known to be 
operationally complex. It requires 
greater awareness of the whole 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 12 
 monetary transmission mechanism 
upgrade the technical capabilities of the 
(MTM) and is based on a working link 
Central Bank staff.  
from policy interest rates to interbank 
interest rates and to long-term interest 
rates. Under our enhanced monetary 
policy framework, we expect to 
predominantly employ market-based 
instruments, particularly policy interest 
rates and open market operations 
(OMO) to guide the average weighted 
call money rate (AWCMR), which is 
considered as the operating target, 
along the desired path. This would 
ensure effective transmission of 
monetary policy.   
With a view to strengthening its policy 
formulation and modelling capacity, the 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka has been 
obtaining technical assistance from the 
IMF in the area of macroeconomic 
forecasting, modelling and policy 
analysis. As such, a joint effort has been 
made by the Central Bank and the IMF in 
developing a structural model-based 
Forecasting and Policy Analysis System 
(FPAS) to strengthen the monetary 
policy decision making process and to 
support Sri Lanka’s transition to a 
Within this enhanced framework, the 
flexible inflation targeting regime. The 
Central Bank does not set any monetary 
FPAS is a medium-term, pre-emptive 
targets explicitly. However, broad 
policy analysis system, which brings 
money (M2b) will remain as the key 
together information and judgment in a 
indicative intermediate variable, which 
coherent and logical manner. 
reflects the broad liquidity conditions in 
the economy, to guide the conduct of 
monetary policy of the Central Bank.  
Under the FPAS, the Central Bank has 
already finalised the development of the 
baseline version of a semi-structural 
To implement the new framework, 
Quarterly Projection Model (QPM) for 
macroeconomic projections, including 
forecasting and analysing monetary 
inflation projections, are currently being 
policy.  
strengthened using short-term as well as 
medium-term structural forecasting 
tools and techniques. In this endeavour, 
continued efforts are being made to 
Meanwhile, the Central Bank is in the 
process of implementing several 
organisational changes necessary for the 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 13 
 effective implementation of the model.  
Moreover, we also intend to reintroduce 
To this end, a separate Modelling and 
the Monetary Policy Consultative 
Forecasting Division has been setup in 
Committee (MPCC) in 2017, comprising 
the Economic Research Department and 
eminent academics, professionals as 
relevant processes are being developed 
well as representatives from the private 
while equipping the staff with adequate 
sector. We expect to benefit from the 
training. 
More importantly, we intend to 
introduce several changes in the 
views and inputs of the MPCC in better 
calibrating the monetary policy decision 
making process.  
monetary policy formulation process as 
In addition, we also intend to establish 
well. Accordingly, we will reduce the 
two other important consultative 
number of Monetary Policy Committee 
committees in relation to financial 
(MPC) meetings to 8 meetings per year 
system stability and private sector views 
from the current level of 12 meetings per 
on Central Bank policies and regulations.  
year. Consequently, around 5-6 weeks 
We are of the view that the inputs of 
will be devoted for analysing the latest 
such committees would also be helpful 
developments in the economy and 
in devising appropriate monetary policy 
developing model-based 
decisions.   
macroeconomic forecasts, thereby 
facilitating the provision of in-depth and 
more forward looking insights to the 
monetary policy formulation process.  
We will continue to monitor 
developments in the monetary sector 
closely and adopt timely and effective 
monetary policy measures, supported 
The above improvements envisaged in 
by other macroprudential measures in 
the monetary policy decision making 
order to ensure stable monetary 
process are expected to be 
conditions and price stability, thus 
implemented before the end of 2017. 
facilitating envisaged economic growth.  
This will entail revising the Monetary 
Law Act to accommodate some of the 
new changes to be introduced in this 
process in the medium-term. 
At the same time, we will continue to 
actively engage in liquidity management 
operations in the money market to guide 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 14 
 the short-term interest rates within the 
economic analyses for the purpose of 
desired path. 
In order to ensure the effective 
implementation of monetary policy, we 
formulating effective policies, while 
improving the transparency of monetary 
policy and policy communication.    
expect to introduce certain measures 
At the same time, in the process of 
with regard to OMOs, such as 
making more informed policy decisions, 
introducing fixed rate and variable rate 
we look forward to enhancing statistical 
auctions, and fine tuning auctions after 
inputs by introducing new indices on 
examining their need and feasibility in 
property prices as well as modifying 
line with other country experiences and 
wage indices, while improving the 
market needs.  We will evaluate 
coverage of existing surveys to better 
alternative instruments to strengthen 
track developments in the private 
OMOs.   
sector. 
Reflecting these measures, inflation is 
The Central Bank will continue to 
expected to remain at mid-single digit 
communicate policy decisions among 
levels in the medium-term. As such, it is 
market participants and the general 
expected that the low inflation 
public through multiple means providing 
environment that prevailed for several 
greater clarity and understanding about 
years would be sustained in a range of 4 
policy.  Moreover, launching of the 
– 6 per cent in the medium-term, which 
revamped corporate website of the 
is also consistent with the inflation 
Central Bank is expected to provide high 
target bands stipulated under the EFF 
quality content with dynamic and 
arrangement with the IMF.  
interactive features. 
We would also continue to strengthen 
At the same time, continuing the 
the technical capability, particularly with 
practice that has been followed in the 
regard to the compilation 
past, we intend to make monetary policy 
methodologies of macroeconomic 
announcements according to an 
statistics in line with international 
advance announcement calendar. The 
standards. This will promote sound 
calendar for 2017 is set out below. 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 15 
  Monetary Policy Announcements in 2017 
 expending US dollars 4.0 billion of scarce 
external reserves in a futile attempt to 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
7 February, Tuesday 
defend the external value of the rupee 
24 March, Friday  
through market intervention. There was 
a similar experience in 2015 when the 
9 May, Tuesday 
currency depreciated by 6.5 per cent 
27 June, Tuesday 
3 August, Thursday 
after spending US dollars 2.1 billion of 
our reserves. Wasting large amounts of 
the country’s external reserves, much of 
26 September, Tuesday 
it borrowed, in a vain effort to defend 
7 November, Tuesday 
the currency, which has to be ultimately 
depreciated anyway, is clearly 
28 December, Thursday 
unsustainable. It is time to stop this 
pattern and commence building up of 
external reserves through sustainable 
Volatile global market conditions and Sri 
foreign exchange inflows.  
Lanka’s vulnerability as a twin deficit 
country underscore the vital importance 
of having a flexible exchange rate policy 
to adjust to external pressures. Recent 
experience has clearly demonstrated 
that it is unsustainable to maintain an 
overvalued exchange rate at the 
expense of external reserves. A smooth 
market based exchange rate would 
prevent highly disruptive adjustments 
after a period of stable rates artificially 
maintained by continuous intervention 
by the Central Bank, as experienced in 
the 2011-12 period when the currency 
depreciated by around 14 per cent after 
The impact of global developments, 
such as Brexit, recent Presidential 
elections in the United States (US) as 
well as interest rate hikes by the US 
Federal Reserve, the forthcoming 
elections in France and Germany in 
Europe, the projected slowdown in the 
Chinese economy, as well as economic 
conditions in Sri Lanka’s major trading 
partners, including India, Japan, Russia 
and the Middle East, will also have a 
significant influence on the domestic 
economy.  
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 16 
 Trends in oil prices and international 
notably agriculture and power 
capital flows, following the 
generation. 
normalisation of interest rates in the US 
are likely to be particularly important. 
As in the past, it is expected that the 
government would take timely measures 
We also expect that changes to 
to counter the adverse supply side 
government tax structure and supply 
effects on prices, thus mitigating 
shortages stemming from weather-
adverse inflation expectations of the 
related developments as well as shocks 
general public.  
that could arise due to possible reversal 
of global commodity prices could cause 
temporary variations in price levels. In 
particular, if current drought conditions 
prevail, there could be adverse 
implications on price levels, while 
impacting on economic activities, 
Accordingly, it is anticipated that 
inflation expectations would broadly 
remain anchored in the medium-term 
with appropriate demand management 
policies, supported by timely supply side 
measures.
                  Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
17 
  4. Financial Sector Policies for 2017 and Beyond
The financial system remains important 
from various internal and external 
for efficient allocation of resources and 
developments. 
hence in facilitating strong economic 
performance of the country. In 
particular, a broader, deeper and a 
liquid financial system is vital as 
economies grow more sophisticated.  
The Central Bank has sought to preserve 
the soundness, efficiency and stability of 
the financial system primarily through 
the regulation and supervision of all 
major categories of financial institutions, 
A stable financial system creates a 
ensuring sound and safe payment and 
trusted, enabling environment 
settlement systems as well as 
favourable to savers and investors; helps 
establishing risk management systems 
the transmission of monetary policy; 
and instilling good corporate 
encourages efficient financial 
governance standards and practices in 
intermediation, which eventually 
the financial sector while promoting 
promotes investment and growth; and 
financial inclusion.  
encourages effective and efficient 
operation of markets while improving 
the allocation of resources in the 
economy. 
In the medium-term, our overall aim is to 
ensure the stability in the financial sector 
through identifying emerging 
vulnerabilities in this sector; adopting 
Financial system stability is founded on 
early corrective actions; and 
the confidence of the public in the 
implementing a series of measures to 
financial system and depends on the 
further strengthen financial institutions, 
soundness and resilience of principal 
markets, infrastructure and safety nets.    
components of the financial system to 
collectively withstand risks emanating 
Our medium-term plan is to have a 
financial system, which offers the full 
range of financial products and services 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 18 
 to all economic sectors, including 
change, both nationally and 
agriculture, infrastructure, 
internationally. Considering the need for 
manufacturing, particularly small and 
upgrading of statutes in line with these 
medium enterprises (SMEs), and trade 
developments, we expect to initiate 
to achieve broader economic objectives 
amendments to the existing Banking 
of our country. We need to have a well-
Act. Accordingly, steps will be initiated 
planned and an ambitious agenda for 
to streamline and strengthen the 
financial sector development and 
regulatory and supervisory framework 
reforms ranging across financial sector 
through the proposed Banking Act 
policies with a vision of innovative, 
amendments. We will consider 
robust and competitive financial 
provisions for reinforcing the Central 
systems.  
As a priority, we expect to strengthen 
the regulatory framework pertaining to 
all financial institutions, including 
licensed banks, licensed finance 
Banks’s enforcement powers for 
violations of the Act and the Directions 
issued under it. In this regard, we wish to 
seek views from the banking sector as 
well.  
companies (LFCs), specialised leasing 
In line with these reforms, we intend to 
companies (SLCs) and primary dealers. It 
review all key regulations in the medium-
will further ensure the stability of the 
term. In this regard, we will review key 
financial sector by promoting the safety 
Banking Act Directions, such as share 
and soundness of those institutions to 
ownership, foreign borrowings, and 
face unforeseen challenges in the 
corporate governance, and these will be 
growing business environment.  
amended where necessary. 
In this regard, the Central Bank wishes to 
In order to maintain financial stability in 
implement the following policies in 2017 
the country and in line with regulatory 
and beyond. 
Since the last amendment to the existing 
Banking Act in 2006, the banking sector 
landscape has undergone a significant 
reforms, we have identified the need for 
further strengthening of the supervisory 
function of the Central Bank. 
Accordingly, we expect to enhance the 
bank examination methodology to 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 19 
 focus on the efficiency, effectiveness 
2014 with a view to further 
and sustainability of individual banks and 
strengthening the resilience of licensed 
the banking sector, based on the Bank 
banks. We have already issued Directions 
Sustainability Risk Index (BSRI). 
on the Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio 
Accordingly, amendments will be 
in April 2015.  
introduced to the existing risk-based 
supervision framework based on a mix 
of quantitative and qualitative 
indicators to enhance focus on 
sustainability and operational efficiency 
of banks. We will conduct the pilot run 
of the Risk Index on large banks during 
the first quarter of 2017 and 
subsequently, the index will be extended 
to the other segments of the banking 
sector.  
In 2018, the Risk Index will be 
incorporated to all examination reports 
and we intend to assign a supervisory 
rating, based on this index. By 2019, a 
comprehensive pre-risk assessment will 
be conducted for all banks and a risk-
based examination plan will be 
formulated. 
We have just issued the Direction on 
Basel III Minimum Capital Requirements 
for implementation on a staggered 
basis, commencing 01 July 2017, and to 
be fully implemented by 01 January 2019 
in line with the international timeline.  
With a view to creating a more resilient 
banking sector, we expect banks to 
maintain a stable funding profile. 
Accordingly, we plan to introduce the 
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) and the 
Leverage Ratio for banks. NSFR will be 
applicable by 01 January 2018 and the 
necessary Banking Act Directions on 
NSFR will be issued in line with the 
international timeline. By implementing 
the Leverage Ratio, it is intended to 
restrict the build-up of excessive 
leverage in the banking sector. 
In addition, we intend to strengthen 
Accordingly, in 2017, we will begin to 
capital positions in line with minimum 
monitor the level of compliance under 
requirements and Basel III capital 
the leverage ratio. 
standards. Implementing Basel III capital 
and liquidity standards were identified as 
key policy measures in the Road Map for 
It is also our intention to finalise the 
Crisis Preparedness Plan, and Recovery 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 20 
 and Resolution Framework as a 
framework of non-bank financial 
precondition for effective supervision. 
institutions.  
Accordingly, guidelines will be issued on 
recovery and resolution frameworks of 
banks and the crisis management 
frameworks will be strengthened and 
streamlined in order to minimise the 
adverse impact, both on the troubled 
banks and, on the banking and financial 
sectors as a whole.   
In line with the developments in the 
banking sector and the guidelines from 
the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision, we will be taking steps to 
review the existing criteria and 
mechanism for the selection of the panel 
of qualified auditors in order to 
strengthen the current assessment 
process and enhancement of audit 
quality.  
In recent years, the Central Bank has 
introduced a broad range of prudential 
regulations to strengthen risk 
management, corporate governance, 
capital adequacy and internal controls of 
the non-bank financial institutions. Going 
forward, the stability of the financial 
sector will also be strengthened by 
enhancing the existing regulatory 
The capital levels of licensed finance 
companies (LFCs) and specialised leasing 
companies (SLCs) are expected to be 
strengthened further. Accordingly, 
existing LFCs and SLCs will be required 
to maintain a higher minimum core 
capital than the prevailing requirement 
of Rs. 400 million and Rs. 300 million, 
respectively. These will be increased to 
Rs. 2 billion and Rs. 1 billion, respectively 
on a staggered basis to facilitate the 
smooth transition. This will serve as a 
structural capital buffer for further 
consolidation of this sector. It is 
expected to improve the existing 
framework on capital adequacy, which 
will be more risk sensitive, focusing on 
credit risk based on borrowers’ risk 
profiles as well as operational and 
market risk in the trading book. 
Further, in order to strengthen the 
governance framework of the non-bank 
financial sector, we will introduce 
appropriate policy changes to the 
existing Corporate Governance 
Direction.   
The risk management framework of 
non-bank financial institutions will also 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 21 
 be strengthened. We will amend the 
encourage companies to pursue organic 
existing Directions on classification and 
consolidation in order to strengthen the 
provisioning for non-performing loans 
non-bank financial sector.  
and advances in line with the new 
Accounting Standards in order to 
harmonise the differences between 
regulatory provisioning and accounting 
impairment. In order to mitigate undue 
exposures and reduce high 
concentration risks on investments, 
guidance will be given for valuation of 
immovable properties of LFC/SLC 
sector. Further, minimum liquidity 
requirement for the sector is expected 
to be more stringent to create additional 
liquidity buffers.  
Measures will also be taken to enhance 
disclosures and transparency through 
the introduction of a new regulatory 
framework for the preparation, 
presentation and publication of the 
Annual Audited Accounts/Quarterly 
Financial Statements and periodical 
returns. 
In addition, more attention will be given 
to distressed finance companies, by 
resolving the difficulties largely through 
mergers and recapitalisation in 2017. We 
intend to establish an Enforcement Unit 
to prosecute the Board of Directors and 
senior management of failed finance 
companies who are involved in 
fraudulent activities and malpractices.  
With a view to strengthening the 
existing enforcement framework on 
prohibited schemes, the Central Bank 
intends to establish a unit comprising 
officers with specialised skills in the 
areas of law, forensic and investigation 
skills and accounting, to liaise and assist 
law enforcement authorities on related 
investigations. This Unit will also deal 
with matters relating to unauthorised 
deposit taking institutions. In addition, 
the Central Bank will continue to 
Our objective is to reduce the overall risk 
enhance awareness of the general public 
of the financial sector by maintaining 
on the dangers of engaging in 
fewer companies but a stronger sector 
unauthorised investment schemes, and 
to avoid any contagion effect. As such, 
institutions authorised by the Central 
with the proposed changes to the 
Bank to accept deposits from the 
existing regulatory framework, we 
general public through an effective 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 22 
 public awareness campaign involving 
surveillance, which includes: (1) 
mass media. 
Primary dealers play a vital role in 
trading of government securities and 
market making. Further, there is high 
potential to deepen the debt securities 
market in the country. Hence, we need 
to have a clearly stated policy 
framework for Primary Dealers. This will 
further enhance the safety of 
investments in the government 
securities market. Accordingly, we have 
already revisited the existing regulatory 
framework of primary dealers and 
based on those findings, we will 
introduce an appropriate regulatory 
framework for primary dealers in line 
with the latest developments in the 
market by benchmarking the global 
standards. We also expect to establish 
and implement a restructuring 
mechanism for distressed primary 
dealers. 
The Macroprudential Surveillance 
Department (MSD) of the Central Bank 
is being strengthened to keep a close 
tab on the developments in the financial 
system as a whole.  In this regard, we 
expect to strengthen the institutional 
framework for macroprudential 
collecting macroeconomic and financial 
data by customising the existing FInNet 
Data Reporting System of the Central 
Bank; (2) expanding the statistical 
analysis to identify system-wide 
vulnerabilities and threats to the 
financial stability from the build-up of 
risks and interconnectedness of 
financial institutions; and (3) improving 
the early warning framework with a 
focus on stress tests and financial 
system stability indicators, to identify 
and assess systemic risks and 
vulnerabilities in order to ensure 
formulation and implementation of 
proactive macroprudential policies to 
maintain financial stability. 
The Central Bank has continued to take 
measures to strengthen the payment 
and settlement infrastructure of the 
country and to develop an efficient and 
stable payment and settlement system, 
capable of catering to the growing 
payment needs.  
Continuing to discharge this important 
function, we expect to improve the 
national payment system to promote 
electronic payments to establish a less-
cash dependent society. In this regard, a 
payment platform is being developed to 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 23 
 effect government payments, 
applications to strengthen security of 
particularly the payments to Sri Lanka 
electronic payments. 
Customs, through the Common 
Electronic Fund Transfer Switch (CEFTS) 
in real time. A National Card Scheme 
(NCS) is being introduced as a cost 
effective alternative to currently 
available international card schemes and 
a Common Point-Of-Sale Switch (CPS) is 
being developed to facilitate clearing 
and switching of payment cards issued 
under the National Card Scheme. A 
Common Mobile Switch (CMobs) will be 
implemented to ensure interoperability 
between mobile wallets. Further, we will 
monitor the progress of licensed banks 
and other financial institutions joining 
the CEFTS, CPS and CMobs and adopt 
policies with a view of increasing the 
efficiency of electronic retail payment 
systems and minimising risks associated 
with such payment systems.  
Going forward, we will strengthen the 
supervisory framework and carryout on-
site and off-site supervision of licensed 
service providers of payment cards and 
mobile payment systems to ensure 
compliance with regulations and 
guidelines. We also intend to introduce 
Internet Banking Guidelines and 
Security Standards for mobile 
In year 2016, the Central Bank adopted 
the Cabinet approved National Policy on 
Anti-money Laundering and Countering 
the Financing of Terrorism. Currently, all 
the stakeholders are in the process of 
developing their internal frameworks to 
support the national policy on Anti-
Money Laundering and Countering the 
Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT).  
Sri Lanka needs to strengthen the 
AMF/CFT regime by effectively 
implementing Financial Action Task 
Force (FATF) recommendations in order 
to upgrade the country rating. If Sri 
Lanka fails to achieve the expected level 
of compliance, the country may be 
considered as a high risk country, 
resulting in adverse implications on the 
financial sector.  
In order to overcome such challenges 
and hence to ensure compliance, the 
Central Bank will focus on a number of 
strategic actions in the medium-term. 
I would also like to note that the 
Microfinance Act came into effect on 15 
July 2016. In line with this, the 
Department of Supervision of 
Microfinance Institutions (DSMI) was 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 24 
 established at the Central Bank of Sri 
management model, where the 
Lanka to carry out the responsibilities, as 
operational managers form the first line 
stipulated in the Microfinance Act No. 
of defense, and the Risk Management 
06 of 2016 and implement policies 
and Internal Audit Departments 
approved by the Monetary Board to 
constitute the second and third lines of 
ensure good governance, transparency 
defense, respectively.  
and stability of Microfinance Institutions 
(MFIs).   
Moreover, in view of the need to build a 
governance and risk management 
The Central Bank is ready to receive duly 
framework that balances return 
completed applications from eligible 
objectives with prudent risk 
companies, which would be submitted 
management and controls, Strategic 
to the Monetary Board. Continuous 
Asset Allocation (SAA) for the 
surveillance and on-site examinations of 
international reserves, managed by 
Licensed Microfinance Companies 
Central Bank, has been developed and a 
(LMFCs) will be conducted by the 
new Investment Policy Statement has 
Central Bank. We expect to maintain a 
been drafted in line with it. The 
constant dialogue with the LMFCs and 
Investment Guidelines have been 
increase awareness on regulations.  
reviewed to reflect the revised 
While we are proposing policies and 
investment criteria.  
plans for the financial sector, as the apex 
Going forward, we expect to ensure a 
financial institution in the economy, we 
proper Enterprise Risk Management 
also need to ensure the stability, 
(ERM) Framework for the Central Bank, 
continuity and safety of our own house. 
which involves setting up a new Risk 
In particular, it is important to foster a 
Governance Structure and developing 
risk culture within the Central Bank as 
systems and procedures to monitor 
central banks are considered as the 
financial and non-financial risks of the 
trustee of public assets.   
Bank by engaging in risk mapping of all 
In line with this endeavour, the Central 
Bank of Sri Lanka intends to continue to 
departments in order to develop a risk 
profile for the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. 
apply the “Three Lines of Defense” risk 
 Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 25 
  5. Policies to Strengthen the Broader Economy 
Currency Management: We want to 
Management of the Employees’ 
make sure that the Sri Lankan Rupee 
Provident Fund: Employees’ Provident 
notes and coins are available to the 
Fund (EPF) is the largest superannuation 
public in required denominations upon 
fund of the country having total assets 
demand without any shortage. We plan 
of Rs. 1.8 trillion. During the last year, we 
to develop a new mechanism for 
have introduced several initiatives to 
islandwide coin distribution and arrange 
enhance the overall risk management 
programmes with banks to collect the 
framework and greater oversight over 
coin tills issued to the public. 
the organisational performance of the 
In 2017, the Central Bank plans to issue a 
new coin series to reduce the cost of 
minting. In addition, measures are also 
being taken to improve the quality 
standards of currency notes issued by 
the Central Bank. 
As in the past, the currency 
management policy of the Central Bank 
will be focused on maintaining quality 
standards. Accordingly, the Central Bank 
plans on strict enforcement of law as 
per the Monetary Law Act on wilful 
mutilation, alteration and defacement of 
currency notes in order to improve the 
quality of currency notes in circulation to 
reflect the image of the emerging Sri 
Lankan economy. 
Fund. In addition, the completion of 
Phase I of the Image Scanning Project 
and the automation of certain functions 
will improve the operational efficiency of 
the Fund. Going forward, we intend to 
strengthen the EPF operations by 
expanding member services to the 
regional level through EPF units 
established in the Central Bank Regional 
Offices. Initiatives have also been taken 
to re-register all members with the new 
biometric National Identity Card in 
consultation with the Ministry of 
National Policies and Economic Affairs.   
In line with the government policy 
agenda, we are in the process of 
reviewing investment policies by 
incorporating international best 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 26 
 practices, focusing on proper assets 
•  Enhancing the institutional capacity 
diversification and risk management 
to ensure effective and efficient 
with the assistance of the Asian 
fund management 
Development Bank (ADB) and the World 
Bank.  
 Improving the framework for 
managing financial risks 
Going forward, the EPF will also focus on 
 the following; 
Public Debt Management: As you know, 
 Improving web based ICT 
the Central Bank manages public debt 
technologies to link employers, 
on behalf of the government. In 
employees and other stakeholders 
delivering this responsibility, we want to 
•  Enhancing the quality of existing 
database 
 Improving the efficiency of the 
refund payment system 
 Improving awareness among 
stakeholders on EPF operations to 
improve the level of service delivery 
•  Establishing e-accounts for both 
employers and employees 
 Introducing a web based data 
collection and contribution payment 
system facility to employers for real-
time validation of member accounts 
 Identification of new markets and 
asset classes for investments and 
maintaining appropriate asset 
make sure that our debt management 
operations are conducted in a 
professional way with the highest level 
of integrity.  
In this context, the Monetary Board has 
come up with a list of actions to develop 
the debt market and debt management 
operations. Some of these have already 
been implemented.  
In July 2016, we resumed Pre-bid 
Meetings with all the primary dealers to 
provide them the relevant information in 
relation to the forthcoming auction. We 
hope that the availability of such market 
information would enhance 
transparency.  
allocations to generate the highest 
We are working towards publishing an 
level of risk adjusted return 
Annual Auction Calendar with more 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 27 
 information with the collaboration of 
quotes will be made mandatory. This will 
the Ministry of Finance, which will be 
enhance price guidance to the market 
reviewed quarterly. This will enhance the 
and would result in increased liquidity 
transparency and predictability of the 
due to price discovery and transparency.  
primary auction process in the 
government securities market. Such 
initiatives will provide the same 
information to all market participants 
thereby ensuring the availability of 
information on potential transactions 
well in advance. 
Further, with the intention of enhancing 
the transparency of our operations, 
since June 2016, a decision is in place not 
to accept more than the aggregated 
offered amount at an auction although 
the Central Bank may accept less than 
the amount offered. 
The Primary Auction Rules for 
government securities will also be 
published in order to improve 
transparency and the standardisation of 
the procedures.  
Meanwhile, the current auction process 
is being reviewed, and the draft 
outcome of this review has been shared 
with the World Bank and the IMF. The 
Central Bank expects to get the draft 
auction system validated by these 
international organisations before going 
live with it. We hope to do this in the 
first quarter of 2017. We have also 
The Bloomberg Trading Platform has 
invited a consultant from the US 
also been introduced for government 
Treasury to look into a number of areas, 
securities trading. Greater price 
including the auction process, cashflow 
discovery and transparency in the 
management and debt management 
system, as well as increased confidence, 
strategies, as well as establishing a good 
have resulted in a significant increase in 
database for government securities.  
the volume of trading on the platform, in 
the secondary market.  
The possibility of active debt 
management initiatives, such as buy-
Further, the Bloomberg e-Trading 
backs, switching and swap 
Platform will be extended for 
arrangements, which are also a part of 
repurchase transactions, and two-way 
liability management initiatives, will be 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 28 
 explored to improve the debt 
diversify the foreign investor base as 
management process, with changes in 
well. We have already seen growing 
relevant legislation.  
The Central Bank will establish an 
Electronic Trading Platform and a 
Central Counter Party (CCP) 
arrangement for government securities 
along with required legal reforms to 
deepen and broaden the secondary 
market for government securities. 
Similarly, a mechanism to disseminate 
secondary market information on debt 
instruments will also be established 
through the proposed e-trading 
platform and the clearing house. Hence, 
we will have a new set of operational 
processes for government securities in 
the secondary market as well, in the near 
term. 
The Treasury is already in the process of 
studying the possibility of implementing 
liability management for US dollar as 
well as Rupee denominated borrowings. 
The Central Bank will work closely with 
the Treasury in this process. 
We should access the international 
capital market when market conditions 
are favourable to Sri Lanka to build a 
buffer to avoid unwarranted domestic 
market pressure due to limited resource 
availability. This would broaden and 
confidence in the currency among some 
large international investors, which 
means that in the near future, we should 
be able to issue international bonds in 
rupees, which would minimise our 
exposure to exchange rate movements. 
In this endeavour, we are working to 
cooperate with the Euroclear System to 
facilitate us to trade our bonds in their 
system in the future. Such an initiative 
will increase the efficiency and 
effectiveness of settlement for investors 
and increase the pool of savings 
available for investment in domestic 
securities.   
There will be a new Public Debt Act. A 
team of professionals is consolidating all 
the statutes relating to debt 
management and a separate Debt 
Management Unit is being set up at the 
Ministry of Finance.   
This, in our view, is a positive 
development, because for years now, 
the Central Bank has had to cope with 
the conflict of interest of trying to 
conduct an independent monetary 
policy while at the same time, raising 
funds for the government as cheaply as 
possible. This conflict of interest poses 
challenges to the monetary policy 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 29 
 conduct of the Central Bank. Therefore, 
Sri Lanka, implements a number of 
taking away the debt management 
concessionary development credit 
function would enable the Central Bank 
schemes through Participating Financial 
to have a greater room to manoeuvre to 
Institutions (PFIs), with a view to uplift 
conduct an independent monetary 
living standards to enhance financial 
policy. 
Foreign Exchange Management: With a 
view to further relaxing foreign 
literacy as well as financial inclusion, and 
to ensure balanced regional growth and 
equitable development.  
exchange transactions, the Central Bank 
  A New Loan Scheme for the Micro, 
has implemented several new policy 
Small and Medium Scale Enterprises 
measures in the recent past with the 
(MSMEs): A new loan scheme for the 
support of the government. We want to 
MSME sector development and 
emphasise that all our policy measures 
employment generation has been 
are in line with the current policy stance 
designed jointly by the Central Bank 
to promote the competitive advantages 
and the Ministry of National Policies 
of Sri Lanka in global business activities 
and Economic Affairs. It constitutes a 
resulting in the enhancement of investor 
government-led support mechanism 
confidence, strengthening of foreign 
to address financial, technical, 
reserves and stabilising the foreign 
marketing and entrepreneurship 
exchange market.  
The government has identified that it is 
timely to have a new Foreign Exchange 
Act. As proposed in the Budget 2017, the 
new Foreign Exchange bill will be 
presented to the Parliament during 2017.  
In addition, the Central bank is in the 
process of further relaxing foreign 
exchange transactions. 
Regional Development: The Central 
needs, especially of youth and young 
graduates, women and differently 
abled people. The unique feature of 
this Scheme is the inclusion of a 
special grant element for start-up 
enterprises to meet the initial 
expenses. The maximum amount of 
the grant will be Rs. 50,000 and the 
maximum loan amount of  
Rs. 250,000 will be given at an 
interest of 5.5 per cent per annum. 
The Scheme intends to allocate  
Bank, as the agent of the Government of 
Rs. 4.0 billion to the needy sectors of 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 30 
 the economy and is expected to 
implemented with the collaboration 
commence in January 2017.   
of the Ministry of National Policy and 
  National Strategy for Financial 
Inclusion: Based on the findings of 
the Financial Inclusiveness Survey 
(FIS), a comprehensive draft of 
National Strategy for Financial 
Inclusion will be developed 
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Power 
and Renewable Energy, Sustainable 
Energy Authority and other 
stakeholders, with the intention of 
promoting rooftop solar power 
generation in the country. 
considering the contemporary 
  Promoting Green Financing: In 
national financial inclusion strategies 
addition, the Central Bank will 
of peer countries. The views of 
promote Green Financing through 
domestic stakeholders, obtained 
enhancing awareness to encourage 
through continuous dialogue, will be 
enterprises to protect the 
considered in drafting the proposed 
environment, conserve resources 
national strategy.  
  Promoting Commercial Scale Organic 
Agriculture and Dairy 
Entrepreneurship: Addressing the 
increased concerns of the public and 
the government on organic 
agriculture, mainly due to the 
multiple benefits that accrue from it, 
the Central Bank expects to promote 
commercial scale organic agriculture 
and dairy entrepreneurs through the 
establishment of formal agribusiness 
societies and multi-stakeholder 
enterprises.  
and to achieve carbon neutrality. 
Banks will also be encouraged to 
provide financial facilities to green 
enterprises with the intention of 
protecting the environment. 
In line with the international appetite to 
promote green financing, the Central 
Bank has also joined the Sustainable 
Banking Network (SBN) of the 
International Finance Corporation (IFC), 
which is a knowledge and capacity 
building platform for financial regulators 
and banking associations of emerging 
markets on sustainable finance. As a 
  A Loan Scheme for Promoting Rooftop 
member of the SBN, we would focus on 
Solar Power Generation: A new loan 
sustainable banking practices to help 
scheme, funded by ADB, will be 
banks to effectively manage 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 31 
 environmental and social risks in the 
finance, with the support of IFC, we 
projects they finance and support 
intend to conduct a workshop for the 
businesses that are greener, climate 
senior staff of banking institutions in Sri 
friendly and socially inclusive. As an 
Lanka during the first quarter of 2017.
important step towards sustainable 
                                Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 32 
 6. Concluding Remarks 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I hope the policies and the outlook 
unveiled in this Road Map will be a 
catalyst in planning your activities and 
formulating relevant policies in the 
Some of these policies may be perceived 
as painful in the short run, but they are 
meant to strengthen medium-term 
stability of the economy.  This is crucial 
for the long-term prosperity of all Sri 
period ahead. At the same time, I would 
Lankans. 
like to mention that we would not be 
hesitant to introduce new policies and 
plans depending on the requirements of 
the economy and as contingencies arise. 
Such initiatives would be adopted with 
necessary consultation and will be 
clearly communicated to the 
stakeholders.  
Now, let me conclude this statement by 
emphasising some important points.  
It is clear that stability in the economy is 
broadly on track as evident in the 
improving macro-fundamentals. As the 
monetary authority and the apex 
regulator of the financial system of Sri 
Lanka, we are making our best efforts 
to ensure stable economic conditions on 
a sustainable basis.  
  As an agent for stability, the Central 
Bank would continue to play its role 
through clear and consistent policies to 
ensure overall macroeconomic stability 
in the country. The frameworks that are 
being developed are intended to 
support this.  
Our role in relation to the country’s 
economic performance is primarily as a 
facilitator. As a facilitator, we would 
continue to support the new growth 
model of the government, which 
focuses on the central role of the private 
sector.  
Our policies aim at supporting the 
overall thrust of the government to 
promote investments, domestic and 
foreign, and enhance exports. To this 
end, we would be contributing through 
our efforts to improving the investment 
climate and facilitating trade, thereby 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
33 
 creating the conditions to harness the 
Priority needs to be attached to 
benefits of the investment-trade nexus.  
equitable and inclusive growth, which is 
In this context, I believe the initial 
impetus to harness the country’s 
considerable potential must come from 
the domestic private sector, particularly 
in the next year or two.  The Megapolis 
Development Project as well as Master 
key to achieving this objective. Hence, 
the Central Bank will continue its role in 
regional development to complement 
these efforts. Special attention will be 
paid to enhancing financial literacy as a 
means of promoting inclusion. 
Plans, that have been drawn up by the 
I should also mention that the 
government for the development of 
government has announced its intention 
Hambantota, Trincomalee and Kandy, 
to restructure the Central Bank. We 
and various regional development 
would very much welcome a 
programmes will open up tremendous 
constructive restructuring process, 
investment opportunities for both 
which would upgrade processes and 
domestic and foreign investors.  
result in the reform of the Monetary 
We are also mindful that while the 
overall development thrust is on track, 
there exists disparity in the incidence of 
poverty across the provinces and 
districts, despite the progress that has 
so far been made in reducing overall 
poverty in the country. Recognising the 
urgent need to pay attention to this, the 
Law and Banking Acts, particularly to 
give greater powers to the Central Bank 
to regulate the financial system. We are 
confident that such moves would be 
instrumental in enhancing the 
credibility of the Central Bank, while 
preserving the independence it needs to 
perform its roles effectively.  
government has declared 2017 as the 
Before concluding, let me express my 
“Year of Alleviating Poverty” to 
sincere gratitude to a number of people 
eradicate poverty in all its forms from Sri 
who are instrumental in supporting our 
Lanka in line with the Sustainable 
efforts to achieve economic and price 
Development Goals (SDGs). 
stability and financial system stability as 
well as to deliver our agency and 
ancillary functions. I am grateful, to His 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 34 
 Excellency the President Maithripala 
excellent and highly professional advice. 
Sirisena, and Honourable Prime Minister 
Last but not least, let me commend and 
Ranil Wickremesinghe for their 
congratulate the Assistant Governors, 
leadership and guidance, and 
Heads of Departments, particularly the 
Honourable Finance Minister Ravi 
Director of Economic Research and the 
Karunanayake for his support, as close 
Staff of the Economic Research 
coordination between the Ministry of 
Department for today’s effort in 
Finance and the Central Bank is essential 
formulating the policy document, as well 
for sound economic management.  
as all Staff of the Central Bank who are 
I am privileged to have unstinted 
support and prudent inputs from the 
Members of the Monetary Board. 
Therefore, my deep gratitude is due to 
Secretary to the Treasury, Dr. R H S 
Samaratunga, Mrs. Manohari 
Ramanathan, Mr. Chrisantha Perera and 
Mr. Nihal Fonseka. They have been 
giving up an enormous amount of their 
time to address the challenging issues of 
the day. I am also thankful to Deputy 
committed to fulfilling the key objectives 
of the Central Bank with utmost 
diligence, proficiency and 
professionalism. On my first day in 
office, I said that professionalism, 
technical excellence and integrity are 
crucial guiding principles for any 
institution and its staff. I am very 
pleased to say I have seen plenty of 
these characteristics among the staff of 
the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. 
Governors Dr. Nandalal Weerasinghe, 
Thank you and I wish you all a Happy and 
Mr. P. Samarasiri and Mr. S. Lankathilake 
Prosperous New Year 2017.
for their continuous support and 
  Central Bank of Sri Lanka – ROAD MAP 2017 
 35 
