    
 
Remarks at the Banking Standards Board Panel “Worthy of 
trust? Law, ethics and culture in banking” 
 
 
Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England 
   Bank of England Conference Centre 
21 March 2017 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
1 
   It is a pleasure to host this Banking Standards Board event “Worthy of trust? Law, ethics and culture in 
banking” and to join this distinguished panel. 
 Over the past decade, banking has suffered twin crises of solvency and legitimacy.   
 The first is being addressed by comprehensive reforms.  As a consequence, large banks are now stronger, 
more liquid, and more focused.1  
 This immense progress has been overshadowed by a crisis of legitimacy.  A series of scandals ranging from 
mis-selling to manipulation have undermined trust in banking, the financial system, and, to some degree, 
markets themselves.  
 
Multiple factors contributed to a tide of ethical drift.2  Market standards were poorly understood, often ignored 
and lacked teeth. Too many participants neither felt responsible for the system nor recognised the full impact 
of their actions.  Bad behaviour went unchecked, proliferated and eventually became the norm. 
 The economic consequences have been enormous. Global banks’ misconduct costs have now reached over 
$320 billion – capital that could otherwise have supported up to $5 trillion of lending to households and 
businesses.3  
 But there is a bigger cost. 
 An industry the scale and importance of finance needs social capital as well as economic capital.  It requires 
the consent of society in order to operate, innovate and grow.  
 Repeated episodes of misconduct have called the social licence of finance into question.   
 In a system where trust is fundamental it ought to be of grave concern that only 20% of UK citizens now think 
that banks are well-run, down from 90% in the late 1980s.4  
                                                          
1 For example, their capital requirements have increased 10-fold. And in response these banks have raised over $1.5 trillion of capital in 
recent years. 
2 There are multiple root causes: (i) market structures presented opportunities for abuse and were vulnerable to conflicts of interest and 
collusion; (ii) systems of internal governance and controls were incapable of asserting the interests of firms – and society – over those of 
staff; (iii) compensation packages rewarded short-term returns and ignored long-term value creation and good conduct; (iv) and dearth 
of personal accountability. 
3 For misconduct costs see BCG report, “Global Risk 2017: Staying the Course in Banking, March 2017 
http://www.bcg.com/publications/2017/financial-institutions-growth-global-risk-2017-staying-course-banking.aspx.  Estimates of the 
impact on lending capacity are Bank of England calculations.    
4 British Social Attitudes Survey (2013). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
2 
 
2 
  From ethical drift to ethical lift 
 The scale of these shortcomings is why the Bank of England has been pursuing a series of measures to 
convert ethical drift into ethical lift.  Domestically we are working closely with the Financial Conduct 
Authority (FCA) and HM Treasury.  Internationally, we have catalysed a series of actions at the Financial 
Stability Board (FSB) that will be presented to the G20 Leaders’ Summit in July. 
 Allow me to review the main elements before concentrating on how codes of conduct and the Senior 
Managers Regime (SMR) can lift standards and improve culture. 
 Let me be clear at the outset that the Bank of England holds itself to the highest standards.  In that spirit, I 
will extend my remarks to review some lessons the Bank can learn from the events surrounding Charlotte 
Hogg’s resignation, and the steps we are taking in response.   
 The UK Action Plan to improve conduct 
 Our action plan for the financial system begins with stronger deterrents.  In the UK, important steps have 
been taken to strengthen laws and regulations, though some gaps remain, most notably in the FX market.5  
But authorities cannot and should not try to legislate for every circumstance, watch every transaction, or 
anticipate every market innovation.  So while fines and sanctions have roles in deterring misconduct, they 
will not, on their own, bring about the cultural change we need.  
 We must move from an excessive reliance on punitive, ex post fines of firms to greater emphasis on more 
compelling ex ante incentives for individuals, and ultimately a more solid grounding in improved firm culture.  
 This includes reducing opportunities for bad behaviour, for example, by overhauling the regulation of key 
benchmarks in FICC markets.   
 More fundamentally, it requires compensation rules that align better risk and reward. In the UK a significant 
proportion of variable compensation now must be deferred for a period of seven years.  This ensures that it 
can be clawed back over the time scales it generally takes for conduct issues to come to light. 
 To address the “rolling bad apples” problem, mechanisms are now in place in the UK to ensure that when 
individuals move on their history will be known to those who consider hiring them.6 The FSB is now 
considering whether to adopt such an approach more broadly.7  
                                                      
5 The UK’s Fair and Effective Markets Review (FEMR) recommended that the EU’s market abuse regulation should be extended to 
cover every major fixed income and currency market, that criminal sanctions be updated, and maximum prison terms extended.  See: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Pages/fmreview.aspx 
6 The PRA has introduced requirements for regulated firms to provide employment references to one another in a mandatory template 
when hiring Senior Managers.  This includes information on an individual’s conduct record, and their fitness and propriety.  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
3 
 
3 
  This is all constructive but insufficient.  That’s why we have emphasised measures to ensure firms and their 
employees take responsibility – individually and collectively – for their own conduct.  These range from 
securing compliance with minimum standards to a common and dynamic understanding of good practice that 
is widely understood and collectively enforced.   
 UK authorities have used their convening powers to encourage market participants to establish standards of 
market practice that are well understood, widely followed and, crucially, that keep pace with market 
developments.   
 This is what the Banking Standards Board is doing by promoting higher standards of conduct and 
competence across the UK banking system.  It’s why the global FICC Market Standards Board (FMSB) is 
establishing readily understood standards for their markets.  And it’s why the FX Committees will launch in 
May the first globally consistent code of conduct for FX markets. 
 But codes are of little use if nobody reads, follows, or enforces them. This is where the UK’s Senior 
Managers Regime comes in.  
 Senior Managers Regime 
 The SMR addresses the common refrain of senior management that they weren’t aware that misconduct was 
taking place in their firms.  The SMR sets a series of requirements for the most senior decision-makers of 
banks, building societies and major investment firms. 
 The SMR re-establishes the link between seniority and accountability.  Senior Managers are now held 
accountable if they fail to take reasonable steps (including training or proper oversight) to prevent or stop 
regulatory breaches in their areas of responsibility.8   
 And the SMR prescribes responsibilities – typically to the Chair and CEO respectively – for developing and 
embedding a firm’s culture.   
 Under the related Certification Regime, firms must also annually assess and certify the fitness and propriety 
of a wide range of risk-taking employees. 
 Although the SMR is only a year old and we are all learning by doing, there are encouraging signs that it is 
making a difference.   
                                                                                                                                                                                 
7 See FSB press release at: http://www.fsb.org/2017/02/fsb-assesses-implementation-progress-and-effects-of-reforms/. Additionally see 
FSB “Stocktake of efforts to strengthen governance frameworks to mitigate misconduct risks”, forthcoming March 2017. 
8 The SMR came into effect on 7 March 2016.  Insurers are required to meet similar standards under Solvency II and in future, the SMR 
will apply to them directly, as it will to other participants in FICC markets. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
4 
 
4 
  For firms, the SMR is clarifying and improving governance, accountability and decision-making processes. 
Senior Managers are increasingly focusing on building cultures of risk awareness, openness and ethical 
behaviour. In the words of one chairman “responsibility for culture has moved to the top of my agenda.” 9   
 For supervisors, the regime is helping identify weaknesses in governance and accountability, and 
encouraging the necessary changes.  This is particularly true in cases where authority has historically been 
blurred such as in cross-border banking.   
 Adoption is spreading.  Some international firms are voluntarily adopting elements of the SMR’s certification 
requirements to strengthen their global operations.  And the FSB is now explicitly reviewing the merits of 
such “responsibility mapping”.10 
 Recent events 
 
The SMR has also been adopted by the Bank of England.11 We chose to because our mission demands that 
we hold ourselves to the highest standards of governance and accountability.   
 One of our colleagues did not meet these high standards recently.  Our newly appointed Deputy Governor 
for Markets and Banking, Charlotte Hogg had previously not disclosed a relevant family relationship, as was 
required under our staff Code of Conduct. 
 For those who have questioned whether we “get it”, we do.  We know this honest mistake was also a serious 
mistake – one that was compounded by the fact that Charlotte Hogg had overseen the development of our 
new Code.  
 We were clear upfront that there must be consequences for both her and the Bank.  
 Our minimum response would obviously be what we would expect to see in the firms that we supervise.  
Let’s be absolutely clear about this baseline. In analogous situations in the private sector, we expect:  
  Evidence that the firm is taking the matter seriously; 
  Proportionate consequences for the individual, including some form of disciplinary warning and 
possibly some impact on remuneration; and 
  A wider review of lessons learned if there was any evidence that there was a systemic problem. 
                                                       
9 See page 16, Financial Reporting Council (FRC), “Corporate Culture and the Role of Boards: Report of observations”, July 2016. 
10 See Footnote 7 for details.   
11 With appropriate modifications to reflect the fact that it has a very different range of functions to a commercial bank and is accountable 
to a different range of stakeholders, including Parliament. For further details see: www.bankofengland.co.uk/about/Documents/smr.pdf  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
5 
 
5 
  Now consider the Bank’s response to Charlotte Hogg’s case:  
  She was formally warned in the strongest – and most public – of terms.  
  There were consequences for her compensation.  While she couldn’t forfeit a bonus as Bank of 
England Governors cannot receive one, she waived her salary increase this year. 
  Court reassigned her COO responsibilities. 
  Court reconfigured reporting lines and internal structures in order to improve governance, 
compliance and disciplinary processes, including reassigning the SMR responsibility for 
implementing our Code.  
  And, on the basis of this one incident, the independent directors of Court have initiated a widespread 
review that will draw on the expertise of the Independent Evaluation Office, Internal Audit and the 
National Audit Office. Its results will be made public. 
In other words, consistent with our higher standards, the Bank planned a tougher response than we would 
expect in the private sector, but one that, in our judgement, was still proportionate to an honest mistake that 
was freely and transparently admitted.  
 The Treasury Select Committee (TSC) reached its own judgement, which in turn triggered Charlotte Hogg’s 
decision to resign.12  I fully respect both the TSC’s judgement and her decision. 
 I wanted to speak to this, not to continue the debate about the rights and wrongs of this case, but instead to 
highlight some of the lessons that the Bank and industry might draw from it.  
 In particular, I want to dispel the urban myth that has developed around these events.  While the Prudential 
Regulation Authority (PRA) can impose financial penalties and suspension under the SMR, we do not run for 
our regulated entities a disproportionate “one strike and you are out” regime for an honest mistake.  Neither 
explicitly nor implicitly.  Not I as Governor, not the CEO of the PRA, not the head of the FCA.  Not any of our 
supervisors in the PRA.   
 The SMR is about clear responsibilities, proportionate consequences, and developing a culture of openness 
and accountability. 
 Proportionate means taking into account the severity of the incident, the track record of the individual and 
their firm, as well as the firm’s wider response.  An honest mistake that is freely admitted for which a firm 
takes prompt remedial action is not a firing offence.  
 And here’s my point: we must not let recent events inadvertently tighten perceived standards for the industry 
because that could have Senior Managers running scared, drive compliance underground and undermine 
                                                      
12 For TSC report see: https://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmtreasy/.../1092.pdf 
  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
6 
 
6 
  our collective objectives.  Another risk, flagged by some, is that it will also become harder to find candidates 
of sufficient calibre willing to take on senior roles. 
 This is why last week I spoke with the CEOs or Chairs of all of the major banks to reiterate our expectations 
as regulator. I’m glad I did because they were all concerned about precisely such unintended consequences. 
 The best in the industry are committed to making the SMR work – not because they have to – but because a 
regime with clear responsibilities, proportionate consequences and a culture of openness helps to build the 
culture that will over time help regain trust for the industry.  
 Conclusion 
 Changes to incentives, new codes and a clearer mapping of responsibilities will all help improve conduct and 
lay the groundwork for better culture. 
 Of course, integrity can neither be bought nor regulated. Even with the best possible framework of codes and 
principles, the soundest compensation schemes, and the most committed efforts to improve transparency, 
financiers – in both the public and private sectors - must consistently challenge themselves and the 
standards they uphold. 
 We are seeking to raise expectations and norms by using a combination of hard and soft law, with much of 
the latter developed by the private sector. The best view finance as a profession with a purpose to serve their 
clients.  They see themselves as custodians of their institutions, with a sense of responsibility for the system. 
 Cultural change takes time. We know this from our own efforts. We have made great strides under our ‘One 
Bank’ strategic plan. Two-thirds of staff now feel encouraged to try new ideas, three-quarters indicate that 
their managers act on their suggestions, and 60% are comfortable speaking up on an important issue. All of 
these metrics have significantly improved in the past few years.13   
 We have comprehensively overhauled our governance, openness and accountability in recent years.   
 With the arrival of Anthony Habgood as Chair, Court has been strengthened and now acts as a unitary board 
and meets the best practice found in the private sector.  Its independent members now have more tangible 
influence on the Bank, including through formal powers to observe the meetings of the Bank’s policy 
committees and to commission independent reviews into the Bank’s performance.  Its minutes are now 
published after a lag of six weeks rather than a hundred years.  It regularly releases reports on matters of 
                                                      
13 ‘Reflecting diversity, choosing inclusion’ speech given by Mark Carney, 9 February 2017 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 7 
 
7 
 concern ranging from policy, such as economic forecasting, to conduct, such as the Grabiner report into the 
FX market.14  
 We know we have more to do. 
 That’s why the independent non-executive directors are reviewing the Bank’s response to recent events. 
 That’s why our next strategic plan will focus to even greater degree on changing how we work.  To maximise 
the potential of our people, the Bank needs to embrace fully collaborative working in diverse teams that value 
robust debate. 
 And it will focus on improving how we communicate, both internally and externally. We want all our 
colleagues to feel empowered to raise issues promptly, to challenge and to voice any concerns they have. 
 These initiatives will help us build the trust that is crucial to delivering our mission. And they will help us merit 
that trust by making us more effective.  
 The Bank will learn the lessons of these unfortunate events and apply those lessons to reinforce what’s best 
in banking and the Bank of England. 
                                                        
14 For details of recent Court reports see: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/about/Pages/ieo/default.aspx. Additionally, see Grabiner, 
“Bank of England Foreign Exchange Market Investigation”, 2014, at: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2014/grabiner.pdf   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
8 
 
8 
 