Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Rethinking microfinance norms
Special address by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara Malaysia), at the Global Symposium on Microfinance, Kuala Lumpur, 22 May 2017.
 Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  today  at  this  Symposium.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is
pleased to host this event together with the World Bank. We are also pleased to have Finance
Minister  II,  Yang  Berhormat  Datuk  Seri  Johari  Abdul  Ghani  present  with  us  to  address  the
audience here today.
It has been almost six decades since the economist John Kenneth Galbraith observed that few
things are more evident in modern social history than the declining interest in inequality as an
economic issue. Today, financial and economic inclusion is given priority as a policy agenda, as
the global economy confronts an environment of rising income inequality and tepid global growth.
According to the World Bank, the distribution of income globally is highly unequal today with a
Gini coefficient of 70.7, up from 68.4 in the 1980s. In some countries, income inequality has in
fact risen sharply.
The challenge of income inequality is even more prominent in Asia. A Working Paper published
by the IMF in 2016, highlighted that in Asia, the average Gini coefficient has risen by 4 points from
36 in 1990 to 40 in 2013. Over the same period, the average Gini coefficient for the rest of the
world rose by only 2 points. This is against the backdrop that Asia experienced an average GDP
growth  rate  of  9.6  percent.  This  suggests  that  trickle-down  economics  has  failed  to  deliver
equitable growth.
We should expect that if significant segments of the population are systematically excluded from
the  tools  that  drive  success,  there  will  be  economic  consequences.  Financial  access  and
education are arguably two of the most critical tools that enable individuals to achieve success.
Yet, around 50% of the global population live on less than USD2.50 per day, most of them without
access to formal financial services.
That is almost one in two people who, given the opportunities that come with financial access,
could  be  making  much  greater  contributions  to  society,  and  consequently,  raising  economic
potential. We also learnt that, stagnating median wages have discouraged the low and middle-
income from saving and investing.
Against  this  backdrop,  microfinance  has  captured  the  global  imagination  of  policymakers,
development  institutions,  private  enterprises  and  donors  alike  to  promote  greater  financial
inclusion.  Yet  over  the  last  few  decades,  since  Grameen  Bank  entered  the  world’s
consciousness,  microfinance  has  had  a  mixed  experience.  World  views  on  this  subject  have
also become more polarised. Some consider microfinance to be the panacea (which it is not) to
end poverty, others have been highly critical of its abuse to exploit the poor.
These characterizations are very diverse but it is useful feedback that we should ponder. These
contrasting  views  illustrate  the  complexities  and  challenges  associated  with  the  subject.
Microfinance,  like  all  public  policies,  faces  the  challenge  of  implementation.  From  a  financial
stability  perspective,  it  is  about  introducing  riskier  and  less  experienced  borrowers  into  the
financial  system.  Hence,  the  implementation  aspect  is  critical,  especially  in  the  attempt  to
balance the trade-offs between financial stability and inclusion. This is never an easy task. For
every success of microfinance, we have seen some failures. One example that comes to mind
is the case of a large Asian economy in 2010 where the unrestrained growth of micro lending led
to  high  debt  stress  among  borrowers,  financial  instability,  and  sensationalized  newspaper
accounts of suicide among borrowers.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
However, these challenges must not sway our resolve to further the cause of microfinance. We
must continue to find new and more efficient implementation strategies. Forums such as this
give us an opportunity to examine these issues more closely, and share successes and pitfalls
so that others might benefit. We therefore welcome the publication of the World Bank’s report on
financial inclusion in Malaysia which we hope will also hold useful lessons for others.
Malaysia  has  devoted  significant  focus  to  the  sustainable  development  of  microfinance  over
many years to boost growth and improve welfare. More than 75% of businesses in Malaysia are
micro enterprises, and 40% of Malaysia’s households earn incomes below USD850 (RM3,650) a
month.  The  view  that  distribution,  not  just  aggregate  growth  matters,  is  therefore,  a  view  that
resonates strongly with us.
William Faulkner, the famed American writer and Nobel laureate, once spoke of the all-important
virtue of “trying until we get it right”. He urged writers to “throw away anything that is false, no
matter  how  much  he  might  love  that  page  or  paragraph”.  In  a  similar  vein,  Malaysia’s
microfinance journey has been one of trial and error, as we continuously strived to increase the
social  and  economic  impact  of  microfinance,  sometimes  working  against  the  tide  of  popular
thinking. This has led to a more nuanced approach to the development of microfinance over time,
and an ongoing process of rethinking norms which we may take for granted today.
Today, I would like to talk about three perspectives that have shaped the way we approach and
implement microfinance in Malaysia.
First,  technology  when  used  in  a  clever  way,  can  be  of  great  use.  While  technological
advancements hold great promise for expanding access to financial services for the poor, we
need to invest time and resources to understand the factors that affect the poor, and the suitable
approach to generate income and create wealth. These insights are what will determine whether
technology is central or peripheral to the inclusion agenda.
Second, the tradeoffs between financial stability and inclusion requires smart management. A
microfinance strategy that focuses largely or wholly on providing credit to the unserved is almost
destined to fail, potentially leaving communities worse off from excessive debt burdens. Instead,
implementation strategies should ensure that the provision of credit are complemented by the
necessary safeguards and financial education.
Third, successful microfinance programs are fundamentally compatible with sound commercial
and  management  principles  and  practice,  and  normally  have  two  things  in  common;  an
obsessive focus on operational innovations and the ability to create powerful synergies.
We have built on these premises to continuously adapt, amplify and align our approach. This
year,  we  have  embarked  on  an  initiative,  working  with  the  Credit  Guarantee  Corporation  in
Malaysia,  to  develop  behavioral  insights  that  will  enable  microfinance  providers  to  integrate
business  and  technological  strategies  that  best  serve  the  poor.  The  initiative  will  leverage  on
analytics to identify drivers of borrower behavior, and expand the use of psychometric tools by
financial  providers  to  develop  financial  solutions  that  are  more  responsive  to  the  needs  and
circumstances of micro borrowers.
A  deeper  understanding  of  borrower  behaviors  also  provides  a  solid  foundation  for  executing
successful  operational  strategies.  In  fact,  operational  innovations  –  even  those  that  represent
small  adjustments  to  existing  processes  –  can  have  a  far  more  important  impact  on  smart
design than a costly, hi-tech re-tooling of financial services.
Our experience in Malaysia suggests that simple changes in application procedures and faster
processing  times  have  encouraged  a  higher  take-up  of  microfinance.  Flexible  repayment
schedules have also enabled borrowers to better manage irregular cashflows while continuing to
meet their repayment commitments. Repayment reminders, delivered in ways that are relatable
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
to  the  poor  (for  example,  “your  repayment  can  help  your  friend  in  need”),  can  help  keep
repayments  current.  Working  through  local  community  groups  to  engage  borrowers,  or
identifying  with  religious  tenets  to  overcome  weak  willpower  to  repay,  are  some  experiential
learning that creates favorable conditions that can expand access to credit and encourage high
repayment rates.
These “small nudges”, a notion popularized by behavioral scientist David Halpern, allow us to re-
visualise how operating models and technology can be adapted more effectively and efficiently to
deliver sustainable microfinance solutions.
Malaysia’s microfinance journey has also reflected a wider focus on developing the broad range
of financial services that are needed by the unfortunate to manage and improve their financial
circumstances. Credit is important, but not all important. Savings, insurance, business training
and financial education are other key components of our program approach which work together
to amplify the economic and social impact of microfinance.
The largest microfinance institutions in Malaysia are also among the largest mobilisers of micro
savings. As  a  case  in  point,  our  National  Savings  Bank  ranks  among  the  top  three  financial
institutions in the country with the largest number of micro-loan and savings accounts. Overall,
92% of the population have a deposit account, compared to 42% who have a loan account.
We are also currently working to expand the offering and take-up of micro insurance solutions
under a multi-pronged strategy that combines tailored products offered by insurance companies
and development financial institutions, and a universal product option available through low-cost
mobile and other channels.
Documented  studies  have  shown  how  simply  introducing  an  affordable,  safe  and  accessible
avenue for savings resulted in increased spending towards healthcare, education and nutrition. It
has empowered women with more decision-making power and enabled children to spend more
on school supplies that ultimately led to better test scores. Insurance has also been shown to
play an important role  in  encouraging  micro  enterprises  and  low  income  households  to  make
productive investments without the fear of natural disasters or medical emergencies wiping away
their hard-earned assets and savings.
By  providing  opportunities  and  the  foundational  knowledge  to  low  income  individuals  and
entrepreneurs to gain access to credit, increase savings and manage their exposures, this would
greatly improve the probability of success in business and enhance socioeconomic mobility. This
in turn will bring many important benefits to society.
These benefits might be difficult to quantify but are obvious and far reaching. This is illustrated in
the story of a Malaysian micro-entrepreneur who spent 10 years selling raisins and dates from
street corners in and around Kuala Lumpur. He travelled daily to and from night markets and
mosques  on  his  motorcycle;  his  fortunes  often  at  the  mercy  of  unpredictable  weather.  But
opportunity  beckoned  when  a  micro  loan  was  obtained  in  2011,  which  enabled  him  to  rent  a
permanent physical space and invest in a basic logistics system to stock and deliver goods to
customers.  With  the  continued  support  of  his  bank,  business  grew,  three  more  stores  were
opened and sales increased fivefold. He secured greater financial security and independence for
his  family  and  at  the  same  time,  created  jobs  for  10  persons  within  his  community.  As  a
contribution to his community, one of the three branches was dedicated for micro-entrepreneurs
in the locality to showcase their products, free of rental.
This  simple  and  generous  gesture  to  share  resulted  in  positive  spillovers,  where  some  once
wayward school-leavers and young adults received the opportunity to become owners of small
businesses plying delicate handicraft and innovative accessories.
There  are  many  examples  such  as  this,  that  if  done  right,  can  create  a  virtuous  cycle  of
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
expanded positive spillovers that uplift the community as a whole.
Despite what seems to be an increasingly crowded space, microfinance often ends up being
relegated to government-sponsored institutions, non-profit enterprises and donor organizations,
because it is perceived to be financially unsustainable if a certain scale is not achieved (usually
very  large)  or  imposing  high  interest  rates  to  hedge  risks  or  cover  high  operational  costs. A
growing  body  of  experience  shows  that  the  reverse  is  necessary  to  deliver  a  lasting  positive
impact on the lives of the poor.
I have alluded earlier that aligning operational strategies with behaviors of micro borrowers can
improve loan performance, thus reducing risks to lenders. In insurance, traditional agency-based
distribution models are being  disrupted  to  lower  the  costs  of  on-boarding  and  servicing  micro
policyholders.  These  are  clear  ways  in  which  the  trade-offs  between  higher  perceived  risks,
accessibility  and  affordability  associated  with  the  micro  segment  can  be  managed  more
optimally. Sustainable microfinance programs are often successful if synergies are realized.
Between  governments,  policymakers,  microfinance  institutions  and  donor  organisations,
significant  synergies  can  be  unlocked  by  aligning  incentives,  reducing  barriers  and  enhancing
coordination.
The  agent  banking  framework  implemented  in  Malaysia  has  been  a  successful  model  where
industry  is  able  to  capture  opportunities  for  cross-sector  strategic  partnerships  that  can
transform the microfinance landscape. Collaborative strategies to deliver solutions on telco and
e-commerce platforms are similarly redefining new business models.
For donors, the adoption of performance-based rewards should be strongly encouraged to focus
on microfinance institutions to effectively serve their mandate. The reward system should take
into account outreach, financial performance and impact on wellbeing.
Another important point is that, regulators and supervisors should ensure regulatory framework
should be proportionate in balancing innovation, inclusion and stability.
Conclusion
All of us have an important role to play in confronting the stark reality that the socio-economic
dividends  of  a  global  wealth  and  growth  need  to  be  cascaded  to  all.  The  vulnerable  segment
cannot afford to wait for trickle-down growth.
As policymakers, we should be concerned with effective financial intermediation and sustainable
growth.  We  are  duty-bound  to  make  sure  that  the  fruits  of  economic  prosperity  are  more
equitably shared. As a community, we are morally obligated to provide opportunity and hope for
the unserved to improve their livelihood.
Malaysia’s journey will not track exactly the same path as others, nor should we expect it to. But
we can all learn something from the footsteps left by others as we move forward. I hope that our
collective journeys, as shared in this forum and others like it, will help us harness the full potential
of microfinance to build stronger, fairer and more resilient communities.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
