Mario Draghi: Youth unemployment in the euro area
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  for  the  Henry
Grattan Lecture Series, Trinity College, Dublin, 22 September 2017.
 First,  let  me  thank  the  Provost,  Patrick  Prendergast,  for  the  warm  welcome,  Professor  Gail
McElroy for the introduction and indeed Trinity College Dublin.
I am happy to see my friend Philip Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland. We see each
other in Frankfurt every other week so I am pleased to see him in a different setting. It’s also nice
to see my former colleague Patrick Honohan. And a warm welcome to all of you.
I am especially honoured to speak here in Ireland for the first time and here in this prestigious,
world-class institution, Trinity College, Dublin. Many of you are students, and to speak to young
people  who  will  carry  today’s  message  into  tomorrow’s  world  always  entails  a  special
responsibility. With it comes the honour of having been chosen to give this address. Your lives
are being changed forever by the education of exceptional quality that you are receiving here, in a
testimony to the history of Trinity, its birth, its glorious past and its distinguished alumni.
I  should  especially  acknowledge  its  extraordinary  teachers,  including  Patrick  Honohan,  former
Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, and his successor Philip Lane.
The Book of Kells, on permanent display here at Trinity, with its history and its beauty, reminds
us of the importance of nurturing knowledge, spreading it throughout the world, and protecting it
in times of peril. It also tells us how important Ireland and its culture are for Europe.
It is well known how relevant the role of Irish monastic orders was in preserving our European
cultural  heritage  in  the  early  medieval  period.  At  the  turn  of  the  7th  century,  St.  Columban
embarked on a journey across Europe. From the Atlantic to the Alps, he founded monasteries
which were the centres of learning of his time. Along the way, he urged kings and commoners
alike to adopt a notion of a European society rooted in the universal values of human life, the
common good and education.
Robert  Schuman,  a  founding  father  of  the  European  Union,  honoured  St.  Columban  in  1950,
saying  that  “this  illustrious  Irishman  who  left  his  own  country  for  voluntary  exile,  willed  and
achieved a spiritual union between the principal European countries of his time. He is the patron
saint of all those who now seek to build a united Europe.”
It is with these thoughts in mind that I have chosen the topic of our meeting today: young people
and the labour market in Europe.
Youth unemployment in the euro area
Youth unemployment is not a recent phenomenon. It was high over the last few decades, driven
both by cyclical and long-term structural factors.
In Europe, the worsening labour market performance for young people became apparent in the
1970s, when unemployment increased from 4.6% to 11.1% by the end of the decade, partly due
to the substantial increase in supply as the so-called baby-boomers entered the labour market.
But even when the size of this group declined, the relative labour market performance did not
improve. There was some recovery in the early 1990s, but it never returned to the level of the
early 1970s.  In 2007, when total unemployment in the euro area declined to 7.5%, its lowest
level since the early 1980s, the unemployment rate for young people was already very high at
around 15%.
1
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Youth  unemployment  is  not  just  structural  but  also  highly  pro-cyclical.  During  the  Great
Recession,  and  the  corresponding  cyclical  downturn,  youth  unemployment  surged  markedly.
Between 2007 and 2013, it increased by about 9 percentage points in the euro area – twice as
much as the overall unemployment rate.
But euro area aggregates hide important differences across the euro area. Greece and Spain
entered the crisis with youth unemployment rates of 23% and 18% respectively, and reached
rates  well  above  50%  by  2013.  In  Ireland,  it  tripled  over  the  same  period,  peaking  at  30%.  In
comparison, the youth unemployment rate in Germany, a country less affected by the cyclical
downturn, declined from about 12% in 2007 to about 8% in 2013.
What is the situation now? The ongoing economic recovery in the euro area has led to improved
labour  market  conditions.  Euro  area  real  GDP  has  now  grown  for  17  consecutive  quarters,
creating in total over 6 million jobs. As a result, from its peak in 2013, the youth unemployment
rate fell from 24% to around 19% in 2016, but is still about 4 percentage points higher than at the
beginning of the crisis in 2007.  In Ireland, where real GDP grew 5.2% last year, it declined by
more than 13 percentage points from its peak, and is now below the euro area average.
2
However, headline unemployment rates give only a partial picture of the labour market situation.
Many young people in the euro area are still in education or are not actively seeking employment.
The possible significant social and economic consequences are even more relevant if we look at
new measures of labour utilisation, taking into account both unemployed people and those not
involved in further education or training. In 2016, around 17% of people between the ages of 20
and  24  in  the  euro  area  were  neither  in  employment,  education  or  training,  with  Ireland  being
close  to  this  euro  area  average.    In  Greece  and  Spain,  the  numbers  are  23%  and  21%
respectively.
3
The  persistence  and  heterogeneity  of  youth  unemployment  across  Member  States  point  to
continued underlying problems in labour market structures, with correspondingly high costs for
our societies.
Long-term costs of youth unemployment
Cyclical  unemployment  can  turn  structural  if  people  remain  unemployed  for  a  long  time.
Protracted  periods  of  unemployment  can  result  in  “scarring”  effects,  leading  to  a  greater
likelihood  of  future  unemployment,  human  capital  losses  and  lower  earnings .  And  this  has
negative effects not only on life satisfaction, but also on health, and may persist well into later life.
The  sense  of  detachment  that  is  produced  by  prolonged  unemployment  has  been  well
documented in several social experiments. With a large proportion of young people not having
any defined role in society (neither looking for jobs, nor acquiring the skills to find one), there is a
high risk of social cohesion and of trust in public institutions being undermined, with harm for
5
medium-term growth prospects.
4
Youth  unemployment  is  also  costly  in  terms  of  long-term  productivity.  High-productivity  firms,
particularly in their early expansion phase,  are more likely to hire young people because that
group will help them to become more innovative.
6
Innovation is driven, among other things, by curiosity and creativity. The fact that young people
are more curious requires no further explanation; the teachers among you or those of you with
children or grandchildren are well aware of that.
When it comes to creativity, age plays a crucial role. Creativity can be measured, for example, by
the  number  of  original  and  valuable  contributions  to  fields  such  as  science  and  art.  By  that
measure, output first increases in our mid-20s, reaches a peak when we are in our 30s or early
7
40s, and then undergoes a slow decline as we age .
 2 / 7
8
BIS central bankers' speeches
8
So to foster innovation, it is very much in the interest of firms to recruit young people .
The  young  are  also  in  a  better  position  to  facilitate  knowledge  diffusion.  In  this  regard,  labour
mobility is key. During the early years of their careers, young workers, in the search for a better
job, move more frequently between professions and assignments. As we get older we change
jobs less often: at the age of 40 we switch half as much as we do at 20.  The mobility of the
young is likely to facilitate an efficient allocation of labour through higher job-to-job transitions. And
this mobility across firms and sectors, and sometimes across regions and countries, contributes
to the diffusion and expansion of knowledge.
9
For  these  reasons,  youth  employment  and  productivity  growth  create  a  virtuous  circle.  When
firms become more productive they are more likely to employ young people. And when young
people have such opportunities, they can capitalise on their skills, adding to productivity growth,
which among other benefits for society will lead to higher wages.
Youth  unemployment  breaks  this  virtuous  circle:  it  is  a  drag  on  innovation  and  impedes
knowledge diffusion by decreasing mobility.
Additionally, unemployment prevents experienced workers and young workers from interacting.
The experienced ones don’t benefit from insights and knowledge of the young. And they, in turn,
don’t gain from the know-how of more experienced workers.
The role of policies
As  we  have  seen,  there  are  cyclical  and  structural  reasons  for  the  high  rates  of  youth
unemployment.
Demand-side  policies,  such  as  fiscal  and  monetary  policy,  can  help  to  address  cyclical
fluctuations. Our monetary policy measures, aimed at maintaining price stability, are supporting
domestic demand and thus the recovery in employment, from which also younger generations of
Europeans are benefiting.
Furthermore, we should not forget that the crisis was a financial crisis, and therefore financial
policies are also essential. It is important to further improve the resilience of the financial system
by  strengthening  sectoral  balance  sheets,  and  having  an  appropriate  financial  regulatory  and
supervisory framework, and a robust macroprudential policy framework.
10
But the rise in youth unemployment has also deeply rooted structural reasons.
The persistence and heterogeneity of youth unemployment rates across the euro area countries
even before the crisis, as well as the diverse developments during the crisis, indicate that there
is  need  for  specific  policies  to  improve  education  and  labour  market  functioning  in  some
countries.
Higher levels of education are positively correlated with both greater labour market participation
and  lower  unemployment.  The  risk  of  losing  a  job  is  significantly  higher  for  people  with  low
educational attainment. And this group was severely hit by the crisis, with their unemployment
rate increasing from about 11% in 2008 to 21% in 2013 in the euro area. The pattern is similar for
young  workers.  For  example,  in  Ireland  the  unemployment  rate  of  young  people  with  an
educational  attainment  below  lower  secondary  education  was  27.5%  in  2016,  while  for  young
people with tertiary education it was about 11%.
Acquiring a good skill set at school and university is therefore essential for a young person to find
work.
However,  skill  mismatch  indicators  –  which  quantify  the  difference  between  skills  wanted  and
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
skills offered – still remain at elevated levels, with only a slight moderation compared with the
record levels at the height of the financial crisis.
11
But skill mismatches are not just a consequence of the crisis. In fact, they started to increase
before the crisis because of structural changes related to digitalisation and globalisation. The skill
mismatch index for the euro area labour market in 2007 was almost twice as high as it was in
2004.
12
There is also large heterogeneity across the euro area countries. The OECD’s Survey of Adult
Skills shows that while young adults in, for instance, Finland and the Netherlands perform well in
problem-solving in technology-rich environments, in other countries they score significantly lower
and  youth  unemployment  is  correspondingly  higher.
  Furthermore,  the  correlation  between
PISA scores and youth unemployment in the euro area is strong and negative.
13
14
The percentage of the working age population that has completed upper secondary or tertiary
education ranges widely in the euro area – from a high of more than 90% in some countries to a
low  of  around  40%  in  others.  The  need  for  improving  skills  has  also  been  confirmed  by  the
results of an ad hoc ECB survey of leading euro area businesses. The survey revealed that over
90% of businesses strongly supported reforms geared to enhancing the quality of education and
training.
  These  factors  were  deemed  particularly  relevant  in  the  light  of  shifts  towards
knowledge-intensive  skill  sets,  digitalisation  and  given  long-standing  structural  deficits  in
engineering skills.
15
Other  non-tertiary  education,  such  as  the  dual  training  and  apprenticeship  systems  which  we
have in some euro area countries, has also been shown as helping to facilitate the transition
from school to work. In particular, Austria and Germany have been successful in keeping youth
unemployment low mostly because of their efficient use of vocational training and programmes
targeted at disadvantaged youth.
16
The employment prospects of the young also depend on the existence of efficient labour market
institutions.
The vocational education system, together with more flexible wage setting, and stronger public
support  for  helping  the  unemployed  to  seek  and  find  jobs,  as  well  as  lower  labour  market
segmentation  explain  in  part  why  the  youth  unemployment  rate  is  lower  in  Germany  than  in
France.
  Furthermore,  labour  market  rigidities  decrease  both  inflows  into  and  outflows  from
employment, and tend to reduce hiring of the young, especially during recessions.
17
In  dual  labour  markets,  it  is  typically  young  workers  that  have  temporary  contracts  and  that
shoulder much of the burden of adjustment.
Segmentation of the labour market and poor vocational training are also among the main reasons
for  the  persistent  high  level  of  youth  unemployment  in  several  countries  that  have  been  hit
severely by the recession such as Greece, Spain, Italy and Portugal. 
The role of Europe
18
Europe’s  role  in  addressing  the  problem  is  primarily  defined  by  its  Single  Market  that  has
removed many barriers to the free movement of goods, people, services and capital. Indeed, the
Single Market fosters competition among firms. In the long run, firms’ competitiveness is not only
determined  by  pricing,  but  also  by  other  product  features  that  meet  customer  demands.
Knowledge and innovation of products and processes are therefore essential.
The Single Market requires firms to be more productive, so that they activate the virtuous circle
between  productivity  growth  and  youth  employment  that  I  described  earlier.  And  indeed,  the
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
countries that have a high degree of openness and have benefited most from the Single Market,
are also those with lower youth unemployment
19
.
Therefore, also to support youth employment and incomes, the first and most important policy
decision at European level is to complete the Single Market in all its dimensions. But to fully reap
the benefits of openness, the Single Market needs to be embedded in supportive policies and
institutions. Competition not only creates opportunities for some firms to expand, it also drives
others out of business and displaces workers in entire industries. It is therefore essential that
those workers are supported when resources are channelled towards more productive firms or
sectors. Protecting people, rather than jobs, means ensuring that they have or will acquire the
necessary skills to be employed in other more productive parts of the economy.
Today much of this support falls under the competence of Member States, but also the EU can
build  on  existing  instruments,  such  as  the  European  Globalisation Adjustment  Fund  and  the
European Social Fund. 
20
There  is  a  second  way  in  which  European  integration  can  support  youth  employment:  by
fostering  the  exchange  of  ideas  and  knowledge  as  researchers,  students,  and  technologies
move across Europe. 
21
I am sure that many of the students here have been on an Erasmus exchange, or have come
from  other  European  countries  to  study  here.  There  is  clearly  a  European  dimension  to
education. And Europe can contribute by investing in such exchanges as well as more broadly in
the advancement of science.
The  new  Erasmus+,  which  now  offers  more  opportunities  for  learning  and  training,  is  thus  a
welcome development. And the Bologna Process makes it easier for young people to work in
another EU country by facilitating the recognition of qualifications across borders.
Moreover,  the  Youth  Guarantee  programme  provides  welcome  support  to  the  commitment  by
Member States to ensure that young Europeans under the age of 25 receive a good quality offer
of employment, training or continued education.
Labour mobility is often, when undesired, the result of poor cyclical and structural labour market
conditions. It is those conditions that should be addressed in the first place. The completion of
the  Single  Market,  the  continuing  progress  in  European  integration  and  the  deepening  of  our
Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  will  further  expand  the  opportunities  for  young  people  beyond
borders, and job matching possibilities. Labour mobility across countries and sectors is bound to
increase. This will require adequate supranational policies.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
In some countries, and Ireland is one of them, some progress in reducing youth unemployment
has  been  achieved.  More  generally,  the  strengthening  of  the  recovery  in  the  euro  area  will
continue to reduce its extent. But to address structural causes of youth unemployment, a uniform
degree of protection among workers, flexible labour arrangements, effective vocational training
programmes, high degree of trade openness, and support to reduce the social cost of mobility
are all necessary conditions.
I  have  highlighted  the  economic  reasons  that  make  addressing  youth  unemployment  an
invaluable  undertaking.  But  there  is  a  more  fundamental  reason  to  continue  addressing  this
challenge with determination and as a priority. We have seen how in several countries the weight
of the crisis has fallen disproportionately on the young people, leaving a legacy of failed hopes,
anger and ultimately mistrust in the values of our society and in the identity of our democracy.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Some say that a more equitable distribution of income and wealth is the answer and that it would
bring  those  who  have  lost  out  from  globalisation  back  into  our  compact.  But  that  cannot  be
enough for the young people who are the future of our democracies. They do not want to live on
subsidies.  They  want  to  work  and  expand  their  lifetime  opportunities.  Today  after  the  crisis,
governments know how to respond to their quest, and how to create an environment where their
hopes  have  a  chance.  They  should  do  so:  for  the  future  of  their  countries’  youth  and  of  their
democracy.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
See Bell, D. and D.G. Blanchflower (2011): Young People and the Great Recession.
Based on the latest Eurostat data.
Another alternative measure of unemployment for Ireland has been recently discussed by Byrne, S. and T.
Conefrey (2017): “A Non-Employment Index for Ireland”, Economic Letter Series, Vol 2017, No. 9, Central Bank
of Ireland.
For example: Gregg P. and E. Tominey (2005) show that an early period of unemployment can lower wages by
up  to  20%  at  the  age  of  42;  See  Gregg  P.  and  E.  Tominey  (2005),  “The  wage  scar  from  male  youth
unemployment”. Labour Economics 12 (4): 487–509.
Research shows that a person exposed to a recession between the ages of 18–25 years has little confidence in
public institutions. See Giuliano P. and A. Spilimbergo (2009): “Growing Up in a Recession: Beliefs and the
Macroeconomy”, NBER Working Paper No. 15321, September.
See Coad A., S.-O. Daunfeldt, D. Johansson and K. Wennberg (2014). “Whom do high-growth firms hire?”
Industrial and Corporate Change, Volume 23 (1): 293–327.
See Franses, P. H. (2014), “When Did Nobel Prize Laureates in Literature Make Their Best Work?” Creativity
Research Journal, 26(3), 372–374; Franses, P. H. (2016), “When Did Classic Composers Make Their Best
Work?”, Creativity Research Journal, 28(2), 219–221.
See Albert C., C. García-Serrano and V. Hernanz (2005) and P. López-García and J.M. Montero (2011), and
Bentolila, S. and Dolado, J. and Jimeno, J., (2012), “Reforming an insider-outsider labor market: the Spanish
experience,” IZA Journal of European Labor Studies, 1(1): 1-29.
See Bosler C. and N. Petrosky-Nadeau, (2016), “Job-to-Job Transitions in an Evolving Labor Market”, FRBSF
Economic Letter, November 14.
See speech by Lane, P. (2017), Macro-Financial Risk Management, Dublin, September.
This  is  likely  to  partly  reflect  the  large  job  losses  of  lower-skilled  employees  seen  over  the  crisis  as  a
consequence of the longer-term secular trend towards upskilling which accelerated during the crisis.
ECB  staff  calculations  based  on  Eurostat  data.  Skill  mismatch  indicator  is  computed  on  the  basis  of  the
summation of differences in the skill shares of the unemployed and employed across three skill groups (less
than  primary,  primary  and  lower  secondary  education;  upper  secondary  and  post-secondary  non-tertiary
education; and tertiary education).
OECD (2015), “Adults, Computers and Problem Solving: What’s the Problem?”, OECD Publishing, Paris.
Using data on the 2015 PISA scores in mathematics from the OECD and 2015 youth unemployment data
calculated by Eurostat.
ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6/2017.
No Country for Young People? Youth Labour Market Problems in Europe”, edited by Juan J. Dolado, a VoxEU.org
eBook, 2015.
See Cahuc, P., S. Carcillo, U. Rinne and K. F. Zimmermann (2013), “Youth Unemployment in Old Europe: The
Polar Cases of France and Germany”. IZA Journal of European Labor Studies, 2, pp. 1-23.
No Country for Young People? Youth Labour Market Problems in Europe”, edited by Juan J. Dolado, a VoxEU.org
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
eBook, 2015.
19
20
21
Eurostat data for 2016 shows that the openness of EU (and euro area) economies to intra-EU (and intra-euro
area) trade, measured as the ratio of the aggregate value of goods and services imports from and exports to the
EU (and the euro area) to GDP, is negatively correlated with youth unemployment.
See Cernat L. and F. Mustilli (2017), “Trade and Labour Adjustment in Europe: What Role for the European
Globalization Adjustment Fund?”, DG Trade Chief Economist Note, European Commission, Issue 2, May 2017.
See Pelkmans, J. (2016), “What strategy for a genuine single market?”, CEPS Special Report No. 126 (January).
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
