Haruhiko  Kuroda:  Monetary  policy 
challenges ahead
Opening remarks by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 2017 BOJ-IMES
conference, hosted by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, Tokyo,
24 May2017.
learned  and
lessons 
 I. Introduction
 Good  morning.  I  am  honored  to  welcome  such  distinguished  guests  to  the  23rd  BOJ-IMES
Conference.  On  behalf  of  the  conference  organizers,  I  thank  all  the  guests  in  this  room,  in
particular those who travelled a long distance to participate in this one-and-a-half-day conference
in Tokyo.
This year’s conference is titled “Monetary Policy: Lessons Learned and Challenges Ahead.” After
my remarks, Mr. Ben Bernanke, former U.S. Fed Chair, will deliver the Mayekawa Lecture based
on his experience as an academic researcher and a monetary policy maker. In the afternoon,
Professor Mark Gertler, our Honorary Adviser to IMES, will give the keynote speech. Tomorrow, a
policy panel session will conclude the program with three panelists, Mr. Charles Evans from the
Chicago Fed, Mr. Frank Smets from the European Central Bank, and my colleague at the Bank
of Japan, Hiroshi Nakaso. The panel session will be moderated by Professor Marvin Goodfriend,
the other Honorary Adviser to IMES. In addition, I am pleased to have three leading economists to
present  their  papers,  addressing  timely  and  important  issues  at  the  frontier  of  monetary
economics  and  monetary  policy  making.  I  am  confident  that  we  will  all  learn  a  lot  during  the
conference.
II. Three Research Questions at the Top of the Agenda
In  my  opening  remarks,  I  would  just  like  to  deliver  a  sneak  peek  of  this  year’s  conference  by
pointing out three major research topics on our agenda.
A. Inflation and Its Expectations Dynamics
Since  the  introduction  of  “Quantitative  and  Qualitative  Monetary  Easing  (QQE)”  in April  2013,
raising inflation expectations to anchor them at the price stability target of 2 percent has been a
crucial element of the Bank of Japan’s monetary policy management. In September 2016, the
Bank  published  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  policy  effects  of  QQE  and  other  policy
measures, 
the
comprehensive  assessment,  the  Bank  of  Japan  also  published  several  empirical  studies
exploring the characteristics of inflation expectations in Japan and comparing them with those in
other advanced economies.  Those studies included an analytical framework developed by Mr.
Jeffrey  Fuhrer  from  the  Boston  Fed,  one  of  today’s  paper  presenters,  to  assess  inflation
2
dynamics with a special focus on the role of survey-based expectations.
interest  rate  policy.  As  companion  papers  of 
the  negative 
including 
1
I am sure that we have learned a lot about inflation expectations in the past few years, but there
still  remain  many  research  questions  on  this  issue  yet  to  be  addressed.  For  example,  there
seems  to  be  a  consensus  that  inflation  expectations  exhibit  a  certain  degree  of  inertia  or
persistence,  which  is  difficult  to  be  explained  in  a  full  information  rational  expectations  (FIRE)
framework even with the classic assumption of nominal (price) rigidity. However, little consensus
has  been  formed  regarding  the  micro-foundations  for  such  seemingly  persistent  inflation
expectations  dynamics.  Against  this  backdrop,  recent  studies  have  increasingly  focused  on
information rigidity, and I would like to encourage researchers to move on further along with this
research agenda.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
B. The Natural Rate of Interest
The second item on our research agenda is an old and new topic, that is, the natural rate of
interest, or, in slightly more technical parlance, the equilibrium real interest rate. The natural rate
of interest has long been discussed in macroeconomics and related time series analyses.
If  we  say  “our  monetary  policy  stance  remains  accommodative,”  this  means  that  actual  real
interest rates are kept at a level below the equilibrium real interest rate. This quite naturally gives
rise  to  the  question  that  how  we  can  know  the  level  of  the  equilibrium  real  interest  rate.  This
question  is  more  difficult  than  it  appears.  The  natural  rate  of  interest  would  have  a  clear
interpretation in a solid dynamic general equilibrium model. Nevertheless, the determinants of the
natural rate of interest vary, depending on how the model is specified. It is well known that, in
some specific cases, the natural rate of interest coincides with the potential growth rate of the
economy, but this is not always the case. Further, when trying to estimate the natural rate of
interest, econometricians face a long list of technical challenges. For example, data on the risk-
free interest rate with a fixed maturity are not readily available, since there is no absolutely “risk-
free” asset in actual financial markets. Also, consumers’ time preferences are hard to estimate,
and, moreover, whose time preference we should estimate still remains an unresolved question.
With  the  difficulties  just  mentioned  in  mind,  central  bankers  have  long  made  careful  policy
decisions using some kinds of estimates of the natural rate of interest. The stakes have become
even higher in recent years when central banks try to estimate the natural rate of interest. As
seen  in  the  debate  on  the  Secular  Stagnation  hypothesis  proposed  by  Professor  Lawrence
Summers of Harvard University, uncertainty regarding the natural rate of interest makes it much
more difficult for central banks to steer a clear course in terms of policy decisions.  While I am
not going into the details of his hypothesis, many of us can agree that the natural rate of interest
has  declined  in  recent  years  and  because  of  this  decline,  combined  with  the  effective  lower
bound  on  nominal  interest  rates,  many  central  banks  in  advanced  economies  developed  new
unconventional monetary policy tools and have embarked on carefully crafted but bold actions. In
this regard, I would argue that we still face old challenges.​
C. Heterogeneous Agent Macroeconomics and Distributional Effects of Monetary Policy
3
The third issue is related to monetary policy and inequality. The order I picked the topics does not
necessarily correspond to their importance; it is simply that the first two topics are closely related
to the real interest rate, while the third topic deals with a very different issue.
As a caveat, I would like to clearly state that monetary policy is by no means a policy tool for
distributional purposes. With this proviso in mind, let me borrow a phrase delivered by U.S. Fed
Chair  Janet  Yellen:  She  said,  “it  is  important  for  policymakers  to  understand  and  monitor  the
effects  of  macroeconomic  developments  on  different  groups  within  society,”  and  I  completely
4
agree with her on this point.
In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, a number of pundits argued that macroeconomics
and monetary economics are totally useless. One of the misconceptions of such critics is that
they  believe  that  modern  macroeconomics  relies  only  on  representative  agent  models  and
ignores  important  implications  arising  from  various  heterogeneities  in  the  economy,  such  as
debtors and creditors, the financial sector and the non-financial sector, importers and exporters,
and more controversially, haves and have-nots. Heterogeneous agent models were developed in
the 1990s, and have been extended since then.  From the viewpoint of policymakers, the true
issue is whether to employ heterogeneous agent models, instead of handier representative agent
models, to examine the implications of heterogeneity for macroeconomic fluctuations. This is a
classic case in which Occam’s razor with regard to the choice of the appropriate model applies.
5
This question remains yet to be explored in full depth. We know that increasing attention is being
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
paid to the distributional effects of economic and other public policies. I would like to reiterate
that, under such circumstances, monetary policy is not a tool that is well suited for dealing with
inequality  or  polarization  and  that  central  banks  should  remain  focused  on  the  aggregate
implications of their own policy decisions. At the same time, however, this does not mean that
central banks are allowed to ignore the distributional effects of monetary policy, especially if the
distributional effects have an aggregate impact. With this aim, central banks should be, and in
fact  are,  open  to  learning  about  heterogeneous  agent  macroeconomics.  These  days,  much
progress has been made  on  this  front  in  computational  economics.  Central  banks  are  keenly
following the technical progress and will keep abreast with the pioneers on this front as well.​
III. The Way Ahead
We are now about to start the 23rd BOJ-IMES Conference, which has a history of more than a
quarter-century. This year’s conference is organized so that discussions can revolve around the
three major topics that I mentioned in these opening remarks. Nearly ten years ago, Professor
Maurice Obstfeld, currently Chief Economist of the IMF and then-Honorary Adviser to IMES, in
this room identified the BOJ-IMES Conference as “a venue in which abstract monetary theory
and  practical  policy  questions  can  comfortably  be  discussed  in  full  depth  and  side  by  side.”  I
regard  his  remark  as  a  great  compliment  to  this  conference.  I  am  convinced  that  this  year’s
conference will produce further insights into more effective central bank policymaking, in a same
manner as previous conferences.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
Bank of Japan, “Comprehensive Assessment: Developments in Economic Activity and Prices as well as Policy
Effects since the Introduction of Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE),” 2016. Nishino, Kousuke,
Hiroki Yamamoto, Jun Kitahara, and Takashi Nagahata, “Supplementary Paper Series for the ‘Comprehensive
Assessment’  (1):  Developments  in  Inflation  Expectations  over  the  Three  Years  since  the  Introduction  of
Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE),” Bank of Japan Review, No. 2016-E-13, 2016.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey, “The Role of Expectations in Inflation Dynamics," International Journal of Central Banking,Vol. 8,
No. S1, 2012, pp. 137–165.
Summers,  Lawrence  H.,  Remarks  at  the  IMF  Fourteenth Annual  Research  Conference  in  Honor  of  Stanley
Fischer,  Washington,  DC,  2013.  Summers,  Lawrence  H.,  “Demand  Side  Secular  Stagnation,"  American
Economic Review, Vol. 105, No. 5, 2015, pp. 60–65.
Yellen, Janet L., “Macroeconomic Research After the Crisis,” Speech at the 60th Annual Economic Conference
Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 2016.
Krusell, Per, and Anthony A. Smith, Jr., “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy,"  Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 106, No. 5, 1998, pp. 867–896.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
