Mario Draghi: Hearing of the Committee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the ECON
committee of the European Parliament, Brussels, 29 May 2017.
 Mr Chairman,
Honourable Members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a pleasure to be back speaking to your committee for the second regular hearing of this year.
I  am  also  pleased  that  you  have  chosen  as  the  topic  for  today’s  hearing  the  role  of  financial
innovation. This is only one element in the broader process of innovation which is taking place in
the  economy.  But  it  is  a  decisive  one,  given  the  essential  role  played  by  financial  markets  in
resource allocation.
Before addressing this topic, let me first review the economic outlook and discuss the monetary
policy stance.
The economic outlook
The economic upswing is becoming increasingly solid and continues to broaden across sectors
and countries. Real GDP in the euro area has expanded for 16 consecutive quarters, growing by
1.7% year-on-year during the first quarter of 2017. Unemployment has fallen to its lowest level
since  2009.  Consumer  and  business  sentiment  has  risen  to  a  six-year  high,  supporting
expectations of a further strengthening of growth in the coming months.
Downside risks to the growth outlook are further diminishing, and some of the tail risks we were
facing at the end of last year have receded measurably. The fact that domestic consumption and
investment  are  the  main  engines  driving  the  recovery  makes  it  more  robust  and  resilient  to
downside risks, which relate predominantly to global factors.
Despite a firmer recovery, and looking through the volatile readings in HICP inflation over recent
months,  underlying  inflation  pressures  have  remained  subdued.  Domestic  cost  pressures,
notably from wages, are still insufficient to support a durable and self-sustaining convergence of
inflation toward our medium-term objective. For domestic price pressures to strengthen, we still
need  very  accommodative  financing  conditions,  which  are  themselves  dependent  on  a  fairly
substantial amount of monetary accommodation.
At  its  June  monetary  policy  meeting  the  Governing  Council  will  receive  an  update  of  the  staff
projections  and  a  more  complete  information  set  on  which  it  will  be  able  to  formulate  its
judgement  on  the  distribution  of  risks  around  the  most  likely  outlook  for  growth  and  inflation
Overall,  we  remain  firmly  convinced  that  an  extraordinary  amount  of  monetary  policy  support,
including through our forward guidance, is still necessary for the present level of underutilised
resources to be re-absorbed and for inflation to return to and durably stabilise around levels close
to 2% within a meaningful medium-term horizon.
You asked me to discuss with you today the dynamics of long-term interest rates. Over the past
few decades long-term bond yields have been trending down in both nominal and real terms.
While  lower nominal  rates  in  part  reflect  monetary  policy  among  other  factors,  the  decline
i n real  yields  has  been  driven  by  structural  factors.  These  factors  include  notably  rising  net
savings as ageing populations plan for retirement, relatively less public capital expenditure in a
 1 / 4
1
BIS central bankers' speeches
context  of  high  public  indebtedness,  and  a  slowdown  in  productivity  growth.   If  long-term  real
interest  rates  are  to  rise  again  to  sustainably  higher  levels,  it  is  those  underlying  causes  that
need to be addressed. And this requires structural action at national and European level.
1
Our monetary policy, for its part, has been instrumental in addressing the cyclical component of
the  balance  between  the  supply  of  savings  and  investment  demands,  and  its  price  stability
implications.  By  supporting  nominal  incomes,  our  monetary  policy  measures  stimulate
investment and consumption, which are preconditions for inflation to climb back to levels below,
but close to, 2%. And a more dynamic economy, over time, will favour a healthy return to higher
policy interest rates.
The relevance of financial innovation for the ECB and the euro area
The relation between savings and investment leads me to the topic you have chosen for today’s
hearing.  Greater  financial  efficiency  in  the  euro  area  is  crucial  in  improving  the  allocation  of
capital and ensuring it is put to productive use. Innovation in financial instruments, services and
infrastructure, as well as changes in the organisation of financial markets, can play a useful role
in that respect.
Financial innovation is a continuous process. Innovations had constantly arisen in the past. Past
examples of innovation include the introduction of secured debt and of preferred stock, which
were developed to align incentives between parties and address information asymmetries. Some
innovations  of  the  past  were  instead  introduced  to  minimise  transaction  costs  and  they  have
become part of our everyday lives, like credit cards or ATMs.
Today,  fintech  –  the  application  of  new  technologies  to  banking  and  financial  services  –  is  a
potentially transformative force. We are closely monitoring its development for several reasons:
to better understand its impact, to assess the risks and to adjust the regulatory environment and
supervisory approaches where needed; and also to adapt as an institution and support innovation
where justified.
Let me now give you some concrete examples of why fintech is directly relevant to our tasks.
A  deep  knowledge  of  the  channels  through  which  monetary  policy  affects  the  economy  is  of
crucial importance to us. As fintech, and financial innovation more broadly, have the potential to
impact  the  way  the  economy  is  financed,  in  the  future  they  may  affect  the  transmission
mechanism of monetary policy and ultimately financing conditions. As the central bank for the
euro area, we thus remain vigilant and make sure that changes in the financial landscape are
closely tracked.
As central bank of issue for the euro, the ECB and the Eurosystem also have a statutory interest
in the safety and efficiency of payment systems and market infrastructures. One of the most
active fields of fintech innovation which might affect the processing of payments and securities is
2
 Given the rapid pace of
that of distributed ledger technologies (DLTs), such as the blockchain.
development in this field, there is a need to constantly monitor and assess potential new or more
pronounced risks resulting from the application of new technology such as DLTs to payment,
clearing  and  settlement  infrastructures  in  particular.  One  such  possible  risk  is  an  increase  in
market fragmentation if different DLT approaches were to become firmly established in parallel in
different Member States. Moreover, the Eurosystem oversight framework has to remain effective
if  we  are  to  discharge  our  responsibility  in  this  new  environment. And  the  Eurosystem  will  of
course  continue  to  act  in  accordance  with  its  mandate  to  promote  the  smooth  operation  of
3
payment systems.
Fintech also gives the financial sector, more generally, a chance to provide more efficient and
effective services to households and companies. Fintech can, for instance, make it easier for
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
banks to adjust their business models, cut costs and exploit new business opportunities. Fintech
companies  can  also  complement  the  lending  capacity  of  banks  by  acting  as  an  additional
channel for accessing credit, for instance through peer-to-peer lending platforms. This may in
turn help to reduce the macroeconomic fallout from disruptions in the provision of bank credit to
4
households and firms, including smaller ones.
At the same time, the increasing relevance of non-banks and digital innovation in the provision of
financial services may also harbour new risks. It is, for instance, essential to assess and adapt
the prudential framework to cater for the increased role of non-banks and financial innovation,
ensure  the  existence  of  a  level  playing  field  for  both  new  and  existing  players  and  provide
supervisors with adequate tools to address new risks. To this end, we are actively involved in
ongoing work at both European and international levels.
Furthermore, risks stemming from the use of new technologies need to be carefully managed,
particularly  in  the  context  of  heightened  cybersecurity  concerns.   Cyber  risk  has  long  been  a
priority  for  national  and  European  supervisory  authorities.  Since  day  one,  the  ECB  Banking
Supervision  has  also  addressed  the  issue  from  various  angles.   As  financial  market
infrastructure overseer, we also need to ensure that individual systems, as well as the network
as a whole, are operationally resilient to cybercrime.
5
6
While  we  are  closely  monitoring  potential  risks  from  fintech,  we  also  contribute  to  financial
innovation by acting as operators. The TARGET2-Securities (T2S) platform that went live in June
2015 is now a cornerstone of the capital markets union project and has given a strong impetus to
promoting and creating harmonised, integrated and efficient euro payments and securities post-
trade services.
The  ECB  is  also  acting  as  a  catalyst  in  the  creation  of  a  truly  single  European  market  for
payments  and  securities.  Financial  integration  and  financial  development  are  distinct,  but
interrelated  concepts.  Therefore,  in  designing  the  necessary  institutional  and  regulatory
frameworks we need to make sure that financial integration and financial development reinforce
each other, thus improving the performance of the financial system. This is why EU legislators
have an important role to play. A Europe-wide harmonised and principles-based framework to
regulate fintech, in the context of the capital markets union agenda, would indeed help to create a
level  playing  field  from  the  outset.  This  would  in  turn  foster  cross-border  investment  and
expansion.
So as you can see, fintech has the potential to improve efficiency in the financial sector, create
better products and push prices down for consumers. But it has other dimensions too, in the
shape  of  potential  risks  and  new  regulatory  questions.  It  is  in  all  our  interests  to  rise  to  this
challenge. As fintech involves the entire financial sector, different regulatory responses are likely
to  be  needed.  Depending  on  the  nature  of  the  fintech  activity,  those  responses  may  need  to
encompass prudential, consumer protection and other regulation – but, at the same time, they
should not hamper healthy developments.
Conclusions
Allow me to conclude.
The  euro  area  economic  outlook  is  improving  and  downside  risks  are  moderating.  However,
these positive signs should not distract from the need for firmer and higher structural economic
growth.
In  this  context  higher  productivity  growth  is  needed.  And  that  productivity  growth  requires
innovation. Structural reforms are essential to create a business environment that is conducive
to innovation and a regulatory environment that adapts accordingly. Both national and European
level initiatives can contribute to this effort.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
If  we  want  to  make  sure  that  our  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  thrives,  we  need  to
upgrade  its  institutional  framework.  This  means  that  we  should  be  ready  to  foster  innovation
wherever necessary, including in the functioning of EMU. In that spirit, I look forward to the debate
that will be opened up by the upcoming European Commission reflection paper on deepening the
Economic and Monetary Union.
Thank you for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions.
1
2
3
4
5
6
See Addressing the causes of low interest rates, Introductory speech by Mario Draghi, President of the ECB,held
at a panel on “The future of financial markets: A changing view of Asia” at the Annual Meeting of the Asian
Development Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 2 May 2016.
The ECB Annual Report 2016 contains a special feature on distributed ledger technology.
The Eurosystem follows all pertinent developments in this field, mindful of the fact that the way they may be
adopted  by  market  participants  will  determine  their  impact  on  financial  markets.  DLT  could,  for  example,
facilitate the sharing of data among different parties involved in processing a financial market transaction. But it
could  also  result  in  risk  building  up  outside  regulated  markets  if  it  were  used  to  disintermediate  financial
institutions. Moreover, the emergence of different DLT specifications could lead to fragmentation within the euro
area payments system​.
Fintech benefits small companies by allowing them to raise capital more cheaply, in the form of both debt and
equity, while offering retail investors direct access to an asset class to which they would otherwise not have
direct  access.  For  instance,  the  development  of  fintech  activities  such  as  P2P  lending,  via  numerous
marketplace investment platforms targeting the provision of funds both to start-ups and more established small
and medium-sized enterprises, may be a useful credit provision channel.
Cyberattacks can severely damage a bank’s solvency and liquidity situation as they can affect its reputation and
undermine customers’ trust. Moreover, a cyberattack on the financial system could disrupt the interconnected
and interdependent operational network and its critical nodes, and even ripple through the entire economy.
First,  supervisors  monitor  cyber  risk  as  part  of  their  ongoing  operational  risk  supervision.  Second,  various
specific assessments have been made, such as the 2015 thematic review of cyber security risks or targeted on-
site inspections. Last but not least, the ECB has initiated a reporting framework for significant cyber incidents
that was implemented as a pilot scheme in 2016 and will be rolled out to all significant institutions in 2017.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
