Stanley Fischer: International effects of recent policy tightening
Speech  by  Mr  Stanley  Fischer,  Vice  Chair  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve
System,  at  the  IBRN-IMF  conference  "The  Transmission  of  Macroprudential  and  Monetary
Policies Across Borders", Washington DC, 19 April 2017.
 I appreciate your invitation to participate in this afternoon’s panel discussion. In my remarks, I will
discuss  how  U.S.  monetary  policy  actions  affect  our  foreign  trading  partners,  with  particular
focus  on  how  foreign  economies  have  responded  to  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee’s
1
(FOMC) ongoing normalization of policy rates.
Spillovers from the Fed’s Unconventional Policies
Extensive  empirical  research  on  spillovers—including  by  Federal  Reserve  and  International
Monetary Fund (IMF) staff members—indicates that spillovers from the actions of major central
banks occur through several important channels.  While the exchange rate is a key channel of
transmission and gets a great deal of attention in the public debate about monetary spillovers, it
is not the only channel. U.S. monetary policy also affects foreign economies by influencing U.S.
domestic demand and by affecting global financial conditions.
2
3
My reading of the evidence is that the Fed’s highly accommodative monetary policy during the
Global Financial Crisis and its aftermath probably raised foreign gross domestic product (GDP)
overall.   While  U.S.  monetary  easing  caused  the  dollar  to  depreciate,  which  reduced  foreign
GDP  by  shifting  demand  toward  cheaper  U.S.  goods,  foreign  economies  benefited  from  a
stronger expansion in U.S. domestic demand. Moreover, U.S. monetary easing also stimulated
foreign GDP by depressing foreign bond yields and raising the prices of risky assets.
Of course, there were considerable differences in how foreign economies were affected by the
Fed’s policies. Because the advanced foreign economies (AFEs) also experienced slow growth
after  the  financial  crisis,  their  central  banks  adopted  similar  policies.  By  contrast,  the  Fed’s
accommodative policies put further upward pressure on asset prices and currencies in some
emerging market economies (EMEs) that were already experiencing rapid output growth. Thus,
EME central banks had to navigate between tightening policy more—and hurting exports through
a bigger exchange rate appreciation—and maintaining an accommodative stance closer to the
Fed’s,  but  with  a  higher  risk  of  overheating.   These  tradeoffs  faced  by  EME  central  banks
underscore some of the challenges posed by monetary policy divergence with the United States
—a tradeoff with which I am personally very familiar.
Spillovers from Recent Policy Tightening
4
Monetary policy divergence remains a familiar theme today, but the focus has obviously shifted to
the consequences of tighter U.S. monetary policy for the global economy. Policy divergence is an
ongoing  concern  given  that  most  AFEs  and  many  EMEs  have  continued  to  pursue  highly
accommodative  monetary  policies  that  remain  appropriate  in  light  of  their  weaker  cyclical
positions and subdued levels of underlying inflation. Many observers point to the “taper tantrum”
in  2013  as  illustrating  how  monetary  tightening  by  the  Federal  Reserve  can  potentially  have
strong contractionary effects on foreign financial conditions. Subsequently, the expectation that a
steadily improving U.S. labor market would call for tighter U.S. monetary policy—and hence imply
greater monetary divergence with our trading partners—helped drive a sharp appreciation of the
dollar  between  the  middle  of  2014  and  the  end  of  last  year  that  was  accompanied  by  capital
outflows from many EMEs.
Against this backdrop and the concerns it raises, the reaction in financial markets to the FOMC’s
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
decisions to increase the target range for the federal funds rate following its December 2016 and
March 2017 meetings—by a cumulative total of 50 basis points—seems benign. The yields on
risky foreign bonds, especially in EMEs, have continued to decline to below historical norms, and
global  stock  prices  have  risen.  The  dollar  has  depreciated  since  mid-December,  especially
against EMEs, and the EMEs have experienced capital inflows.
In my view, this favorable reaction partly reflects a view by market participants that the rate hikes
are a signal of the FOMC’s confidence in the underlying prospects for the U.S. economy that in
turn has increased confidence in the global outlook: A strong U.S. economy is a major plus for
the global economy. But the main reason for the positive market reaction is that foreign output
expansions appear more entrenched, and downside risks to those economies noticeably smaller
than  in  recent  years.  In  Europe,  unemployment  has  fallen  steadily;  inflation  and  inflation
expectations are moving toward central bank targets; and, while Brexit entails many unknowns,
so  far  it  has  not  resulted  in  significant  financial  market  disruptions.  China’s  economy  also
appears to be on a more solid footing, which has helped stabilize the renminbi as well as support
growth in other EMEs.
The  IMF  staff  has  taken  these  developments  into  account  in  the April  2017 World  Economic
Outlook (WEO) and forecasts that world GDP growth will be noticeably higher over the next two
years than in 2016—a slight upward revision relative to the October 2016 WEO.  There may well
even  be  some  chance  that  foreign  economies  kick  into  gear  enough  that  U.S.  and  foreign
business  conditions  become  reasonably  well  aligned,  as  occurred  during  the  U.S.  monetary
tightening cycles that began in 1999 and in 2004. In both of those episodes, U.S. exports grew
substantially against the backdrop of a brisk expansion in foreign activity and a stable or even
slightly depreciating dollar.
5
Of  course,  it  is  hard  to  predict  whether  foreign  economies  continue  to  strengthen  so  that  the
global economy will move more in sync—as I hope—or if a substantial gap will remain between
the business cycle positions of the United States and our foreign trading partners. However, even
if monetary policy divergence remains substantial, there is good reason to think that spillovers to
foreign economies will be manageable. First, I expect that the Fed’s removal of accommodation
will be driven by a continued expansion of the U.S. economy; thus, foreign economies are likely
to benefit from the developments that induce the FOMC to tighten. Second, most foreign central
banks  should  be  able  to  mitigate  an  undesirable  tightening  of  their  own  financial  conditions
through appropriate policy actions. An important lesson of the taper tantrum was that effective
communication and actions by major central banks, including the European Central Bank and the
Bank of England, were helpful in quickly pushing bond yields down to levels that these central
banks  regarded  as  appropriate  to  their  economic  situation.  Third,  many  EMEs  have  markedly
improved fundamentals—including smaller current account deficits and more anchored inflation
expectations—that should allow them to better withstand the effects of U.S. tightening, though
some vulnerabilities remain.
Finally,  I  expect  that  U.S.  policy  normalization  will  be  gradual  under  likely  scenarios  for  the
evolution of output and inflation. A gradual and ongoing removal of accommodation seems likely
both to maximize the prospects of a continued expansion in the U.S. economy and to mitigate
the risk of undesirable spillovers abroad.
References
Ammer,  John,  Michiel  De  Pooter,  Christopher  Erceg,  and  Steven  Kamin  (2016).  “International
Spillovers  of  Monetary  Policy,”  IFDP  Notes.  Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal
Reserve System, February 8.
Bernanke, Ben S. (2015). “Federal Reserve Policy in an International Context (PDF),” Mundell-
Fleming lecture presented at the 16th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, International
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Monetary Fund, Washington, November 5.
Fischer,  Stanley  (2016).  “U.S.  Monetary  Policy  from  an  International  Perspective,”  speech
delivered at the 20th Annual Conference of the Central Bank of Chile, Santiago, November 11.
Fratzscher, Marcel, Marco Lo Duca, and Roland Straub (2013). “On the International Spillovers of
U.S. Quantitative Easing (PDF),” Working Paper Series 1557. Frankfurt: European Central Bank
(June).
International Monetary Fund (2017). World Economic Outlook. Washington: IMF, April.
Neely, Christopher J. (2015). “Unconventional Monetary Policy Had Large International Effects,”
Journal of Banking and Finance, vol. 52 (March), pp. 101–11.
Rogers, John H., Chiara Scotti, and Jonathan H. Wright (2014). “Evaluating Asset-Market Effects
of Unconventional Monetary Policy: A Multi-Country Review ,” Economic Policy, vol. 29 (October),
pp. 749–99.
Sahay, Ratna, Vivek Arora, Thanos Arvanitis, Hamid Faruqee, Papa N’Diaye, Tommaso Mancini-
Griffoli, and an IMF Team (2014). “Emerging Market Volatility: Lessons from the Taper Tantrum
(PDF),”  IMF  Staff  Discussion  Note  SDN/14/09.  Washington:  International  Monetary  Fund,
September.
1
2
3
4
5
The views expressed are mine and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open
Market Committee. I am grateful to Chris Erceg for his assistance.
There is a large empirical literature assessing the spillovers from Federal Reserve policy actions, including
those from unconventional policies such as large-scale asset purchases—for example, Fratzscher, Lo Duca,
and Straub (2013); Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014); Neely (2015); and Sahay and others (2014).
My November 11, 2016, speech (Fischer, 2016) provides a more detailed discussion of spillovers from U.S.
monetary policy, including some quantitative estimates that draw on the analysis of Ammer and others (2016).
For a more detailed discussion, see Fischer (2016) and Bernanke (2015).
See International Monetary Fund (2017).
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
