Benoît Cœuré: The perils of isolation
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Council on Foreign Relations, New York City, 19 April 2017.
 I would like to thank J. Beirne, M. Ca’ Zorzi and M. Grill for their contributions to this speech. I
remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.
We are currently seeing widespread concerns in many parts of the world regarding free trade
and  globalised  finance.  These  concerns  mainly  stem  from  perceptions  of  inequality  of
opportunities  and  a  lack  of  inclusiveness  in  sharing  the  benefits  of  international  openness,
resulting in growing disparities in income. Often, these are not only perceptions. In this country,
1
for example, net income inequality has been on an upward trend since the late 1970s.
Although globalisation might have amplified growing income inequality, empirical analysis tends
to suggest that technological progress, and the associated rise in demand for skilled labour over
low-skilled, is likely to explain most of the rise in income inequality in advanced economies since
the early 1980s.  And yet, fears of globalisation appear to dominate public discussion and are
likely to have been a key factor in fomenting political opposition to the free movement of goods,
services, capital, and people.
2
Much has been said about the perils of rising protectionism. Today, I would like to focus on a
related but distinct risk, namely all the talk of a weakening of the international financial regulatory
agreements that were reinforced in the wake of the financial crisis. Such a push-back would be
all the more difficult to understand as there is compelling empirical evidence that excessive risk
taking  by  the  financial  sector  has  contributed  to  rising  inequality.   Dismantling  regulatory
standards would therefore not only make financial markets less safe, it would also be unfair to
those who feel left behind.
3
Indeed, in recent years, through the actions of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and standard-
setting  committees  such  as  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  the  international
community has made important progress in rewriting the international financial rule book with a
view to curbing financial exuberance, protecting taxpayers from costly bailouts, and improving
4
cross-border cooperation.
These reforms have undoubtedly made global financial markets more resilient. And they have
also  supported  the  recovery  of  loan  growth  to  households  and  firms  despite  claims  that
regulation may hurt economic growth and dent bank profitability. Indeed, researchers at the Bank
5
for International Settlements have found that soundly capitalised banks tend to lend more.
Our  experience  in  the  euro  area  corroborates  this  view.  The  phasing  in  of  new  regulatory
standards has helped bring about a measurable increase in euro banks’ capital ratios in recent
years. In parallel, and supported by the ECB’s comprehensive monetary policy measures, bank
loans  to  the  real  economy  have  recovered  steadily  from  their  cyclical  (and  historical)  troughs
6
and, towards the end of last year, were increasing at their fastest pace since the crisis.
This suggests that a sound regulatory framework is an essential element of a country’s growth
agenda. But in an integrated global economy, financial regulation has to rely on internationally
agreed  standards.  To  the  extent  that  countries  around  the  world  are  signing  up  to  these
standards,  the  conditions  for  growth  in  a  financially  stable  environment  are  being  reinforced
globally. Of course, this does not mean that we should not look back and evaluate critically what
has been done already. The FSB, together with other bodies, will undertake a broad evaluation of
the individual and combined effects of past reforms. It will assess if the initial objectives have
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
been  achieved  or  if  there  are  any  unintended  consequences  that  call  for  changes  to  the
regulatory framework. It will also assess whether reforms aimed at different industries or market
segments have created conflicting incentives. And it will take stock of the progress achieved in
curbing risk taking outside of the banking sector and in strengthening the resilience of financial
market infrastructures.
But this exercise should not be mistaken for tolerance of hidden forms of financial protectionism
or  a  relaxation  of  regulation.  Turning  back  the  clock  on  international  financial  regulation  would
revive  distrust,  create  financial  fragmentation,  and  risk  regulatory  arbitrage  and  a  race  to  the
bottom.
The  stakes  are  too  high  to  allow  such  short-termism  to  thrive.  While  unilateral  financial
deregulation may yield quick benefits, its potentially harmful implications for financial stability and,
ultimately, economic growth are not likely to be felt until later. And then, those implications would
be  felt  worldwide.  Ultimately,  this  would  leave  the  most  vulnerable  members  of  society  very
exposed.
More than ever, we Europeans are convinced that belonging to the European Union (EU) helps
us  maximise  the  benefits  of  international  cooperation.  It  minimises  the  risks  of  short-sighted
unilateralism. It offers a framework that disciplines Member States to work towards the common
objectives and values enshrined in our treaties. It leverages the experience gained as one of the
world’s largest markets, which has existed for 60 years under a single rule of law. And it reminds
us that there is no fair exchange without an agreed and enforceable set of rules, domestically
and internationally.
Despite  daunting  challenges,  the  EU  and  the  euro  area  in  particular  have  a  track  record  of
overcoming  common  challenges  through  cooperation.   The  creation  of  a  single  banking
supervisor for the euro area, along with a single framework for bank recovery and resolution, is a
recent case in point. It has created a level playing field for banks operating across the euro area
that  strengthens  financial  stability,  eliminates  double  standards  and  can  protect  European
taxpayers.
7
The European Commission’s recent steps to curb illegal tax benefits for multinationals and to
promote a common corporate tax base are another example. Progress on this front is essential
as globalisation has made it more difficult to effectively tax multinational companies. Globalisation
will  be  sustainable  only  if  its  benefits  are  spread  across  society.  This  is  not  something  that
market forces alone can correct. It is possible only if governments keep control of their tax and
benefit  systems.  Effective  tax  cooperation  can  tilt  the  balance  towards  rebuilding  trust  in
globalisation.
Strengthening  these  efforts  is  advisable.  Globalisation  has  already  helped  to  raise  our  living
standards considerably. Over the past 25 years, world trade has increased by about twice as
much  as  GDP,  financial  openness  has  quadrupled  and  millions  of  people,  particularly  in
emerging and developing markets, have been lifted out of poverty. Regional and multilateral trade
and  financial  agreements,  alongside  the  creation  of  international  financial  and  regulatory
institutions and bodies, have significantly contributed to this process.
Many  of  us  have  taken  these  developments  for  granted.  In  Europe,  for  example,  younger
generations have grown up in the belief that the free movement of people, goods, services and
capital is an unqualified right.
The current zeitgeist forces us to put aside our complacency. As the benefits and legitimacy of
international cooperation are being called into question, it’s essential to defend the values that
underlie  global  economic  governance  –  openness,  collaboration  and  tolerance.  Those  who
cherish  the  benefits  of  international  cooperation  should  make  their  voices  heard.  They  should
highlight  past  achievements  and  explain  why  continued  and  strengthened  cooperation  is
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
essential. This appeal must be seen as an opportunity and responsibility, not as a chore.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
 See, e.g., Solt, F. (2016), The Standardized World Income Inequality Database, Social Science Quarterly 97(5),
1267–81. In other advanced economies, e.g. France and Norway, net income inequality has remained fairly
constant in recent decades.
  See  Dabla-Norris,  E.,  K.  Kochhar,  N.  Suphaphiphat,  F.  Ricka  and  E.  Tsounta  (2015),  Causes  and
consequences of income inequality: A global perspective, International Monetary Fund Staff Discussion Note
SDN/15/13, June.
 See, e.g., Philippon, T., and A. Reshef (2012), Wages and Human Capital in the U.S. Finance Industry: 1909–
2006, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(4): 1551–1607.
 For a critical appraisal of the FSB, see Sheets, N. (2017), Race to the Top: The Case for the Financial Stability
Board, Peterson Institute for International Economics, Policy Brief 17–12, April.
 Gambacorta, L. and H. S. Shin (2016), Why bank capital matters for monetary policy, BIS Working Papers No
558, April 2016.
 The common equity Tier 1 ratio of significant euro area banks reached 13.7% in the third quarter of 2016
against 9% in 2012. The annual growth rate of adjusted MFI loans to non-financial corporations (i.e. adjusted for
loan sales, securitisation and notional cash pooling) stood at 2.0% in February 2017, up from a trough of –3.5%
in February 2014. The annual growth rate of adjusted MFI loans to households stood at 2.3% in February 2017,
up from a trough of –0.4% in November 2013.
 See Cœuré, B. (2017), Sustainable Globalisation: Lessons from Europe, speech at a special public event “25
years after Maastricht: The future of Money and Finance in Europe”, Maastricht, 16 February.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
