[Speech structure uses Problem/Opportunity; Solution and Benefit structure] 
Audiences:  school  children  of  Noro  and  Munda  primary  schools.  Credit  union 
members  of  Soltai  Fishing  and  Processing  Staff  Association  Credit  union  Limited 
(SolTuna Employees Credit Limited) and Tuna Trust Credit Unions; and general public 
of Noro] 
Dignitaries:  
[Salutation] 
Introductory remarks 
I am very happy to celebrate this Global Money Week event today with you the 
children and youth of Noro and Munda, Western Province. 
This is a historical event, not only for Noro, but also for Solomon Islands because 
we for the first time are celebrating the Global Money Week  together with the 
rest of global community. We are putting Noro Town, and the Children and youth 
of Noro as part of this Global event to represent our country the Solomon Islands. 
Let me share with you three reasons why I am passionate about events like this 
Global  Money  Week  that  focuses  on  educating  our  children  and  youth  on 
financial  education,  to  change  the  habits  that  we  have  inherited  from  our 
environment on how to deal with financial resources. 
[Problem/Opportunity] 
First,  the  future  of  our  economic  growth  and  management  of  our  financial 
resource requires that our children and youth must have financial education early 
in their life so that they can become informed economic citizens of our country. 
This need arises because studies that we have carried out with our development 
partners in the country show that our country has a very low score on financial 
management  and  financial  competency.  Another  study  we  also  conducted 
reviewed that 66.2% of our total population are not using the banking services. 
At  present  we  have  no  financial  education  subjects  formally  taught  in  our 
education  system.  Therefore,  to  empower  our  children  and  youth  to  become 
successful  economic  citizens  in  future,  we  must  start  to  teach  and  educate  our 
children  on  financial  education.  This  is  one  of  the  priorities  of  the  Solomon 
Islands  government  goals  that  the  Central  Bank  and  the  National  Financial 
Inclusion Taskforce have been working on and are still working on to achieve in 
the  past  6  years  and  will  continue  to  do  so  until  our  education  curriculums 
 1 
incorporate financial education as part of learning for our students from year 1 to 
year 12. 
As  a  country,  Solomon  Islands  has  commitments  both  regionally  and 
internationally  to  facilitate  financial  education  in  collaboration  with  the 
Government to integrate financial education in our school curriculum. Regionally 
we  have  the  2020  Money  Pacific  goals  and  internationally  the  Alliance  for 
Financial Inclusion Maya Declaration where Central Bank of Solomon Islands is 
committed to champion financial education through close collaboration with the 
Government  to  integrate  financial  education  in  the  existing  Solomon  Islands 
national school curriculum.  
Work to integrate financial education in our school curriculum has started. We 
understand  the  Ministry  of  Education  and  Human  Resources  Development; 
Curriculum Division is working to incorporate the financial education learning 
objectives  in  our  existing  school  curriculum.  I  hope  that  when  the  work  is 
completed  and  our  teachers  are  taught  how  to  teach  financial  education  in  our 
schools, this problem of not incorporating financial education in our primary to 
high schools that we face today will be corrected so the country can benefit to 
have financial literate and competent economic citizens in our country. 
Secondly let me tell you why I am excited about the theme of this year’s Global 
Money Week; “Learn, Save, and Earn”; this is a way of highlighting the urgent 
need for financial education in our country. 
First  the  “learn” part  of  the  theme. This  word highlights the need  to  teach our 
children and youth (also adults included) on the value of looking after our money 
(management), saving, and investing money. The use of money can empower our 
children and youth to become good economic citizens. Money is a resource and 
its scarce or we don’t have enough of it. Unless our children are taught how to 
use  it  wisely,  they  could  spend  the  money  uneconomically.  An  event  like  this 
highlights the need to learn about financial education and services that is provided 
by  our  financial  institutions  like  banks  or  our  credit  unions  to  help  us  become 
good economic citizen 
The second word in the theme is “Save”. This word appears to be a very important 
key  word  in  children  and  youth  Global  Money  week  promotions,  because  the 
word ‘Save’ is also part of the 2016 Global Money Week. We need to teach our 
children to develop the early habits of savings, which is one of the most important 
roles of parents or even our financial educators.  
 2 
Putting aside a small sum of money for future, creates a habit of good resource 
management. But this saving habit can also extend to other areas that we often do 
not see it as a means of savings. For example, when we fixed a broken water tap 
that waste water, saves us the cost of paying for wastage of water. We save money 
when we switched off power in our house when no one is in the house. We save 
money for our school when we look after the school property and as a result our 
school does not waste money on repairing them. Looking after our environment 
so that we can save it for our future generation is also true, another concept of 
saving. So the need to teach our young people to understand these saving habits 
is critical. 
And third word in the theme is  “Earn”. This word focuses on livelihood skills, 
business  training  and  job  training.  It  emphasises  that  we  can  start  to  help  our 
children to learn what is required to work towards education to achieve a career 
they dream to have; educate our children to start good business practices of how 
to own their own businesses, which includes going into agriculture productions, 
buying and selling of farm products, owning a retail shop or a transport business 
or  involved  in  service  industry  as  legal  advisers,  accountants  or  as  medical 
practitioners or information technology or engineering. Earning an income has 
many sources. 
[(Optional and can be left out) Let me tell you a story about a 10-year boy who 
lives in a village called Zutapate in Dovele, Vella La Vella. This is a true story 
that our Deputy Governor learnt while he was having his holiday there recently. 
Let  us  call  him  Johnny.  Johnny’s  parents  are  just  ordinary  villagers  and  like 
village  parents  they  work  hard  to  earn  income  by  providing  transportation  to 
people who want to come Gizo or sell fresh fish to villages around them.  Johnny 
however saw an opportunity and takes advantage of his parents coming to Gizo; 
he decided to ask his parents to buy a carton of noodles, cans of Soltuna, boxes 
of matches and lollies to sell to his friends or people in his village. Since coming 
to  Gizo  is  expensive  for  the  villagers,  they  buy  the  goods  from  Johnny’s  little 
canteen.  Johnny saves his earning and continue to recycle his cash flow until he 
has accumulated enough money to pay for his own school fees this year. And as 
I understand, he is still in business to raise money for his school fee next year. I 
like this story because it is the children like Johnny who can develop the savings 
habits and entrepreneurial habits earlier in their lives that we want to see as future 
economic citizens of our country.] 
 3 
So our Global Money Week theme “Learn, Save and Earn” emphasises the need 
to help our children and youth to learn about money, how to save and how to earn 
money either as professional employees or as business owners. I am sure you will 
learn more about this when you participate and go around the stalls this morning. 
Thirdly, the particular focus of this Global Money Week is to bring attention to 
everyone that a credit union is one of the powerful institutions that can help our 
children and youth to learn financial education at an early age. A credit union is 
similar to a commercial bank, it can provide the same products and services like 
a  commercial  bank,  but  what  is  different  is  that  the  credit  union  is  owned  by 
members  who  are  the  shareholders  and  at  the  same  time  are  customers  to  the 
credit union. Credit unions can provide different saving accounts to suit the needs 
of their members. They can create saving products such as junior saving accounts 
for the children. Credit Unions provide lending products for their members. And 
credit unions can provide insurance coverage for their members as well. 
One of the reasons people explain why they don’t want to open an account with 
a commercial bank is that because banks charge fees to keep their accounts. While 
paying fees is something that we all cannot avoid because provision of banking 
services costs money, in a credit union the interests, fees and charges that are paid 
by members is distributed back to the members as net interest income. I say this 
because I am also member of our staff Credit Union called Bokolo Credit Union 
Limited day one when I join the Central Bank of Solomon Islands and know the 
benefit credit unions can give members. 
As the Registrar for Credit Unions, I take note of the progress in the growth of 
the assets of  both the  Soltuna  Employees Credit  Union  Limited  and  The  Tuna 
Trust Credit Union limited. If the Board and management of these credit unions 
continue  to  manage  these  credit  unions  professionally,  they  will  both  be  the 
vehicle to encourage our children and youth here in Noro and Munda community 
to learn how to save and earn and become good financial and economic citizens 
of our country. 
Finally,  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  many  people  who  made  this 
Global Money Week celebration possible. To the Board of directors of both Tuna 
Trust Credit Union Limited and Soltuna Employees Credit union Limited. I salute 
you for accepting our request to work together to host this Global Money Week. 
I  would  like  to  thank  Selwyn  Talasasa,  one  of  the  long  serving  credit  union 
promoters who has been a credit union person since day one of his career. He has 
been  very  helpful  in  organizing our global  money  week. Thank  you  Selwyn. I 
 4 
also thank the Global money week committee for their assistance in organising 
this  global  money  week.  And  thanks  to  the  management  of  both  National 
Fisheries Development Limited and Soltuna Limited for your support in hosting 
this Global Money Week. Thank you NFD and Soltuna, you made us all proud as 
good cooperate citizens. 
To our Noro town Clerk for your support. And to Noro and Munda Police that 
provide overall security for the program. 
But our thanks go to all  of you school children and teachers of both Noro and 
Munda primary schools who are part of this program this week. You have made 
Solomon  Islands  proud  by  registering  in  the  map  that  we  too  are  part  of  this 
Global Money Week. 
Finally, to my staff who have been working to ensure that we celebrate this day 
as opportunity to learn and have fun. 
Let us make Global Money Week celebration here at Noro a memorable occasion. 
Let us all LEARN, SAVE and EARN. 
God bless all. 
Thank you. 
 5 
