  Opening remarks by Francois Groepe,  
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the public workshop on proposals to establish  
a deposit insurance scheme for South Africa 
South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria 
 23 August 2017 
 Introduction 
 Good afternoon, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  this  workshop  on  a  possible  deposit 
insurance scheme for South Africa. We are privileged to have present here today fellow 
central  bankers,  commercial  bankers,  financial  market  participants,  regulators,  public 
sector  representatives,  academics,  members  of  the  media  fraternity,  and  other  staff 
members of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB). In particular, I would like to extend 
a very warm welcome to the representatives from the World Bank, which has been very 
supportive over the past two to three years in the formulation of the proposals that will be 
discussed  today,  as  well  as  to  the  representatives  from  other  central  banks  in  the 
Common Monetary Area  that  are present. We hope that this workshop will be  the first 
step in expanding our fruitful cooperation in the area of managing bank failures. 
 The SARB and National Treasury are currently developing new legislation to put in place 
a framework that will facilitate the resolution of failing financial institutions in an orderly 
and transparent way, one which seeks to minimise the use of government funding to bail 
out such institutions. This new resolution framework is an important pillar of the SARB’s 
expanded  and  explicit  financial  stability  mandate,  as  contained  in  the  Financial  Sector 
Regulation Bill. A key component of such a resolution framework is the establishment of 
 Page 1 of 6 
an explicit deposit insurance scheme to ensure that the depositors who are most exposed 
to an asymmetry of information and thus least able to hedge themselves against financial 
loss in the event of a bank failure are protected against any losses and hardship that may 
stem from a bank failure. This framework is expected to enhance the public’s trust in the 
banking sector, which is an important aspect of financial stability.  
 The  implementation  of  a  prefunded  deposit  insurance  scheme  will  bring  about  closer 
adherence  to  the  Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution  Regimes  and  to  the  Core 
Principles of Effective Deposit Insurance Systems issued by the Financial Stability Board 
and the International Association of Deposit Insurers respectively. 
 South Africa has a well regulated and stable banking sector, but one that is  also  quite 
concentrated. Where one tends to find relatively regular failures of small banks in some 
other countries, bank failures in South Africa are rare – although when they do occur, they 
are typically more disrupting.  
 Because bank failures in South Africa do not occur often and because, in the past, these 
failures  involved  relatively  small  banks or  banks  with  limited  retail  funding  (like  African 
Bank), it was possible for government to compensate at least the retail depositors. Over 
time, this practice  has led many  South Africans to believe that their bank deposits are 
fully insured. However, this type of deposit protection is implicit rather than explicit, with 
compensation  being  largely  dependent  on  the  size  of  the  failing  bank  and  the  fiscal 
strength of government at the time of such failure. There is unfortunately no clear, upfront 
guarantee of deposits in place, which creates uncertainty in the event of a payout about 
the  deposits  that  will  be  compensated  and  to  what  amounts.  Such decisions  are  often 
arbitrary, depending on the circumstances at the time.  
 Furthermore, even if deposits are paid out, it can be a lengthy process to actually execute 
the  payments  in  the  absence  of  readily  available  depositor  information  and  payout 
mechanisms. This  can cause prolonged periods of hardship for depositors who do not 
have access to their bank accounts.  
  Page 2 of 6 
Another important disadvantage of an implicit deposit guarantee system is that it relies 
on government funding and tends to be procyclical; as such, support is usually required 
at a time when the economy and the financial system may already be vulnerable as a 
result of wider-spread bank failures.  
 In principle, it is not desirable that public funds are used to pay for private failures.  
 The main advantage of the implicit deposit insurance arrangements that South Africa has 
had in place to date, and probably the reason why we  have lived with them for such a 
long time, is that the current framework does not put a direct cost on the banking sector 
–  and  it  hardly  costs  the  government  anything  unless  there  is  actually  a  bank  failure. 
However,  we  regard  such  arrangements  as  risky  and  acknowledge  that  they  create  a 
significant contingent liability for government.  
 It  is  for  all  these  reasons  that  South  Africa  is  moving  away  from  government-funded, 
implicit  deposit  insurance  scheme  to  a  privately-funded,  explicit  deposit  insurance 
scheme. An explicit deposit insurance scheme sets out payment arrangements in law and 
ensures there is always adequate funding available. This funding is built up by the private 
banking sector in good times rather than at the point of failure. And although the proposed 
deposit insurance scheme will be prefunded, we will endeavour to ensure that we avoid 
placing an excessive cost on the banking system, distorting the competitiveness in the 
banking  sector,  or  causing  moral  hazard  to  the  extent  that  it  may  become  a  threat  to 
financial stability.  
 South  Africa  is  currently  the  only  G201  country  that  does  not  have  an  explicit  deposit 
insurance  scheme.  In  fact,  about  125  countries  have  an  explicit  deposit  insurance 
scheme, of which the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in the US2 is probably the 
best known, having been established in the 1930s just after the Great Depression. The 
organisation,  funding,  and  operations  of  deposit  insurance  schemes  varies  greatly 
between countries; while there are a number of generic characteristics, each jurisdiction 
                                                
1 Group of Twenty 
2 United States 
 Page 3 of 6 
ultimately decides on the type and structure of the deposit insurance scheme that best 
suits its own financial system.  
 However, a common denominator of all deposit insurance schemes is that they play an 
important  role  in  the  resolution  of  failed  banks  and  the  prevention  of  financial  crises 
emanating from institutional failures. They also facilitate the process through which poorly 
managed  and  weak  banks  can  leave  the  system  in  an  orderly  way,  without  causing 
extreme hardship, thereby making way for efficiently managed firms that can better serve 
the needs of the economy and of the population.  
 The purpose of today’s workshop is to discuss the proposals outlined in the discussion 
paper that was published on 30 May 2017, which contains the joint views of the SARB 
and National Treasury on the design features of a possible deposit insurance scheme for 
South  Africa.  The  paper  deals  in  detail  with  all  the  aspects  of  the  envisaged  deposit 
insurance scheme; these will also be covered in subsequent presentations today, which 
I do not want to front-run or repeat. Let me just highlight, briefly, the key features of the 
envisaged scheme. 
 Firstly,  the  deposit  insurance  scheme  would  be  housed  in  a  separate  legal  entity 
established  as  a  subsidiary  of  the  SARB.  This  organisational  structure  would  ensure 
adequate independence for the deposit insurance scheme to pursue its objectives, but 
with the backing of the SARB for good governance and operational support. 
 Secondly, all deposits (except those by other financial institutions and government, listed 
in the paper) would be covered, irrespective of the type or term of the deposits. Deposits 
at all banks, small and medium and large, would be covered to the same limit of R100 
000. Based on a survey of the deposits at all banks, we estimate that R100 000 would be 
sufficient to fully cover the deposits of about 98% of the retail depositors in South Africa. 
Among the other benefits that have been mentioned, we expect that this level of coverage 
would help the small banks to expand their funding base and, over time, contribute to the 
diversification of the banking sector. 
  Page 4 of 6 
Thirdly,  the  envisaged  deposit  insurance  scheme  would  be  funded  by  the  banks 
themselves, and all registered banks would be obliged to contribute to the fund. The paper 
proposes two possible funding options  that were considered at the time. However, the 
most cost-efficient funding mechanism is still being discussed with the banking sector, 
and the ultimate decision may well differ from the proposals in the paper. It is important 
that the deposit insurance scheme is funded in such a way that the cost to the banking 
sector does not exceed the financial stability benefits, and that there is sufficient funding 
available  to  make  the  deposit  insurance  scheme  effective.  It  is  also  important  to  have 
emergency funding available in the event that the deposit insurance scheme experiences 
a  funding  shortfall.  Emergency  funding  arrangements  should  include  prearranged  and 
guaranteed sources of liquidity funding and be legislated. This is, however, subject to the 
proviso  that  such  emergency  funding  is  subsequently  recovered  from  the  remaining 
banks after the failure event. 
 Fourthly, the build-up of a fund is but one aspect of the deposit insurance scheme. Equally 
important is the availability of accurate depositor information as well as IT3 systems and 
mechanisms  to  enable  the  prompt  payout  of  deposits,  supported  by  a  sound  legal 
framework, effective operational controls, and a strong governance framework. There will 
be much work for both the deposit insurance scheme and the banks once the legislation 
is in place. In this regard, the International Association of Deposit Insurers, of which South 
Africa is currently  an associate member, has developed a set of tried and tested Core 
Principles to guide us in the development of a world-class scheme. There are also some 
more detailed areas that will require further research and deliberation, for example how 
exactly  pooled  accounts  should  be  treated  and  how  the  small  cooperative  financial 
institutions should fit into the deposit insurance scheme framework. These aspects are 
important and will receive special attention  in the coming months, without delaying the 
legislative processes.   
 We appreciate your interest in this important initiative as a major part of the success of 
the deposit insurance scheme will depend on the public’s awareness of the scheme and 
knowledge about how it works. Enhancing such awareness will be an ongoing task of the 
                                                
3 information technology 
 Page 5 of 6 
deposit  insurance  scheme,  in  which  the  media  will  be  our  close  allies.  The  workshop 
today is a good start.  
 Finally,  we  would  like  to  remind  you  that  there  is  also an opportunity  to  submit  written 
comments on the deposit insurance scheme paper until 31 August 2017. We encourage 
you to make use of this opportunity as it will assist us in making the best policy choices.  
 Thank you. 
  Page 6 of 6 
