Peter Praet: The role of the European Central Bank - pudence and
responsibility in times of crisis
Lecture by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
"Heidelberg Symposium", Heidelberg, 11 May 2017.
Accompanying slides
The ECB’s mandate, instruments, and accountability
 In the wake of the economic fallout from the global financial crisis, central banks have deployed
novel  policy  instruments  on  a  grand  scale.  It  was  to  be  expected  that  these  decisions  would
spark  fierce  debates  on  central  bank  mandates,  roles  and  instruments.  In  certain  quarters,
central banks have come to be perceived as institutions which are eager to expand their mission
and take on more powers, but reluctant to scale up – in parallel – the obligations associated with
being  accountable  to  the  public.  Partly  in  connection  with  this  criticism,  concerns  were
expressed  about  the  unintended,  adverse  side  effects  that  the  new  policy  instruments  might
cause.   Overall,  the  debate  as  to  whether  central  banks  have  availed  themselves  of  the
resources and powers conferred upon them by their statutes in a responsible way takes us right
to the central topic of this Symposium.
1
Speaking as a central banker on the role and instruments of the ECB and on the means and
ends of monetary policy here at Heidelberg University, I am, of course, reminded of Max Weber’s
famous  lecture  on  politics  held  in  1918  about Verantwortungs- versus Gesinnungsethik (the
ethics  of  responsibility  versus  the  ethics  of  conviction ).  Max  Weber’s  considerations  pivoted
around a potential dilemma between the ethical values of the means and the ultimate ends of
public policies. In the light of the difficult historical circumstances at the time, he went so far as to
conjecture  that  achieving  “good”  goals  may,  in  certain  instances,  require  having  to  accept
dubious means to achieve them.
2
Has monetary policy been exposed to such challenging choices in modern times? In Germany,
after  World  War  II,  the  Bundesbank  was  established  by  an  act  of  collective  will  deliberately
founded on a rejection of that dilemma. The culture of stability that was established in the country
after the war aimed to avoid precisely that type of conflict between goals and instruments. In line
with  this  aim,  society  should  avoid  too  ample  a  scope  for  discretion  and  –  in  the  end  –
arbitrariness  being  given  to  unelected  policymakers.  The  positions  expressed  by  numerous
German participants in the debate about the ECB’s policies can indeed be read in this light. The
tendency  of  many  of  those  participants  to  minimise  the  distinction  –  which  is  standard  in  the
Anglo-Saxon debate – between “goal dependence” and “instrument independence” is probably
dictated by the idea that the scope of delegation to an unelected agency should be as limited as
possible.
Was the ECB well advised to take seriously the “goal dependence” principle that presides over
the high-level agreements between parliaments and central banks, which assign many central
banks  in  the  world  with  the  task  of  delivering  a  certain  definition  of  price  stability  within  a
meaningful  medium-term  time  frame? And,  in  that  endeavour,  did  the  ECB  do  the  right  thing
when it claimed “instrument independence”, within the confines of the Treaty stipulations, when
delivering on its objective by using conventional instruments was no longer a viable option?
In attempting to answer these questions, let me take a step back.
Over the past decades, a clear consensus has emerged that price stability is the sole, or at least
the  primary,  responsibility  of  a  central  bank.  This  is  what  we  call  “goal  dependence”:  central
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
banks did not – and should not – choose their ultimate goal. Their ultimate goal – price stability –
is stipulated by legislatures which express the collective will of society. In many countries in the
world the precise formulation of that assignment has been elaborated with welfare and feasibility
considerations in mind. Among all the public policy goals that are most relevant to furthering the
welfare  of  the  public,  central  banks  were  given  the  mandate  to  stabilise  inflation  around  a
sufficiently low level over the medium term.
The welfare considerations are simple to explain. Price stability is the foundation of a functioning
economy.  Price  stability  ensures  that  the  market  mechanism  can  work  properly.  It  supports
correct market signals, contributing to an efficient use of economic resources and strengthening
job creation and prosperity. It preserves the purchasing power of our money and the value of our
savings. It is a common good for the whole economy.
It is worth remembering that these welfare propositions are not just abstract theory. Germany’s
history,  in  particular,  has  taught  us  that  monetary  disorder  undermines  not  only  economic
prosperity, but also political stability. This aspect concerns not just the hyperinflation of the 1920s
that has been etched so indelibly onto Germany’s collective memory. In the wake of the Wall
Street Crash in 1929 and the banking crisis starting in 1931, monetary mismanagement led to a
precipitous collapse in money, prices, and employment.   Nowhere  were  losses  in  output  and
jobs as dire as in Germany and in the United States.  These economic reverberations also had
traumatic  consequences  for  the  political  cohesion  of  German  society.  In  sum,  ensuring  price
stability – that is, protecting societies against excess inflation and deflation – is a key contribution
to collective welfare.
3
4
But how can price stability be preserved? In the course of monetary history, consensus on the
role  of  monetary  policy  has  fluctuated  considerably.  The  “Great  Inflation”  of  the  1970s,  which
Germany escaped thanks to its sound monetary policy framework, grew out of confusion and
misperceptions  about  what  drives  inflation.  Some  top  academic  circles  and  central  bankers
entertained  the  notion  that  inflation  was  a  structural  problem  and  not  amenable  to  monetary
policy instruments: inflation was seen as the outcome of cost factors, such as wage negotiations
or commodity price developments. The Great Inflation was only overcome once monetary policy
came  to  be  recognised  as  being  solely  responsible  for  price  developments.  Eventually,
economists,  irrespective  of  their  scholarly  persuasion,  and  policymakers  alike  became
convinced  of  Milton  Friedman’s  famous  dictum  that  “inflation  is  always  and  everywhere  a
monetary phenomenon”.   This  consensus  that  monetary  policy  is  solely  responsible  for  price
developments  paved  the  way  to  granting  sufficient  independence  to  central  banks  to  pursue
monetary  stability  without  political  interference  –  and  to  providing  central  banks  with  effective
instruments to do so.
5
Today  central  bank  mandates  have  come  to  embrace  the  consensus  that  central  banks  are
solely  responsible  for  monetary  stability.  In  the  euro  area, Article  127(1)  of  the  Treaty  (on  the
Functioning of the European Union) stipulates: “The primary objective of the European System of
Central Banks shall be to maintain price stability.”
Back in 1998, at the very beginning of monetary union, the Governing Council chose to specify its
mandate in quantitative terms. In 2003 the Governing Council further clarified that, in conducting
its monetary policy, it would aim at stabilising inflation over the medium term at a level below, but
close to, 2%. As changes in inflation cannot be controlled over the short term, price stability is
sought to be maintained over a medium-term horizon.
The definition reflects the fact that price stability does not mean zero inflation. The theory and
practice of monetary policy has consistently found that a low but positive rate of inflation is critical
to the functioning of the real economy. One factor in favour of tolerating low, positive inflation is
the  possible  measurement  bias  in  the  calculation  of  the  consumer  price  index  as  a  result  of
insufficient compensation for the improvement in the quality of underlying goods. Low, positive
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
inflation rates can also support the necessary adjustment of relative prices to economic shocks
in the face of downward rigidities in wages and prices. Finally, the nearer the target inflation rate
is to zero, the greater the risk that interest rates cannot be sufficiently cut to counter deflationary
shocks.
Where does “instrument independence” come in? To achieve the goal assigned to it, monetary
policy must be vested with the right instruments and with sufficient independence to choose to
activate those tools – within the confines of eligibility stipulated by law – in such a way that makes
the  accomplishment  of  the  goal  feasible.  Instrument  independence  is  a  precondition  of
accountability. Holding a central bank accountable for delivering its objective is meaningful only to
the extent that the central bank is unconstrained – again, within the confines of the law – in its
choice of the means to achieve it. Both the duty to be faithful to the mandate and the ability to
pursue it effectively and independently ultimately allow the ECB to be held accountable.
times, 
Of course, “instrument independence” does not mean that central banks’ choices of instruments
cannot be called into question. Central banks need to explain to what extent the instruments they
use are effective in meeting their objective over a certain horizon, and are not causing collateral
damage that is likely to compromise the achievement of the objective further into the future. In
normal 
this obligation  to  explain  is  relatively  unproblematic.  This  is  because  we
understand the transmission of the conventional instruments of monetary policy – the very short-
term interest rate – fairly well. By steering the interest rates in interbank money markets, central
banks  in  normal  times  are  reasonably  capable  of  influencing  the  broader  conditions  in  capital
markets, and affect the interest rates applied by banks when lending to the economy. Both the
financial conditions prevailing in the capital markets and those prevailing in the market for bank
credit, in turn, influence the investment and spending decisions of households and firms, and,
ultimately,  price  developments.  Before  the  crisis,  this  mechanism,  which  we  also  technically
refer to as monetary policy transmission, worked rather smoothly.
In  times  of  crisis,  this  link  between  short-term  interest  rates  and  price  developments  can  be
weakened dramatically. Financial fragilities in money or capital markets or in banks may render
the interest rate instrument ineffective. Disinflationary developments may be strong enough to
eventually  remove  the  central  bank’s  room  to  lower  short-term  instruments.  This  situation
requires recourse to more complex and potentially untested instruments. It complicates the duty
to  explain  but  makes  convincing  explanations  even  more  critical  to  the  credibility  and
effectiveness of policy. This is why in the remainder of the speech I will give an account of the
main  phases  of  the  crisis  and  how  the  various  phases  have  called  for  the  activation  of  non-
standard instruments, often tailor-made to address the challenges and the risks that the crisis
brought on.
Monetary policy in times of crisis
During the years of the crisis, the relationship between instruments and mandate has become
much more complex, and has in fact stoked concerns about a possible dilemma between the
adequacy of means and the ultimate ends.
The  financial  crisis  evolved  in  three  main  phases,  each  of  which  required  different  policy
responses and posed new challenges in explaining their merits.
The  first  phase  was  marked  by  the  banking  crisis,  culminating  in  the  collapse  of  Lehman
Brothers in 2008. It prompted a systemic failure of interbank funding markets. Banks – both in the
euro area and elsewhere – suddenly became very uncertain about the underlying health of other
banks and stopped lending to each other. Together with other major central banks, we stepped in
with forceful and coordinated interventions to provide essential liquidity to the banking sector. In
the  euro  area,  liquidity  was  made  available  in  virtually  unlimited  amounts  –  against  eligible
collateral – and at increasingly longer tenors, which helped those banks that were being denied
access to market refinancing to remain in business and keep their key intermediation function.
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Without these operations, the financial system would have imploded and a far deeper contraction
would have occurred. In arresting the meltdown in the money market we were able to avoid a
chain of bank failures which would have precipitated a collapse in money and credit, with severe
consequences  for  price  stability.  Not  acting  would,  in  fact,  have  amounted  to  deflecting
responsibility for our mandate and risked accepting the kind of economic disorder experienced
during the Great Depression, as mentioned in my introduction.
On that account, our balance sheet took on a more prominent role as a stabilising instrument.
The novelty of deploying the central bank balance sheet as an instrument was immediately met
with substantial scepticism. First, there was apprehension about moral hazard: after all, the ECB
expanded credit to banks at a time when they were under scrutiny for having precipitated the
crisis  in  the  first  place.  Second,  there  were  also  fears  about  grand-scale  liquidity  injections
ultimately paving the way for inflation.
We subsequently entered a second phase, starting in 2010, as a consequence of the loss of
confidence  in  some  sovereigns.  It  brought  on  the  development  of  redenomination  risk  and
thereby threatened the integrity of our currency. The sovereign debt crisis was triggered in some
cases by a weak fiscal position and in others by a weak banking system. But irrespective of its
initial  impulse,  it  quickly  became  a  two-way  loop  through  the  “bank-sovereign”  nexus:  banks
remained dependent on fiscal authorities for solvency assistance, and the financial obligations
vis-à-vis  banks  that  this  responsibility  created  on  the  part  of  some  governments  with  weak
fundamentals  further  undermined  their  credit  standing.  As  the  cost  of  borrowing  for  certain
governments increased, banks with exposures to this debt came under intense market pressure,
ultimately leading to entire national banking systems losing market access. This development, in
turn, resulted in financial fragmentation and a serious disruption to the monetary transmission
mechanism.  In  view  of  the  implications  that  such  dynamics  could  have  for  price  stability,  the
ECB  lowered  interest  rates.  But  these  reductions  were  not  being  passed  on  to  firms  and
households  in  a  large  part  of  the  euro  area.  This  signalled  an  unusual  disconnect  between
expanding central bank liquidity and exceptionally stimulative monetary policy interest rates and
contracted lending to non-financial corporations and households.
The ECB’s response to these unprecedented conditions was twofold.
First,  the  ECB  revived  the  longer-term  refinancing  instrument  that  had  proved  particularly
effective in the aftermath of the Lehman demise. Central bank liquidity was made available to
banks  for  up  to  three  years.  This  eased  the  pressure  particularly  on  banks  located  in  the
countries that had been hit by the sovereign debt crisis.
Second, the announcement of Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs) in the summer of 2012
removed the euro area break-up risk which markets – by that time – had started to price into the
yields of securities issued by the governments most impaired by the sovereign debt crisis. The
impact of the announcement on market sentiment was instantaneous and material to an extent
few had anticipated. The steep fall in interest rates and improved monetary policy transmission in
those  countries  most  affected  by  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  averted  a  deeper  recession  in  the
euro area as a whole. Nonetheless, the sovereign debt crisis left a damaging legacy on the euro
area economy and laid the groundwork for the third phase of the crisis.
In  the  years  that  followed,  as  a  legacy  of  the  debt  crisis,  banks  in  those  vulnerable  countries
entered a drawn-out process of deleveraging aimed at shedding the most risky components of
their  balance  sheets:  loans  to  the  economy.  This,  once  more,  impeded  transmission  of  the
stimulus introduced by OMTs and by the liquidity operations to the real economy. It threatened to
derail  the  very  tenuous  recovery  that  had  started  in  2013  and  prompted  inflation  rates  to  drift
downwards – and away from levels consistent with price stability.
A third phase of the crisis started in 2014, as it became clear that the incipient recovery was too
fragile and dependent on progress in transmission to warrant inaction on the part of the ECB.
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Additional monetary policy measures were required to repair the bank lending channel and to halt
an accelerated fall in inflation that threatened to de-stabilise long-term inflation expectations and
usher in a period of self-sustained deflation.
Because the main policy interest rate, the interest rate on the deposit facility, had already been
brought  to  zero  in  summer  2012,  the  Governing  Council  introduced  innovative  measures  to
provide additional stimulus. Starting in June 2014, the Governing Council brought the interest rate
paid on banks’ deposits of excess reserves with the Eurosystem to –0.1%. At the same time, a
credit-easing  package  was  announced  which  included  targeted  longer-term  refinancing
operations (TLTRO-I), a programme to purchase covered bonds issued by the banks (CBPP3, a
new version of two earlier programmes with a similar scope) and a new asset-backed securities
purchase  programme  (ABSPP).  These  credit-easing  measures  influence  the  economy  by
improving  the  pass-through  of  liquidity  injected  into  the  financial  system  to  private  sector
borrowing costs.
The  credit-easing  measures  were  immediately  effective  in  turning  around  the  credit  crunch
situation prevailing in a number of countries and fostering a pronounced easing in bank lending
conditions for companies and households. But, also owing to the headwinds coming from the
international economy, the inflation outlook continued to deteriorate in the summer and autumn of
2014 and long-term inflation expectations started to give concrete signs of destabilisation. As a
result,  in  January  2015  the  Governing  Council  announced  the  expanded  asset  purchase
programme (APP), which included a large-scale purchase programme targeting public securities
(PSPP). The purpose of the new programme was to promote a general compression of yields
across  all  asset  classes  and  to  generate  incentives  for  banks  to  rebalance  their  portfolios
towards assets with higher risk-adjusted returns – such as loans to firms and households.
Overall,  these  measures  have  been  designed  to  complement  each  other  and  have  proved
effective and adaptable to the series of shocks which have hit the euro area economy since their
introduction. Indeed, the deposit rate has been reduced further (it now stands at –0.4%). This
decrease into more negative territory incentivises banks to invest the liquidity they receive as a
consequence of the asset purchases into longer-maturity and higher-yielding assets. The APP
has been recalibrated since its introduction and in early 2016 the Governing Council announced
four  additional  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTRO-II)  to  further  support  credit
availability to euro area firms and households.
All these elements adopted in the third phase are still in place. Moreover, the ECB has adopted
an integrated system of forward guidance that governs the future path of asset purchases and
short-term interest rates, as well as the sequencing of these different policy tools.
Given their novelty, scope, and potential interaction with other public policies, communicating the
merits  of  these  measures  proved  to  be  much  more  difficult  than  before  the  crisis. A  debate
evolved around the premise that central bank purchases of sovereign bonds ventured into the
realm of fiscal policy. After all, in the few preceding years of the crisis public debt had surged to
high levels.
Is the decision to purchase public securities one which can be seen as overstepping the limits of
“instrument independence”? In particular, how could the ECB avoid being pressured by political
forces into alleviating debt servicing costs through continued purchases of government bonds?
Would such purchases not have to be conducted above and beyond what would be appropriate
for  monetary  policy  purposes?  In  other  words,  are  we  back  to  Weber’s  dilemma  between
Gesinnungs-  und  Verantwortungsethik and  are  we  not  at  risk  of  resolving  the  dilemma  in  an
opportunistic way, achieving “good” goals by dubious means?
Public debates have pivoted precisely around such concerns. If it did occur, such overstepping of
the confines that society has laid down for the central bank mandate would undermine central
banks’ independence and the legitimacy of their instruments and would ultimately pave the way
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
for higher inflation. In the light of these risks, how can we be sure that the measures taken fall
within the ECB’s narrowly defined price stability mandate?
Conflicts  with  the  price  stability  objective  could  indeed  emerge  from  monetary  operations  that
support  unsustainable  government  finances.  There  is  no  doubt  that  monetary  policy  has  had
beneficial effects on government finances. The same kind of indirect support occurred when we
cut  our  main  refinancing  rate  to  2%  in  the  early  2000s  –  a  very  low  level  at  the  time  –  and
maintained that level for more than two years. But neither this episode, nor today’s policy easing,
is akin to the deliberately coordinated strategy of monetary financing that we observed in some
countries in the 1970s.
To  maintain  responsibility  and  prudence  in  our  actions  we  must  dispel  any  doubts  about  the
reasons  behind  them  and  their  effect  on  price  stability.  Indeed,  in  the  euro  area,  we  have  a
number of extremely important safeguards in place ensuring that any central bank instrument is
used solely on the basis of the central bank’s narrow price stability objective, and not on any
fiscal consequences thereof.
One of our most important provisions is the Treaty prohibition on monetary financing. It was key
to preserving the monetary policy nature of OMTs and the public sector purchase programme
(PSPP). In line with this provision, we specified that OMTs can be activated only if price stability
is under threat. Moreover, the extra exposure to any single country that the Eurosystem might
acquire as a consequence of OMT activation is secured by strict conditionality: as a precondition
for  OMT  activation,  the  country  would  first  have  to  commit  to  a  macroeconomic  adjustment
programme under the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). It is worth noting that in June 2015
the European Court of Justice ruled that, given the strict modalities for their activation, OMTs fall
within  the  scope  of  the  ECB’s  mandate  and  include  sufficient  safeguards  to  avoid  monetary
financing.
A  number  of  safeguards  apply  to  public  sector  bond  purchases  under  the  PSPP  too.  Such
purchases have a monetary policy purpose which is different from the one that applies to OMTs.
They are specifically aimed at bringing inflation back to our medium-term objective in a situation
in  which  our  key  interest  rates  are  at  levels  that  can  hardly  be  reduced  much  further.  The
modalities for their activation are exclusively governed by the primary objective of price stability
and are decided in full independence, irrespective of developments in other policy areas.
The  size  and  duration  of  the  PSPP  are  calculated  to  achieve  progress  towards  the  ECB’s
inflation objective. The effectiveness of the tool is rooted in two important features of the financial
system.  First,  government  bond  yields  are  the  benchmark  indicator  for  pricing  a  large  set  of
private debt instruments. Second, government bond markets are deep and liquid. Interventions in
these markets have eased financing conditions for households and firms. Several safeguards
are  in  place  to  minimise  potential  distortive  effects  on  market  functioning  and  price  formation
(such as the issuer limit and the issue share limit of 33%).
Turning  to  another  area  of  public  policy,  our  actions  also  have  a  notable  financial  stability
dimension  because  of  the  implications  of  financial  stability  risks  for  monetary  policy
transmission.  In  the  course  of  the  crisis,  the  incompleteness  of  the  European  institutional
architecture  meant  that  in  some  instances  the  ECB  had  to  act  in  order  to  maintain  orderly
financial  conditions.  Institutional  developments  since  then  have  improved  the  conditions  for
financial  stability.  The  creation  of  a  permanent  crisis-resolution  framework  for  Member  States
facing financial difficulties (the European Stability Mechanism (ESM)) and the establishment of
banking union, in particular the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and the Single Resolution
Mechanism (SRM), have been critical steps in that direction.
All our measures were designed and deployed in order to fulfil our narrowly defined price stability
mandate. We did not take action to help banks or governments. We took action to help maintain
the flow of credit to firms and households. We took action to provide monetary stimulus in the
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
face of persistently weak inflation. Taking decisions using unconventional instruments has not
been easy. It has always been a difficult balancing act, based on a careful assessment of the
merits of all possible policy choices in view of our mandate. Not taking action would have been
irresponsible and tantamount to deflecting our singular responsibility for price stability.
Conclusions
Unconventional  policies  have  been  complicated  to  implement  and  to  communicate.  But  they
have  been  effective  in  enhancing  our  ability  to  deliver  on  our  price  stability  mandate.  Our
measures have been designed to complement each other. They have proved both effective and
adaptable  in  the  face  of  a  series  of  adverse  developments  that  have  affected  the  euro  area
economy.
Going back to the type of concerns once expressed by Max Weber, I would say that we are not
subject to a conflict between the values and merits of means and those of ultimate policy goals.
The ECB’s institutional framework continues to safeguard congruence between instruments and
goals. It ensures that central bank instruments are used only in the pursuit of the central bank’s
narrow price stability objective, and not of other public policy goals.
Our non-standard measures have been designed in such a way that they cannot compensate for
failures  in  other  policy  areas.  They  have  made  a  crucial  contribution  to  preserving  the  very
favourable  financing  conditions  that  are  supporting  the  economic  upturn  and  the  sustained
adjustment in the inflation path towards our aim.
The  euro  area  economy,  including  the  public  sector,  currently  benefits  from  very  low  interest
rates. It is important for everyone to realise that our monetary policy decisions are only guided by
our price stability mandate. In the light of this, fiscal authorities and borrowers in the euro area
should be long-sighted enough and plan sufficiently ahead to prepare themselves for the time
when it will be appropriate for us to start a gradual process of policy normalisation.
In using novel instruments to reach our goal, we have been mindful of the principle that, while
“instrument independence” is critical for us to be able to deliver on our Treaty mandate, it does
not  excuse  us  from  basing  our  choices  on  the  law  and  on  economic  effectiveness.  In  this
respect,  we  have  been  striving  for  two  other  important  public  policy  virtues,  also  famously
highlighted  by  Max  Weber: Augenmaß  und  Verantwortungsgefühl (which  I  would  translate  as
prudence and sense of responsibility). In designing our instruments, we implemented provisions
and safeguards ensuring prudence. In deciding to act, in lieu of letting events march on, we took
responsibility for our price stability mandate.
By  ensuring  price  stability,  monetary  policy  creates  one  of  the  conditions  for  a  thriving  social
market economy. Monetary policy alone, however, cannot ensure prosperity. Sound economic
policies are indispensable to unlocking the sources of employment and growth in Economic and
Monetary Union. Member States need to live up to their joint responsibility for the stability of the
euro area and step up their efforts to conduct fiscal and economic policies in a way that supports
the smooth functioning of monetary union.
1
2
3
See Willem Buiter (2016), “Dysfunctional Central Banking; The End of Independent Central Banks or a Return to
‘Narrow  Central  Banking’  –  or  Both?”, Global  Economics  View,  Citi  Research,  21  December;  Otmar  Issing
(2016), Central Banks – From Overburdening to Decline?, SAFE White Paper Series, No 42; Jakob de Haan and
Sylvester C.W. Eijffinger (2017), Central bank independence under threat?, CEPR Policy Insight, No 87.
Max Weber was professor of economics at Heidelberg University from 1896–1903. His lecture was given in
1918  at  the  University  of  Munich  and  published  in  1919.  See  Max  Weber  (1919),  “Der  Beruf  zur  Politik”,  in
Johannes  Winckelmann  (ed.), Max Weber – Soziologie – Universalgeschichtliche Analysen – Politik, , Alfred
Kröner Verlag, 1973, pp. 167–185.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
4
5
In Germany and Austria, the banking crisis was precipitated by the collapse of DANAT bank and Creditanstalt in
1931.
See  Barry  Eichengreen  (1992), Golden  Fetters:  The  Gold  Standard  and  the  Great  Depression,  1919–1939,
Oxford University Press.
Milton Friedman (1963), Inflation: Causes and Consequences, Asian Publishing House.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
