Urjit R Patel: Agricultural debt waiver - efficacy and limitations
Opening remarks by Dr Urjit R Patel, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Seminar on
"Agricultural Debt Waiver - Efficacy and Limitations", Mumbai, 31 August 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 On behalf of the Reserve Bank of India, I warmly welcome you and thank you for accepting our
invitation to join us today in this seminar.
1.  In  the  recent  period,  farm  loan  waivers  have  engaged  intense  attention  among  the  farming
community, policy makers, academics, analysts and researchers. On the one hand, there is a
gamut  of  issues  that  have  intensified  the  anguish  of  our  farmers.  In  this  context,  farm  loan
waivers have brought forward the urgency of designing lasting solutions to the structural malaise
that affects Indian agriculture. On the other, there are concerns about the macroeconomic and
financial  implications,  how  long  they  will  persist  in  impacting  the  economy,  the  possible
distortions that they could confront public policies with, and the ultimate incidence of the financial
burden.
2. Let me, in a modest way, try to eclectically address both sides of the debate. India's agrarian
economy is the source of around 15 percent of GDP, 11 per cent of our exports and provides
livelihood to about half of India's population. The importance of the sector from a macroeconomic
perspective is also reflected in a significant flow of bank credit to finance agricultural and allied
activities relative to other sectors of the economy. Outstanding bank advances to agriculture and
allied  activities  have  risen  from  about  13  per  cent  of  GDP  originating  in  agriculture  and  allied
activities  in  2000-01  to  around  53  per  cent  in  2016-17  (Chart  1).  In  real  terms  (adjusted  for
inflation  measured  by  the  GDP  deflator),  the  growth  of  bank  credit  to  agriculture  and  allied
activities accelerated from 2.6 per cent in the 1990s to 15.4 per cent during 2000-01 to 2016-17.
3.  Much  of  this  credit  flow  has  been  propelled  by  the  policy  thrust  on  expanding  credit  to
agriculture, especially through priority sector lending (PSL) stipulations. Public sector banks and
private  banks  are  required  to  lend  18  per  cent  of  annual  net  bank  credit  (ANBC)  or  credit
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
equivalent amounts of off-balance sheet exposures, whichever is higher, to agriculture. Under
this carve-out, 8 per cent is prescribed for small and marginal farmers. Even foreign banks with
20 branches and above have to achieve this target within a maximum period of five years starting
from  April  1,  2013  and  ending  on  March  31,  2018.  The  share  of  outstanding  advances  to
agriculture and allied activities in total priority sector advances has increased from 32.5 per cent
in 2000-01 to 43.2 per cent in 2016-17 (Chart 2). Thus, without exaggeration, it is safe to say that
financial flows to agriculture have been generous.
4. The Government has also undertaken several measures to compensate for the adverse terms
of  trade  and  the  inert  institutional  architecture  confronting  agriculture  in  order  to  improve  the
profitability of crop production. The Interest Subvention Scheme has been running for a decade
under which banks and cooperative institutions extend short term crop loans of up to   3 lakh to
farmers at a concessional rate of 7 per cent. Timely repayment is incentivised by an additional
subvention of 3 per cent. The scheme also encompasses other benefits, including post-harvest
loans for storage in accredited warehouses against Negotiable Warehouse Receipts (NWRs) for
upto  six  months  for  Kisan  Credit  Card  (KCC)  holding  small  and  marginal  farmers  at  a
concessional  rate  of  7  per  cent  in  order  to  avoid  distress  sales.  During  2017-18,  the  Central
Government will provide interest subvention of 5 per cent per annum to all prompt payee farmers
for short term crop loans of up to one year. Many farmers will thus have to effectively pay only 4
per cent as interest on loans contracted from these institutions. In case farmers do not repay the
crop loans in time, they would still be eligible for interest subvention of 2 per cent. On June 14,
2017 the Government earmarked a sum of   20,339 crore for this purpose for 2017-18 as against
the provision of   15,000 crore originally made in the Union Budget (Table 1). During 2016-17, the
volume of short term crop loan lent stood at   6,22,685 crore, surpassing the target of   6,15,000
crore.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
6. Despite the sizeable volume of subsidised and directed credit flows as well as the various
fiscal incentives, Indian agriculture is beset with deep seated distortions that render it vulnerable
to  high  volatility.  It  has  perennially  been  characterised  by  low  investment,  archaic  irrigation
practices,  monsoon  dependence,  fragmentation  of  land  holdings  and  low  level  of  technology.
Lack of property rights and low initial net worth of farmers add to the constraints. Consequently,
considerable  flux  in  output  and  prices  is  common,  imposing  large  losses  on  farmers  and
potentially imprisoning them in a circle of indebtedness with disturbing frequency. Therefore, in
the absence of coordinated and sustained efforts to put in place elements of a virtuous cycle of
upliftment,  loan  waivers  have  periodically  emerged  as  a  quick  fix  to  ease  farmers’  distress.5.
Earlier, the Union Budget 2014-15 had put in place a scheme under which five lakh Joint Liability
Groups of ‘Bhoomi Heen Kisan’ (landless farmers) will be financed through the NABARD in order
to augment flow of credit to landless farmers cultivating land as tenant farmers, oral lessees or
share  croppers  and  small/marginal  farmers  as  well  as  other  poor  individuals  taking  up  farm
activities,  off-farm  activities  and  non-farm  activities.  The  experience  of  catalysing  bank  credit
flows  to  agriculture  and  expanding  the  panoply  of  subventions  begs  the  question:  Are  we
substituting  credit  for  other  policy  interventions?  Indeed,  this  issue  prompted,  in  2014,  RBI’s
Expert Committee to Revise and Strengthen the Monetary Policy Framework to recommend a
revisit of the need for subventions on interest rates for lending to agriculture.
7. A brief history of farm loan waivers in India may be in order. The first major nationwide farm
loan waiver was undertaken in 1990 and the cost to the national exchequer was around   10,000
crores, which works out to   50,557 crores at current prices using the GDP deflator. The second
major waiver was under the agricultural debt waiver and debt relief scheme (ADWD) of 2008
amounting to   52,000 crores (0.9 per cent of GDP) or   81,264 crores at current prices using the
GDP deflator. Unlike the 1990 scheme that aimed at providing blanket relief to all farmers up to a
certain loan amount, the 2008 scheme waived debt for certain classes of cultivators . In 2014,
Andhra  Pradesh  and  Telangana  announced  farm  loan  waiver  of    24,000  crores  and    17,000
crores, respectively. Beginning with Tamil Nadu in 2016, domino effects have spread in 2017 to
several states and the total cost of loan waivers announced amounts to around   1,30,000 crores
(0.8  per  cent  of  GDP).  I  am  sure  that  the  proceedings  today  will  dwell  upon  the  details
characterising each scheme. Therefore, I will move on.
1
8.  The  pros  and  cons  of  agricultural  debt  relief  have  been  widely  debated  and  literature  has
evolved around the theme. Alongside beneficial effects in terms of clearing the debt overhang of
farm households, negative side effects in the form of faulty targeting of beneficiaries and resulting
discrimination, incentivising wilful defaulters, and erosion of credit discipline have been cited. I
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
am pleased to note that several luminaries driving the evolution of these ideas are present here
today. Rather than attempting an uninformed evaluation, I am personally looking forward to the
guidance of experts present here on various issues that intermingle around the subject.
9. Let me now turn to the other side of debate - the implications for macroeconomic conditions
and policies. The first impact of any loan waiver is on the balance sheet of lending institutions, be
they  formal  or  informal.  This  is  inherent  in  the  inevitable  lags,  in  the  timing  of  impact  and  the
arrival  of  compensation  from  the  government.  In  this  interregnum,  the  quality  of  assets
deteriorates  and  bridge  provisions  crowd  out  new  loans.  In  the  second  round,  loan  waivers
impact the state of public finances in the form of higher than budgeted revenue expenditure. This,
in turn, has to be financed by additional market borrowings which pushes up interest rates, not
just for the States but for the entire economy. A collateral damage is that private borrowers are
crowded out of the finite pool of investible resources as the cost of borrowing rises. Even if the
loan waiver is accommodated within budgetary provisions, it will force cutbacks in other heads of
expenditure. Experience has shown that the most vulnerable category is capital expenditure. In
turn,  this  will  entail  deterioration  in  the  quality  of  expenditure  and  inter  alia  lead  to  adverse
implications  for  productivity  as  asset  forming  investment,  including  for  the  sector  itself  -  e.g.,
irrigation works, cold storage chains etc., - is foregone. If capital/infrastructural constraints are
binding,  a  reduction  in  capital  expenditure  for  the  sector  that  would  have  benefitted  from  this
expenditure could even be inflationary as costs - including time value/opportunity cost of delays
and material damages - go up as a result of capacity constraints becoming even more acute and
attendant “congestion charges”. If, on the other hand, budgetary provisions are exceeded, higher
spending  and  widening  of  the  fiscal  deficit  have,  as  experience  has  shown,  inflationary
consequences,  and  possible  spillovers  that  could  undermine  external  viability  (the  twin  deficit
argument). Also,  research  points  to  adverse  welfare  effects  because,  ultimately,  loan  waivers
involve a transfer of resources from tax payers to borrowers. Consumption redistribution effects
have also been reported.
10.  As  you  would  have  noted  from  these  initial  remarks,  farm  loan  waivers  have  stirred  up
considerable passion and polarised opinions. While in no way detracting from the acute distress
that farmers face with every disruption in crop cycles, it is important to recognise that there are
externalities that spill over beyond the farm sector. Eventually, other economic agents and other
parts of the economy get affected. How can these spill overs be minimised? How do we defray
the incidence of the burden on tax payers? From a policy perspective, what needs to be done to
move away from palliatives in the form of debt relief and into a more fundamental solution that
enhances  welfare  all  around?  Many  elements  of  this  optimal  approach  are  well  known  -  crop
insurance, infrastructure, irrigation, technology-enabled productivity improvements, and, opening
up the farm economy to market forces and open trade. The Government’s initiative to establish a
nation-wide  market  for  agricultural  produce,  through  eNAM,  the  Pradhan  Mantri  Fasal  Bima
Yojana, the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana, the Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana and the
national  drive  towards  financial  inclusion  for  all  are  important  initiatives  in  this  direction.  The
coming  to  fruition  of  these  initiatives  holds  the  potential  of  achieving  the  mission  of  doubling
farmers’  income  over  time.  We  need  to  ensure  that  their  benefits  percolate  down  to  all  the
intended recipients.
11. I will refrain from either prejudging or influencing the rich discussions that are expected to
occupy  your  minds  during  the  rest  of  the  day.  I  am  sure  that  amidst  the  heat  and  dust,  this
seminar will shine light on the multi-faceted discourse on farm loan waivers. So I will stop here
and wish you all success in your deliberations.
1
The 2008 scheme waived debt by classes of cultivators whereby small and marginal farmers (that is, farmers
holding up to one to two hectares of land) received a full waiver of all loans overdue, while other farmers were
given a one-time settlement – rebate of 25 per cent against the payment of the balance 75 per cent.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
