Benoît  Cœuré:  Dissecting 
perspective
Welcome remarks by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the annual meeting of the ECB’s Bond Market Contact Group, Frankfurt am Main, 16
May 2017.
the  yield  curve  –  central  bank
Ladies and gentlemen,
 Let  me  welcome  you  again  and  thank  you  for  coming  to  Frankfurt  to  share  your  views  and
1
insights with us.
As you might know, just a few weeks ago I gave a speech  in Paris that addressed possible spill-
overs from the repo market to the government bond market – a topic that you also discussed
today and where I believe further work is needed to develop our understanding and guide policy
deliberations.
2
In  my  remarks  this  evening  I  would  like  to  address  a  different  topic,  but  one  that  is  no  less
important:  how  central  banks  interpret  yield  curve  movements,  and  how  this  process  might
influence our monetary policy considerations.
Policy actions and the yield curve
Let me start by clarifying what I mean by “yield curve”.
This is not a trivial discussion in a currency union with 19 different yield curves. Among these, we
generally  consider  that  two  curves  in  particular  provide  us  with  insight  and  inform  our  policy
decisions: the overnight index swaps (OIS) curve and the Bund curve, as these have become
3
widely accepted proxies for risk-free yields in the euro area.  As such, they serve as the bedrock
for pricing virtually all credit products and related derivatives.
These  curves  are  vital  for  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  as  they  have  a  significant
influence on broad asset valuations and the pricing of bank loans and, ultimately, they affect the
investment and saving decisions of households and firms.
This means that we need to understand – as much as you do – what drives changes in these
curves, so we can draw correct inferences regarding the appropriateness of our monetary policy
stance.  This  has  become  all  the  more  important  in  an  environment  where  central  banks  no
longer only control very short-term policy rates but also influence long-term yields through asset
purchases.
In other words, we need to make a quantitative distinction as to what part of a given change in the
yield curve is likely due to policy itself – our actions and often also our words – and what part is
due to other factors, such as spillovers from abroad or improved growth expectations.
A natural starting point for such an analysis is the use of dynamic term structure models that
divide yields into two key components – an expectations component and a term premium.
The  expectations  component  reflects  the  average  of  current  and  future  expected  short-term
rates over the maturity of the bond. If the pure expectations hypothesis of the term structure were
to hold, this would be all that mattered in terms of explaining movements in long-term rates.
But broad empirical evidence suggests that the pure expectations hypothesis fails to hold true in
practice, and that there is indeed a time-varying premium that investors require in order to hold a
 1 / 6
4
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
long-term bond instead of simply rolling over a series of short-term bonds.
Monetary policy – and there we are increasingly certain – cannot only influence the expectations
component, but also the term premium.
Three examples demonstrate this more clearly.
First, by changing our key policy rates, we can directly impact the short end of the curve – the
footing of the expectations component. In normal times, medium to long-term rates would adjust
to the extent that market participants would see a change in policy rates as the beginning of an
incremental series of changes.
But with short-term policy rates approaching levels closer to zero during the early phases of the
most recent easing cycle, this channel had become less effective. Markets – in the belief that
rates could not enter negative territory – stopped short of pricing in the degree of accommodation
they would normally have expected in the face of downside risks to our price stability mandate.
Our decision in June 2014 to introduce negative deposit facility rates restored our ability to steer
market  expectations  and  thereby  also  medium  to  long-term  rates.  Indeed,  by  signalling  to  the
market that policy rates could go below zero, we ultimately succeeded in shifting downwards the
entire  distribution  of  future  expected  short-term  rates,  thereby  providing  important  additional
5
accommodation.
Second,  and  related,  by  communicating  about  where  we  see  the  economy  heading,  and  by
clarifying  our  ‘reaction  function’  –  that  is,  by  providing  forward  guidance  –  we  can  directly
influence expectations regarding future short-term rates.
Forward guidance has served us well and has contributed to keeping the short to medium end of
the yield curve well anchored at times when external shocks were threatening to unduly tighten
financial conditions.
I will come back to this in a minute. But to the extent that forward guidance reduced uncertainty
about the future path of interest rates, it has not only affected the expectations component but
also the term premium.
Yet, the main channel through which we – and other major central banks – have recently exerted
measurable downward pressure on the term premium, and this is my third example, is through
asset purchases. We now have a growing body of evidence that suggests that central banks can
lower long-term rates by removing duration risk from the market.
For example, according to ECB estimates, our monetary policy measures have contributed to
reducing euro-area long-term risk-free rates by around 80 basis points since June 2014.  Asset
purchases have contributed significantly to this drop and have therefore been an indispensable
tool  to  create  the  financial  conditions  necessary  for  inflation  to  move  back  towards  levels
consistent with price stability.
An assessment of recent long-term yield dynamics
6
So, you can now easily see that the increased use of non-standard measures also meant that
there  was  a  pressing  need  to  upgrade  our  internal  analytical  toolkit.  Standard  term  structure
models alone were no longer sufficient.
We needed to broaden our set of models to also capture the effects that changes in the amount
of  bonds  available  for  private  investors  would  have  on  the  term  premium. And  we  needed  to
refine our event study methodologies and make use of other models and tools, with a view to
developing  our  understanding  of  the  extent  to  which  our  actions  are  reflected  in  yield
7
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
movements.
Put differently, these efforts were necessary in order to map (expected) purchases in billions of
euro  into  long-term  yields  in  basis  points  that  would  help  the  Governing  Council  calibrate  the
pace and size of our purchases.
The residual movement in rates – subject of course to the general large uncertainty one faces
when relying on model-based analysis – would then be due to other forces largely outside our
direct control. These include, for instance, spillovers from other major economies, flight-to-quality
related movements into safe assets, or changes in investors’ outlook for growth and inflation.
And as central bankers we also need to carefully disentangle those residual driving forces to help
us understand the possible implications for our policy stance.
Let me give you a simple example: an unexpected increase in long-term rates. This is neither
good nor bad, per se, from a monetary policy perspective. The implications for monetary policy
depend, crucially, on the sources of this movement.
For  example,  if  the  increase  reflects  a  re-pricing  based  on  better  current  or  prospective
economic  conditions,  this  would  not  be  a  source  of  concern  for  policy  makers.  However,  if  it
were induced by markets overreacting to news or misunderstanding our policy intentions, this
increase would be undesirable from a policy perspective.
It also matters for policymakers whether movements in nominal yields are driven by their real or
inflation components, in particular at longer maturities. And changes in the inflation component, in
turn, do not necessarily signal changes in expected inflation – they may also reflect changes to
the inflation risk premium as I will explain in a minute.
The  academic  literature  has  come  up  with  a  range  of  techniques  that  we  can  draw  from  to
8
separate these unobservable underlying driving factors from observable yield movements.
However, unlike academic studies that have the luxury of looking at past events over extended
periods  to  distinguish  certain  patterns  and  develop  convincing  economic  stories,  we  have  to
make such judgements in real time.
Let me illustrate this by focusing on the repricing in bond markets that started around the end of
September last year.
By that time, the ten-year OIS rate had reached a low point of slightly below zero. Since then –
and looking through the occasional ups and downs – it has risen by about 65 basis points.
At face value, such tightening of financial conditions looks inconsistent with the stance required
to bring inflation back to levels closer to 2%.
But the set of models currently in use by ECB staff generally tell one consistent story: for the
most part, the steepening of yield curves over the past few months reflects an overall benign
increase in the term premium – only around a quarter of the change in yields reflect changes in
the  expected  future  policy  path.  By  and  large  this  is  also  what  we  have  seen  in  other  major
economies, in particular in the US.
We think two factors can mainly account for this. First, a decomposition of euro-based inflation-
linked swap rates points to a measurable increase in the compensation for inflation risk from
historically  low  and  probably  negative  levels.  So,  from  this  angle,  the  increase  in  the  term
premium is likely to reflect a pricing out of deflationary tail risks. This in itself is certainly good
news.
The second factor that is likely to have added to the increase in the term premium is uncertainty,
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
mainly  coming  from  outside  the  euro  area.  One  reason  might  be  that  although  markets  have
generally become more optimistic about global growth prospects – buttressed by the undeniable
upswing in the global business cycle – they may have also become less certain about the future
course of fiscal policy in some jurisdictions as well as about other policies, including trade and
regulation.  This,  in  turn,  may  increase  uncertainty  about  future  duration  supply,  impacting  the
term premium.
Uncertainty,  by  and  of  itself,  is  undesirable.  But  to  the  extent  that  the  increase  in  the  term
premium  likely  reflected  a  reassessment  of  global  economic  conditions  after  a  long  period  of
subdued  macroeconomic  expectations  –  as  also  reflected  in  the  adjustment  of  inflation  risk
premia – it may not constitute an unwarranted tightening.
The  role  of  foreign  factors  in  driving  euro  area  yields  becomes  clearer  when  considering  the
indications from another class of models: researchers at the IMF have developed a simple yet
powerful  methodology  to  identify  yield  curve  drivers  using  cross-asset  correlations  involving
9
stock, bond and exchange markets.
And these models confirm – as you can see from the chart in front of you – that the bulk of the
increase  in  euro  area  long-term  yields  initially  came  from  shocks  originating  from  outside  the
euro area – the green part.
You can also see, however, that after the first initial sharp upward movement in yields following
the US presidential elections, it was increasingly an improvement in euro area domestic growth
prospects  that  contributed  to  upward  pressure  on  yields.  You  can  see  this  reflected  in  the
increasing contribution of the yellow component in the chart.
But  what  is  even  more  important  is  that  during  this  period,  and  despite  stronger  global  and
domestic growth prospects, expectations regarding our monetary policy have, on balance, had a
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
stabilising effect on yields, according to our analysis. This is the blue part in the chart, which you
can see shifted into negative territory after our decision in early December to extend the intended
horizon of the APP by another nine months.
In  other  words,  market  participants  understood  our  reaction  function  and  agreed  with  our
assessment in December last year that the absence of a sustained adjustment in the path of
inflation warranted continued monetary accommodation.
Conclusion
This implies, and with this I would like to conclude, that the recent measurable increase in long-
term  yields  has  not  affected  our  monetary  policy  stance:  current  financial  conditions  remain
highly supportive of the ongoing recovery.
However, and this is what I wanted to convey in my short remarks this evening, identifying the
drivers of yield curve movements in real time is a challenging task. For this reason, we look at a
wide range of information and models to obtain a robust assessment. This also means that we
don’t want to over-interpret any uptick or downtick that we observe, but rather accept as a fact
that some volatility is natural and healthy for the market to function.
At the same time, we don’t want to contribute to that volatility ourselves. This is why we try to
carefully explain the strategy underlying our actions and the resulting contingent plans. This is
especially important when we are in uncharted territory with negative interest rates and asset
purchase programmes.
I am convinced that clear and time-consistent communication on our part will avoid unwarranted
volatility in financial markets and help preserve the financial conditions necessary for inflation to
reach levels closer to 2% in the medium term.
Thank you for your attention and “guten Appetit”.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
I would like to thank W. Lemke and A. Saint-Guilhem for their contributions to this speech. I remain solely
responsible for the opinions contained herein.
 Cœuré, B. (2017), “Bond scarcity and the ECB’s asset purchase programme”, Speech at the Club de Gestion
Financière d’Associés en Finance, Paris, 3 April 2017.
 See also ECB (2014), “Euro area risk-free interest rates: measurement issues, recent developments and
relevance to monetary policy”, Monthly Bulletin, July 2014.
 In principle the term premium can be positive or negative. Empirical studies find that recently the term premium
has turned negative in certain regions.
 For the effect of decreasing the lower bound on the yield curve see, e.g., Rostagno, M. et al. (2016), “Breaking
through the zero line: The ECB’s Negative Interest Rate Policy”, Brookings Institution, Washington DC, 6 June
2016 (presentation available on the Brookings website) and Lemke, W. and A. Vladu (2017), “Below the zero
lower bound: a shadow-rate term structure model for the euro area”, ECB Working Paper No 1991.
 See also ECB (2017), “Impact of the ECB’s non-standard measures on financing conditions: taking stock of
recent evidence”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 2/2017; and Praet, P. (2017), “Calibrating unconventional monetary
policy”, Speech at the ECB and Its Watchers Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 6 April 2017.
 See, e.g., Altavilla, C., G. Carboni and R. Motto (2015) “Asset purchase programmes and financial markets:
lessons from the euro area”, ECB Working Paper No 1864; Andrade, P., J. Breckenfelder, F. De Fiore, P. Karadi
and O. Tristani (2016), “The ECB’s asset purchase programme: an early assessment”, ECB Working Paper No
1956; and Blattner, T. and M. Joyce (2016), “Net debt supply shocks in the euro area and the implications for
QE”, ECB Working Paper No 1957.
 See, e.g. Joslin, S., K. J. Singleton and H. Zhu (2011), “A new perspective on Gaussian dynamic term structure
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
models”, Review of Financial Studies, vol. 24; and Abrahams, M., T. Adrian, R. K., Crump, E. Moench and R. Yu
(2016), “Decomposing real and nominal yield curves”, Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 84.
9
 See Matheson, T. and E. Stavrev (2014), “News and Monetary Shocks at a High Frequency: A Simple Approach”,
IMF Working Paper 167.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
