      December  4,  2017 
B ank  o f   Japa n 
Innovation and the Future of Finance 
Remarks at the Paris EUROPLACE Financial Forum in Tokyo 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
 I. Paris International Expositions in the 19th Century -- Exploring the Future through 
New Technologies -- 
It is a great honor to have the opportunity to give a speech at the Paris Europlace Financial 
Forum today. 
 Nowadays,  rapid  innovation  in  information  technology  is  significantly  changing  financial 
services, and even the economy and society as a whole. It seems that people are thrilled to 
watch, with hope and a little anxiety, how such innovation will change the world landscape 
and affect the role of human beings. 
 Similarly,  there  was  a  time  in  the  past  when  people  had  strong  interest  in  how  new 
technologies  would  change  the  future.  Particularly  in  the  late  19th  century,  with  the 
development  of  heavy  industry,  the  popularization  of  electricity,  and  mass  production  of 
new  materials  such  as  iron  and  glass,  people  wondered  how  such  technological  progress 
would change the economy and society. During that period, Paris hosted international expos 
as  many  as  five  times.  These  expos  presented  prospects  of  the  20th  century  that  new 
technologies could open up, and brought these technologies closer to ordinary people. 
 Indeed, many major structures using new materials and construction methods were built at 
the time of these expos, namely, la tour Eiffel, la Gare d'Orsay, le Pont Alexandre III, and le 
Grand  Palais.  They  continue  to  be  symbolic  landmarks  of  Paris  today.  Moreover,  very 
interestingly, Bordeaux wine classification was also introduced at the 1855 Paris Expo, and 
it  seems  that  creating  such  a  "database"  has  helped  French  wines  become  the  world's 
leading brand. 
 The  Paris  Metro  was  also  opened  during  the  1900  Paris  Expo.  The  subway  has  played  a 
major  role  in  urban  transportation  systems  since  the  early  20th  century.  I  am  particularly 
attracted by the Art Nouveau decorations at the entrances of the Paris Metro. Art Nouveau 
widely  adopted  new  materials  such  as  iron  and  glass,  combined  with  the  delicate  artistic 
sense of human beings, and created a path for the future of fine art and architecture. 
  1 
 II. Innovation in Information Technology and FinTech 
Undoubtedly, the Paris Expos in the late 19th century presented "visions" and "prospects" of 
how  science  and  technology  could  lead  to  economic  and  social  development  and  improve 
people's daily life in a wide range of fields, such as urban architecture, transportation, and 
fine art. They thereby contributed to the broad application of science and technology in the 
20th century.   
 I  believe  we  can  also  make  use  of  such  historical  analogies  for  maximizing  the  value  of 
on-going  rapid  innovation  in  information  technologies.  If  many  people  could  share  the 
visions  and  prospects  as  to  how  these  new  technologies  could  contribute  to  making  the 
world better and what they could bring to our daily life,  the benefits would be substantial. 
Namely, we can intimately feel the benefits of new information technologies and cope with 
the associated anxiety through sharing these visions  and prospects. If so, it would become 
easier to facilitate collaboration among various entities in applying these new technologies 
to improve financial services and develop the economy.   
 In  this  regard,  application  of  new  information  technology  toward  financial  innovation, 
called  "FinTech,"  will  present  the  following  visions  or  prospects  that  will  open  up  the 
frontiers of financial services. I would like to encourage wide-ranging stakeholders to make 
efforts to realize them. 
 First, FinTech will facilitate the delivery of financial services customized to suit individual 
users  around  the  world.  More  specifically,  in  emerging  and  developing  economies,  where 
financial  infrastructure  such  as  bank  branches  and ATMs  are  underdeveloped,  the  Internet 
and  smartphones  are  spreading  very  rapidly.  In  these  countries,  FinTech  enables  the 
provision of  financial services by using the  Internet and smartphones  as new access tools. 
Therefore,  emerging  and  developing  economies  are  eager  to  promote  FinTech  in  order  to 
accelerate "financial inclusion." Moreover, big data and artificial intelligence (AI) makes it 
possible to customize financial services in accordance with the needs of individual users. 
 Second,  FinTech  will  contribute  to  increasing  the  efficiency  of  financial  operations  and 
services  and  raising  productivity  through  the  application  of  information  technology. 
 2 
 FinTech  also  has  the  potential  to  create  new  networks  between  financial  services  and 
wide-ranging  industries,  such as  the  Internet  of  things  (IoT),  e-commerce,  and  the  sharing 
economy.  By  fostering  the  development  of  new  sources  of  growth,  FinTech  could 
contribute  to  boosting  growth  potential  through  enhancing  productivity,  which  is  now  a 
common policy challenge to developed countries. 
 Furthermore,  FinTech  will  improve  our  daily  life  and  address  various  social  challenges 
from  the  financial  aspect.  For  example,  as  population  is  aging  in  Japan  and  many  other 
developed  countries,  it  is  becoming  increasingly  important  to  make  financial  transactions 
easier and safer for the elderly and to protect them from fraud. In this regard, biometrics and 
AI could be effective tools. In addition, new technologies such as AI and big data analysis 
may enable rapid credit assessment and low-cost remittance services. They could facilitate 
easier access to lending and remittance services for financially vulnerable people. Moreover, 
robot  advisers  utilizing  AI  may  provide  easy-to-access  asset  management  services  with 
lower  costs,  and  thereby  promote  "the  shift  from  savings  to  investment,"  which  is  a 
long-standing policy challenge in Japan. 
 In  this  way,  FinTech  could  contribute  to  raising  growth  potential  and  addressing  social 
challenges, not only in emerging and developing economies but also in developed countries. 
On  this  basis,  major  cities  such  as  Paris  and  Tokyo  consider  FinTech  as  one  of  the  major 
driving  forces  in  the  efforts  of  promoting  financial  services  and  industries.  In  November 
2016,  the  Metropolitan  Government  of  Tokyo  established  the  "Advisory  Panel  for  Global 
Financial City Tokyo," in which a senior official of  the Bank of Japan participated.  In the 
discussion there, FinTech, as well as fostering asset management services, were considered 
core drivers for promoting financial activities in Tokyo. 
 III. Initiatives at the Bank of Japan and the Central Bank's Perspective 
The Bank of Japan is actively promoting FinTech from the standpoint of a central bank. In 
April  2016,  the  Bank  established  the  FinTech  Center  within  its  Payment  and  Settlement 
Systems Department. The Bank has also built up a Bank-wide "FinTech Network" to share 
information and expertise related to FinTech. 
  3 
 Also, the Bank has held four FinTech Forums so far. In these Forums, we have focused on 
topics  of  high  interest,  such  as  information  security,  open  innovation,  distributed  ledger 
technology (DLT), and big data. In November 2016, the University of Tokyo and the Bank 
of  Japan  held a  joint  conference  focusing  on  the  future  of  money.  Moreover,  in  April  this 
year, the Bank organized a conference on AI.   
 Furthermore, in order to gain deep understanding on new information technologies and their 
impact,  the  Bank  has  been  conducting  various  research  activities,  including  the  joint 
research  with  the  European  Central  Bank  on  DLT.  In  parallel  with  these  activities,  senior 
officials of the Bank, including myself, have been delivering speeches focusing more on IT 
innovation  and  FinTech  as  well  as  their  impact  on  finance  and  the  economy,  in  order  to 
convey the Bank's views on these issues.   
 When we try to examine the impact of FinTech on finance and the economy from a central 
bank's perspective, I think the following four points are important. 
 First, entities which provide financial services are  becoming widespread. One of the major 
characteristics  of  FinTech  is  that  various  new  players  such  as  IT  companies  and  start-ups, 
which  are  different  from  traditional  financial  institutions,  are  entering  financial  service 
businesses. It would be informative to examine how these new players could influence the 
structure  of  financial  service  provision,  financial  markets,  and  risk-sharing  among  various 
entities. From a central bank viewpoint, we need to closely monitor the impact of these new 
entrants so that new technologies will enhance the efficiency of payments, settlements, and 
financial services, while ensuring their safety and stability.   
 Second, new styles of systemic importance may emerge under the development of FinTech. 
Since  the  global  financial  crisis,  efforts  have  been  made  to  classify  big  banks  as 
systemically important financial institutions, or SIFIs, based on  factors such as the size of 
the balance sheet. Based on these efforts,  various  financial regulatory measures have been 
taken  so  that  their  systemic  importance  would  not  threaten  financial  stability.  Recently, 
however,  entities  that  provide  global  IT  platforms  to  many  entities  and  accumulate  huge 
volumes  of  big  data  have  become  increasingly  powerful  and  influential  in  wide-ranging 
 4 
 businesses including financial services. In addition, high-speed, high-frequency transactions 
in  financial  markets  are  expanding,  and  if  many  market  participants  come  to  use  similar 
algorithms  in  conducting  such  transactions,  this  might  involve  the  risk  of  amplifying 
one-way market developments. Based on these changes in environment, rather than the size 
of balance sheets of banks, factors such as global IT platforms, the huge volumes of big data, 
and widely used algorithms might become more systemically important from the viewpoint 
of financial stability. 
 Third, as the utilization of big data is becoming more important in the provision of financial 
services,  data  security,  privacy,  and  the  consensus  of  stakeholders  on  data  utilization  will 
become even more critical. Thus, financial service providers and stakeholders are required 
to pay due attention to data protection and privacy, in order to maintain public confidence in 
innovative financial services utilizing new technologies. 
 Finally,  as  application  of  AI  to  financial  operations  is  becoming  widespread,  ensuring 
governance  in  AI's  decision-making  and  accountability  to  customers  using  AI-related 
services  may  also  become  critically  important.  If  customers  are  concerned  that  AI's 
decision-making  might  turn  into  a  "black  box"  and  poses  risks  to  them,  such  customers' 
anxieties would hinder the application of AI to create innovative  financial services. In this 
regard,  efforts  to  ensure  the  governance and  accountability  of  AI  are  meaningful  to  "wipe 
out" people's concern about new technologies.   
 IV. Closing Remarks 
In  promoting  FinTech,  France  and  Japan  seem  to  have  common  challenges  as  developed 
countries. 
 In  the  case  of  emerging  and  developing  countries,  basic  financial  services  are 
underdeveloped,  and  market  growth  can  be  expected  to  a  certain  extent,  simply  by 
introducing  and  promoting  these  basic  services.  On  the  other  hand,  both  in  France  and 
Japan, basic financial services are already embedded in people's daily life. Thus, in order to 
make FinTech bloom in these countries, it is strongly needed to create innovative financial 
services  with  high  added-value  beyond  already-available  services.  In  addition,  financial 
 5 
 institutions are required to take forward-looking measures to reform their own structures in 
order to make effective use of FinTech. Without such efforts, the countries where traditional 
financial services already prevail might lag behind in the field of FinTech. 
 In this regard, let me introduce another important aspect of the Paris Expos in the late 19th 
century.  At  that  period,  Japan  was  in  the  middle  of  a  big  transition  phase,  from  the  Edo 
period to the Meiji era. Nonetheless, Japan very actively participated in the Paris Expos. It 
seems to me that Japanese people, who were in the midst of a big historical turning point, 
were  driven  by  their  strong  motivation  to  learn  as  much  as  possible  from  European 
countries, which were already the most industrially-advanced countries in the world. I feel 
that  Japanese  people  really  wanted to  obtain  prospects  for  the  future and  to  gain  clues  for 
reform.  At  the  same  time,  many  ukiyo-e  prints  were  brought  to  France  from  Japan.  The 
interaction between Western and Oriental arts and  the consequent "chemical reactions" led 
to  the creation  of  new  fine  arts,  namely,  Japonisme  and  Impressionism,  which  remarkably 
incorporate both Western and Oriental cultural backgrounds. 
 These  histories  vividly  illustrate  that  interactive  dialogue,  which  is  sometimes  carried  out 
across borders, and chemical reactions brought by cross-cultural exchange play critical roles 
in innovative creation. Needless to say, both  France and Japan have their own history and 
culture, and are now playing leading roles in science and technology. I firmly believe that it 
is  extremely  beneficial  for  these  two  countries  to  strengthen  dialogue  also  in  the  areas  of 
financial innovation and FinTech. 
 The Bank of Japan would like to further deepen exchanges with the Banque de France on 
financial innovation and FinTech. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
  6 
