Erkki Liikanen: Finland, UK and the European Union
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the "A Century of Political and
Trading Links between Finland and Britain 1917-2017: a Celebration Conference", organised by
the Anglo-Finnish Society and the Finnish-British Chamber of Commerce, London, 27 October
2017.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 It is a great honour and pleasure for me to address this conference on A Century of Political and
Trading Links between Finland and the UK. I thank you for the invitation.
This occasion is even more significant because the economic and political relationship between
our countries is undergoing a deep change, the content of which is yet uncertain. In this kind of
juncture, it is useful to see things in a larger perspective. So, let me start with some remarks on
the early years of Finnish independence and follow the development of our relations with Britain,
and Europe, since then.
 For Finland, as a small and newly independent nation a hundred years ago, it was of utmost
importance to develop trading links with the European markets. It was not easy because of the
protectionism that dominated international trade at the time. Difficult negotiations were required,
and the Finnish negotiating position as a small nation was not strong.
The  first  trade  agreement  between  Finland  and  the  UK  was  signed  in  1923.  It  was  very
successful by any standard. During the inter-war years, Britain became Finland’s most important
market by far, taking about half of our exports.
Finnish foreign trade during the inter-war years was so concentrated in Britain that in economic
and  financial  terms  Finland  was  clearly  in  the  British  sphere  of  influence.  From  our  side,  the
relationship was based on Finnish exports of newsprint and other forest industry products to the
UK.
As a consequence of the trade links, the links were also close in monetary policy. In the 1920’s,
for example, Finland followed the UK to the gold standard, and again followed the UK out when it
had to leave the gold standard during the European currency crisis of 1931.
After the Great Depression, the Finnish markka was stabilized by linking it – to the pound sterling,
of course. There was a fixed rate of 227 markkaa to the pound from 1933 up to the outbreak of
the Second World War. Throughout the inter-war years, the Governor of the Bank of Finland,
Risto Ryti developed a close relationship with the great Montagu Norman, his counterpart at
the Bank of England.
***
After  the  Second  World  War,  the  reconstruction  of  Europe  started.  The Marshall  Plan  was
launched in 1947 and played a major role in these efforts. The Soviet Union considered the Plan
as an attempt to interfere in the internal affairs of the participating states and refused the plan.
For political reasons, Finland too was forced to stay outside.
This had major consequences.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Besides  losing  the  important  financial  benefits  of  the  Plan,  Finland  also  could  not  join  the
Organization for European Economic Cooperation (OEEC). As a result, it had to stay outside the
European  Payments  Union  (EPU),  which  made  the  Western  European  currencies  mutually
convertible in the 1950s.
In  the  face  of  such  restrictions,  the  participation  in  other  forms  of  multilateral  economic
integration  was  seen  as  even  more  vital  in  Finland.  Before  the  relations  between  the
superpowers deteriorated further, Finland used the window of opportunity in 1947 and early 1948
to join both the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT). Even Sweden joined the IMF more than three years later than Finland.
In April 1948, the Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance between Finland and
the Soviet Union was signed and it set up the framework for the Finnish relations to the Soviet
Union and sometimes even beyond that for about 40 years.
Winston Churchill had given his famous speech in Zurich on ‘a kind of United States of Europe',
already in September 1946. As a first step, he called the creation of a Council of Europe. This
speech launched many initiatives. One of them was a Congress of Europe in The Hague in
May 1948.
The Congress of Europe was attended by a great number of leading European politicians and
statesmen,  among  them Konrad Adenauer  from  West  Germany  and  three  former  French
prime  ministers, Paul Renaud, Éduard Daladier  and Paul Ramadier. From the UK, Winston
Churchill  naturally  was  there  but  also Harold Macmillan,  and Sir  Maxwell  –  Fyfe,  who  had
become famous during the Nuremberg trials.
I participated in the 50th anniversary event of the Congress of Europe in 1998. Peter Mandelson
spoke on behalf of the UK Government. I tried to find out if any Finn had been present 50 years
before. I found the list of participants. Not one was on that list. But on the list of observers, there
was one Finn, Hjalmar J. Procopé, a former minister of foreign affairs. Unfortunately, as later
research tells, he was only invited, but in the end even he did not attend. His friends advised him
not to go. This story tells how far Finland was from the European discussion at the time.
So  it  was  no  surprise  that  Finland  was  not  among  the  founding  members  of  the  Council  of
Europe in May 1949. Actually, Finland did not join the Council of Europe before 1989.
Early in the 1950’s, the European Coal and Steel Union was founded at the initiative of Robert
Schuman,  former  French  prime  minister  and  was  followed  by  the  EEC,  European  Economic
Community, created by the Treaty of Rome 60 years ago.
Finland´s two biggest trading partners, UK and Sweden decided to stay outside the EEC at that
time. Those countries, which in 1957 had not taken part of the Treaty of Rome, founded instead
the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) in 1960, a trade bloc of seven countries centred
around the UK, its biggest member.
The founding of EFTA was a big challenge for Finnish trade policy. The major part of the Finnish
exports went to Western Europe. The trade with Soviet Union was on the average around fifteen
per cent during the post-war period. For this reason, a major objective for Finland was again to
secure the access to the markets in Western Europe and, at that time, especially the UK.
The  UK  and  the  other  participants  agreed  that  the  Finnish  government  could  follow  the
negotiations on the EFTA agreement. However, at the demand of the British, Finland’s observers
were not allowed to be present in the negotiation room but were to be kept informed, in the first
place, through Sweden. That was the solution for Finland. We were there, but not allowed to sit
at the tables where decisions were taken.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
So,  the  UK  being  a  founding  member  of  EFTA,  Finland  negotiated  the  so-called  Fin-EFTA
agreement, which made us an associate member of EFTA in 1961 and gave us access to the
markets of the area. As a political condition, Finland gave the same trade concessions also to
the Soviet Union.
The associate membership of Finland was a delicate operation due to the suspicions in Moscow.
But  for  Finland  it  was  important  and  beneficial.  EFTA  exposed  Finnish  industries  to  more
competition  from  abroad  and  opened  new  markets  to  our  exports,  especially  in  the  UK  and
Sweden.  This  diversified  our  economy  and  started  structural  changes,  which  made  us  more
competitive in larger markets.
In some sense you can draw a parallel between the Sterling club of the 1930’s and the EFTA of
the 1960’s. Both included the UK and the Nordic countries. EFTA was of course a trade bloc
unlike the sterling club, and it was a different time, but in both instances Britain and Finland were
joined by a form of special economic relationship.
 The contacts between our countries have been frequent on many levels, including the highest. In
1963, soon after the Finnish associate membership in EFTA had been achieved, the UK Prime
Minister  Harold  Macmillan  visited  Finland.  President  Urho  Kekkonen  hosted  a  dinner  in  his
honour. In his dinner speech, Kekkonen told a story, which tested everybody´s sense of humour.
He spoke about the arrival of the British Bishop Henry in Finland. This happened more than 850
years ago for the purpose of converting our ancestors to the Christian faith.
"The attempt failed", Kekkonen stressed, “for the Bishop was killed here with an axe. But our
ancestors were not ungrateful killers. Proof of this is that they later realized the good and honest
intentions of the Bishop, and made him the patron saint of Finland. This course of events – at
least its latter part – would probably in Britain be regarded as fair play", Kekkonen told the visiting
British Prime Minister.
EFTA was seen by many as only an intermediate stage in European integration. Already in 1961,
the  British  and  Danish  applied  for  membership  in  the  EEC,  closely  followed  by  Norway.  The
neutral  EFTA  states  Sweden,  Austria  and  Switzerland  applied  for  association.  Due  to  our
geopolitical position, Finland was not able to follow the same course of action. The EEC was
seen,  already  then,  as  more  than  just  a  trade  area,  and  rightly  so.  This  political  dimension
precluded the Finnish participation at the time.
But  the  enlargement  negotiations  failed  twice  in  1963  and  1967,  mainly  due  to  the  ¨Non!¨  to
British membership by French president de Gaulle.
Meanwhile, Finland took prudent steps towards the west, and in 1968 we became a member of
the OECD, the successor to OEEC, that had been established for the delivery of Marshall Aid.
We also participated in the Nordek negotiations of 1968–70 aiming for a customs union or an
economic  community  between  the  Nordic  countries.  These  negotiations  did  not  lead  to  an
agreement.
In France, President Georges Pompidou followed de Gaulle and Edward Heath became Prime
Minister of the UK. They de-blocked the still pending issues and the EEC membership for the UK,
Ireland, Denmark and Norway was again on the table. In 1973, the UK joined the EEC together
with Ireland and Denmark.
For Finland, this was the first Brexit, then from EFTA.
Due to the importance of the British trade, this was a serious challenge, and negotiations were
begun on a free trade agreement between Finland and the EEC.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Finland and the other remaining EFTA countries were offered free trade in industrial goods. The
Soviet  attitude  towards  Finland,  however,  had  again  tightened  after  the  occupation  of
Czechoslovakia. The process leading to the free trade agreement with the EEC involved various
gestures and measures to convince the Soviet leadership that an agreement would not mean a
re-orientation in Finland’s foreign policy. The free trade agreement between Finland and the EEC
was successfully concluded in the end of 1973.
Jacques Delors became president of the European Commission in 1984 and lord Cockfield
the  vice-president  responsible  for  the  internal  market.  They  launched  a  major  project  for  the
Single  market.  It  deepened  integration  and  the  four  freedoms:  the  free  movement  of  goods,
services, labour and capital.
The follow-up question for Finland and the other EFTA members was how to guarantee access
to  the  Single  market.  The  negotiations  led  to  the  creation  of  the European  Economic Area
(EEA). The EEA included all four freedoms: the free movement of goods, services, capital and
labour, plus participation in a Cohesion Fund. At the time when the project was started, it was
supposed  that  EFTA  and  the  EEC  would  remain  separate  organizations.  But  the  world  and
Europe changed. The unification of Germany in 1990 and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in
1991 changed everything.
The EEA agreement was signed on in May 1992 but by that time, Finland had already applied for
EU  membership.  The  EEA  agreement  entered  into  force  in  January  in  1994.  This  was  the
solution for Finland for one year only.
Why did Finland apply for EU membership so soon? President Mauno Koivisto explained this
well in his speech in Parliament: We want to have a seat at the table where the decisions are
made.  We  needed  the  European  Economic Area,  but  we  also  wanted  to  have  influence.  We
wanted both access and a say.
Membership  negotiations  with  the  EC  (soon  to  be  the  EU)  lasted  over  a  year,  starting  in  the
spring  of  1993,  simultaneously  with  other  applicant  countries.  In  the  Finnish  referendum  of
October 1994, the EU membership was approved with 57 percent against 43, i.e. with a large
majority. On the 1st of January 1995, our membership entered into force – and you could say
that we were again united with Britain in the same club.
Britain  has  traditionally  been  a  supporter  of  a  wider  Europe,  and  also  we  Finns  enjoyed  the
support from the UK during our accession process. As members, we both have been strong
supporters of free trade and the Single market.
 Finland and the UK were first together in EFTA. Then the UK moved on and joined the EEC. Our
reunion in the EU took place in 1995, 22 years later, in 1995, when Finland joined.
Now, in 2017, we have been members together for another 22 years. The general assessment of
the membership in Finland is overwhelmingly positive.
I just quote two respected statesmen and thinkers from Finland.
Max Jakobson, the great Finnish diplomat and historian told his daughter Linda two years after
Finland had joined the European Union: "Listen, only during last few days I have understood that
Finland is, for the first time in her history, fully independent"
Mauno Koivisto, our late president, said at his 90th birthday dinner: "I belong to the generation
which fought for independence. Then we worked for integration in order to gain more influence.
The pessimists were wrong."
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
From 1990 onward, I followed and participated in the events as the Finnish ambassador to the
EC. The autumn of 1991 was a decisive period. Sweden had followed Austria and applied for the
EC membership. The Soviet Union was falling apart. In the UK, John Major was the new prime
minister  after  Margaret  Thatcher,  defending  British  interests  in  the  negotiations  leading  to  the
Maastricht Treaty.
I had great colleagues in the British foreign office. John Kerr was the permanent representative
then. Let me mention, that as EU commissioner from 1995 I had of course the good fortune to
cooperate  with  outstanding  individuals  from  the  UK: Leon Brittan, Neil  Kinnock,  and Chris
Patten. I have very fond memories of cooperation with them.
There  have  also  been  differences  between  our  countries’  choices  and  policies  within  the  EU.
Most  importantly,  Finland  became  an  early  member  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  in
1999,  while  the  UK  remained  outside  the  euro.  Britain  has  of  course  stayed  outside  the
Schengen Area, too, together with Ireland. To compensate for its geographic distance from the
continent, Finland has wanted to be in the institutional core.
A  word  about  central  banks:  although  Britain  never  joined  the  single  currency,  the  Bank  of
England is a member of the European System of Central Banks, where we co-operate on many
things,  even  if  not  monetary  policy.  There  and  elsewhere  I  have  had  the  opportunity  to  work
together  with  the  Bank  of  England  Governors  Mervyn  King  and  Mark  Carney.  The  Bank  of
England is an institution highly respected also by us at the ECB.
 Ladies  and  gentlemen:  We  are  now  entering  a  new  phase  in  the  economic  and  political
relationship between the UK and Finland, as the UK has decided to leave the EU.
The EU gave us -the Finns and the British – a new platform, where both countries have worked
together daily for our common interests and been like-minded on many issues. The Brexit vote in
the 2016 Referendum was a surprise and also disappointment for most Finns.
There is still a lot of uncertainty. Today, more than a year after the Brexit vote, we still don¹t know
the overall framework of our future relations. This tells much of the complexity of the situation.
But whatever is the final outcome of the Brexit process, Finland and the UK will remain close
European partners. Our common interests in many issues will not disappear and we must find
ways to collaborate, drawing inspiration from the long history of our good bilateral relations.
Thank you for your attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
