Nestor  A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Maintaining  a  conducive  macroeconomic
environment
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  European  Chamber  of  Commerce  of  the  Philippines  (ECCP)
Membership Luncheon Event, Makaty City, 25 October 2017.
 Mr. Guenter Taus, ECCP President, distinguished officers and members of the ECCP, special
guests, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
The European Union (EU) with its 28 member states and 512 million citizens forms the second
largest economic market of the world.  Closer to home, 15 percent of Philippine total exports go
to  the  EU,  making  it  a  key  trading  partner.   A  major  source  of  direct  investments  comprising
roughly  12  percent  of  total  gross  placement  of  foreign  direct  investment  comes  from  the  EU.
Moreover, nearly 12 percent of total cash remittances from Filipino Overseas workers originate
from  the  EU.  ...  It  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  EU  is  a  formidable  economic  partner  of  the
Philippines.
With this important relationship in mind, and with a view of building stronger ties, cooperation and
collaboration, it is my pleasure and privilege to be your guest speaker at today’s membership
luncheon. 
I thank the European Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines (ECCP) for the invitation and
welcome this opportunity to speak about our initiatives at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas which
are aimed at promoting a conducive business climate.  I am also pleased to share in greater
detail how the Philippines offers significant investment prospects as the economy is expected to
grow strongly in the next few years.
As long-term investors in the country, you may have witnessed how the macroeconomic stability
we now enjoy was brought about by significant structural reforms pursued through the years.
The list of reforms is long and the scope wide ranging.  It is because of these reforms that price
and financial stability have been achieved and maintained.
Since adopting the inflation targeting framework in 2002, inflation has generally been kept low and
stable. This is our source of credibility as a monetary authority. To sustain the positive growth
and inflation dynamics in the country, the BSP enhanced the implementation of inflation targeting
through  the  adoption  of  the  interest  rate  corridor  (IRC)  system.  The  IRC  enhances  the  link
between the BSP’s monetary policy stance and financial markets, and from there its impact on
the real economy. The primary benefit of the adoption of an IRC system in the Philippines is the
strengthening of monetary policy transmission by ensuring that money market interest rates are
meaningfully influenced by the BSP’s policy rate.
Importantly, the IRC system also supports the development of the Philippine capital market by
promoting  money  market  transactions  and  active  liquidity  management  among  Philippine
banks.  The  ensuing  higher  level  of  activity  in  the  money  market  in  turn  helps  promote  price
discovery.
For the first nine months of 2017, the inflation rate averaged 3.1 percent.  We remain on track to
stay within the target range of 3.0 percent ± 1.0 percentage point for 2017.  This sustained low
and  stable  inflation  lends  support  to  robust  household  spending,  preserves  the  public’s
purchasing  power  and  supports  the  demand  for  goods  and  services.  Based  on  our  latest
forecasts, inflation is likely to settle near the midpoint of the Government’s target range of 2 to 4
percent in 2017 to 2019.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Carefully-calibrated  and  well-communicated  monetary  policy  has  effectively  anchored  market
expectations.   It has enabled us to maintain price stability while providing support to economic
expansion.    We  shall  continue  to  improve  the  IRC  system  towards  a  more  market-friendly
implementation of monetary policy.
The  financial  sector  also  demonstrates  stability  and  sustained  growth.  Domestic  liquidity
conditions remains ample to finance the requirements of a growing economy.  Bank lending is
upbeat and loans continue to flow into the country’s productive sectors such as wholesale and
retail trade, motor repair; manufacturing; electricity, gas and water utilities; financial services; and
real estate.
The  level  of  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  has  been  relatively  flat  since  2008  despite  the
continued uptrend of total loan portfolios (TLP). The Philippine banking system’s non-performing
loan  ratio  (NPL)  stayed  low  at  2.0  percent  of  total  loans  as  of  end-August  2017.  This  is  fully
covered as NPL coverage ratios registered at 114.1 percent.
Philippine  banks  have  developed  a  good  ability  to  absorb  losses.  Data  as  of  end-June  2017
shows that the capital adequacy ratio (CAR) of universal and commercial banks is stable at 15.3
percent  on  a  solo  basis  and  16.0  percent  on  a  consolidated  basis.    This  is  well  above  the
minimum CAR requirements.
This robust ability of the banking system to provide credit support to the economy is the result of
a  long  and  systematic  reform  process,  boldly  implemented  since  the Asian  Financial  Crisis.
These  reforms  include  asset  cleanup,  industry  consolidation,  continuing  enhancements  of
corporate  governance  and  risk  management  standards,  and  strengthening  of  compliance  and
enforcement  frameworks.    We  likewise  pursued  liberalization  of  foreign  bank  entry  and
rationalization of branching guidelines in order to promote healthy competition, resulting in greater
market penetration and more efficient delivery of financial services.
We  have  further  improved  financial  access  through  the  promotion  of  various  digital  banking
solutions  and  service  delivery  channels.  The  subsequent  increase  in  the  utilization  of  both
traditional and non-traditional banking platforms has boosted deposit generation, resulting in its
14.1 percent expansion, to P11.0 trillion by the first half of 2017. In so doing, the banking system
has a stable funding base, as deposits are primarily peso-denominated and sourced mostly from
resident depositors.
Today, we continue to pursue prudential reforms that promote financial stability.  In a series of
circulars dated 22 August 2017, the Monetary Board approved enhanced guidelines raising the
bar on corporate governance, setting minimum prudential requirements on risk governance, and
strengthening the compliance framework.  The corporate governance guidelines are anchored on
the fundamental principle that the tone of good governance should come from the top and set out
enhanced  requirements  on  the  membership  composition  of  the  board.    Further,  the  risk
governance policy framework integrates the principles set out in other risk-related issuances of
the BSP under one umbrella.  Finally, the compliance framework provides the role of the board of
directors in establishing a compliance system, and emphasizes the shared responsibility of all
personnel, officers, and the board in managing business risk.
We continue to align our risk management guidelines with international standards. This month,
the Monetary Board approved the enhancements to BSP’s liquidity risk management guidelines. 
This is part of a broader set of BSP reforms on liquidity standards. Earlier last year, we have
already  issued  the  liquidity  coverage  ratio  (or  “LCR”)  framework.  This  will  be  followed  by
issuances on the implementation of the net stable funding ratio (or “NSFR”), which is also part of
the Basel III Liquidity Standards; and intraday liquidity reporting requirements.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  just  outlined  some  of  the  key  initiatives  focused  on  our  core
mandates,  i.e.  price  and  financial  stability.    In  your  invitation,  I  was  asked  to  talk  about  my
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
priorities and plans.  I now wish to share with you game-changing financial sector reforms we are
implementing over the medium-term. 
These  strategic  reforms  aim  to  deepen  our  local  debt  market,  liberalize  further  the  domestic
foreign  exchange  market,  digitalize  our  payment  system,  and  ultimately  enhance  access  to
financial services and products.  All these complement our financial inclusion agenda.
The Philippines has a lot of potential as a promising investment destination.  Our capital market
is  being  positioned  to  serve  as  an  important  source  of  long-term  funding,  in  support  of  the
National Government’s “Build, Build, Build” agenda.  Developing the domestic capital market is
critical given its role in complementing bank lending to support economic growth.  Last August
2017,  the  BSP,  together  with  the  Department  of  Finance  (DOF),  Securities  and  Exchange
Commission  (SEC)  and  Bureau  of  the  Treasury  (BTr),  unveiled  the  roadmap  to  hasten  the
development  of  the  domestic  debt  market.    Deliberately,  we  sequenced  and  calibrated  the
roadmap to prioritize urgent and foundational issues.  The initial phase will focus on improving
market  benchmarks,  covers  initiatives  to  increase  volume  of  treasury  issuances,  promotes
market-making  and  price  discovery,  enhances  the  yield  curve,  establishes  an  organized  repo
market, and strengthens regulatory oversight.  We look forward to the launch of the first trade in
the organized repo market by next month.
On the part of the BSP, we have started improving the regulatory framework for project financing
starting last year with the issuance of Circular No. 914.  Just this month, we issued Circular No.
976, which enhances prudential reporting requirements over project finance exposures.  This will
sharpen BSP’s ability to assess bank exposures to project finance, and timely deploy macro-
prudential measures, if necessary.  Finally, we issued amendments to provide banks and quasi-
banks  (QBs)  more  flexibility  in  issuing  bonds  and  commercial  papers.  These  proactive
measures are important as demand for infrastructure picks up and gains traction.
Complementing  capital  market  development  initiatives,  we  are  also  further  liberalizing  and
rationalizing  foreign  exchange  (FX)  rules  in  order  to  reduce  the  cost  of  doing  business  and
facilitate job-generating investments.   This forms part of a broader FX market reform agenda to
enhance  transparency,  improve  price  discovery,  and  increase  availability  of  FX  products,
especially hedging instruments.  Ultimately, a deeper FX market will increase resilience of our
domestic economy against external shocks even as we allow greater exchange rate flexibility.
Finally, we come to a topic that is closest to my heart, our advocacy for financial inclusion.  We
are passionate about empowering Filipinos and we remain focused in our efforts to include those
from the lower income groups into the formal financial system.
To further help expand the market and provide greater access to more Filipinos, we have been
leveraging  on  technology  and  institutional  networks.  Financial  technology  is  being  harnessed
especially for remittance and payment transactions. The BSP continues to provide an enabling
regulatory environment, while raising the bar against cybercrime and related risks.
As  part  of  our  commitment  to  the  national  strategy  for  financial  inclusion,  the  BSP  is  actively
leading 
the  National  Retail  Payment  System
industry-wide 
(NRPS).                     
to  operationalize 
initiatives 
The  NRPS  is  positioned  to  digitize  retail  payments  and  facilitate  our  transition  to  a  cash-lite
economy,  bringing  material  benefits  for  government,  businesses  and  consumers.    This  will
enable customers to make payments and transfer funds between and among accounts using
any digital device. 
We are seeing progress in this area.  The Philippine Payments Management, Inc. (PPMI) was
recently registered with the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC).  It  would  act  as  the
self-governing body in overseeing the development and operations of the retail payment system.  
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  are  also  working  with  the  industry  on  the  formation  of  two  priority  Automated  Clearing
Houses (ACHs), the batch electronic fund transfer credit payment scheme (called PESO Net),
and the real-time low-value push payment scheme (called InstaPay).  The PESO Net can be the
electronic  alternative  to  the  paper-based  check  system  but  will  be  more  inclusive  in  terms  of
participants  and  users.    InstaPay,  on  the  other  hand,  is  designed  to  facilitate  small  value
payments  and  enable  merchants  to  accept  digital  payments  from  both  e-money  and  bank
accounts without the use of a point of sale terminal. PESO Net is set to launch on November 8,
2017.
Our  initiatives  in  the  BSP  are  varied  and  we  remain  committed  to  ensuring  that  the
macroeconomic  environment  for  business  is  stable.    We  are  vigilant  so  that  the  economic
landscape  will  be  conducive  for  business  growth  and  increased  investments  for  engaged
stakeholders such as yourselves here at ECCP.
At  the  BSP,  we  are  cognizant  that  trade,  financial  and  other  economic  linkages  with  other
economies such as the EU require us to regularly take note of global economic and financial
developments.
The recently-concluded discussions during the Annual Meetings of the IMF-WB in Washington,
D.C. highlighted that despite clear signs of global economic recovery, policy uncertainty remains
at  a  high  level  and  could  well  rise  further.    US  economic  policies,  post-Brexit  arrangements,
geopolitical risks and other events could negatively impact confidence, deter private investment,
and weaken global growth.  
At the BSP, we have to take all of these into consideration in our analysis and in crafting our
policy response.
Nevertheless, here in the Philippines, we remain positive.
Southeast Asia  is  one  of  the  most  economically-dynamic  and  fastest-growing  regions  in  the
world.  In  the  Philippines,  economic  growth  is  expected  to  be  sustained  and  is  predicted  to
outpace regional growth, which is already faster than the rate of global growth.
Given shifting market conditions as well as the increasing sophistication of the global financial
services  industry,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  assure  you  that  the  BSP  remains  strongly
committed to the pursuit of ambitious financial sector reforms.
That I have had this opportunity to share all of these exciting initiatives with you and share the
prospects  of  growth...  on  behalf  of  the  BSP  and  the  Monetary  Board,  I  thank  the  ECCP,  its
distinguished officers and members.  Thank you all for your kind attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
