Peter  Praet:  The  outlook  for  reform  -  cementing  growth  and
delivering sustainable employment
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the Ludwig Erhard Lecture, organised by the Lisbon Council, Brussels, 30 November 2017.
Accompanying slides
 The solid and broad-based economic recovery in the euro area is continuing .  We  have  now
seen  18  quarters  of  positive  growth  and  the  short-term  economic  indicators  all  point  to  a
continued economic upswing with above-trend growth.
1
The breadth of the expansion is notable. The dispersion of growth rates across both countries
and  sectors  is  at  its  lowest  level  for  two  decades,  reflecting  a  convergence  of  growth  rates
around higher levels. This is reassuring for the growth outlook because recoveries tend to be
firmer and more robust when they are broad-based.
Progress  in  the  euro  area  recovery  has  been  mostly  home-grown,  with  a  virtuous  cycle
increasingly  taking  hold  between  rising  income  and  spending  in  both  the  corporate  and  the
household sector. An important driver behind the good performance of domestic demand is the
very favourable financing conditions for firms and households, which are heavily contingent on
our policy measures.
However, the positive developments also reflect the pay-off from years of balance sheet repair,
institution-building – at both national and Union level – and structural reforms.
In  the  banking  sector,  enhanced  regulation  and  supervision  have  steered  the  sector  towards
safer  business  models  and  stronger  capital  profiles.  Euro  area  banks  have  shored  up  their
capital positions with average Common Equity Tier 1 capital (CET1) having increased from 7% in
2007 to 14.1% at present. Banks have also disposed of non-core assets, reduced their exposure
to  market  risk  and  generally  refocused  their  activities  on  more  traditional  business  models.
These measures imply that banks are today in a much better position to intermediate between
those who save and those who want to invest, thereby supporting the recovery.
Banking  sector  repair  has  also  been  helped  by  structural  reforms.  A  number  of  euro  area
countries  have,  for  instance,  enhanced  the  effectiveness  of  their  insolvency  regimes.  In
corporate  debt  restructuring,  experience  to  date  shows  that  an  effective  insolvency  regime  is
critical to facilitate the early rescue of viable firms and the speedy exit of non-viable ones. Internal
ECB  analysis  has  confirmed  that  EU  countries  with  better  insolvency  frameworks  deleverage
faster and are able to adjust their non-performing loans more rapidly than countries with weaker
regimes. In turn, this has been shown to lead to easier financing conditions for companies, to
2
stronger entrepreneurship and to higher productivity.
Reforms  have  generally  been  stepped  up  in  the  euro  area.  The  OECD’s  Going  for  Growth  –
which  identifies  and  reviews  progress  on  five  key  priorities  in  areas  including  labour,  product
markets,  and  tax  and  transfer  systems  as  well  as  on  financial  sector  reform  for  all  OECD
countries – shows an increase in the reform momentum in most euro area countries since the
start of the crisis. Results from the European Commission’s labour market reforms database
(LABREF) show a similar trend. In addition, the Commission has assessed that at least “some
progress” has been made on around two-thirds of the country-specific recommendations issued
3
between 2011 and 2016.
Even more important, an increasing number of empirical studies confirm the positive economic
1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
impact of these reforms. For instance, in Italy the introduction of a new permanent contract in
2015 led to a 5% increase in new gross hires.  Along similar lines, the Spanish labour market
reform is found to have increased the likelihood of exiting from unemployment to employment,
while  the  direct  transition  from  temporary  to  permanent  positions  is  also  eased  by  the
reform.   Meanwhile,  evidence  based  on  micro-data  for  Portuguese  firms  shows  that  the
liberalisation of product markets has lifted the productivity of downstream industries, even in the
short run. And research has shown that even smaller-scale reforms and in particular those that
can reduce the fixed costs of firms, such as measures to reduce red tape, can have significant
6
positive effects.
5
These positive developments should not mask the long-term challenges that the euro area is still
facing. Our estimate of potential growth has declined substantially over the past two decades – in
part due to the decline in multifactor productivity growth. The public sector debt ratio remains
elevated, while our population is ageing. Overall, structural indicators still reveal substantial gaps,
both between euro area countries and relative to best performers.
This matters not just for welfare and social cohesion within individual countries. It also matters
for the functioning of Monetary Union. If countries have very different economic structures, their
business cycles will diverge when faced with common shocks: some will return quickly to trend
growth and full employment, while others will require a longer period of recession for prices and
quantities  to  fully  adjust.  By  contrast,  better,  mutually  compatible  economic  structures  among
countries support growth on a sustainable basis and produce less dispersion when recessions
hit. Reforms which improve economic structures make countries more resilient and the single
monetary policy more effective.
The current economic expansion offers a unique window of opportunity to make further progress
in Europe’s reform agenda. During good times, countries can better afford the adjustment costs
of reforms and may have more fiscal space available to compensate losers (see OECD, 2012).
As  Christine  Lagarde  recently  reminded  us: “the  time  to  repair  the  roof  is  when  the  sun  is
7
shining”.
History,  alas,  suggests  that  this  rarely  happens.  In  good  times,  reforms  tend  to  face  strong
opposition,  which  only  breaks  down  during  times  of  economic  demise,  either  following  a  long
period of economic decline or in the wake of a severe crisis.  Evidence of crisis-led reforms is
plentiful: for instance, not just the Latin American trade reforms in the 1980s and 1990s, but also
the most recent experience in the euro area goes in this direction.
8
So how can we do things better in future? Structural reforms are nothing new in Europe’s policy
debate. They have been discussed since the 1970s, when European growth and employment
started  to  fall  behind  that  of  the  United  States.  The  substantial  step-up  in  reform  momentum
during the crisis has revived this debate along three dimensions: the trade-off between short-
term costs and long-run benefits, the distributional incidence of structural reforms, and finally the
scope of the reform agenda.
9
First,  the  trade-off  between  short-term  costs  and  long-run  benefits.  The  long-run  benefits  of
reforms  are  largely  undisputed ,  but  the  potential  short-term  costs  have  increasingly  been
highlighted. Such undesirable effects can materialise through a number of channels. Reforms
that enhance competition can displace workers and capital in the short run. In bad economic
times,  there  is  a  risk  that  these  factors  of  production  will  not  be  absorbed  by  new  entrants,
thereby aggravating the recession. Reforms that lower wages can depress consumer demand in
the short term if not rapidly offset by employment gains and the prospect of future productivity-
related income gains that would materialise in normal times.
To  ensure  that  the  expansionary  effect  of  reforms  dominates  in  the  short  run,  both  the
sequencing of reforms and the policy mix matter. As regards sequencing, research has shown
 2 / 5
10
BIS central bankers' speeches
that outcomes may be better if product market reforms precede labour market reforms  and if
product market reforms focus on reducing entry barriers in service sectors with large pent-up
demand.
 As regards the policy mix, if there is fiscal space, IMF research  has underscored
the beneficial effects of carefully designed fiscal packages which can overcompensate for the
short-run cost of reforms.
11
12
10
Second, the distributional effects of reforms. That growth is not necessarily distribution-neutral
already drew some attention towards the end of the 1960s. The macroeconomic disruption that
followed the oil crisis of the mid-1970s, however, completely overshadowed distributional issues,
as research priorities shifted towards macroeconomic stabilisation and structural adjustment of
inefficient economies.
13
Recent experience and research have however shown that growth is actually more difficult to
achieve  without  equity.
terms  of
macroeconomic  growth  is  not  enough  to  make  them  socially  acceptable.
  The  distributional
costs  of  reforms  have  triggered  heated  debates  and  in  some  quarters  the  term  “structural
reforms” is even perceived as “toxic”.
the  benefits  of  reforms 
  Moreover,  highlighting 
in 
14
15
16
The  feeling  that  growth  in  recent  years  has  become  less  inclusive  is  borne  out  by  the  data.
Income  inequality  in  OECD  countries  stands  at  a  historical  high  and  household  disposable
incomes  across  most  euro  area  countries  remain  below  pre-crisis  levels,  especially  for  the
poorest members of society. Social transfers continue to play an important role in dampening the
effects of inequality, although they have become less effective since the mid-1990s.
17
18
In  such  an  environment,  we  must  ensure  that  the  distributional  impacts  of  reforms  are  not
ignored.  One  way  to  do  this  in  practice  is  to  focus  on  reforms  that  entail  a  double  dividend:
increasing equity while lifting growth. Examples include measures that facilitate the accumulation
of human capital, reduce labour market dualism or abolish product market regulations that stifle
competition.
 Back in 2006, the Lisbon Council think tank  already flagged the importance of
raising  and  enhancing  human  capital  in  its  policy  brief “Innovation  at  Work:  The  European
Human  Capital  Index”.  In  particular  with  “routine-biased  technological  change”  increasingly
permeating and transforming the world of work, high-quality education and training systems are
vital to ensure that workers can withstand the disruption caused by this change and benefit from
it. Another way to account for the distributional impacts of reforms is – for those reforms that
have  unavoidable  negative  distributional  costs  –  to  work  out  “smart  redistribution”  packages.
Smart redistribution does not necessarily take the form of a fiscal transfer. What laid-off workers
most want is to have a new job. Hence public policies could focus on helping people back into
work, and into jobs where they can develop and refine their skills.
19
Finally, the third dimension relates to the scope of the reform agenda. Structural reforms should
not be limited to product and labour market reforms. Strong institutions and a well-functioning
financial  sector  at  national  and  euro  area  level  are  necessary  conditions  to  ensure  that  the
impact of other reforms actually materialises. Our reform agenda should be sufficiently broad
and tackle the binding constraints in the economy. This requires country-specific and country-
tailored  solutions  which  allow  each  Member  State  to  find  and  exploit  their  comparative
advantages in the Single Market.
 But it does not mean that countries can reform independently
of each other.
20
Indeed, to ensure convergence, countries do not necessarily need to have the same economic
structures,  but  they  do  need  to  ensure  that  their  economic  structures  foster  resilience  and
contribute to a more homogeneous transmission of common shocks. For example, if one set of
countries focuses mainly on reforms to make wages adjust more quickly in response to shocks,
and another on reforms to produce adjustment through employment, the first group will recover
more quickly than the second. Research  has shown that countries will only converge in their
21
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
response to shocks if they have a broadly similar mix of labour market institutions – or to put it
another way, broadly similar Phillips curves. Encouragingly, this research finds that changes in
labour market institutions since the creation of the single currency have actually contributed to a
more  homogeneous  transmission  of  common  shocks.  However,  the  dispersion  could  still  be
considerably reduced.
22
From  a  euro  area  perspective,  it  is  thus  vital  to  ensure  sufficient  resilience  and  convergence
among countries so that all can benefit from Monetary Union, but not so much as to interfere with
national social choices.
So this brings me to the question: what role can European institutions play in ensuring resilience
and convergence among euro area countries? While the responsibility for structural reform has
so far primarily been at national level, European institutions have a strong coordinating role to
play.
However, relying merely on rules and coordination to achieve mutually beneficial outcomes may
not always be sufficient. In some areas, such as banking sector policy, moving from a system of
rules  and  guidelines  for  national  economic  policymaking  to  a  system  of  further  sovereignty-
sharing  within  common  institutions  has  been  highly  beneficial  for  the  Union  and  its  Member
States.
Over recent years a quantum leap forward has been taken by moving from decentralised banking
supervision  and  resolution  to  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and  the  Single  Resolution
Mechanism, based on the single rulebook. These steps have created the conditions for deep and
durable  financial  integration.  It  remains  essential  to  complete  the  banking  union  in  all  its
dimensions.  To  underpin  confidence  in  a  durable  way  in  the  area-wide  financial  system,  both
supervisory  responsibility  and  the  fiscal  backstop  need  to  be  at  European  level.  Just  as
necessary is the establishment of a European Deposit Insurance System.
Strengthening Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) will, over time, require us to make progress
in all policy areas. In a monetary union, no policy area can be seen in isolation. Each interacts
with and affects the others. After years of reform efforts, there is an increasing risk that fatigue is
setting in: both “reform fatigue” and “integration fatigue” may increasingly reduce the willingness
to fix the flaws in the design of EMU. This reluctance may be further intensified by the current
good  economic  times,  which  reduce  the  sense  of  urgency.  This  is  why  it  is  so  important  to
resolutely pursue the debate on completing our Economic and Monetary Union.
To conclude, the euro area is currently in a broad-based and solid expansion. While monetary
policy still plays an important role in sustaining the recovery, it is not “the only game in town”.
Years of balance sheet repair, institution-building – at both national and supranational level – and
structural reforms are all supporting the recovery. However, let us not yet declare victory and
“bask in the warmth of the recovery”
: more needs to be done to lift growth on a sustained basis
and to reduce the euro area’s vulnerability to shocks. Looking ahead, well-crafted reforms that
combine growth with equity and take account of the macroeconomic backdrop will be pivotal,
both at national and European level.
23
1
2
3
4
 I would like to thank Isabel Vansteenkiste for her support in the preparation of this speech.
See, for instance, Davydenko, S. and J. Franks (2008), Do Bankruptcy Codes Matter? A Study of Defaults in
France,  Germany,  and  the  U.K.,  Journal  of  Finance  63(2):  565–608.  Ferrando,  A.  et  al.  (2015), Creditor
protection, judicial enforcement and credit access, ECB Working Paper No 1829. Lee, S.-H. et al. (2011), How
do bankruptcy laws affect entrepreneurship development around the world?, Journal of Business Venturing
26(5). Andrews, D. et al. (2017). Insolvency Regimes, Technology Diffusion and Productivity Growth: Evidence
from Firms in OECD countries, OECD Economics Department Working Paper No. 1425.
See: European Commission: 2017 European Semester: Country-specific recommendations.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
See Sestito, P. and E. Viviano (2016). Hiring incentives and/or firing cost reduction? Evaluating the impact of the
2015 policies on the Italian labour market, Bank of Italy Occasional Paper No 325.
See García-Pérez, J. and J. Mestres Domènech (2017). The Impact of the 2012 Spanish Labour Market Reform
on  Unemployment  Inflows  and  Outflows:  a  Regression  Discontinuity  Analysis  using  Duration  Models.
Universidad Pablo de Olavide de Sevilla, Working paper 17.02.
See, for instance, Amici, M. et al. (2015). Red tape reduction and firm entry: evidence from an Italian reform.
Banca d’Italia Occasional Paper No 285.
See J. F. Kennedy: Annual message to the Congress on the State of the Union. January 1962
See Rancière, R. and A. Tornell (2016), Why Do Reforms Occur in Crises Times? USC-INET Research Paper
No. 16–19 and Dias Da Silva et al. (2017), When do countries implement structural reforms? ECB Working
Paper No 2078
See Berger, H. and S. Danninger (2007), The Employment Effects of Labor and Product Market Deregulation
and Their Implications for Structural Reform, IMF Staff Papers Vol. 54, No. 3; and Nicoletti, G. and S. Scarpetta
(2005), Product Market Reforms and Employment in OECD countries, OECD Working Papers No. 472.
See Blanchard, O., and F. Giavazzi (2003), Macroeconomic Effects of Regulation and Deregulation in Goods and
Labor Markets, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 118.
See OECD (2016), Economic Policy Reforms 2016, Going for Growth Interim Report.
See Banerji, A. et al. (2017), Labour and Product Market Reforms in Advanced Economies: Fiscal Costs, Gains,
and Support. IMF Staff Discussion Note 17/03.
Bourguignon, F. (2001). The distributional effects of growth : micro vs. macro approaches.
According  to  OECD  (2015),  an  increase  in  inequality  by  1-Gini  point  reduces  cumulative  growth  by  0.8
percentage point in the following five years. See OECD (2015), In It Together: Why Less Inequality Benefits All ,
OECD  Publishing,  Paris.  Other  studies  have  found  that  higher  inequality  reduces  both  the  pace  and  the
sustainability of growth. See for instance: Ostry, J. et al (2014), Redistribution, Inequality, and growth, IMF Staff
Discussion Note 14/02.
See  Draghi,  M.  (2017), Structural  reforms  in  the  euro  area,  introductory  remarks  at  the  ECB  conference
“Structural reforms in the euro area”, 18 October 2017.
See Pithon, S. (2015), Structural reforms: why did the term become so “toxic”?CEPII.
See OECD (2011), An Overview of Growing Income Inequalities in OECD Countries: Main Findings, in: Divided
We Stand: Why Inequality Keeps Rising.
See  OECD  (2012), Reducing income inequality while boosting economic growth: can it be done? Economic
Policy Reforms 2012, Going for Growth.
See: The European Human Capital Index.
See  Draghi,  M.  (2014), Stability  and  Prosperity  in  Monetary  Union,  speech  at  the  University  of  Helsinki,  27
November.
See Abbritti,  M.  and A.  Mueller  (2013), Asymmetric Labor Market Institutions in the EMU and the Volatility of
Inflation and Unemployment Differentials, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 45(6), pp. 1165–1186.
Calculations based on estimation results from Abbritti, M. and S. Weber (forthcoming), “Reassessing the Role
of Labor Market Institutions for the Business Cycle,” International Journal of Central Banking.
See J. F. Kennedy: Annual message to the Congress on the State of the Union. January 1962
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
