49th Credit Day
Banks, other financial intermediaries and firms:  
what needs to be done for Italy’s development
Finance and development
Speech by the Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy and  
President of IVASS
Salvatore Rossi
Rome, 4 October 2017
     
INDEX 
 Italian finance has begun to change  .................................................. 4 
 
Yet this is not enough .......................................................................... 5 
Firms .............................................................................................. 6 
Institutional investors ...................................................................... 8 
The rest of the financial market .................................................... 10 
 
The outlook ......................................................................................... 11 
 
     The theme of this year’s Credit Day is not new, but the Italian economy’s 
current status makes it relevant and topical once again. What role can finance 
play  in  transforming  our  economy’s  cyclical  growth  into  real,  long-lasting, 
structural  growth?  The  type  of  growth  that  Italy  hasn’t  seen  for  the  last  20 
years,  though  it  alone  can  help  us  lower  unemployment  levels,  improve  the 
quality of labour, and raise living standards in a stable way? In other words, 
put Italy at the top of the list of advanced countries, as it was in the past? 
By finance we mean all the financing activities on the part of families and 
firms, undertaken by financial intermediaries such as banks or other non-bank 
professionals or entities working directly in the financial and capital markets. 
We will look at it in terms of both supply and demand, and will then assess 
both  the  behaviour  of  those  needing  financing  and  the  products  offered  to 
satisfy those needs, including the manner in which they are offered. 
For some time now we have been saying that Italy’s financial structure 
must  change  if  we  also  want  the  productive  economy  to  move  towards 
greater growth. We would like firms to make greater use of the markets and 
to  rely  less  on  financial  intermediaries,  especially  banks.  Paradoxically,  by 
downsizing  their  role  banks  may  find  a  path  towards  greater  profitability, 
offering higher returns on their growing capital. In essence we would like a 
virtuous  cycle,  one  that  fosters  greater  growth  for  the  economy  and  more 
stability for the banking system. 
The reasons behind this wish are well established so I will not dwell on 
them: most important of all is the fact that growth feeds on innovation, which 
is a riskier proposal than proven, traditional productive activity, and  it is best 
to  finance  innovation  with  capital  rather  than  loans,  especially  bank  loans, 
 because  banks  are,  and  must  be,  more  risk  averse  than  the  rest  of  the 
financial community.    
Two weeks ago in Courmayeur I focused on the glass being half empty, 
that is, the road that still separates us from this objective. Today I would like 
to look first at the glass being half full, focusing on the progress that has been 
made  over  the  past  few  years.1 My  analysis  will  focus  on  firms  and  their 
demand for financing. 
Italian finance has begun to change  
Since  2011,  private-sector  firms’  leverage  has  fallen  by  more  than  7 
percentage  points  to  42  per  cent  (excluding  banks  and  other  financial 
professionals, calculated as the ratio between debt and debt plus net capital).  
This reduction has affected firms of all sizes. In large firms (those with 
more than 250 employees or with assets or turnover above €50 million) this 
was mostly due to an increase in net capital, thanks to the positive effects of 
the recovery, which has favoured both higher market value for capital and the 
reinvestment of profits in firms. The allowance for corporate equity (ACE), a 
measure enacted in 2012 which finally gave risk capital and debt the same 
tax treatment, also played a part.2 However, the weakening of this measure 
as of this year will greatly limit its effects going forward. 
Leverage has decreased in the other size classes too, though mainly 
due to the decline in bank loans: many small firms, already greatly in debt, 
have left the market or found it difficult to renew their credit lines. 
                                                           
1  See I. Visco, Address by the Governor of the Bank of Italy, Italian Banking Association, Annual Meeting, 
Rome, 12 July 2017. 
2  On the effects of the ACE, see N. Branzoli and A. Caiumi, ‘Tax incentives and financial stability’, Banca 
d’Italia, Questioni di economia e finanza (Occasional Papers), forthcoming. 
 Recourse to the stock market has increased, especially in recent years. 
Between 2014 and 2016 over 60 firms were quoted on the stock exchange, 
mainly  on  the  Alternative  Investment  Market  (AIM),  a  market  segment  with 
lower  entry  costs.  In  the  same  period,  investments  by  private  equity  and 
venture capital firms in risk capital returned to pre-crisis levels of around €5 
billion a year. Despite the positive contribution from various public schemes, 
such as the Italian Investment Fund and the Business Register for innovative 
start-ups, the share of investment in start-ups or in high-growth firms is still 
modest by international standards: in 2016 it stood at 15 per cent, against 23 
per cent in Germany and almost 40 per cent in France and Spain. 
During the crisis, not only did the relative weight of debt and risk capital 
change, but so did the composition of firms’ sources of debt, with a growth in 
bonds to the detriment of bank lending. 
Since 2011 the share of bonds in overall financial debt has risen by 5 
percentage points to 12 per cent; that of loans granted by Italian banks has 
fallen in equal measure to 61 per cent.   
During the most acute phases of the credit restriction triggered by the 
global  financial  crisis  and  then  by  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis, 
recourse  to  the  financial  market  proved  to  be  feasible  only  for  a  few  large 
industrial  groups  that  were  already  active  in  that  market.  However,  the 
number of issuers has grown in recent years, also among small firms, thanks 
to the removal of tax burdens and legal constraints on unlisted companies: 
for example, around 140 firms have issued minibonds worth over €10 billion 
since the relative measure came into force in 2012. 
Yet this is not enough 
Now we come to the half empty glass. The progress made is undeniable, 
but there have not been sufficient changes to the Italian financial structure. Our 
system still puts too much emphasis on financial debt and not enough on risk 
 capital,  and banks  continue  to  play  too  big  a  role  in  it,  which  then  backfires, 
making  them  more  vulnerable  during  the  negative  phases  of  the  economic 
cycle. This makes life more difficult for those who want and are able to invent, to 
paraphrase the historian Carlo Maria Cipolla, ‘new things that please the world’, 
which is the only way to create solid economic development.  
This  slow  progress  is  explained  by  the  particular  characteristics  of 
Italian  firms,  which influence  demand, and  those of  financial  entities,  which 
influence supply. Let’s look at some of them. I must warn you that I shall be 
focusing  on  insurance companies,  regardless  of  their current  importance  in 
corporate financing, for reasons connected not only with my role but also with 
the future prospects for this issue. 
Firms 
Let’s begin with the demand side, or rather with firms asking for loans. I 
don’t  think  anyone  will  be  surprised  if  I  remind  them  that  Italian  firms  are 
smaller than those in the other advanced countries. It is a well-known fact, 
the  causes  and  consequences  of  which  have  been  widely  debated.  In  a 
recent book written by Anna Giunta and myself, which cites official Istat data 
for 2012, the issue is summarized as follows: 
...  our  economy  ...  has  a  great  many  firms  with  a  very  low  average 
number of staff: more than 4,426,000 firms in industry and services average 
3.7 employees each (9.2 in the manufacturing sector) ... in Germany micro-
firms (up to nine employees) make up 84% of the total, in Italy 95%; 39% of 
employees  in  German  industry  work  for  large  firms  (250  employees  and 
over), in Italy 22%.3 
                                                           
3  A. Giunta and S. Rossi, Che cosa sa fare l’Italia. La nostra economia dopo la grande crisi, Laterza, Bari-
Roma, 2017. 
 Company  size  and  type  of  governance  are  inter-related  and  here  we 
can see another characteristic of our firms from an international point of view: 
they are family firms not only as regards ownership and top management but 
also  as  regards  the  second  and  third  lines  of  command.4 Recent  analyses 
show that between 2008 and 2015 this tendency increased.5 
Small  family-owned  firms  where  there  is  a  strong  presence  of  family 
members in management are less productive, more poorly managed and less 
inclined to innovate – and there is plenty of empirical evidence to support this.6 
This  is  already  sufficient  to  explain  why  this  kind  of  firm  tends  to 
approach a bank when it needs external financing rather than issuing bonds 
to  be  traded  on  the  market  or  selling  its  own  shares  privately  to  a  fund  or 
publicly  on  the  stock  exchange.  I  would  like  to  quote  a  couple  of  recent 
research papers  on the  Italian  market,  written  by  Bank  of  Italy  economists, 
according to whom, in line with findings in the international literature, firms’ 
recourse to the bond market essentially depends on three factors: the need 
to fund new investments; the company’s reputation and transparency vis-à-
vis investors; and balanced financial and capital conditions.7 
For our companies to want and be able to obtain funds from non-bank 
financial institutions or directly on the market, they need to: increase the level 
of  management  transparency;  improve  the  quality  of  governance;  produce 
balanced and credible financial statements and industrial plans; and undergo 
a  profound  cultural  shift,  including  by  acquiring  new  financial  skills  and 
                                                           
4  A. Giunta and S. Rossi, op. cit. 
5  M. Bugamelli and F. Lotti, ‘Productivity growth in Italy: a tale of a slow-motion change’, forthcoming. 
6  M. Bugamelli, L. Cannari, F. Lotti and S. G. Magri, Il gap innovativo del sistema produttivo italiano: radici e 
possibili rimedi’, Questioni  di  Economia e Finanza  (Occasional  Papers), 121,  2012. For an  international 
comparison  see  N.  Bloom  and  J.  Van  Reenen,  ‘Why  do  management  practices  differ  across  firms  and 
countries?’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 24(1), 203-224, 2010. 
  M. Accornero, P. Finaldi Russo, G. Guazzarotti and V.  Nigro, ‘First-time corporate bond issuers in Italy’, 
Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza, 269, 2015; N. Branzoli  and G. Guazzarotti, ‘Il mercato 
dei private placement per il finanziamento delle imprese’, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza 
(Occasional Papers), 262, 2015. 
7
 developing relations with investors whose needs are very different from those 
of  a  traditional  bank.  All  this  is  already  within  the  reach  of  many  medium-
sized and large firms. This needs to extend to other companies too. 
Institutional investors 
On  the  supply  side,  the  first  requirement  of  a  thriving  economy  is  to 
have  a  large  number  of  active  institutional  investors:  insurance  companies, 
pension  funds  and  other  asset  management  entities  involved  in  managing 
savings,  which  facilitate  the  flow  of  resources  to  innovative  firms  with  high 
growth potential. 
In  Italy,  the  share  of  managed  assets  in  households’  total  financial 
assets  remains  below  the  average  for  euro-area  and  English-speaking 
countries,  despite  strong  growth  in  recent  years  (in  2016  the  total  volume 
managed by institutional investors exceeded €1.4 trillion and reached 85 per 
cent as a proportion of GDP). More importantly, only a small share of these 
resources  currently  flow  into  the  productive  system.  Institutional  investors 
hold  just  over  one  tenth  of  corporate  bonds.  In  France,  where  the  capital 
market  is  more  developed,  the  share  is  over  40  per  cent.8 And  that  is  in a 
context  where  total  bond  issues  are  at  much  lower  levels  than  in  Italy. 
Investors are certainly deterred by the limited development of pension funds 
and  of  intermediaries  specializing  in  the  placement  and  underwriting  of 
corporate  debt  instruments,  such  as  private  debt  funds,  but  there  are  also 
more wide-ranging reasons.  
Let’s  look  at  the  insurance  sector.  Insurers’  investments  to  cover 
technical reserves focus on Italian government securities, with little appetite 
for  corporate  bonds,  much  less  equity.  So  far,  insurance  companies  have 
                                                           
8  M. Accornero, P. Finaldi Russo, G. Guazzarotti and V. Nigro, ‘The Italian corporate bond market: missing 
investors or missing issuers?’, Banca d’Italia, forthcoming. 
 shown  limited  interest  in  the  legislative  and  regulatory  changes  made  to 
encourage investment in productive firms. 
Prudential regulation on own funds obviously influences this approach. 
As we know, Solvency II introduced the principle that insurers’ assets – on 
which  the  solvency  capital  requirement  is  calculated  −  must  be  valued 
according  to  riskiness,  instrument  by  instrument.  The  metrics  are  very 
granular  and complex  even  when  using  the  simplest  of  the  three  permitted 
methods, i.e. the standard formula.   
Non-rated  bonds  and  unlisted  shares  are  seen  as  very  risky 
instruments  with  high  capital  absorption;  however,  it  is  precisely  these 
instruments that small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) can issue, and 
it  is  these,  alternative  to  traditional  bank  loans,  that  we  would  like  Italy’s 
numerous SMEs should make use of. 
At IVASS we conducted a survey of insurance companies’ investment 
policies  one  year  after  the  launch  of  the  new  regulatory  framework.  They 
have  not  changed  much.  So  the  marked  preference  for  government 
securities, especially Italian ones, and corporate bonds with a high rating is 
not  new.  Solvency  II  added  the  strong  argument  of  capital  absorption  to 
insurers’ deep-rooted reluctance to invest in securities that are not perceived 
as very safe.  
The  issue  of  financial  support  for  SMEs,  and  the  part  that  insurance 
companies  can  play  in  this,  is  not  just  an  Italian  problem,  but  rather  a 
European one. The project for a capital markets union must take into account 
any  regulatory  obstacles  posed  by  Solvency  II.  The  European  Commission 
has  recently  sent  a  Call  for  Advice  (CfA)  on  the  matter  to  the  European 
Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA), which shall reply by 
the end of February 2018. Among the points which EIOPA will have to address 
are insurance companies’ investments in non-rated bonds, unlisted equity and 
strategic interests, and how these are treated in order to calculate the solvency 
 capital requirement. The idea is to reduce capital absorption without sacrificing 
anything in terms of the prudence needed in assessing a company’s capital 
adequacy − in short, to rationalize rules rather than soften them. 
At  IVASS  we  observe  these  possible  developments  at  EU  level  with 
great interest, aware that Italy’s economic and financial structure badly needs 
to evolve. We are supervisors, of course, and our mission is to guarantee that 
insurance companies are sound in the best interest of the insured. We must 
never  forget  that.  But  we  are  always  ready  to  step  in  when  reason  and 
common sense must be added to the rules that we are called upon to set at 
European and national level. 
The rest of the financial market 
If further progress is to be made in overcoming the difficulty of matching 
the  demand  and  supply  of  funds  then  it  is  important  that  markets, 
technologies and stakeholders develop the capacity to ‘bundle’ corporate risk 
into  financial  instruments  that  meet  the  needs  of  final  investors,  such  as 
insurance companies, pension funds and households. 
An  example  of  this  is  venture  capital  funds,  which  use  their  ability  to 
evaluate  young  and  highly  innovative  firms  to  reduce  the  very  high 
idiosyncratic risk of individual firms for their investors. Similarly, securitization 
companies can offer investors bonds with different risk/return profiles bundled 
into portfolios of assets not individually negotiable. 
Banks  play  a  crucial  role  in  this  evolution  of  the  productive  system’s 
model  of  financing,  a  role  that  affects  not  only  firms  but  investors  and 
infrastructure  as  well.    Banks  can  exploit  their  knowledge  of  the  country’s 
entrepreneurial  fabric  and  their  key  position  in  the  distribution  of  savings 
products, and they can provide valuable financial advisory services, helping 
those firms that can gain access to the stock market or to forms of financing 
other than loans; they remain at all times an indispensable reference point for 
 small  firms.  Offering  a  broader  range  of  services  can  in  turn  help  them  to 
diversify their sources of income. 
The outlook 
Opening  up  firms  to  external  investors  and  developing  a  non-bank 
financial industry are among the objectives of Europe’s capital markets union 
project. The European Commission recently published a report taking stock 
of  progress  so  far  and  relaunching  the  whole  project. 9    It  is  the  most 
promising  international  scheme  in  this  area,  despite  the  uncertainty  and 
lengthy negotiation times typical of European projects. 
In the meantime, Italy needs to make a move. 
In  an  attempt  to  increase  the  share  of  savings  invested  in  the 
productive  system,  the  Government  has  recently  set  up  individual  savings 
plans (Piani Individuali di Risparmio, PIR), asset management products that 
are eligible  for reduced  taxation.  Just  a  few  months  after  their  introduction, 
the amount of funds collected, over €5 billion, is more than the Government 
itself  had  projected.  This  is  good  news,  although  the  risks  should  not  be 
underestimated, particularly as regards investor protection. 
Another instrument that is fairly new to Italy and is proving increasingly 
successful is the SPAC (Special Purpose Acquisition Company). Basically, it 
is  a  small  private  equity  firm  that  gathers  funds  from  few  investors  on  the 
basis of the promoters’ personal reputation. The money is then used to gain 
control of a single target firm, which must be acquired within a stated period 
of time of having set up the SPAC. A SPAC is listed and it in turn speeds up 
the target firm’s listing. 
9  Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic 
and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the Mid-Term Review of the Capital Markets 
Union Action Plan, COM(2017) 292 final. 
These  are  all  interesting  signs,  and  they  need  to  take  firm  hold.  Italy’s 
entire financial system must change to address the best and most innovative 
firms, helping them to grow. The whole of Italy’s economic future depends on it. 
 Designed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
