William C Dudley: Higher education - financing, costs and returns
Opening remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Conference on “Higher Education Financing and Costs and
Returns of Higher Education”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 7 December
2017.
 Good morning. It is my pleasure to welcome you to the New York Fed for today’s conference on
the costs and returns of higher education and higher education financing.  I am delighted to see
such  broad  interest  and  attention  from  the  academic  community  on  this  topic.  The  role  of
education and education financing in today’s labor market and economy has never been more
important.  It is a topic that I have spoken about frequently during my tenure here at the New York
Fed,  especially  with  regard  to  education’s  importance  for  economic  mobility.  Understanding
educational  investment  decisions  and  their  macroeconomic  implications  requires  rigorous
analysis from top academic researchers like you.  Let me briefly discuss some developments
that I find particularly significant and worthy of investigation. As always, what I say represents my
own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or  the  Federal
1
Reserve System.
As  has  been  well  documented  by  Raj  Chetty  and  his  co-authors,  income  inequality  has
increased  in  recent  decades,  while  economic  mobility  has  stagnated.    Meanwhile,  absolute
mobility appears to have fallen, indicated by the declining share of children who earn more than
their  parents.    The  combination  of  high  inequality  and  low  mobility  is  problematic,  because  it
means that being born into a low-income family is more consequential today than in the past. 
Since education is a key determinant of upward mobility, one way to increase economic mobility
in the United States would be to increase overall post-secondary educational attainment.  There
are, however, a number of important barriers to achieving that goal.
First, many high school students and their parents appear to lack accurate information about the
returns  obtained  from  a  college  education.    New  York  Fed  research  shows  evidence  of
systematic underestimation of the average benefits—and overestimation of costs—of a college
education, with larger biases among lower-income and non-college households.  Research by
Caroline  Hoxby  and  Sarah  Turner  shows  that  among  low-income  high  school  students,  even
very high achievers are poorly informed about the academic options that are available and their
effects on career opportunities.  This research finds that the provision of relevant information can
lead to markedly better outcomes.
A  second  impediment  is  the  lack  of  preparedness  among  new  college  entrants,  with  large
numbers of those students needing remedial courses that earn no college credit.  Low readiness
contributes to persistently low college completion rates, especially among lower-income, part-
time,  and  nontraditional  students.    Higher  dropout  rates,  in  turn,  contribute  to  a  substantial
reduction in the net expected and realized returns from college attendance.
The third major barrier to college attendance and completion is the rise in the cost of a college
education.  While a college education is generally a good investment, the cost of attending a four-
year  college  has  risen  considerably  faster  than  wages  over  the  last  several  decades.    This
means  that  college  has  become  increasingly  unaffordable—which  can  act  as  a  drag  on
economic  mobility  and  the  growth  of  a  college-educated  workforce,  and  by  extension,  on
productivity growth and living standards.
As has been well documented by my New York Fed colleagues, many young Americans have
adjusted to rising tuition and fees by taking on more debt.  This trend highlights the importance of
the federal student loan program, which has helped mitigate the impact of the shift in financing of
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
higher education from state and local funding to students and their families over the past few
decades.  However, the end result is that more students leave college with significantly higher
amounts of debt.  Student loan debt has more than tripled over the past two decades and now
totals over $1.4 trillion.
It is important to consider what these changes in financing higher education mean for economic
mobility.  First, New York Fed researchers have documented that a large percentage of student
borrowers—especially  those  who  attend  less  selective  colleges  or  drop  out—have  trouble
staying current on their loans, and often become delinquent and default on their debt.  We also
know that these factors—slow repayment, delinquency, and default—are most prevalent among
those from more modest family circumstances.  In addition, there is evidence that student debt
acts as a drag on homeownership.  Specifically, our research indicates that when college tuition
rises in a state, it leads to higher levels of student debt and a lower homeownership rate.  These
factors matter for inequality  and  social  mobility,  because  increasing  home  equity  is  the  major
form of wealth accumulation for the great majority of American families.  Thus, rising tuition and
changes  in  the  way  that  college  is  financed  appear  to  have  diminished  the  ability  of  higher
education to lift people from poverty into the middle class.
Of course, students’ reliance on debt and the returns from graduating vary across educational
institutions.  Of particular interest here is recent work by Raj Chetty and his co-authors showing
that some colleges—some of which can be found in the CUNY and California state systems—
appear to be much better at fostering economic mobility than others.  In other words, they accept
relatively large numbers of lower-income students while also producing large numbers of high
earners, which means that these institutions facilitate considerable upward mobility.  Learning
exactly how they do it and how it can be replicated strikes me as a first-order question for further
study.    Recent  research  by  Caroline  Hoxby  to  assess  differences  in  productivity  across
educational institutions makes important progress in that direction.
In summary, academic research on the financing, costs, and returns of higher education is more
important  now  than  it  has  ever  been.    We  are  pleased  to  have  many  of  those  researchers
participating in this conference. I would like to thank Raji Chakrabarti and Wilbert van der Klaauw
and the New York Fed’s Research Group for organizing this timely conference, and for bringing
together this superb group of scholars.  Thank you all for your participation.  I wish you a very
productive and enjoyable conference.
1
Betsy Bourassa, Rajashri Chakrabarti, Andrew Haughwout, and Wilbert van der Klaauw assisted in preparing
these remarks.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
