  Public lecture at the Oesterreichische Nationalbank 
Vienna, 6 October 2017 
 The euro area’s monetary policy in the context of economic 
recovery 
 Speech by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de Francei 
        Press contact: Clara Martin (+33 1 42 92 98 75; +33 6 74 83 32 38; clara.martin@banque-france.fr). 
  Ladies and gentlemen, 
Page 1 sur 8 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  and  my  friend 
Governor  Ewald  Nowotny  for  having  invited  me  today.  A  little  more  than  one 
year ago, the full  Governing Council  of  the ECB  celebrated  in this  very place 
the  200th  anniversary  of  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  (OeNB).  Today, 
your country is on the eve of important national elections . Throughout history, 
Vienna has been one of the centres of Europe, and Austria a country that we 
love:  on  a  more  personal  note,  I  am  indebted  to  Austria  for  enabling  me  to 
improve my German during a lengthy stay in Graz, Styria, over 40 years ago. 
And the Austrian economy has been a strong performer in the euro area: a low 
unemployment  rate  of  just  5.6%  in  August  2017,  against  9.1%  for  the  euro 
area  as  a  whole.  You  are  the  proof,  along  with  other  countries,  that  our 
common European social model is compatible with economic success.  
Today,  you  have  invited  me  to  speak  about  euro  area  monetary  policy  in  the 
context of economic recovery. The prospect of a possible normalisation of our 
monetary policy gives rise to expectations and somewhat unduly to concerns. 
To be frank, this very gradual normalisation has already started. I will begin by 
focusing on the progress that our accommodative monetary policy has already 
achieved, before talking about prospects for the future, and then come to the 
necessary completion of non-monetary tools in Europe.    
  I. The progress that we have already achieved 
Economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  is  here  [slide].  It  is  robust  and  broadly 
based  across  countries  and  sectors.  Our  latest  ECB  forecastsii confirm  this: 
growth  should  stand  at  2.2%  in  the  euro  area  in  2017,  that  is,  a  significant 
upward  revision  of  0.3  point  compared  with  June’s  forecast  of  1.9%.  This 
means  that  for  the  second  consecutive  year,  euro  area  growth  will  be 
  
comparable  to  that  of  the  United  States.  And,  according  to  Eurosystem 
calculations, the output gap will return to close to zero by the end of the year 
Page 2 sur 8 
(-0.6%). 
The non-standard monetary policy that we have been conducting since 2014 is 
contributing  to  this  acceleration  of  growth  in  the  euro  area,  by  fostering  very 
favourable  financing  conditions  and  by  supporting  domestic  demand.  In 
concrete  terms,  this  acceleration  results  in  more  jobs  –  over  6  million  jobs 
created  in  the  euro  area  since  the  start  of  2013  –  and  in  a  pick-up  in 
investment. Corporate investment in particular, decisive for supply capacity, is 
clearly recovering: up 4.7% in 2015, 6% in 2016, and is expected to be up 4% 
in  2017  and  2018.  [slide]  This  improvement  in  investment  is  underpinned 
notably  by  ongoing  growth  in  lending  to  the  private  sector,  at  2.5% 
year-on-year in August 2017 for firms and at 2.7% for households, with interest 
rates also remaining very low.  
We  are  also  observing  favourable  developments  in  inflation,  which  is 
gradually moving back towards our target of 2% over the medium term [slide]. 
After peaking at the start of 2017, the inflation rate stood at 1.5% year-on-year 
in  September.  This  performance  remains  below  our  inflation  aim,  partly 
reflecting  headwinds  due  to  the  past  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate. 
However,  for  2017  as  a  whole,  euro  area  inflation,  at  1.5%,  should  be  much 
higher than a year ago. For the next few years, we foresee inflation at 1.2% in 
2018  and  at  1.5%  in  2019  –  with  a  change  in  composition:  less  “energy” 
inflation,  more  underlying  inflation.  This  represents  a  first  success:  our 
monetary policy measures have succeeded in warding off the risk of deflation 
which  was  still  threatening  the  euro  area  last  year  –  we  mustn’t  forget  that 
inflation was declining in April 2016, standing at -0.2%.  
That said, despite the progress made towards our target, it is still  incomplete. 
Underlying  inflation,  excluding  energy  and  food,  has  admittedly  increased  – 
rising from 0.8% in the first quarter of 2017 to 1.1% in September 2017 – but it 
  
still  remains  at  subdued  levels,  despite  the  strong  recovery  in  activity  and 
Page 3 sur 8 
employment.  
A  significant  factor  is  the  relatively  low  nominal  wage  growth.  Among  the 
cyclical factors, I would like to mention two in particular: first, persistent  slack 
in  the  labour  market  –  the  unemployment  rate  has  fallen  sharply  in  the  euro 
area,  to  stand  at  9.1%  in  August  2017,  but  it  is  still  too  high;  second, 
backward-looking  wage  bargaining,  which  means  that  low  past  inflation  is 
feeding  through  to  wages  today.  The  influence  of  these  two  causes  should 
nevertheless diminish with the recovery in economic growth and inflation.  
Structurally,  many  studies iii  suggest  that  the  Phillips  curve,  that  is  the 
relationship  between 
inflation  and 
fluctuations 
in  economic  activity  or 
unemployment,  appears  to  have  flattened  since  the  1980s  [slide].  Inflation 
seems less responsive to changes in economic activity in advanced countries, 
notably because of globalisation,iv which appears to exert downward pressure 
on inflation via the decline in imported goods prices and competition from low-
wage  countries.  But  a  flatter  Phillips  curve  does  not  call  into  question  this 
relationship:  we are  in no doubt  about the  way  we are heading:  the  recovery 
and job creations will lead to higher wages and, ultimately, more inflation. But 
we remain, nevertheless, less certain as to the speed of this adjustment. We 
are both confident about the effectiveness of our monetary policy and willing to 
be patient regarding the time it will take. 
 II.  The  prospects:  an  adequate  reduction  of  asset  purchases,  within  an 
overall substantially accommodative monetary policy 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  implications  of  this  for  our  monetary  policy.  You  are 
well aware that we at the ECB’s Governing Council will decide this autumn on 
the re-calibration of our policy instruments beyond the end of the year  – and, 
to  quote  Mario  Draghi,  “probably  the  bulk  of  these  decisions  will  be  taken  in 
October”.  We  are  now  faced  with  a  simple  requirement,  in  line  with  our 
mandate  to  maintain  price  stability,  and  the  progress  towards  our  inflation 
  
target:  we  have  to  reduce  the  intensity  of  our  net  asset  purchases,  while 
maintaining overall a substantially accommodative monetary policy.  
Page 4 sur 8 
As  regards  our  asset  purchases,  we  have  to  reduce  their  intensity  in  a 
pragmatic  manner,  as  we  already  decided  successfully  in  December  2016. 
“Pragmatic”  because,  while  keeping  the  current  rules  –  we  shouldn’t  change 
any of the parameters, including the  issuer and issue  limits –,  we  can on the 
one  hand  exploit  the  margins  of  flexibility  of  the  programme  and  we  must  on 
the other hand hold in reserve an additional purchasing capacity  – if needed. 
So, there is no reason to be worried by the prospect of an adequate reduction 
of our net purchases, which  would be perfectly compatible with maintaining a 
substantial degree of monetary accommodation.  
Indeed, QE is not limited to net asset purchases, and monetary policy is 
not  limited  to  QE.  Our  monetary  policy  is  based  on  a  set  of  instruments 
[slide]:  it  is  not  a  solo,  but  a  quartet.  On  top  of  QE,  we  perform  with  our 
policy  interest  rates,  our  forward  guidance  and  the  provision  of  liquidity  to 
financial institutions. 
1/ On QE, the academic literature provides consistent evidence that the impact 
of asset purchase programmes on the yield curve and asset prices is primarily 
driven  by  the  total  stock  of  assets  held  by  the  central  bank  (the  so  called 
“stock effect”), rather than by the flow of transactions conducted over a given 
period  (“flow  effect”)  [slide].  Banque  de  France  studies  of  the  effects  of  the 
PSPP find that holding a stock of bonds equivalent to 10% of GDP lowers the 
10-year  yield  by  about  45  bps  in  the  euro-area.v These  results  imply  that  our 
current  programme  lowers  the  10-year  euro-area  government  bond  yield  by 
about  100  bps.  These  estimates  are  of  similar  magnitude  to  results  obtained 
for  evaluations  of  the  programmes  conducted  in  the  United  States  and  the 
United Kingdom.vi  
In  any  case,  the  Eurosystem  will  remain  a  major  buyer  of  euro-denominated 
bonds over the coming years,  thanks to  our reinvestment commitment, which 
we took in December 2015 and which was perhaps not widely enough noticed: 
 Page 5 sur 8 
 
the repayments that we will obtain when bonds reach their maturity date will be 
fully reinvested, thus keeping the size of our asset holdings unchanged and at 
a high level. In addition, the maturity of such reinvestments can be calibrated, 
if  need  be,  to  support  the  duration  that  we  will  extract  from  the  market.  This 
implies that we will continue to exert downward pressure on the yield curve by 
keeping  our  stock  of  asset  holdings  at  a  high  level  for  a  prolonged  period  of 
time, and we could specify it in our communication.   
2/ Perhaps the most unconventional policy tool is the use of negative interest 
rates.  Negative  interest  rates  have  their  limitations;  I  have  already  stressed 
them in the past.vii And at our Governing Council’s meeting in Tallinn last June, 
we  clarified  these  limitations  in  our  forward  guidance  stating  that  we  do  not 
intend  to  lower  our  deposit  facility  rate  below  its  current  level  of  -0.40%.  But 
slightly  negative  interest  rates  have  their  virtues.  First,  by  removing  the  zero 
lower bound constraint on expectations of future short-term interest rates, they 
contribute to easing financial conditions by lowering rates along the curve, with 
a  positive  impact  on  the  demand  for  credit  by  firms.  Second,  the  negative 
deposit  facility  rate  (DFR)  positively  interacts  with  asset  purchases.  Indeed, 
the  portfolio  rebalancing  effect  of  QE  is  reinforced  by  the  negative  DFR,  as 
banks  with  excess  liquidity  holdings  have  a  stronger  incentive  to  put  their 
reserves  to  work.  And,  so  far,  we  have  not  seen  significantly  detrimental 
effects  of  negative  rates  on  the  profitability  of  banks,  notably  thanks  to  the 
favourable fact that the slope of the yield curve has remained positive.  
3/ Our forward  guidance provides further indications as to the future path of 
our  monetary  policy;  and  by  steering  expectations,  it  has  an  impact  on  the 
yield  curve.  Our  forward  guidance  is  clear  as  to  the  sequencing:  “we  expect 
[the  key  ECB  interest  rates]  to  remain  at  their  present  levels  for  an  extended 
period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases.” There is 
no doubt within the Governing Council about this sequencing. In all events, we 
should  not  consider  raising  interest  rates  until  we  have  reached  a  sustained 
adjustment in the path of inflation.  
 Page 6 sur 8 
 
4/ The fourth instrument is the provision of liquidity to financial institutions. In 
October  2008,  we  introduced  the  fixed-rate  full  allotment  policy  in  all  our 
regular refinancing operations. The maturity of this liquidity provision was then 
extended  with  the  launch  of  3-year  longer-term  refinancing  operations 
(LTROs) and, later,  targeted longer-term  refinancing operations (TLTROs). In 
September  2017,  a  total  of  EUR  760  billion  is  still  lent  to  euro  area  banks 
through TLTROs, which at over 7% of euro area GDP is substantial.  
 III. Supplementing monetary policy in Europe  
For the future,  we can be confident, because our monetary policy is effective 
and  recovery  is  robust.  But  our  confidence  must  be  without  complacency, 
because  monetary  policy  cannot  be  the  only  game  in  town:  it  must  be 
supplemented  by  national  reforms,  and  by  a  strengthening  of  the  euro  area. 
We have been saying this for a long time, but now is the time to act. 
Now is the time to act in France, where stepping up reforms is a priority, with 
a  focus  on  two  main  areas:  on  the  one  hand,  sustainably  consolidating  our 
public finances, and on the other, aiming to achieve an overall transformation, 
with and a major simplification effort in both labour market and the goods and 
services  market,  and  large-scale  investment  in  education,  vocational  training 
and apprenticeships. Even though we must pursue this course, this is what the 
new government appears to be doing with the labour market reform underway 
since this summer, and efforts to bring the government deficit down to 2.6% in 
the 2018 budget, well below the threshold of 3% of GDP for the first time in 11 
years.   
Now  is  the  time  to  act  in  Europe,  above  all.  We  cannot  both  overburden 
monetary  policy  –  our  German  friends  are  right  in  this  respect  –  and  refuse 
Economic  Union  which  is  the  prerequisite  for  a  sounder  Monetary  Union.  So 
we  must  not  let  ourselves  be  slowed  down  by  sterile  debates  or  false 
suspicions:  there  is  no  question  of  implementing  a  “transfer  union”,  which 
would  only  benefit  certain  countries;  we  must  not  get  bogged  down  by 
  
considerations  about  methods  either,  between 
intergovernmental  and 
community  methods.  It  is  now  urgent  to  make  concrete  progress  on 
substance,  and  to  move  up  a  gear,  by  triggering  four  accelerators  of  the 
Page 7 sur 8 
Economic Union: 
   A  macro  accelerator:  the  French  President,  Mr.  Macron,  in  his  speech 
about  Europe  ten  days  ago  at  the  Sorbonne,  started  by  talking  about  the 
“coordination  of  economic  policies”.  In  this  widely-discussed  speech,  I 
believe that this was not sufficiently remarked upon. In my opinion – as an 
independent  central  banker  –  we  should  aim  to  achieve  a  genuine 
collective economic  strategy;  a  mutual  commitment  between  the  Member 
States  of  the  euro  area,  for  more  reforms  in  countries  where  they  are 
required,  and  more  fiscal  support  in  countries  with  leeway  for  this.  This 
collective  strategy  could  be  prepared  and  adopted  as  of  2018.  It  could  be 
supplemented  by  the  creation  of  a  common  stabilisation  fund,  aimed  at 
supporting,  through  lending,  Member  States  facing  asymmetric  shocks. 
This could be part of a European Monetary Fund, provided that its scope of 
action is extended beyond the current European Stability Mechanism.  
   A micro accelerator: i.e. a Financing Union for Investment and Innovation. 
The aim is to mobilise the EUR 350 billion savings surplus of the euro area, 
notably to shore up equity which is the key to an innovation economy, and 
also  to  foster  synergies,  thanks  to  an  integrated  steering  mechanism, 
between  the  Juncker  investment  Plan,  the  Capital  Markets  Union  and 
Banking Union. Here too, progress could be rapid.  
   A  fiscal  accelerator, once  we  have  increased  trust  between  Member 
States  and  made  headway  towards  greater  economic  convergence:  the 
euro area budget could be used to finance, for the benefit of all  countries, 
certain  “European  common  goods”  such  as  digital  technology,  energy 
transition, security, migration controls.  
   An  institutional  accelerator:  i.e.  first  and  foremost  a  euro  area  Finance 
Minister,  President  of  the  Eurogroup  and  member  of  the  Commission, 
 backed by a European Treasury; but also a euro area Parliament group, in 
order to ensure the democratic legitimacy of the institutions and decisions. 
Page 8 sur 8 
  The  latter  two  accelerators,  fiscal  and  institutional,  would  require  Treaty 
changes,  unless  they  were  to  be  very  limited.  But  this  must  not  stop  us  from 
making progress straightway on the first two, in order to breathe new life into 
Economic Union.  
  I would like to conclude my speech today by quoting Stefan Zweig, one of the 
most  famous  Austrian  authors.  He  wrote  a  beautiful  text  after  his  visit  to  the 
Banque de France in Paris in 1932.viii But he above all paid tribute to his home 
town in the following words: “For the genius of Vienna — a specifically musical 
one — was always that it harmonized all the national and lingual contrasts. Its 
culture  was  a  synthesis  of  all  Western  cultures.  Whoever  lived  there  and 
worked there felt himself free of all confinement and prejudice.”ix I admire this 
Viennese  spirit,  which  combines  audacity  and  liberty,  and  which  was  the 
cradle of the greatest minds of our contemporary era. Today, as Europe’s time 
may be here again, I hope that this spirit will continue to inspire us. Thank you 
for your attention. 
                                                             
i I would like to thank P. Andrade, P. Antipa, G. Cette, M. Dujardin, O. Garnier, A. Lojschova, B. Mojon and B. 
Rudelle for their help in preparing this speech. 
ii Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, September 2017. 
iii See e.g.  Blanchard (O.), Cerutti (E.), and Summers (L.) (2015) “Inflation and Activity - Two Explorations and 
their  Monetary  Policy  Implications,”  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  Working  Paper  No.  21726, 
November. 
iv Guilloux-Nefussi  (S.)  (2016) "Globalization,  Market  Structure  and  Inflation  Dynamics,"  Banque  de  France 
Working Papers 610. 
v See e.g. Andrade, Philippe, Johannes Breckenfelder, Fiorella De Fiore, Peter Karadi, and Oreste Tristani (2016) 
“The ECB's asset purchase programme - an early assessment” ECB Working Paper No. 1956 and Arrata, William 
and    Benoît  Nguyen  (2017)  “Price  Impact  of  Bond  Supply  Shocks:  Evidence  from  the  Eurosystem's  asset 
purchase program” Banque de France Working Paper No. 623. 
 Page 9 sur 8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
vi See  e.g.  D’Amico  Stefania  and  Thomas  B.  King  (2013)  “Flow  and  stock  effects  of  large-scale  treasury 
purchases:  Evidence  on  the  importance  of  local  supply”  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  Volume  108,  Issue  2, 
Pages 425-448 for evidence associated with programmes conducted in the US and Joyce et al. (2010) in the UK. 
vii See speeches of August 2016 (Handelsblatt conference), September 2016 (annual CERS conference) and April 
2017 (conference at Columbia University).  
viii Stefan Zweig, Visiting the billions (Besuch bei den Milliarden), 1932. 
ix Stefan Zweig, The World of Yesterday, Memories of a European, 1944.  
 