François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  Monitoring  financial  stability,  with
active monetary policies
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at a conference at
the London Business School, London, 23 November 2017.
 Accompanying slides
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Price stability and the prevention of financial imbalances are often two sides of the same coin.
Indeed,  price  stability  and  financial  stability  are  supposed  to  be  complementary  and  mutually
beneficial. During the recent crisis in the euro area, the transmission mechanism of monetary
policy was hampered by a fragmented interbank market, as borrowing conditions deteriorated in
stressed  countries.  The  resulting  deterioration  in  the  economy  in  turn  contributed  to  a  further
worsening of the financial stress, in what we call a real-financial feedback loop.
To cope with this difficult situation, the policy response in the euro area was twofold. First, we
adopted  an  active  monetary  policy  and  launched  unconventional  measures  that  included  the
credit easing package. Second, we set up a Banking Union and assigned new macroprudential
powers and tasks both at the European level (the ECB, the ESRB) as well as at the national
level.  In  France,  the Haut  Conseil  de  stabilité  financière  (HCSF  or  High  Council  for  Financial
Stability) was created in July 2013 as the French authority with the legal ability to impose binding
macroprudential measures.
The economy is now recovering, so the medicine seems to have worked. However, our attention
is now turning to the potential side effects of our treatment. Monetary policy in the euro area is
maintaining  short-term  nominal  interest  rates  at  very  low  levels,  and  through  our  forward
guidance,  rates  are  also  very  low  up  to  medium-term  maturities.  But,  as  the  economy  is
recovering  and  we  are  progressing  towards  our  inflation  target,  the  Governing  Council  clearly
decided  on  26  October  to  pursue  the  gradual  normalisation  of  our  monetary  policy.  We  will
continue along this road, but financial stability concerns could be increasing. It has recently been
argued that this could result in unwanted side effects in terms of asset price misalignments or
spur a search for yield that would entail excessive risk taking.
The  issue  of  the  side-effects  of  monetary  policy  is  not  entirely  new.  Monetary  policy  is  never
neutral since it works its way through to the real economy via its effects on financial conditions,
that is to say the current and expected cost of borrowing liquidity, and in turn on asset prices and
risk premia, even in normal circumstances. Let me first say some words on bank profitability –
which is not the only element of financial stability (1). I will then discuss the price of assets and
the financial cycle (2), before turning to the relation for policy makers between monetary policy
and  macroprudential  policy  (3).  Lastly,  I  will  say  a  few  words  on  how  we  should  complete
financial regulations (4).
1. – Let me start with bank profitability
 It is true that low interest rates may affect the interest margins of banks since the latter cannot
generally  pass  negative  rates  on  to  depositors.  Also,  because  these  institutions  engage  in
maturity transformation, both the slope and level of the yield curve matter for their profitability.
But let me comment on what I see as the predominant effects of interest rate cuts since 2014.
Our monetary policy is driving up real asset prices and lowering debt-servicing costs. Indebted
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
corporations, households and governments can improve their balance sheets and yet maintain a
steady  spending  trajectory  with  improved  growth  prospects. As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  ongoing
recovery in the euro area has been synonymous with lower unemployment (7 million jobs have
been  created  since  2013),  resulting  in  higher  disposable  income  [SLIDE  2].  In  turn,  this  has
significantly lowered the risk of default borne by the banking sector. Banks have also benefited
from very low interest rates through cheaper funding and significant capital gains on their long-
term assets.
So far, these effects seem to have compensated for the reduction in the bank interest margins.
In a recent ECB working paper by Altavilla, Boucinha and Peydró,  the authors even argue that
there is no causal relationship between low interest rates and reduced bank margins. The latter
effect is due more to the past deterioration in macroeconomic conditions than to active monetary
policy.
1
A comprehensive assessment of our current policy package should not only look at the intended
consequences  and  side  effects  that  can  be  observed,  but  also  weigh  them  up  against  what
would have happened in the absence of our exceptional policy [SLIDE 3]. How profitable would
our banking system now be had we not eliminated the 2014–15 deflation risk? The landscape for
our banking system would have been somewhat dire. In a deflationary environment – and we
have  avoided  this  lethal  danger  thanks  to  our  monetary  policy  –,  the  debt-servicing  cost  for
borrowers is heavier in real terms. Defaults are more frequent, and less sustainable debts result
in higher credit spreads. The risk of a debt deflation spiral then increases further. But this has
been avoided in the euro area and if the price of this is a temporary reduction in bank interest
margins, then it is worth incurring such a secondary side effect.
2. – Let me turn now to the price of assets and the financial cycle            
At  the  level  of  the  euro  area,  we  consider  the  financial  stability  situation  to  be  overall  under
control. The solvency ratios of significant euro area institutions have improved continuously since
2014, reaching 15% on average in Q2 2017. Overall private debt in the euro zone diminished as
a  share  of  GDP:  128%  in  2011,  122%  today.  Non-performing  loan  ratios  have  also  declined,
especially  for  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises.  I  support  the  recent  SSM  initiative  for
provision rules for new flows of NPL, despite all the criticisms. Moreover, after some years of
subdued  financial  cycles,  most  cycles  in  euro  area  countries  have  normalised  and  in  some
countries they have even accelerated [SLIDE 4]. This is the case for France, and should it be a
concern?
In France, asset prices are currently rising in a context of low market volatility. Since low volatility
and abundant liquidity may encourage risk-taking behaviour alongside search-for-yield behaviour,
we  must  be  vigilant  against  the  risk  of  a  widespread  mispricing  of  financial  assets  that  could
hinder  the  economic  recovery.  To  give  you  some  numbers:  residential  real-estate  prices  are
back in positive territory, with year-on-year growth of 2% in real terms, and the commercial real-
estate sector is still buoyant. Our main alert is on non-financial corporation debt, which is now
74.4% of GDP against 61.8% in 2010 [SLIDE 5]. Overall, private debt in France now amounts to
2
130.5% of GDP.
I do not want to bombard you with numbers but the main difficulty now is for policymakers to
disentangle from these positive figures what is a desirable consequence of our monetary policy
stance and what clearly signals a potential financial risk that we must address.
3.  –  Policy  makers:  can  monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  policy  be  best  [better?]
combined?
As said, overall private debt in the euro zone has diminished as a share of GDP. But in some
countries,  the  financial  cycle  is  picking  up,  while  at  the  same  time  inflation  has  been  slowly
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
increasing, but remains below our target.
Already before the 2008 crisis, central bankers firmly believed that price stability is a necessary –
and for some even a sufficient – condition to ensure financial stability. This view is referred to as
the ‘Jackson Hole consensus’. Following the financial crisis, financial imbalances were seen as a
huge source of disruption which decision-makers needed to remedy, questioning the relationship
between monetary and financial policy tools and objectives. Let me give two polar views on that.
A  first  approach,  in  line  with  the  ‘Jackson  Hole  consensus’,  is  to  clearly  separate  monetary
stability from financial stability. In line with the Tinbergen rule and the Mundell efficiency principle
respectively, one policy should fulfil one objective and each policy tool should be assigned to the
objective it can fulfil the best. In this regard, monetary policy would not be efficient at mitigating
financial imbalances but would not generate them either.
On the other side, an extreme approach is to consider that both policies are strongly intertwined
and that their respective objectives could be merged: in this case, monetary policy could reduce
risk taking and target asset price bubbles.
I consider that full adherence to the separation principle and the combining of objectives are both
approaches  that  are  too  radical  to  conduct  monetary  and  financial  stability  policies.  The
implementation of unconventional policies has blurred the frontier between the two objectives. Let
me  quote  here  my  colleague  Vice-President  Vítor  Constâncio:  “Macroprudential  policy  and
monetary policy rely on separate tools and aim to achieve different objectives. Yet, they need to
be co-ordinated, which is a non-trivial task.”  It is a wise view. Keeping monetary policy aligned
with its primary objective of price stability but not blindly sticking to the separation principle may
help us to manage our two main objectives and strengthen our credibility.
3
As  you  may  know,  the  Banque  de  France,  like  many  other  central  banks,  has  had  the  dual
mandate of maintaining price stability and preserving financial stability since 2013. The financial
stability mandate is demonstrated by the fact that the governor of the Banque de France has the
sole right and responsibility to make proposals for implementing macroprudential instruments to
the  High  Council  for  Financial  Stability,  the  French  macroprudential  authority.  I  consider  this
specific role assigned to the governor of the Banque de France as an opportunity to make price
and financial stability objectives more consistent.
First, macroprudential policy complements the monetary policy framework decided at the euro
area level, by adjusting it to national specificities and addressing idiosyncratic financial stability
risks while maintaining the harmonious transmission of monetary policy across the euro area.
Second, macroprudential policy may help to fine tune the overall impact of monetary policy by
ensuring that the risk-taking channel is not disproportionate in some specific sectors/countries, in
order to prevent systemic risk. Let me give you two examples of what we monitor very closely in
France: the increase in commercial real estate prices in Paris, and the rise in corporate debt.
Having said this, I do not mean that there is no hierarchy between the two objectives. I call for
strong complementarity, not for a merging of objectives. To be more explicit, I consider that a
monetary policy strategy that targeted asset prices would be a mistake. As central bankers, we
need  to  avoid  confusing  economic  agents;  our  role  is  to  anchor  expectations  and  ensure
business continuity.
4. – There are still challenges to be addressed to provide authorities with the necessary
policy toolbox for financial stability
For it to be more effective, we still face a number of challenges in order to achieve an optimal
macroprudential regulatory framework. First, we have to complete the regulatory framework for
banks, by finalising the Basel III reform: I strongly wish and hope that we can reach a fair and
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
reasonable agreement soon. A revision of the European Macroprudential Framework is currently
underway at the European Commission level. Moreover, decisive progress should be made to
better provide macroprudential authorities with policy tools properly designed to address financial
risks  beyond  banking.  Market  financing,  shadow  banking,  Fintechs,  pension  funds,  financial
innovations are all part of the scope of macroprudential policy, insofar as they have the potential
to pose a financial risk to our economies. Our next issue is less the solvency of banks than the
liquidity of non-banks.
It  is  also  our  duty  to  complete  the  European  regulatory  framework  with  the  finalisation  of  the
resolution mechanism to make the functioning of the banking sector smoother – in line with the
spirit of the Banking Union, also enabling the Capital Market Union (CMU) to bloom, within the
holistic approach of the “Financing Union for Investment and Innovation” I have suggested.
Finally,  we  must  ensure  that  the  new  regulatory  framework  is  consistently  implemented
everywhere, and avoid any backtracking outside Europe. Financial stability is a global common
good, and as such, regulatory arbitrage must not become an option.
 Let me conclude. Credibility for central bankers now rests on admitting that monetary policy and
macroprudential policy are somewhat porous, especially in a situation where we could have an
upward financial cycle associated with weak inflation. This calls for a consistent action by central
banks  that  covers  both  areas:  price  and  financial  stability.  Moving  away  from  an  overly  strict
separation principle, let us try to be complete and consistent central bankers playing an active
role in monetary policy as well as in macroprudential policies.
1
2
3
Altavilla  C.,  Boucinha  M.,  Peydro  JL,  2017,  Monetary  Policy  and  Bank  Profitability  in  a  Low  Interest  Rate
Environment, ECB Working paper series #2105, October 2017.
Ratio of non-financial agents’ debt to GDP, first quarter 2017. Source: Eurostat, Federal Reserve, Banque de
France calculations. 
“The future of finance and the outlook for regulation”, Remarks by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, at
the Financial Regulatory Outlook Conference organised by the Centre for International Governance Innovation
and Oliver Wyman, Rome, 9 November 2017.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
