  Modesty in times of uncertainty 
Monetary policy after the crisis 
 Business Economists’ Annual Dinner (London, 29 November 2017) 
Speech by Klaas Knot 
 Introduction 
Good evening everyone. Thank you for inviting me here to share my thoughts on 
monetary policy. We stand at an important turning point, 10 years after the 
global financial crisis began to unfold. During the crisis, monetary policy stepped 
in with unprecedented measures. At each new turn of the crisis, we as the 
Eurosystem took action and designed new policy measures where necessary. 
These measures proved successful. Now, a broad-based economic expansion is 
taking hold across the euro area. As the economy is enjoying robust growth, it is 
giving us the opportunity to take a step back from the crisis mode.  
 Against this background, tonight I want to elaborate on the following. The 
current inflation outlook poses no threat to price stability. Despite 
undershooting its inflation aim in the near-term, the ECB is thereby fulfilling its 
mandate. This is thanks to a combination of monetary policy measures, including 
the Asset Purchase Programme, which has achieved what could reasonably have 
been expected. The slow inflation convergence towards our medium-term 
objective is due to global supply factors largely outside the realm of central 
banking.  
 In this situation, continued monetary expansion is not a free lunch. 
Unconventional monetary policy is more intrusive than conventional monetary 
policy. It creates deeper market distortions that can generate misallocation and 
financial stability risks. As long as the standard economic relation between 
domestic slack and inflation, the so-called Phillips curve, fails to assert itself, 
adding ever more stimulus makes our policy increasingly procyclical, reinforcing 
these risks. 
  1 
  I therefore want to argue for modesty in monetary policy-making. We need more 
emphasis on the medium-term orientation of our inflation objective. Patience is 
thereby of the essence. Absent deflation risk, a full phasing-out of net asset 
purchases from September 2018 onwards is warranted. Our communication will 
have to shift accordingly, from net asset purchases and incremental stimulus 
towards reinvestment and preservation of broadly accommodative financing 
conditions.  
 A quick look back 
Let me begin by taking a quick look back. The euro area has endured some rough 
times. In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, the euro area weathered a 
sovereign debt crisis and a severe recession. These developments affected 
financial market actors, households, firms and governments. In an attempt to 
soften the impact of the crisis, the ECB took unprecedented monetary policy 
measures. Liquidity was provided in full allotment, and for longer periods than 
ever before. Interest rates were cut below zero, and several outright purchase 
programmes were set up. An indicator developed by the Dutch central bank 
shows that our actions were collectively equivalent to cutting short-term 
interest rates to around -4%.1 Faced with severe challenges, the Eurosystem 
responded forcefully.  
 Being here in London tonight, allow me to highlight one crucial moment 5 years 
ago, when the functioning of sovereign debt markets in the euro area was 
severely undermined in the presence of redenomination risk fears. On July 26, 
2012, our President Mario Draghi gave his famous “Whatever it takes” speech. 
Shortly after, the ECB announced its Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) 
programme. Markets calmed down, in the knowledge that the central bank 
would intervene if needed. As they quickly realized the futility of speculating 
against the central bank in its lender-of-last-resort capacity, no purchases 
whatsoever were required under the OMT. This policy was successful on all 
accounts. 
                                                 
1 Christiaan Pattipeilohy et al., “Assessing the effective stance of monetary policy: A factor-based 
approach”, November 2017. 
 2 
   Chart 1: Euro area inflation 
Euro area inflation
Annual percent change
4
3
2
1
0
-1
 12
13
14
15
16
17
HICP
Core inflation (excl food & energy)
 Stemming a speculative attack on the integrity of your currency is one thing, 
controlling inflation is clearly a different ballgame. Whereas a central bank can 
credibly promise to do “whatever it takes” in lender-of-last-resort capacity, 
financial markets should not overestimate central banks’ ability to fine-tune 
inflation.  
 Since the acute crisis abated, euro area inflation has been low and rising only 
slowly. As chart 1 illustrates, core inflation fluctuated slightly below 1% between 
2014 and early 2017, and has yet to show more convincing signs of a sustained 
uptick. It is good to realize that stubbornly low inflation is not just a European 
phenomenon. Inflation in the US today, once corrected for imputed housing costs 
and thereby made comparable to our HICP measure, is actually lower than in the 
euro area, even though the economic and monetary policy cycles in the US are 
several years ahead compared to the euro area.  
 3 
   The universal nature of subdued inflation is increasingly linked to favourable 
supply-side developments such as technological advances and globalisation of 
product, labour and capital markets. The resulting disinflationary factors are 
global in nature and largely outside the realm of individual central banks. They 
have altered domestic inflation processes and have thus complicated the life of 
central bankers around the world.2 
 Chart 2: Euro area GDP growth 
Euro area real GDP growth
Quarter-on-quarter percent change
1,0
0,8
0,6
0,4
0,2
0,0
-0,2
-0,4
-0,6
12
13
14
15
16
17
  The inflation outlook 
I would nonetheless argue that the current low inflation rates, despite falling 
short of our medium-term objective, do not constitute a threat to price stability. 
The current inflation outlook should be assessed against the background of a 
robust expansion of the eurozone economy. As chart 2 illustrates, the euro area 
is currently enjoying its fifth consecutive year of GDP growth. Since mid-2014 
this growth can also be dubbed “reflationary”, in the sense that quarterly growth 
readings have consistently outpaced potential growth rates.  
                                                 
2 Claudio Borio, “Through the looking glass”, OMFIF City Lecture, London, 22 September 2017. 
 4 
   Against the backdrop of a reflating economy, the inflation outlook is consistent 
with our aim of an inflation rate of below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term. It should be emphasized that from the ECB’s early days onward, the 
medium term has been defined as a flexible concept. It depends on the shocks 
hitting the economy and the efficacy of the monetary policy transmission that 
should bring inflation back on target. The global financial crisis was arguably 
much deeper than the average shock foreseen at the euro’s inception, and the 
financial fragmentation it created within the euro area severely impeded 
monetary transmission. In a context of such widespread financial imbalances, 
the ECB’s first chief economist, Otmar Issing, argued that “there is little sense in 
continuing to pursue an inflation forecast for consumer prices over a horizon of 
one to two years. In such circumstances it may instead be advisable to set 
interest rates with a view to a time frame extending well beyond conventional 
forecast horizons.”3  
 Concerns have been voiced that a prolonged period of low inflation could lead to 
a de-anchoring of inflation expectations. While the conceptual relevance of this 
argument is beyond dispute, there are some challenging issues in 
operationalising it in the monetary policy process. Market-based and survey-
based measures of inflation expectations exist, but they both come with a range 
of caveats and have often provided conflicting signals as to whether inflation 
expectations were anchored or not. Moreover, the mechanism by which inflation 
expectations affect actual price- and wage-setting behaviour is far from 
understood. I therefore sympathize with former Fed Governor Dan Tarullo, who 
recently argued that “inflation expectations are bearing an awful lot of weight in 
monetary policy these days, considering the range and depth of unanswered 
questions about them”.4  
                                                  
3 Otmar Issing, “The ECB and the euro - the first five years”, Mais Lecture at the City University 
Business School, London, 12 May 2004. 
4 Daniel Tarullo,”Monetary policy without a working theory of inflation”, Hutchins Center working 
paper #33, October 2017, and “Fed has no reliable theory of inflation, says Tarullo”, Financial Times, 
4 October 2017.   
 5 
  All in all, I am confident that our monetary policy measures will continue to work 
their way through the transmission mechanism. Also at current low inflation 
rates the ECB is fulfilling its price stability mandate and successfully protecting 
the purchasing power of European citizens.  
 Current policy stance 
So where does this assessment leave me in terms of the current monetary policy 
stance? After all, the crisis is several years behind us, the economy is enjoying 
solid expansion, price stability is not in jeopardy, yet many of our 
unconventional monetary policy measures are still in place. Liquidity operations 
are still conducted under fixed-rate full allotment, significant volumes of 
Targeted Longer-Term Refinancing Operations are still outstanding, and the 
deposit facility rate is still in negative territory. But the measure that has 
attracted most controversy in the recent years is our Asset Purchase Programme 
(APP). As you will be aware, the programme has just been extended until at least 
September 2018, albeit at a reduced pace of 30bn a month. As stated in our 
Introductory Statement, “The recalibration of our asset purchases reflects 
growing confidence in the gradual convergence of inflation rates towards our 
inflation aim.” 
 Although at past occasions I have been sceptical about the APP’s effectiveness 
with respect to raising inflation, the APP has contributed to four important 
achievements which I would like to recall here. First, the APP has further eased 
financing conditions across the euro area up to the point where borrowing costs 
are no longer an impediment to whatever spending decision. This also means 
that since monetary policy constraints have become de facto non-binding, the 
marginal benefits of further accommodation are negligible. Second, financial 
fragmentation between euro area countries has been reduced and monetary 
transmission has become much more homogeneous across Member States than 
was the case during the crisis. Third, the APP has supported the strong economic 
expansion I talked about earlier. Fourth, and perhaps most importantly, the tail 
risk of a 1930s type deflationary spiral has been averted. In doing so, the 
programme has achieved what could reasonably be expected from it. 
 6 
   With deflation risk clearly off the radar, the main rationale for employing the 
APP has therefore ceased to exist. Fear of relapse owing to an alledgedly 
premature discontinuation of net purchases seems rather overdone. The 
programme has simply run its course. Continuing the programme for the sake of 
fine-tuning inflation rates to precise values below, but close to, 2% suggests a 
degree of control over the inflation process that is at least debatable.  
 Risks and side effects 
At the same time, continued monetary expansion is not a free lunch. 
Unconventional policy measures can have unconventional consequences that 
even professional economists cannot always oversee. A prolonged period of low 
interest rates, ample liquidity and prominent central bank intervention in 
markets has given rise to potential misallocation of credit and wider resources 
toward zombie firms.5 Risk premia are compressed to a point where they no 
longer reflect the assets’ inherent risk characteristics. The dynamics of 
preventing financial markets to adequately price risks for an extended period of 
time takes our economies into largely uncharted territory.   
 These financial stability risks also need to be considered when assessing our 
monetary stance. While some would argue that prudential and not monetary 
policies should address financial stability risks, I tend to agree with former Bank 
of England deputy Governor Charles Bean that there are “important 
qualifications to this somewhat Panglossian view of the ability to maintain both 
price stability and financial stability by assigning monetary policy to the former 
and macroprudential policy to the latter.”6 After all, only monetary policy sets 
“the universal price of leverage”.7 Conversely, materialization of financial 
stability risks can also become detrimental to price stability. 
                                                  
5 Viral Acharya, Tim Eisert, Christian Eufinger, and Christian Hirsch, “Whatever it takes: The real 
effects of unconventional monetary policy”, SAFE Working Paper Series, No. 152, 2017. 
6 Charles Bean, “The future of monetary policy”, speech at the London School of Economics, London, 
20 May 2014. 
7 Claudio Borio and Mathias Drehmann, “Financial instability and macroeconomics: bridging the gulf”, 
September 2009. 
 7 
  Procyclicality 
In the current context, financial stability risks interact with the issue of 
procyclicality. The failure of the traditional Phillips curve relation between the 
business cycle and inflation to thus far assert itself makes monetary policy 
increasingly procyclical. Economic growth in the euro area passed its cyclical 
trough in the first quarter of 2013, while core inflation bottomed out early 2015. 
Yet until at least September 2018 the APP will be adding stimulus. Not only in 
terms of length, but also in terms of magnitude of the expansion, the economy is 
in outstanding shape. With real GDP growth hitting levels above 2% year-on-
year, the monetary policy stance is increasingly out of sync with the business 
cycle. 
 Chart 3: Euro area business cycle and monetary policy decisions 
Euro area business cycle and monetary policy decisions
PMI number on y-axis, with 50 marking difference between business 
cycle expansion and contraction
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Mean of PMI +/- ½ standard deviation
Composite Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) index
Policy easing (rate decrease or APP decision/expansion)
Policy tightening (rate increase)
 A simple historical comparison serves to illustrate this point. Chart 3 shows that 
during previous upturns, that is when the euro area composite Purchasing 
 8 
  Managers’ Index (PMI) stood at similar levels above its long-term mean, policy 
was generally tightening instead of the current prolonged easing.8 
 Obviously, the main factor underlying this contrasting pattern is the weak and 
elusive character of the traditional Phillips curve relationship between cyclical 
conditions and inflation. Whether this is merely a temporary or a more 
permanent phenomenon is a topic for ongoing debate. My colleague Mark 
Carney, for example, has recently argued that “globalisation has been 
accompanied by a weakening in the relationship between domestic slack and 
domestic inflation, and by a corresponding strengthening between global forces 
and domestic prices”9. Also in the euro area, the strong recovery of the labour 
market has yet to translate into upward pressure on wages and prices. 
 Communication 
Patience is therefore needed for our monetary stimulus to unfold. The reflating 
economy will ultimately translate into increased pressure on wages and prices. 
This may however take time. Central banks can only affect the price level with 
“long and uncertain lags”. Consequently they cannot be over-ambitious and try 
to steer price developments in the short run, nor should they seek to precisely 
define the horizon of their action.10 As we intend to reinvest maturing securities 
for an extended period of time, financial conditions will likely remain 
accommodative long after net asset purchases will have come to an end. 
 In view of the above, we have to adjust our communication. With a medium-term 
focus in mind, we need to highlight patience and confidence in the measures that 
we have already taken, while at the same time remaining realistic about what 
our measures can and cannot achieve. We will need to cater for the possibility 
that a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation (SAPI) can only be achieved 
well after net asset purchases will have come to an end. Fortunately, our 
                                                 
8 Moreover, data since the 1960s show that once the recovery took hold, the first policy rate increase 
has typically taken place after 10 quarters in Germany and 11 quarters in the US, on average. As 
indicated earlier, the current euro area recovery is enjoying its 19th consecutive quarter of growth. 
9 Mark Carney, “[De]Globalization and inflation”, 2017 IMF Michel Camdessus Central Banking 
Lecture, 18 September 2017. 
10 Otmar Issing, “Inflation targeting: a view from the ECB”, “Inflation Targeting: Prospects and 
Problems” Symposium St. Louis, 16-17 October 2003. 
 9 
  monetary policy stance is more encompassing, and all our measures are geared 
towards this objective. The focus in communication therefore needs to shift to 
the other elements of our policy toolkit, such as forward guidance on key policy 
rates, together with the ongoing stimulus provided by the stock of our asset 
purchases.  
 Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Our economy is in the midst of a strong cyclical upswing. Far-
reaching policy measures have contributed to cement growth, avert deflation 
risk, and enhance the cohesion of the monetary union. Although raising inflation 
towards our aim is taking longer than expected, current inflation rates are not a 
threat to price stability. With actual growth exceeding potential and labour 
market slack falling, inflationary pressures will eventually unfold. At the same 
time, the longer the Phillips curve fails to assert itself, the more procyclical policy 
might become, and the greater is the likelihood of financial stability risks 
building up.  
 Patience and confidence should therefore replace suggestions of open-
endedness in our communication. Absent deflation risk, a full phasing-out of net 
asset purchases from September 2018 onwards is warranted. Preservation of 
existing stimulus will be more than sufficient to reach our inflation objective, 
albeit at a medium term that may be further away than many of us are used to.  
 Let me then end with the more than relevant words of Augustus William Hare, 
“True modesty does not consist in an ignorance of our merits, but in a due estimate 
of them". Let us be modest and take a realistic look at what our measures can and 
cannot achieve in our efforts to maintain price stability. 
 I thank you for your attention. 
  10 
