François Villeroy de Galhau: With economic recovery underway in
Europe, what monetary policy?
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at a lunch-debate at
the Centre des Professions Financières, Paris, 28 September 2017.
 Accompanying slides
1
Ladies and gentlemen ,
It is a pleasure to be here with you for this lunch-debate of the Centre des Professions
Financières. I would especially like to thank your chairman Michel Pébereau for his kind
invitation. Today, I am delighted to be able to speak to you on a highly topical subject:
monetary policy in Europe in the context of economic recovery. The prospect of a very
gradual normalisation of our monetary policy gives rise to concerns and expectations. I
will begin by focusing on what our accommodative monetary policy has already achieved
today, before talking about prospects for the future. 
I. What is the situation today?
Economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  is  here  [slide].  It  is  robust  and  broadly  based  across
countries and sectors. Our latest ECB forecasts  confirm this: growth should stand at 2.2% in
the  euro  area  in  2017,  i.e.  a  significant  upward  revision  of  0.3  point  compared  with  June’s
forecast  of  1.9%.  This  means  that  for  the  second  consecutive  year,  euro  area  growth  will  be
comparable  to  that  of  the  United  States. And  that,  according  to  Eurosystem  calculations,  the
output  gap  will  return  to  close  to  zero  by  the  end  of  the  year  ( 0.6%),  even  though  France’s
situation is less favourable due to its growth lag (output gap of around 1.4% according to our
calculations). 
2
The non-standard monetary policy that we have been conducting since 2014 is contributing to
this acceleration of growth in the euro area, by supporting domestic demand and by fostering
very favourable financing conditions. In concrete terms, this acceleration results in more jobs –
over  6  million  jobs  created  in  the  euro  area  since  the  start  of  2013  –  and  in  a  pick-up  in
investment.  Corporate  investment  in  particular,  decisive  for  supply  capacities,  is  clearly
recovering: up 4.7% in 2015, 6% in 2016, and is expected to be up 4% in 2017 and 2018). [slide]
This  improvement  in  investment  is  underpinned  notably  by  ongoing  growth  in  lending  to  the
private sector, at 2.5% year-on-year in August 2017 for firms and at 2.7% for households, with
interest  rates  moreover  remaining  very  low.  This  growth  in  lending  is  over  twice  as  high  in
France, which incidentally leads us to be very vigilant at the High Council for Financial Stability.
We  are  also  observing  favourable  developments  in inflation,  which  is  gradually  moving  back
towards our target of 2% over the medium term [slide]. After peaking at the start of 2017, the
inflation rate stood at 1.5% year-on-year in August. Over 2017 as a whole, euro area inflation
should reach 1.5%, against just 0.2% in 2016; for the coming years, we foresee inflation at 1.2%
in  2018  and  at  1.5%  in  2019  –  with  a  change  in  composition:  less  “energy”  inflation,  more
underlying  inflation.  This  represents  a  first  success:  our  monetary  policy  measures  have
succeeded in warding off the risk of deflation which was still threatening the euro area last year –
we mustn’t forget that inflation was declining, standing at  0.2% in April 2016.
That said, despite the progress made towards our target, it is still too slow. The underlying trend
in  inflation  is  still  not  strong  enough  to  support  prices  in  the  medium  run.  Underlying  inflation,
excluding energy and food, has admittedly increased – rising from 0.8% in the first quarter of
2017 to 1.2% in July and August 2017 – but it still remains at subdued levels, despite the strong
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
recovery in activity and employment.
A significant factor is the relatively low nominal wage growth. Among the cyclical factors, I would
like to mention two in particular: first, persistent slack in the labour market – the unemployment
rate has fallen sharply in the euro area, to stand at 9.1% in July 2017, but it is still too high; [slide]
second,  backward looking  wage  bargaining,  which  means  that  low  past  inflation  is  feeding
through to wages today. The influence of these two causes should nevertheless diminish with
the recovery in economic growth and inflation.
3
Structurally, many studies  suggest that the Phillips curve, i.e. the relationship between inflation
and  fluctuations  in  economic  activity  or  unemployment,  appears  to  have  flattened  since  the
1980s  [slide].  Inflation  seems  less  responsive  to  changes  in  economic  activity  in  advanced
countries,  notably  because  of  globalisation,   which  appears  to  exert  downward  pressure  on
inflation via the decline in imported goods prices and competition from low-wage countries. But a
flatter Phillips curve does not call into question this relationship: we are in no doubt about the way
we are heading: the recovery and job creations will lead to higher wages and, ultimately, more
inflation. But we nevertheless remain less certain as to the speed of this adjustment. We are
both confident about the effectiveness of our monetary policy and willing to be patient regarding
the time it will take.
II. What prospects for the future?
4
Let me now turn to the consequences for our monetary policy. You are well aware that we at the
ECB’s Governing Council will decide this autumn on the re-calibration of our policy instruments
beyond the end of the year – and, I quote Mario Draghi, “probably the bulk of these decisions will
be taken in October”. We are now faced with a simple requirement, in line with our mandate to
maintain  price  stability,  and  the  progress  towards  our  inflation  target:  we  have  to  reduce  the
intensity  of  our  net  asset  purchases,  while  maintaining  overall  a  substantially  accommodative
monetary policy.
As regards our asset purchases, we have to reduce their intensity in a pragmatic manner, as
we already decided successfully in December 2016. I insist on the word “pragmatic” because,
while keeping the current rules, we should on the one hand exploit the margins of flexibility of the
programme and on the other hand hold in reserve an additional purchasing capacity – if needed.
That  said, monetary  policy  is  not  limited  to  QE,  and  QE  is  not  limited  to  net  asset
purchases: we can keep a substantial degree of monetary accommodation even if we reduce
our monthly flow of net purchases.
1/  On QE,  the  academic  literature  provides  consistent  evidence  that  the  impact  of  asset
purchase programmes on the yield curve and asset prices is primarily driven by the total stock
of  assets  held  by  the  central  bank  (the  so  called  “stock  effect”),  rather  than  by  the  flow  of
transactions conducted over a given period (“flow effect”). In-house studies of the effects of the
PSPP find that holding a stock of bonds equivalent to 10% of GDP lowers the 10-year yield by
about 45 bps in the euro-area.  By contrast, flows of purchases have no significant additional
impact.  These  results  imply  that  our  current  programme  lowers  the  10-year  euro-area
government bond yield by about 100 bps. These effects are of similar magnitude than results
6
obtained  for  the  programmes  conducted  in  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom.
According to these studies, what matters is the extent to which and for how long central banks’
holdings reduce the availability of assets by removing them from the market. This implies that we
can  continue  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  the  yield  curve  by  keeping  our  stock  of  asset
holdings at a high level for a prolonged period.
5
Let  me  first  state  the  obvious:  even  if  we  reduce  the  monthly  flow  of  net  purchases,  we  will
continue to increase the size of our balance sheet. And let me add as a second consideration for
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
later:  in  any  case,  the  Eurosystem  will  remain  in  the  coming  years  a  major  buyer  of  euro-
denominated bonds thanks to our reinvestment commitment, which we took in December 2015
and  which  was  perhaps  not  widely  enough  noticed:  the  repayments  that  we  will  obtain  when
bonds  reach  their  maturity  date  will  be  fully  reinvested,  thus  keeping  the  size  of  our  asset
holdings unchanged.
Most importantly, our monetary policy is based on a set of instruments [slide]: it is not a solo,
but a quartet. On top of QE, we play with our policy interest rates, our forward guidance and the
provision of liquidity to financial institutions.
2/ Perhaps the most unconventional policy is the use of negative interest rates. I insist on the
fact  that  this  measure  is  the  most  unconventional  because  for  most  people,  nominal  interest
rates  are  positive.  It  is  true  that  negative  interest  rates  have  their  limitations;  I  have  already
stressed  them  in  the  past.  And  at  our  Governing  Council’s  meeting  in  Tallinn  last  June,  we
clarified  these  limitations  in  our  forward  guidance  stating  that  we  do  not  intend  to  lower  our
deposit facility rate below its current level of –0.40%. But slightly negative interest rates have their
virtues, even if they are not very popular among bankers. First, by removing the zero lower bound
constraint on expectations of future short-term interest rates, they contribute to easing financial
conditions by lowering rates along the curve, with a positive impact on the demand for credit by
firms. Second, the negative deposit facility rate (DFR) positively interacts with asset purchases.
Indeed, the portfolio rebalancing effect of QE is reinforced by the negative DFR, as banks with
excess  liquidity  holdings  have  a  stronger  incentive  to  reduce  these  holdings  and  put  their
reserves to work. The truth of the matter is that we have not so far seen significantly detrimental
consequences of negative rates on the profitability of banks, notably thanks to the favourable fact
that the slope of the yield curve has remained positive.
3/  Our forward  guidance  provides  further  indications  as  to  the  future  path  of  our  monetary
policy; and by steering expectations, it has an impact on the yield curve. Our forward guidance is
clear as to the sequencing: “we expect [the key ECB interest rates] to remain at their present
levels  for  an  extended  period  of  time,  and  well  past  the  horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases.”
There is no doubt within the Governing Council about this sequencing. In all events, we should
not consider raising interest rates until we have reached a sustained adjustment in the path of
inflation.
4/ The fourth instrument is the provision of liquidity to financial institutions. In October 2008, we
introduced  the  fixed-rate  full  allotment  policy  in  all  our  regular  refinancing  operations.  It  was
designed in order to guarantee banks’ access to liquidity – and this policy is still active today, for
both 1-week or 3-month  operations.  The  maturity  of  this  liquidity  provision  was  then  extended
with the launch of 3-year long-term refinancing operations (LTROs) and, later, targeted longer-
term refinancing operations (TLTROs). The latest series of TLTROs provided banks with up to 4-
year funding at attractive rates – as low as –0.4% – in order to further ease financing conditions.
In September 2017, a total of EUR 760 billion is still lent to euro area banks through TLTROs,
which is substantial, over 7% of euro area GDP.
Before  I  conclude,  let  me  add  a  few  words  on  the  recent  evolution  of  the  euro. A  number  of
factors play a role; monetary policy is only one of them. The sharp appreciation of the euro has
notably been stemming from the significant reappraisal of growth prospects for the euro area, as
well as from the geopolitical context. The impact of the strong euro on growth is currently offset
by the strength of domestic demand in the euro area; but the recent appreciation of the euro
exchange rate has led us to revise down slightly the outlook for inflation. Let me recall that the
exchange rate of the euro is not a policy target of the ECB. But the exchange rate remains an
element that we closely monitor owing to its possible implications for the medium-term outlook
for inflation.
I would like to finish by insisting on one word: confidence, but confidence without complacency.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Confidence, because our monetary policy is effective and the economic recovery is robust. But
confidence without complacency, because monetary policy is not the only game in town. It must
be supplemented by national reforms, particularly in France where the current acceleration of
reforms is positive. It must also be supplemented at the European level by strengthening the euro
area:  in  order  to  lastingly  boost  growth,  we  must  complete  Monetary  Union  by  invigorating
Economic Union. All those who legitimately reject overloading monetary policy – on both sides of
the Rhine – must now firmly support a stronger economic union. Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
 I would like to thank P. Andrade, P. Antipa, G. Cette, M. Dujardin, O. Garnier, A. Lojschova and B. Mojon for their
help in preparing this speech.
Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, September 2017.
See e.g.  Blanchard (O.), Cerutti (E.), and Summers (L.) (2015) “Inflation and Activity – Two Explorations and their
Monetary Policy Implications,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 21726, November.
Guilloux-Nefussi  (S.)  (2016)  "Globalization,  Market  Structure  and  Inflation  Dynamics, ” Banque  de  France
Working Papers 610.
See e.g. Andrade et al. (2016) and Arrata and Nguyen (2017) for the euro area.
See e.g. D’Amico and King (2013) for evidence associated with programmes conducted in the US and Joyce et
al. (2010) in the UK.
See speeches of August 2016 (Handelsblatt conference), September 2016 (annual CERS conference) and April
2017 (conference at Columbia University).
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
