Carlos  da  Silva  Costa:  Opening  remarks  –  "Conference  on
Financial Stability"
Opening remarks by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the Bank of
Portugal Conference on Financial Stability, Lisbon, 17 October 2017.
Opening Remarks by Governor Carlos da Silva Costa
Good morning ladies and gentlemen,
 It is a great pleasure to be here today to open Banco de Portugal’s 2017 Conference on Financial
Stability. On behalf of Banco de Portugal and the organising team, a very warm welcome to you
all!
10 years past its beginning, academics and policymakers are still struggling to build a consensus
on the policy implications of the financial crisis.
It is undisputable that the financial system in most advanced countries is now sounder than at
the onset of the financial crisis in 2007:
Funding of the core of the financial system (banks) is more stable,
An adjustment process leading to more sustainable levels of leverage took place, and
Banks are significantly more capitalized.
Nevertheless, the financial system is not immune to risks, and the existing policy instruments are
unable to fully address the persisting legacy of the crisis. 
Moreover,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  to  reduce  the  risk  of  moral  hazard  and  protect  the
taxpayer from shouldering private sector losses, there was a strong impetus against involving
public money in providing a safety net to the financial system. Bail-in principles in resolving banks
prevailed, as well as a general aversion to bail out provisions. While this should be the norm,
flexibility should be preserved to address emergency situations.
By  limiting  policy  options  on  the  usage  of  public  funds,  regulators  may  have  ended  up
exacerbating risks in the event of a systemic crisis. Jeopardizing financial stability will result in
output losses and damaging consequences to the overall economy.
As investors rationally act to protect themselves against the possibility of haircuts to their claims
on  weaker  institutions,  the  existing  framework  may  actually  accelerate  runs  and  create  a
heightened vulnerability to a future systemic financial crisis.
The  incomplete  set  up  of  the  Banking  Union  in  Europe  with  the  full  implementation  of  the
resolution  regime  is  a  dangerous  combination.  Last  week’s  proposal  by  the  European
Commission risks prolonging this problem. When seen in the context of the much smaller room
for manoeuvre of monetary and fiscal policy tools, this threatens to leave us less prepared to
deal with future crises.
Therefore,  despite  the  reforms  in  financial  regulation,  and  the  upgrade  in  analytical  and
monitoring instruments, we should not convince ourselves that our ability to detect and curb the
emergence of financial imbalances has reached a point in which we are in condition to avoid any
financial crisis.
In  the  meantime,  economic  policy  has  acquired  a  macro-prudential  scope,  aiming  at  leaning
against  the  wind,  which  includes  several  tools  as  the  countercyclical  setting  of  traditional
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
measures of capital requirements and borrower based instruments.
However,  macro-prudential  policy  is  still  quite  recent  and  more  research,  namely  on  the
instruments  that  can  be  used  and  on  their  potential  impact,  is  still  needed.  The  underlying
‘buffers’ were not built up before (and during) the crisis, additional tools still need to be developed,
and  more  work  is  still  needed  to  establish  a  comprehensive  macro-prudential  toolkit  beyond
banking, which to date is lacking. 
Issues  such  as  how  to  optimally  coordinate  policies  and  how  to  avoid  time-inconsistency
problems in this coordination are still outstanding. This is even more evident in a currency union
where monetary policy affects the entire region, but macro-financial imbalances may be local in
nature. 
Today’s Conference will address many of these issues by discussing:
the  main  challenges  imposed  by  this  changed  environment  on  financial  institutions’
profitability, behaviour towards risks and on overall financial stability;
possible  issues  arising  from  the  implementation  of  macro-prudential  policy,  such  as:  (i)
defining  the  optimal  policy  stance,  (ii)  availability  of  policy  instruments  to  mitigate
vulnerabilities  in  the  downturn  of  the  financial  cycle,  and  (iii)  the  interactions  of  policy
instruments in the mitigation of systemic risk, and 
the most promising advances in research to overcome the existing limitations to the most
commonly used methodologies in the analysis of systemic risks.
I thank you all for your participation and wish you a very pleasant and constructive conference.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
