Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Beginning a meaningful conversation - first
coordination dialogue on developing the local debt market
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Local Debt Market Development Workshop, Manila, 25 August
2017.
 The Securities and Exchange Commission, the Bureau of Treasury, and the Bangko Sentral ng
Pilipinas  are  no  strangers  to  coordination  and  collaboration  (Many  of  our  achievements  come
from working together!) and while this is not our first time to collaborate, it IS the beginning of a
new  and  meaningful  conversation.  Today,  we  mark  a  milestone  as  we  unveil  the  Philippine
roadmap for developing the local debt market.  At the same time, we look forward to engaging in
an initial discussion with market participants. 
This is a great time to begin this conversation! 
Recently, our capital market was recognized as an emerging investment hub in Asia by three (3)
major debt watchers – Moody’s, Standard and Poor’s, and Fitch. 
Robust economic conditions coupled with Government’s thrust to promote infrastructure create
favourable  conditions  for  capital  market  deepening.  Government’s  vision  of  a  “Golden Age  of
Infrastructure”  to  support  value-added  output  to  the  housing,  manufacturing,  connectivity  and
agricultural sectors is a game changer.  A deeper capital market will mobilize long-term savings
for the financing requirements of these priority industries.
1
Moreover, GDP is projected to grow at 6.8 percent in the medium term, with the inflation outlook
for the next two (2) years manageable and within the Government’s three (3) percent ± one (1)
percentage point target. 
Our international reserves are at a level of eighty point eight billion US Dollars (USD80.8B) as of
end-July 2017 — enough to cover eight point six (8.6) months of imports and payments of goods
and services.
As  if  these  are  not  encouraging  enough,  our  discussion  on  capital  market  reform  received
support via technical assistance from the IMF. The time is right to talk and take up reforms.
Colleagues and friends, it is our pleasure to start this conversation with you and to make local
history.  I am honoured to represent the BSP in this regard.
SEC  Commissioner  Ephyro  Amatong,  Treasurer  of  the  Philippines,  Rosalia  De  Leon,
representatives of the Bankers Association of the Philippines (BAP), headed by President Nestor
Tan and  BAP Open Market Committee Chairman Wick Veloso, the Money Market Association of
the Philippines under President Michael Joseph Delfino Government Securities Eligible Dealers
(GSEDs),  esteemed  guests,  on  behalf  of  the  Monetary  Board  and  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng
Pilipinas, I welcome you to the BSP.  Magandang hapon sa inyong lahat. 
Allow  me  to  share  some  pointers  on  how  to  make  common-ground  conversations  more
meaningful. 
These tips are borne not just out of my thirty-six (36) years of experience as a Central Banker not
just as Deputy Governor of the Supervision and Examination Sector for twelve (12) years but
these points were learned chiefly in my capacity as a friend and colleague (perhaps even as a
husband and father!). 
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
In my experience, a conversation is more meaningful when:  First, it is between those with the
same goals. 
In  this,  there  is  no  issue.   As  mentioned  earlier,  the  SEC,  BTr  and  BSP  have  always  been
partners.  For one, together with other institutions,  we are members of the Financial Stability
Coordination Council (FSCC).  The FSCC’s key objective is to identify, manage and mitigate the
build-up of systemic risks. Our institutions share the prudential objective of financial stability and
development.  Our  being  here  today  is  just  a  step-up  an  expression  and  a  specific
operationalization  of  our  original  goals.  In  this  particular  case,  we  share  the  same  vision  of
developing  our  local  currency  debt  market  to  support  our  growing  economy  in  a  sustainable
manner.
2
As  a  result,  the  Capital  Market  Working  Group  of  the  BSP,  the  BTR,  and  the  SEC,  with  the
support  of  the  Department  of  Finance,  joined  hands  in  developing  the  Philippine  Roadmap  to
accelerate  the  development  of  the  domestic  debt  market.  Three  areas  are  prioritized:  (1)
deepening the local bond market by adopting reforms to incentivize market-making, increasing
supply  of  short-term  debt  securities,  and  developing  an  effective  regulatory  framework  for  the
repo and OTC government securities markets; (2) the creation of reliable financial benchmarks
and valuation of financial instruments;  and (3) the establishment of an integrated financial market
infrastructure  to  promote  price  discovery,  transparency  and  orderly  trading,  clearing,  and
settlement of the full range of financial transactions.
Second,  the  value  of  a  conversation  is  greater  when  those  who  engage  in  it  understand  its
relevance and importance.  Otherwise, discussion is just chatter, intellectual calisthenics or a
venturing into hypothetical thinking.
Thankfully, we are here not just to engage in an academic exchange.  While there are scholarly
points to be made and learned, we all agree that debt market development is a pressing concern
one that has real-life implications, deserving of our particular attention.
We  understand  there  is  greater  demand  for  more  active  debt  markets  as  financial  systems
require funding sources from outside the banking system. We know that a vibrant capital market
can serve as an alternative source of industry financing and act as a powerful complement to
bank lending. 
We  appreciate  that  a  developed  local  currency  debt  market  is  essential  for  efficient  fiscal
operations,  supporting  a  sustainable  market-oriented  debt  strategy  at  reasonable  costs  and
desirable mix of maturities. A liquid money market likewise can help strengthen BSP’s monetary
transmission mechanism.  Development of the domestic currency debt market will also broaden
investment  opportunities  and  pave  the  way  for  increased  availability  of  financial  products,
including hedging instruments. This boosts economic resilience to external shocks.  
My third tip is that a dialogue becomes productive when it is open and honest when even hard
questions are respectfully asked and when responses are heard and listened to. This is perhaps
the most important tip to follow. When adhered to, this is when real connections are made.
And what are some of the hard questions?  Perhaps we can begin by asking, “What does it really
mean to deepen the bond market, to develop it?  What are the barriers to an efficient, transparent
and fair market?” 
How can we enable more people to have access to capital?  How do we increase scale and
efficiency? 
Should we take a deeper look at the secondary retail market? It is common knowledge that with
bond  sales  there  is  not  much  incentive  to  serve  retail  customers.  The  issue  is  cost  as  it  is
cheaper  to  deal  with  institutional  investors  transacting  in  large  sums  rather  than  with  retail
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
investors,  who  (despite  their  potential  number)  have  smaller  transaction  sizes.  The  barrier  of
minimum investment requirements in T-bills and bonds exclude many. Also, there is disparity as
while  institutional  investors  could  manage  the  information  asymmetries  (with  respect  to  price
discovery), retail investors are limited to deal only with their own banks.
My  take  away  from  this  is  that  while  a  deepening  of  the  financial  market  might  translate  to
financial inclusion, the two may not be automatically synonymous as they have different policy
implications. As a staunch proponent of financial inclusion, I suggest we bear these nuances in
mind when crafting regulations, with a commitment to financial inclusion as part of a broader
agenda.
There  is  a  need  to  be  pragmatic,  but  we  must  be  open  to  out-of-the-box  ideas,  balancing
regulation and innovation. We must be mindful of the changes brought about by digitization and
technological innovation. We might explore encouraging on-line bond trading even for individuals
in  the  secondary  market,  perhaps  doing  away  with  cumbersome  paper  work  to  complete
transactions. We can also look into how we can build capacity and acquire the individual and
institutional expertise to deepen capital markets.
Finally, I have learned that a conversation is only as good as the actions and changes that follow
it.  Parties  must  move  the  dialogue  forward,  with  a  clear  identification  and  fulfilment  of  their
corresponding roles to add value to the objectives sought. 
Winston Churchill said, “to improve is to change; to be perfect is to change often.” This is a good
note  to  end  on  since  this  afternoon,  SEC,  BTr  and  BSP,  will  be  announcing  some  changes
aimed at improving our local currency debt market. I also like the quote as it implies constant
improvement.
I hope I have sufficiently set the stage for beginning our dialogue. Although now, I can see from
your  faces  that  very  little  motivation  is  needed  for  this  group  to  move  forward  with
excitement. You are excited enough!
Looking at the participants – prime movers and stakeholders in our debt market, from both the
government and private sectors – it is evident that discussions will be interesting, meaningful and
engaging. 
I wish us all Godspeed in our important task, not just for today, but in the days to follow. Thank
you and good afternoon.
1
2
The Philippine Development Plan. 2017 to 2022.
The Insurance Commission, the Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Department of Finance
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
