Andreas  Dombret:  What's  the  state  of  play  in  Germany's  banking
sector?
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the presentation of the 2017 Financial Stability Review of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt
am Main, 29 November 2017.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
I, too, would like to welcome you to our press conference. Now that Ms Buch has given you an
overview of the risks in the German financial system, I will now, as usual, take a closer look at
the German banking sector.
2. The German banking sector remains resilient
Let’s begin with the good news. The capital adequacy of German banks and savings banks is
today much better than before the financial crisis. Whereas, in 2008, the average tier 1 capital
ratio of German credit institutions came to 9%, it reached 16.6% in the second quarter of this
year. Many banks that were less well capitalised prior to the crisis have raised this ratio by a
particularly large extent. This is something I welcome very much.
The strategies by which they achieved this varied from one bank to the next. Small and medium-
sized banks and savings banks built up large amounts of tier 1 capital while at the same time
expanding  loans  to  the  real  economy.  Big  banks  responded  to  the  more  stringent  capital
requirements rather by scaling back their risk-weighted assets by 36%. This they did partly by
cutting back credit risk, partly by shifting to lower-risk investments, though for the most part by
reducing their balance sheets. However, fears of a credit crunch, though often voiced, did not
materialise.
With regard to credit risk, the problem of large holdings of non-performing loans (or NPLs) has
become a subject for growing discussion at the European level. However, in Germany, this issue
is limited to only a small number of institutions which invested more and more heavily in ships.
On the whole, however, the German banking sector has a very low NPL ratio of around 2%, and
the bulk of the portfolios concerned have largely been written down.
Allow me, nevertheless, to say a few words about Europe at this point. The current infighting over
powers at the European level on how to deal with NPLs is not helpful. We have to tackle the
reduction of NPLs in a determined and forceful manner – this is the only thing that should matter
to us. For this reason, the Bundesbank expressly supports the initiative of the ECB, which in
October published guidelines in an effort to push ahead with scaling back of NPLs.
3. Profitability in the German banking sector still low
After the good news, now for the not-so-good: The profitability of German institutions continues to
be  low.  This  effect  is  partly  attributable  to  structural  factors  and  partly  to  the  low-interest-rate
setting. Indeed, the impact of low interest rates is hitting the German banking sector especially
hard, as in many cases, the business models are heavily geared to interest income. As a result,
we are seeing a substantial drop in profits in traditional deposit and lending business. German
credit institutions are predicting that this development will continue. Another factor is that German
banks and savings banks are paying negative interest rates on their deposits with the central
bank, but rarely pass these negative rates on to private customers.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
So far, this development has been countered by the favourable macroeconomic conditions here
in Germany. The buoyant economic development, which is reflected, for example, in the small
number of corporate and personal insolvencies, is a major reason why both loan default rates
and risk provisioning needs have stayed low. In other words, the write-downs banks are having to
make on loans are very small. This effect has boosted earnings, which would otherwise have
been even lower.
In the context of the dialogue with external auditors, who are advocating releasing risk provisions
where possible given the current economic situation, I nevertheless advise banks and savings
banks to stick with their conservative stance going forward. I consider necessary the additions to
risk  provisions  which  banks,  according  to  information  provided  as  part  of  the  low-interest-rate
survey, are planning in the medium to long term. It is good to see the managing boards at these
banks are resisting the inclination to assume that conditions will always be good. To expect the
favourable developments of the past to continue indefinitely might otherwise be tantamount to
systematically underestimating credit risk.
4. A change in interest rates could hit parts of the banking system hard
This  problem  is  compounded  by  the  fact  that  German  banks  have  expanded  their  maturity
transformation in recent years. In order to stabilise profits in times of very low interest rates, they
have  increasingly  extended  the  lives  and  the  interest  rate  lock-in  periods  of  their  loans.  For
instance, the percentage share of longer-term loans and advances – that is to say claims with a
maturity of more than five years – at German banks has risen from 60% in 2007 to just under
70%. The ratio among institutions in the savings bank and cooperative bank sector is especially
high. At 83%, it is significantly higher than the 47% ratio for commercial banks.
Thus, we are in a situation in which banks and savings banks are holding many long-term, low-
yielding  investments  in  their  books.  Moreover,  valuations  for  many  investments  are  extremely
high. By contrast, risk provisioning in the German banking system is very low, at 0.6% of total
assets. This makes banks vulnerable to unexpected macroeconomic developments, such as an
abrupt hike in interest rates or an unforeseen deterioration in economic activity.
At  the  same  time,  they  have  shortened  the  maturities  of  their  liabilities.  The  ratio  of  overnight
deposits to total liabilities towards non-banks has risen within ten years from 36% to around 60%.
An important aspect in this context is that customers are parking their funds in deposits because
interest rates on investments are so low. It is difficult to predict how these funds will be shifted as
soon as more attractive investments become available. Historical experience gives us a rough
idea, but in view of the extreme situation of the current low-interest-rate environment it is of only
limited use as a guide for the future.
The bottom line here is that we see an increased vulnerability of banks to changing interest rates.
This is why we have been keeping a very close eye on the topic of interest rate risk.
Our  low-interest-rate  survey  2017  focused  on  this  very  issue,  simulating  the  implications  of
possible shocks for small and medium-sized banks and savings banks. One scenario entailing
an abrupt rise in the yield curve by 200 basis points highlights banks’ short-term vulnerability. In
such a scenario, profits would initially plummet by around 55% before staging a recovery in the
medium term. This means that the speed at which interest rates are raised is crucial.
The  stress  test  carried  out  as  part  of  our  low-interest-rate  survey  combined  several  risks  at
once. Besides an abrupt rise in the yield curve of 200 basis points, it simulated a simultaneous
increase in credit and market risk. On aggregate, in such a case the tier 1 capital ratio would
drop from around 16% to around 13%, which is to say by some three percentage points. Yet a
more detailed look reveals the positive impact of substantially improved capital levels. Small and
medium-sized institutions prove largely resilient to a simultaneous rise in the three types of risk.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thus the stress test scenario presents a mixed picture overall. On the whole, German banks and
savings banks are robust and in good shape. But this should not blind us to the major challenges
and the associated need for adjustments that banks face. Elevated interest rate risk and the low
level of risk provisioning increase vulnerability to shocks. I would therefore call on banks to focus
their risk management operations primarily on the issues of maturity transformation and interest
rate risk.
5. Brexit will represent a challenge
Let me round out my remarks by discussing a challenge faced by all of us and which is having a
particular impact on institutions. In all likelihood, the United Kingdom will be leaving the European
Union on 29 March 2019. In that respect, no press conference on financial stability can avoid the
topic of Brexit. I will therefore address this topic in the remainder of my remarks.
The  negotiations’  progress  has  tended  to  be  on  the  sluggish  side,  creating  considerable
uncertainty for everyone: citizens, companies and not least the financial sector. In the 16 months
that  remain,  the  Brexit-related  restructuring  has  to  be  completed  in  order  to  ensure  the
uninterrupted continuation of customer relationships between economic areas.
In this connection, I urgently advise all financial market participants to begin reorganising their
operations  as  soon  as  possible,  and  to  implement  this  process  rigorously.  This  means,  in
particular, that all those banks seeking to continue to do business in Germany or in other EU
countries once the UK leaves the EU should, if they have not yet done so, file applications for
licences as fast as possible.
Solutions  also  need  to  be  found  with  regard  to  how  existing  contractual  relationships  will  be
continued seamlessly after Brexit. For those institutions which change their contracts proactively
hoping  for  their  customers’  tacit  approval,  legal  risks  could  ensue,  at  least  concerning  retail
customers. Time will ultimately be the decisive factor.
For the UK to achieve the smoothest possible exit from the EU, meticulous preparation by the
banking industry is not the only thing that will be necessary. The preparations – or rather, the lack
thereof – in the real sector give me cause for concern. Companies should put their own access
to financial services on a solid footing, and vulnerabilities that the UK leaving the EU will create
for their own business models need to be reduced. Reorientation is always complex and requires
a lot of time – which, unfortunately, is in very short supply. 
What will Brexit mean for Germany? Even if the EBA will not be coming to Frankfurt after all, the
city will remain one of many EU financial centres where companies will relocate owing to Brexit.
In  particular,  we  are  noticing  that  business  areas  with  close  proximity  to  the  markets  will  be
making their new home here in Frankfurt. And this relocation will have a perceptible impact on the
structure  of  the  German  financial  system.  For  instance,  here  in  continental  Europe  we  have
never supervised brokers/dealers as large as those that are now likely to be moving to Frankfurt.
The  German  financial  centre  will  therefore  be  closer  to  the  capital  markets.  It  will  then  be
necessary to counter the negative stimulus of Brexit with a positive stimulus towards a deeper,
high-performance capital market. This could promote the development of Europe’s economies.
That would require rigorous advancement of the European capital market union project. Yet the
door  needs  to  be  left  open  for  a  close  and  deep  partnership  with  the  United  Kingdom.  I  am
therefore very much in support of a capital market union.
In those places where Brexit has driven a wedge between our economies, bridges need to be
built post-Brexit. One opportunity for such a bridge could be, for instance, the topic of central
counterparty  (CCP)  clearing.  One  way  of  building  a  bridge  here  could  be  through  intensive
cooperation between UK and EU supervisory authorities, which would also have to include far-
reaching powers of information and intervention for EU supervisors vis-à-vis UK CCPs. To the
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
extent  that  this  is  assured,  I  am  convinced  that  this  could  obviate  the  need  for  a  large-scale
relocation of clearing business, at least from an economic standpoint. The reverse naturally also
applies.
At  all  events,  London  will  remain  one  of  the  world’s  leading  financial  centres.  That  is  why
creativity and a truly global outlook will be necessary in order to place future cooperation between
the  EU27  and  the  United  Kingdom  on  a  solid  legal  footing.  For  one  thing  is  also  clear  –  the
world’s fast-growing regions are not going to stand idly by while Europe indulges in navel gazing.
German and European supervisors alike are making intensive preparations for the post-Brexit
era. And  this  is  our  message:  we  will  certainly  not  accept  "empty  suits",  and  the  banks  are
perfectly aware of this. Sound local structures with working risk management frameworks are
indispensable. This does not preclude a certain shifting of sub-risks to specialised risk hubs in
London which ensure group-wide risk management. It is clear that decisions cannot be made
exclusively from London. What makes this approach all the more important is that, in a crisis,
EU-based units will have to be able to act, or be resolved, independently.
We will try to take as pragmatic an approach as possible in our preparations. Thus, for instance,
we are willing to provisionally recognise models approved by UK supervisors in order to ensure a
smooth transition. On-site inspections by our banking supervisors, however, will then gradually
ensue.
The labour market for specialists is an aspect of Brexit that thus far has received little attention.
This represents a dormant, and not very tangible, risk – as demand for experienced staff will
encounter limited supply. These specialists’ current employers will have to reckon with intensified
competition for able brains. This must not be permitted to develop into a risk to the stability of our
financial centre.
The Bundesbank – along with the SSM – will increase its staff in order to maintain the high quality
with which it supervises the growing banking market. For us – precisely under the constraints of
the public sector – this will represent a challenge. Our Executive Board has already taken the
appropriate decisions, which we are now in the process of implementing.
All in all – as our talks with the affected institutions, amongst other things, have shown us – I see
banks  and  supervisors  alike  as  being  on  the  right  track  in  terms  of  shaping  Brexit-induced
change without any major frictions or risks to financial stability.
Another  sign  of  this  is  that  Brexit  is  not  a  sudden  shock  for  which  there  was  no  time  for
preparation or response. Ever since the UK prime minister declared in the middle of last year that
"Brexit means Brexit," it has been clear that the United Kingdom will leave the EU and that this
will  entail  far-reaching  implications  for  the  economy  in  general  and  the  financial  markets  in
particular.
If nothing else, the principle of commercial prudence impels us to prepare for the least-favourable
outcome – a hard Brexit. All things considered, I am convinced that, while Brexit will continue to
impair the efficiency of the financial industry, it will, in the process, not entail any considerable
direct adverse consequences for the stability of our financial system.
Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
