Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim:  Creating  an  inclusive,  sustainable  and
prosperous Labuan
Speech by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara
Malaysia), at the Labuan Industry Annual Dinner 2017, Labuan, 27 October 2017.
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  speak  at  this  dinner.  Last  year  I  spoke  on  the  urgent  need  for  Labuan
International Business and Financial Centre (IBFC) to reinvent itself to stay relevant – in other
words, for us to reinvent ourselves in order to survive in a new world reality.
In my remarks tonight, I will build on last year’s theme and touch on three imperatives for change
in Labuan, namely:
1.  First, to ensure the local community benefits from economic activity;
2.  Second,  to  transform  the  economic  structure  to  become  one  that  is  more  diversified,
resilient and sustainable; and
3.  Third, to rationalise and enhance tax incentives consistent with international best practices.
Ensuring the local community reaps the benefits of economic activity
Labuan has come a long way. After two and a half decades, it is now home to close to 14,000
companies,  54  banks,  more  than  200  insurance  related  entities,  foundations  and  leasing
companies, respectively.
Nonetheless, the growth of the financial sector should have more spillover benefits to the local
community. Two facts illustrate this:
1.  First, gains in income must be more evenly distributed across the local population. The top
20% earns more than 5 times the income of the bottom 40% household group . In addition,
we must improve the inequality in Labuan as measured by the Gini Index. It has to improve
to  at  least  the  national  level.  High  inequality  in  income  affects  growth,  productivity  and
opportunities for social mobility; and
1
2.  Second, the average unemployment rate at 5.1% in the recent years continues to be above
national average in Malaysia. While this might be cyclical because of the downturn in the
global  oil  and  gas  industry,  we  need  a  diversification  strategy  so  that  over  reliance  over
certain sectors is avoided.
Further, the workforce participation rate, especially among women, is markedly lower than the
national averag . Both reflect a worrying trend where the labour market is not tailored to meet the
needs of the local community. 
2
This state of affairs is disappointing and cannot persist. It reveals that an improvement in the
current economic operating model is warranted. A new model must be designed that can benefit
the local community in a more meaningful manner. Without doubt, it is our collective duty, as an
industry whether as regulators or industry players, to advance the welfare of society through a
more inclusive economic development. The success or failure to achieve this will reflect on us all
as a collective. 
In  this  respect,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  proud  to  offer  undergraduate  scholarships  to  two
deserving local students. This initiative to provide educational opportunities for deserving talents
is very much needed and it exemplifies how one can contribute in a tangible manner to the local
community. For the offshore industry in Labuan, which has benefitted significantly from Labuan
since its inception, it is time to give back.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
There are various ways in which the industry can assist the local population, such as innovative
and  creatively  designed  technical  and  industrial  training  that  can  assist  in  uplifting  the  job
prospects of local talents. For example, fit-for-work programmes that leverage on online courses
to complement industry supported training programmes and on-the-job training will improve the
job fit of the workforce. Needless to say, strong commitment by industry captains to grant similar
opportunities,  apprenticeship  and  fit-for-work  schemes  will  surely  hasten  the  upskilling  of  the
locals. The industry ought to come together to devise a scheme that give opportunities to locals
to get good jobs.
As we move forward, we need to be more focused on the outcomes we want for Labuan. We
want a more balanced growth. A clear step forward is to formulate clear and measurable targets,
and to review them consistently. The primary performance indicators that should be applied must
cover  aspects  such  as;  contribution  towards  Malaysia’s  and  Labuan’s  GDP,  quality  of  job
creation, training and development for the local population, investment in infrastructure, access
to financing by local SMEs. We must ensure that the benefits we obtain outweigh the incentives
given by the government such as the revenues foregone from the notional tax incentives offered.
The old adage – “You can’t manage what you don’t measure” – captures the essence of this
idea.
Transforming the economic structure to become one that is more diversified, resilient
and sustainable
Over the past few decades, the finance and oil and gas sectors have been the main economic
contributors  to  the  island’s  economy,  representing  more  than  half  (51%)  of  the  economy.
However,  the  decline  of  oil  prices  since  2015  have  revealed  the  vulnerabilities  of  Labuan’s
economy  to  the  volatilities  in  the  external  environment. As  observed,  businesses  across  the
board  declined  by  at  least  40%,  with  significant  repercussions  on  the  livelihood  of  the  local
community. The focus on only these two sectors has unwittingly elevated the concentration risk
on the island’s economy and the associated employment.
A  deeper  assessment  on  the  performance  of  the  financial  sector  indicates  that  the  intended
outcomes  have  not  fully  materialised.  Comparing  against  other  international  financial  centres,
there is still a significant gap in Labuan’s achievement from its counterparts. A case in point is
the Mauritius International Financial Centre, which was established around the same time as the
IBFC in the 1990s. Based on available data, the contribution to GDP of the Mauritius financial
sector was 10.4% with an employment and tax revenue share of 4.5% and 6.5%, respectively.
Other financial centres which entered the foray much later, such as Shanghai, have moved even
further  ahead  in  terms  of  tax  revenue  generated,  as  well  as  job  creation.   The  2017  Global
Financial Centres Index ranks Shanghai at 13 with Mauritius at the 73  position, while Labuan
is currently not even ranked in the Index. What this alludes to is that continuous reinvention of
financial  offerings  by  our  market  players  is  necessary  for  the  IBFC  to  build  a  niche  and  gain
international prominence.
th 
rd
3
Empirical evidence suggests long-term economic resilience can only be secured by adopting a
broad-based  economic  development  strategy.  In  other  words,  Labuan  needs  to  horizontally
diversify its economic base beyond financial services and oil and gas. Financial services might
be a driver, but it will not be the main one. Unquestionably, the way forward requires a refined
model that also gives equal weight, if not more, to inclusive and sustainable development of the
economy.
Another imperative for long term development is the issue of infrastructure. As with any other
island economy, Labuan’s growth prospects are very much influenced by the availability of hard
and soft infrastructure which are critical enablers for better connectivity and livability. Connectivity
is also an important imperative. Frequency of flights to Labuan would attract talent and visitors to
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the island. Labuan can also be positioned as the ‘halfway point’ between tourism in Sabah and
Sarawak. Travelling time can be potentially reduced with the Pan Borneo Highway and physical
connection between the island to mainland Sabah.
All in all, the effort to transform the economy through identifying new areas of economic potential
and fulfilling infrastructure needs is a difficult but not insurmountable task. We may refer to the
story of our country’s development for inspiration. Within six decades, our economy moved from
being a commodity-dependent nation to one that is successfully transformed. We subsequently
elevated ourselves to where we are today, an economy that is open, diversified and competitive.
This is only possible because of continuous investments in infrastructure over many decades.
Rationalising tax incentives to be in line with international practices
On the global regulatory front, as we had witnessed, the unfolding of the global financial crisis
revealed the significant vulnerability of international financial markets to market dislocations. Calls
for  greater  regulatory  harmonisation  and  the  adoption  of  international  best  practices  have
gathered speed, blurring the distinction between onshore and offshore regulatory requirements.
Offshore financial centres which remain mired in the old model and thinking are set to become
part of a sunset industry.
There have also been significant advancements with respect to international taxation practices.
Authorities are now more proactive in seeking to mitigate the distortionary effects of harmful tax
competition on the allocation of resources and its negative implications on national tax bases.
Malaysia,  until  early  this  year,  has  been  an  observer  of  the  OECD’s  Inclusive  Framework  on
Base  Erosion  Profit  Shifting  (BEPS).  Since  January  2017,  we  have  agreed  to  become  a
participating member in the Inclusive Framework.
This will allow Malaysia to participate in the BEPS related work on equal footing with other OECD
and G20 countries. We will also be able to provide direct inputs to shape the content of the BEPS
related standards.
In addition to that, work has commenced on reviewing respective jurisdictions’ preferential tax
regimes against the standards outlined, to combat harmful tax practices. The standar , which
forms  one  of  the  four  BEPS  minimum  standards,  will  require  authorities  to  step  up  on
transparency  and  substance  rules  for  geographically-mobile  activities,  such  as  financial
services. It seeks, for one, to prohibit the shifting away of income into preferential tax regimes
where  businesses  have  little  or  no  economic  activity.  Such  international  developments  will
directly influence IBFC’s business model going forward.
4
The  world  that  we  live  in,  since  the  creation  of  offshore  Labuan  in  the  1990s,  has  drastically
changed. What was relevant then is no more relevant now. We have no choice but to change
with it. It is an opportune time for us to review of the current tax framework for Labuan.
The purpose of this review is not only to ensure alignment with international best practices, but to
confirm  the  continued  relevance  of  such  incentives  in  catalysing  new  growth  areas.  Tax
incentives for businesses which have become irrelevant should be rationalised. The allocation of
any  preferential  tax  treatment  must  be  supported  by  clear  value  propositions  that  are
systematically measured across the qualifying period.
Businesses  that  enjoy  tax  incentives  will  be  benchmarked  against  the  performance  indicators
that quantify economics and financial benefits. This is not meant to be onerous. It is a necessary
tool to ensure that the economy grows in an inclusive and sustainable way and the public policies
implemented bear the intended benefits. Specific to financial industry players, such preferential
treatment  must  be  coupled  with  clear  business  strategy  that  integrates  the  desired  expected
outcomes of contributing positively to the national and the local economy.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The intended outcome of the revised tax structure would enhance the economy of Labuan with
balanced development. The revised tax regime should also improve regulation, compliance and
prevent tax leakages.
There will be greater and closer cooperation between the authorities to address any regulatory
arbitrage.  The  enhancement  is  also  consistent  with  our  continued  commitment  in  advocating
strong transparency and promoting greater fiscal sustainability. The review of tax incentives is
also to preserve the IBFC’s reputation and competitiveness.
Conclusion
The  outcome  that  we  seek  is  for  an  inclusive,  sustainable  and  prosperous  Labuan. All  must
benefit from the financial activities in Labuan. How we will get there is by design, by determination
and the courage to institute reform. Leonardo da Vinci once said “Knowing is not enough; we
must apply. Being willing is not enough, we must do”.
It is not an option for us to remain where we are. We must embrace the new reality, change
course and design a new strategy for our industry. Or else we will perish. We are in this as a
community.
As I said last year, we need to swim, or we will sink, together.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
RM15,328 vs RM3,654
Lower participation rate in Labuan (66.5%) vs national (67.7%). Among women this is even more stark (47.8%
in Labuan vs 54.3% at the national level).
Shanghai financial centre was incepted in 2009. Latest available data shows that the share of employment and
tax revenue collected was 5% and 9.6%, respectively.
Refers  to  the  BEPS  Action  5  –  Countering  Harmful  Tax  Practices  More  Effectively,  Taking  Into  Account
Transparency and Substance
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
