Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Towards resilience - are we on the right
path?
Keynote address by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara Malaysia), at the Malaysian Insurance Summit (MIS) 2017 "Towards Resilience: Are We
on the Right Path?", Kuala Lumpur, 30 October 2017.
 Nearly 30 years ago, the Governor of Bank Negara Malaysia highlighted several challenges facing
the insurance industry in Malaysia at the “Malaysian Insurance Industry Seminar” organised by
the Malaysian Insurance Institute (MII). He made four observations in his speech:
Insurance companies accounted for only 3% of the assets of the Malaysian financial system.
Only 1 in 10 Malaysians had a life insurance policy.
Foreign  insurers  were  at  best,  agents  for  their  head  offices.  There  was  no  urgency  to
develop local underwriting and management expertise.
Due  to  lack  of  local  technical  expertise,  the  sector  was  significantly  dependent  on  the
international reinsurance market. This in turn curtailed the development of local expertise,
perpetuating a vicious cycle.
A “Stock-take” on the Insurance and Takaful Industry’s achievements and shortcomings
In  the  decades  since,  the  Bank  has  implemented  major  reforms  to  strengthen  market
participation, improve transparency and professionalism in sales practices, and encourage the
development  of  domestic  underwriting  capacity  to  optimise  retention  of  reinsurance  and
specialised risks. In 2009, foreign equity participation in the sector was liberalised further.
After almost three decades of BNM taking over the task of regulating the insurance industry, it is
worth for us to do a brief stock take.
The insurance and takaful industry has grown at a healthy annual rate of 10.47% in the 20 years
prior to 2016, and the sector now accounts for 6% of the Malaysian financial system assets.
The industry is on a strong financial footing, with excess capital above regulatory requirements of
RM37.9  billion.  Risk  management  and  corporate  governance  practices  have  also  been
significantly strengthened. Insurance penetration, which is the ratio of life insurance policies and
family  takaful  contracts  to  total  population,  increased  from  25.3%  in  1996  to  56%  in  2016.
Liberalisation in the insurance sector shareholding was also undertaken with a view to further
improve the insurance sector.
Unfortunately, this is where the good news ends. Despite stronger and better managed insurers,
and an increase in foreign insurers’ market share from 60% in 2009 to 76% in 2016, many of the
issues raised 30 years ago remain with us today.
There are a few areas in particular that I would like to highlight:
First, the failure to make insurance and takaful attractive enough to large segments of our
population who are still devoid of any form of protection;
Second,  underinvestment  in  talent  and  the  continued  dependency  on  group  resources  to
support core functions, and
Third, the low commitment to domestic arrangements for reinsurance optimisation.
From the perspective of the population that remains underserved, the existing business models
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
are  essentially  broken.  While  life  insurance  premiums  and  family  takaful  contributions  have
grown by 48% since 2010, the penetration rate has only increased by 5 percentage points. This
indicates that the industry is increasingly concentrated on a narrow insurance segment. If we
eliminate double-counting, only 35% of adults have some form of cover. For the rest, products
are  too  complex  and  remain  unaffordable.  Existing  distribution  channels  also  fail  to  provide
adequate access, especially outside urban centres. Technological advancements are not being
used to the fullest.
Even  for  the  population  segments  that  are  being  served,  making  a  purchase  or  a  claim  is  a
process fraught with anxiety and headache. Increasing medical insurance premiums have also
placed  insurers  under  heightened  public  scrutiny,  with  questions  raised  on  the  suitability  of
product  designs  that  offer  little  protection  against  escalating  costs  of  healthcare.  Insurers’
contracting arrangements with healthcare service providers have also been called into question.
While insurers might not be the guilty party here, the response to the criticism has been slow and
wanting. As a group, the insurance community is meek in safeguarding the sector’s image and
reputation.
Underinvestment in domestic talent and capacity is another key concern. Among a large number
of foreign insurers, significant reliance on group level support has limited the investments in core
functions needed to develop strong domestic capabilities. In addition, large amounts of payments
are being made for management fees and outsourcing arrangements. Between 2014 and 2016,
it is estimated that insurers in Malaysia made no less than RM1.3 billion of such payments to
foreign affiliates. The repatriation of funds will be even larger if we compute the amount over a
longer period. Such arrangements are extractive in nature, and will have longer term implications
for the development of a strong domestic industry. We need higher reinvestment by insurers to
support the protection and risk management needs of our population and businesses.
Intra-group reinsurance arrangements have also resulted in unnecessary outflows when such
risks are well within the capacity of the onshore market. A handful of insurers have continued to
disregard arrangements that have been put in place to optimise onshore capacity, ceding large
amounts to group reinsurers. This is not an acceptable behaviour. It must change.
Going  forward,  we  expect  insurers  to  review  these  practices  and  fully  support  optimisation
arrangements.  In  parallel,  more  must  be  done  to  develop  domestic  underwriting  expertise,
especially in specialist risks. More must be done to create high income jobs. More needs to be
done to improve remuneration packages at entry and middle levels, to attract young talents and
retain  expertise.  The  data  we  collated  is  stark.  It  is  a  clear  conclusion.  The  data  points  to  a
prolonged  underinvestment  in  talent,  with  fewer  than  1  in  10  of  the  industry  workforce  today
having any form of professional qualification.
From another angle, the industry has yet to realise its potential, in part due to a lack of long-term
commitment from domestic shareholders. The industry needs domestic shareholders that have
a long term outlook and can support the deepening of our market. For such shareholders, the
payoffs are likely to be significant given the untapped growth potential of the industry in Malaysia.
However,  on  more  than  several  occasions,  opportunistic  shareholding  transactions  have
destabilised the market, and set back broader efforts to build a strong domestic sector. There
are a number of domestic shareholders who after being given a license and the opportunity to
participate in the insurance sector decided to sell off their shareholding and make quick profits.
These types of shareholders are a cause of instability to the insurers’ operations. These are not
the kind of shareholders that would be viewed favourably for future participation in the financial
industry. 
The way forward: invest now to make insurance accessible to all
Given this state of affairs, I would like to pose this question, borrowing from the theme of this
summit: “Are we on the right path?” I believe that the industry can be on the right path if it takes a
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
long term view and starts taking meaningful steps to address the gaps in our market. Let me lay
out some of these steps.
Firstly, products and delivery channels need to be diversified and redesigned to be better suited
to the whole population. This must entail a renewed focus on protection needs especially for first-
time buyers. The Bank is partnering with the industry to roll out Perlindungan Tenang, a national
branding  and  communication  platform  in  the  near  future.  Perlindungan  Tenang  is  intended  to
reach 8 million working-age Malaysians and over 700,000 micro enterprises that currently need
insurance and takaful protection against key risks.
Products that meet the three criteria of being: Affordable, Accessible and Easy to understand.
This product will carry the Perlindungan Tenang logo and benefit from regulatory flexibilities and
co-branding and promotional initiatives. The aim is to address ‘pain points’ that commonly hold
consumers back from purchasing insurance and takaful products. To-date, four insurers and two
takaful  operators  have  developed  products  that  will  be  introduced  under  this  initiative  and  we
expect many more to come on board.
Secondly, the industry needs to embrace digitalisation to revolutionise the customer experience.
Many  of  the  factors  that  make  digitalisation  possible  in  other  sectors,  such  as  a  high  mobile
penetration  rate  of  134%  and  the  proliferation  of  new  technologies,  are  also  available  to  the
insurance  and  takaful  sector.  The  banking  industry  has  made  significant  strides  towards
enhancing the take up of financial services delivery through the use of technology. In 2016, there
were 22.8 million Internet banking subscribers which represents over 70% of the total population.
The  insurance  and  takaful  sector  needs  to  catch  up.  Today,  online  insurance  distribution  still
accounts  for  less  than  0.1%  of  business  volume. A  very  poor  achievement.  With  consumers
already enjoying benefits of digitalisation in many other daily activities, they should expect better
levels  of  personalisation,  responsiveness  and  reliability  from  their  insurance  and  takaful
experience. This includes shorter time-to-compensate for insurance claims.
In terms of the migration to e-payments, the insurance and takaful sector is a key sector where
the usage of cheques is still prevalent. In 2016, 2.3 million cheques were issued by insurance
and takaful companies while 9.8 million cheques were collected by such companies from their
customers.
While good progress has been made this year with the decline in cheque collection accelerating
from -0.5% in 2016 to -22.1% in the first 7 months of 2017, more effective and creative measures
are needed to drive cheque usage to negligible levels. To this end, Bank Negara Malaysia has
recently  concluded  a  consultation  exercise  with  the  industry  on  the  implementation  of  an  e-
Payment Incentive Fund Framework (ePIF).
Under the framework, insurance companies shall set aside RM3 for every cheque issued and
RM1 for every cheque collected to be used as incentives to encourage their customers, agents,
service providers and government agencies to migrate to e-payments.
The current practice where agents collect premiums from customers in cash and make payment
to  insurance  and  takaful  companies  using  the  agencies’  own  cheques  or  credit  cards  should
stop.  The  industry  should  promote  greater  prudence  and  transparency  in  the  collection  of
customer  premiums  by  facilitating  customers  to  make  direct  payments  to  the  insurance  and
takaful companies. To this end, the industry equipping agents with mobile point-of-sale (mPOS)
or mobile apps to collect payment directly from customers should be the norm.
Thirdly,  the  industry  needs  to  collaborate  and  invest  in  key  market  infrastructure  and
arrangements.  These  should  support  at  least  four  key  objectives,  to  enhance  access  to
insurance;  increase  efficiencies  in  claims  processing;  promote  fair  competition  and  provide
additional choice for consumers as well as provide a strong mechanism to prevent frauds and
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
cheats. This is important not only to deliver a superior customer experience, but also to control
leakages,  manage  costs  and  ensure  sustainability  over  a  long  term.  It  will  also  position  the
industry to compete and position itself more effectively as we move forward as the disruptive
forces of competition, including from non-traditional players, continue to gain traction. It will also
prevent leakages arising from abuses, misrepresentation and fraudulent claims.
In  the  immediate  term,  the  industry  needs  to  set  its  sights  on  creating  a  convenient  and
seamless first-loss-notification process that leverages on shared infrastructure. Such a process
should eliminate intermediate processes that are currently adding costs and enabling abuse and
fraud to take place. Certain infrastructure should not be considered as a competitive edge. We
have  raised  this  issue  many  times.  Sharing  infrastructure  and  information  among  industry
players is very important, but efforts towards this have been quite disappointing.
The  establishment  of  the  ISM  Fraud  Intelligence  System  marks  a  significant  first  step  in  this
direction.  Deploying  the  latest  data  analytics  and  network  analyses,  the  Fraud  Intelligence
System is a milestone in the industry’s efforts to combat fraud, especially in the motor business.
This is a long overdue development and I note that the first phase has successfully gone live in
September  2017  with  four  pilot  insurers.  Its  success  and  benefits  will  very  much  depend  on
achieving  the  widest  possible  network  effects.  We  expect  all  insurers  to  support  these
arrangements.  Insurers  who  refuse  to  participate  in  this  scheme  will  be  looked  upon
unfavourably. We shall also take note of these recalcitrants’ failure to participate for a common
good.
Fourthly, insurers and takaful operators need to invest individually and collectively in creating a
strong talent pipeline for the industry. We need to take stronger measures to professionalise the
insurance  workforce  and  foster  the  highest  standards  of  conduct  and  competence.  As  the
benefits of upskilling will accrue to the industry as a whole, talent development should also be a
collective endeavour. Only through collective effort can this be achieved.
In  this  regard,  I  am  pleased  to  announce  the  establishment  of  a  Talent  Development  Fund,
funded  by  the  industry  that  will  be  made  available  to  support  professional  training  and
development initiatives for the sector. This will include the introduction of appropriate professional
qualifications for key strategic and operational roles in the industry.
Finally,  there  will  be  deeper  engagements  with  shareholders,  boards  and  management  of
individual  insurers  and  takaful  operators  on  the  development  agenda  for  the  industry.  We  will
make  clear  the  areas  of  development  focus  in  the  coming  years.  Regular  engagement  with
candid  assessment  of  individual  company’s  performance  will  pave  the  way  for  companies  to
make more significant contributions to development objectives. And we shall rigorously measure
insurers’  performance.  Failure 
its  own
consequences.
Conclusion
favourable  achievements  will  have 
to  register 
Change is not an option. It is a constant. While global insurance growth is expected to remain
healthy and will continue to be driven by emerging economies over the next few years, the quality
of growth is equally important. We want growth that is sustainable and balanced where benefits
are  enjoyed  by  society  at  large  via  higher  levels  of  meaningful  protection  for  households  and
businesses.  We  must  be  responsive  to  the  changes  that  are  taking  place  in  our  society  and
economy. 
We need to take urgent action or risk becoming irrelevant. The rising awareness of insurance in
our population is a golden opportunity for us to make an impact and change the way insurance is
perceived and experienced. The heightened consumer expectations and disruptive forces of the
new  economy  will  mean  that  accomplishing  this  will  require  a  steadfast  commitment  to  the
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
values that are fundamental to the social mission of insurance. We must always act in the public
interest for the long term benefit of our society.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
