Andreas Dombret: Sometimes small is beautiful, and less is more –
a Small Banking Box in EU banking regulation
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at a lunch debate on proportionality in banking regulation at the Representation of the State of
Hesse to the European Union, Brussels, 19 October 2017.
1. Introduction: Striking the right balance
Ladies and gentlemen
 At the end of the day, regulation is always about striking the right balance.
Regulators are always torn between “the stronger, the better” and “sometimes less is more”.
We  need  to  strike  the  right  balance  –  to  find  a  middle  ground  –  between  too  weak  and  too
constraining regulation. Today, I want to focus on a very important – but frequently neglected –
aspect of our balancing act: that between setting robust standards for global banks, on the one
hand,  and  allowing  different  business  models  of  the  many  small  and  medium-sized  banks  in
Europe to co-exist, on the other.
We  are  not  quite  there  yet.  The  core  problem  is  that  our  regulatory  architecture  still  lacks
sufficient  proportionality  –  in  non-technical  terms:  the  rules  are  too  complex  for  small,  locally
oriented banks.
Today I want to explain why this is the case – and why Europe’s decision makers should care. I
will begin by outlining how the current regulatory regime of complex rules that governs virtually all
banks in the EU came into being. Then, I will devote most of the rest of my speech to laying out a
solution for the EU’s banking sector: the Small Banking Box – a separate set of rules for smaller,
locally oriented, and less risky institutions.
2. International, complex rules for small, local banks
But let me first outline the challenge at hand: All banks in the EU are subject to a single set of
strong,  but  also  complex  and  detailed,  rules.  These  rules  are  derived  from  an  international
standard developed in a global forum. Why is this a problem?
International  standards  for  the  banking  business  are  very  important.  In  fact,  they  are  a  key
element of global financial stability. That’s why the Basel Committee, a global forum of regulatory
authorities from the G20 nations, develops these standards.
But we need to keep in mind that these rules were originally designed to level the playing field for
internationally  active  banks  across  the  globe. And  to  prevent  a  regulatory  race  to  the  bottom
among jurisdictions.
Naturally, they have therefore been fitted to the organisational structures, the business models, of
such large international banks. Since the adoption of the international Basel II framework in 2005,
the complexity of these rules has mushroomed.
The  Basel  III  reforms  launched  in  response  to  the  last  financial  crisis  –  including  the  final
elements of the Basel III package that we are currently negotiating in Basel – have made the
rules even more detailed and complicated.
We  have  the  guiding  principle  of  the  reforms  to  thank  for  this:  risk-oriented  governance  and
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
regulation  are  there  to  help  banks  allocate  capital  resources  as  efficiently  as  possible.  But  in
order to prevent undercapitalisation, this approach needs very specific rules. This increases the
compliance workload – that is, the effort associated with meeting the requirements as well as
demonstrating that they’ve been met.
The Basel rules were made for large, internationally active banks – they were not designed with
small banks in mind.
Yet, in Europe, we adopted these rules for all European credit institutions alike – including the
thousands of small and medium-sized banks with simple business models and regional focus.
The motivation for this one-size-fits-all-regulation was to have a single set of rules for the single
market. The EU’s primary goal of a common, single market meant that one single set of rules
was preferred over differentiated sets of rules. Proportionality – the principle that rules must be
proportionate to the issue they address – played only a secondary role.
While  this  makes  good  political  sense,  it  has  had  serious  side  effects  –  as  it  favours  large,
internationally active banks over smaller institutions.
Particularly for credit institutions that are able to strongly optimise their employment of capital in
order to benefit from higher returns, this is worth all the effort. And it’s worth it for especially large
credit institutions because they can profit from economies of scale where fixed costs per product
fall  as  the  volume  of  business  increases.  This  then  also  makes  it  easier  to  finance  a  larger
compliance department.
Smaller,  regionally  based  institutions,  however,  cannot  normally  rely  on  these  economies  of
scale or a strong risk appetite as a source of income. Seen from a single-entity perspective, the
cost of regulation is similar or even higher for these banks, but their ability to take advantage of
these complex strategies is somewhat weaker.
In other words, the complicated risk-oriented approach favours banks with a large organisation,
whose activities are more complex and which take on greater risks.
The reason we should be giving this more thought is that the vast majority of European banks –
around 7,000 in all – are smaller institutions.
The lack of proportionality is a serious concern. In my eyes, it entails at least three issues.
First  of  all,  small  banks  simply  do  not  have  the  resources  to  cope  with  the  sheer  volume  of
regulation. Employing another eighty employees for compliance is quite manageable for a large
international  bank.  But  to  a  small  institution  with  only  fifteen  or  twenty  FTEs,  another  two
administrative staff members might well no longer be affordable. Thus rules create distortions in
banking business.
New regulation typically need not worry about such business distortions if it serves the greater
good. Anti-smoking  regulation,  for  instance,  is  actually  intended  to  interfere  with  the  tobacco
market.  But  in  the  case  of  banking  regulation,  the  situation  is  different.  Some  requirements
developed for large international banks have proved ineffective for small credit institutions, simply
because these enterprises are less complex, do not engage in comparable business fields and
are thus exposed to fewer risks. Ineffective regulatory burdens are the second issue for smaller
institutions.
The  third  concern  is  about  potential  financial  stability  issues.  Due  to  their  local  focus,  small
institutions  perform  an  essential  function  in  funding  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises. And
during the crisis years, small institutions have proven to be more robust – not least due to their
simple  and  less  risky  business  models.  Thus  one-size-fits-all-regulation  threatens  the  healthy
diversity of the European banking landscape.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
3. Sometimes small is beautiful, and less is more: The Small Banking Box
This has spurred the European Commission to take action. In November 2016, it put forward its
proposals  for  strengthening  proportionality  as  part  of  the  general  overhaul  of  EU  banking
regulation. These proposals include important changes to the small print, and I am certain that
we will be able to roll out a number of meaningful initial improvements.
That  said,  the  proposals  don’t  go  far  enough.  Therefore,  I  strongly  support  more  graduated
regulation,  including  a  simple  set  of  rules  for  small  and  non-complex  banks.  I  call  this  more
fundamental solution the Small Banking Box.
The blueprint for this idea was drafted in a German Expert Working Group. The aim of this group
was to develop specific proposals on how to fundamentally alleviate the burden of regulation on
small institutions with simple business models. And it delivered on that aim. The outcome is a
“non-paper” which the Federal Ministry of Finance put before the competent expert group of the
European Commission in June this year. Let me briefly walk you through the approach.
4. The “Who”
First, let me address the “Who?", namely the intended addressees of the relief measures. The
proposal follows a three-tier approach.
At the very top are the systemically important and potentially systemically risky institutions – the
smallest group in terms of numbers but extremely important in terms of risk. Nothing will change
for  these  institutions.  They  remain  subject  to  the  full  Basel  III  requirements,  additional  capital
buffers, total loss absorbing capacity, and so on.
The second group includes institutions which are neither large and systemically important nor
small and low-risk, which is why it is not possible to make extensive simplifications for them.
Nonetheless, some targeted relief measures should be taken by making specific amendments to
the current regulations.
Finally, the third group is made up of small and non-complex institutions – the banks that are
most affected by the fixed costs of regulation. This group – the largest in number – would see its
cost  burden  alleviated  radically  by  means  of  a  separate  regulatory  device:  the  Small  Banking
Box.
The  burning  question  now,  of  course,  is  which  institutions  belong  in  which  group  –  and
particularly, which banks could be included in the Small Banking Box. These classifications have
to be balanced carefully, and this should be part of a European-level discussion.
Importantly, size wouldn’t be the only criterion. I’ve already said that not only do institutions in the
Small Banking Box have to be relatively small, they also must not be too complex. This is why we
will need additional criteria that prevent institutions with riskier business models from being part
of the simplified regime.
Experience has taught us, however, that there will almost never be a perfect list of criteria that
covers  every  eventuality.  This  is  why  the  final  decision  should  always  rest  with  supervisors.
Should they have serious misgivings, they can opt not to subject an institution to the simplified
rules.  They  can  also  take  into  account  the  systemic  risks  arising  from  the  connectedness  of
several small institutions – that is to say, small banks which are “too many to fail”.
This  set  of  options  should  not  be  a  one-way  street.  I  believe  that  institutions  that  would  be
considered eligible for the Small Banking Box should also nevertheless have the option of being
supervised under the more complex rules.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
5. The “What”
That leaves the second key question: what exactly might the box look like? Here we must aim
right at the heart of the problem, namely, the paperwork which the complex requirements create
in various areas.
Some of these requirements could be completely eliminated for institutions in the Small Banking
Box. I could, for instance, imagine largely exempting small banks from disclosure requirements
and abolishing remuneration rules for them. In addition, they could be absolved from recovery
and resolution planning.
Full exemption from other requirements would be a step too far. But that should not prevent us
from trying to make life easier for small banks. For example, reporting could be reduced to a core
reporting process – a standardised reporting approach, if you will.
When  designing  the  Small  Banking  Box  we  must  weigh  up  the  benefits  for  supervisors,  i.e.
ensuring financial stability, against the burden it creates for banks. As a rule of thumb, we can
say that any rules that are dispensable for effective supervision are up for negotiation.
Conversely, however, that also means that a lot of rules are not up for de-bate. And that brings
me to the limits of the Small Banking Box. Importantly, there can be no concessions regarding
risk-based capital ratios, the leverage ratio or the short-term liquidity ratio. And the list goes on.
Small banks’ business models are neither per se simple nor automatically low-risk – and that is
particularly true when looking at them as a whole. The new regime must therefore be simple yet
robust. Whatever happens, financial stability must be guaranteed.
6. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
Europe’s banking sector is still struggling with the legacy of the financial crisis. Regulatory reform
has made sure that this is done in line with clear, strong rules.
But: In 20 years, do we want Europe’s economy to be served by 50 banks – all of them much too
big to fail – and not interested in financing rural development? Or do we want a robust sector with
several thousand institutions – with very different business models, serving the different needs of
different  customers?  This  future  banking  sector  is  what  I  imagine  for  a  robust  European
economy – it is agile and it is resilient!
I am deeply convinced that it is worth to change regulations toward this end.
We need to strike a better balance between setting standards for internationally active banks and
allowing  for  different  business  models  of  the  thousands  of  small  and  medium-sized  banks  in
Europe.
Clearly, we can only meet this task at European level. That’s why we need to move forward with
proportionality within the current review process of CRR and CRD IV. But we must also push for
a more fundamental solution.
Therefore, I am calling on the Commission Expert Group on Banking, Payment and Insurance to
give  priority  to  the  work  on  proportionality  –  the  Small  Banking  Box  is  the  most  effective  and
efficient strategy to enhance proportionality.
More debate is needed on this topic. And that’s why I am pleased to see that we have gathered
such  a  diverse  group  of  experts  and  stakeholders  here  today.  I  am  now  looking  forward  to
hearing your views and discussing them with you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
