Stephen S Poloz: Understanding inflation – getting back to basics
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the CFA Montreal and
Montreal Council on Foreign Relations, Montreal, Quebec, 7 November 2017.
Introduction
 Inflation targets have been the centrepiece of monetary policy in Canada for over 25 years now.
Every Canadian has benefited. The high and volatile inflation and interest rates of the 1970s and
1980s are a distant, though painful, memory.
Recently,  however,  inflation  targeting  has  come  under  increased  scrutiny.  Many  advanced
economies have seen inflation either slow down or remain weak, even while economic growth
has been strengthening. This has led some to question whether central banks can still target
inflation effectively. Some have even suggested that central banks may be losing the ability to
understand the processes that drive inflation.
I hope to persuade you today that this is not the case. I’ve been at this for a long time, having
been part of the team that developed the Bank of Canada’s policy framework back in the 1980s.
Inflation  targeting,  supported  by  a  flexible  exchange  rate,  is  the  product  of  an  enormous
cumulation of thought and research spanning an entire generation. In my speech today, I intend
to show that the Bank has a solid understanding of the inflation process and retains the ability to
guide inflation to our targets over time.
Reviewing the Fundamentals
I will start with a quick review of the fundamentals. We implement monetary policy through our
key policy interest rate. Changes to this rate influence other interest rates, such as mortgage
rates.  Through  this  channel  and  others,  policy  rate  changes  affect  decisions  about  spending,
saving and investment. These adjustments work through the economy and eventually have an
effect on inflation. Importantly, it takes one and a half to two years for a change in our policy rate
to have its full impact on inflation.
The goal of our policy is to keep the annual rate of CPI inflation at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to
3 per cent range. The idea of a target range has been a key feature of our framework from the
beginning.  It  serves  to  recognize  that  inflation  targeting  is  an  imprecise  business.  First,  the
transmission from monetary policy to inflation contains several economic linkages, each of which
is complex and highly uncertain. Second, the inflation data themselves are subject to short-term
fluctuations  that  make  it  difficult  to  hit  the  target  exactly.  A  central  bank  can  do  little  about
fluctuations  in  gasoline  prices,  for  example,  yet  these  transitory  movements  have  a  large
influence on inflation movements from month to month.
Given  these  uncertainties,  it  is  not  realistic  to  expect  our  policy  instrument  to  control  inflation
down to tenths of a percentage point. In fact, the two-percentage-point inflation-control range is a
reasonable approximation of the degree of precision that we can expect to achieve. It is much
like piloting a boat in rough water: the boat is buffeted in one direction or the other, and the pilot
must continuously adjust the heading so that the fluctuations average to zero in order to arrive at
the desired destination.
To  help  steer  through  these  short-term  fluctuations  in  inflation,  we  make  use  of  various
measures of core inflation. These measures help us judge the underlying trend of inflation—the
rate we would see if no sector-specific or one-off factors were at work. Put another way, these
measures help us separate inflation’s signal from its noise.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  underlying  trend  in  inflation  is  driven  by  the  laws  of  supply  and  demand,  which  are  as
applicable today as they ever were. Excess demand pushes inflation up; excess supply pushes
inflation  down.  Central  banks  exploit  this  relationship,  working  to  create  excess  demand  or
excess supply in the economy, to target the inflation rate.
A  central  role  in  this  relationship  between  the  economy  and  inflation  is  played  by  inflation
expectations. The more anchored those expectations are, the more quickly the economy will find
its  way  back  to  normal  after  an  economic  shock.  This  is  known  as  the  credibility  dividend:  a
credible central bank will see inflation expectations well anchored at the target level and will have
a relatively easy time restoring normality after a shock. What this means is that the underlying
trend in inflation may become more stable as expectations become more anchored. In short, the
more  successful  the  inflation  target  is,  the  less  obvious  the  relationship  between  economic
shocks and inflation will become.
But that does not mean that the relationship is no longer there. The relationship between inflation
and  excess  demand  or  supply  really  represents  a  summary  of  a  number  of  more  complex
underlying linkages between companies and the labour market. Consider a company that finds
itself running at full capacity. If it sees increased demand for its product and expects that demand
to  persist,  the  company  is  likely  to  invest  in  new  capacity  and  expand  its  workforce.  If
unemployment  is  already  low,  the  company  may  have  to  increase  wages  to  attract  new
employees.  Over  time,  higher  wages  can  add  to  inflationary  pressure.  This  is  how  excess
demand works its way through the system and translates into higher inflation.
In addition to these domestic drivers of inflation, a couple of key external factors can also play a
role. For example, exchange rate movements can have both direct and indirect impacts. If the
value  of  the  Canadian  dollar  falls,  that  directly  raises  the  price  Canadians  pay  for  imports.
Inflation may tick up immediately, albeit temporarily. At the same time, the lower dollar can boost
export sales, and this impact on demand may work its way through ultimately to the inflation rate.
The same analysis holds for movements in global commodity prices—they affect inflation directly
right away, albeit temporarily, but can also have a more gradual impact via adjustments in the
economy. When oil prices plunged in late 2014, we saw both types of shock hitting the Canadian
economy simultaneously.
To sum up, in the absence of shocks coming from external factors, we can expect the trend of
inflation to be sustainably around the midpoint of the target range when the economy is operating
at full capacity and inflation expectations are well anchored on the target. That is why I have said
that “home” for the economy is at the intersection of full capacity and 2 per cent inflation.
Recent Inflation Performance
As I said at the outset, inflation in a number of advanced economies has been running short of
expectations recently. Consider a prime example, the United States. There, the Federal Reserve
looks at core personal consumption expenditure (PCE)—an index of prices consumers pay for
goods and services that is adjusted to remove the volatility caused by food and energy prices.
Core PCE had climbed close to the Fed’s 2 per cent target around the end of 2016, following a
prolonged  period  of  weakness.  However,  it  has  slipped  by  0.6  percentage  points  since  the
beginning of this year and now sits at 1.3 per cent on a year-over-year basis—all while economic
growth has been steady and unemployment very low.
While this may raise doubts about our ability to explain the trend in inflation, when you dig a bit
deeper  you  discover  that  there  have  been  some  special  factors  affecting  US  inflation.  In
particular,  as  mobile  phone  carriers  began  offering  more  unlimited-data  plans,  there  was  a
significant drop in the cost of data. Staff at the Bank of Canada estimate that special factors such
as these account for roughly two-thirds of the decline in US core inflation since the start of this
year. The impact on inflation of these relative price changes should not persist—in other words,
the underlying trend in US inflation is higher than it appears.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
In many other advanced economies, core inflation was soft throughout 2016, even as excess
supply was being absorbed. And unlike in the United States, this softness has come mainly from
goods  prices.  Bank  staff  have  identified  exchange  rate  movements  and  low  export  prices  in
emerging-market  trading  partners  as  factors  acting  as  a  drag  on  core  inflation  in  these
economies.
Here in Canada, total inflation slowed over the first half of this year and has stayed in the lower
half of the target range, even as our output gap has been closing rapidly. Both total and core
inflation have firmed in the past couple of months. Still, since the middle of last year, an average
shortfall in inflation of 0.7 percentage points has been unexplained by fundamental drivers. The
factors behind this weakness include below-average food inflation, caused by a combination of
abundant crop supplies and increased competition in the retail sector. Another special factor is
the  impact  of  the  Ontario  government’s  reduction  in  electricity  prices.  Like  the  United  States,
these  one-off  factors  account  for  roughly  two-thirds  of  this  year’s  shortfall  in  total  inflation  in
Canada.
The bottom line is that the fundamental drivers of inflation, along with some special factors we
can identify, can explain the recent behaviour of inflation reasonably well. Certainly, the remaining
shortfall  is  well  within  a  reasonable  margin  of  error,  given  that  we  are  working  with  statistical
relationships. Furthermore, the underlying trend in inflation is well within the target range we have
committed to.
In short, we understand inflation well enough for policy purposes. Nevertheless, like all central
banks, we would prefer to understand inflation perfectly and are not content to leave even a few
tenths of a percentage point unexplained. We are working hard on this, and this research agenda
is what I turn to now.
Searching for Other Inflation Drivers
Bank staff have examined 20 years’ worth of inflation data from 10 advanced economies and the
euro area. They used statistical techniques to look for inflation factors that these countries might
have in common. The first factor they found in common is fluctuations in food and energy prices
across  countries—as  it  turns  out,  these  can  explain  almost  half  of  the  movements  in  total
inflation. This makes sense, as food and energy prices are driven by global commodity prices.
But we generally look through movements in food and energy prices when we are assessing the
underlying trend of inflation. So, this common factor does not add much to our understanding.
Looking beyond commodity prices, Bank staff found evidence of a second factor common to all
countries that can explain around 15 per cent of the remaining variation in core inflation. As it
turns  out,  this  factor  is  correlated  with  the  recent  softness  in  inflation  shared  by  a  number  of
countries, including Canada. While we do not yet know exactly what is driving it, several ideas
have been advanced. Generally, these are related to either globalization or the digital economy.
Let me review some of these ideas.
Globalization
Globalization could affect prices in a few ways. An obvious one is linked to the movement over
the years toward more open trade. When companies are exposed to increased competition in
global markets, they face pressure to cut costs and hold down prices. Similarly, consumers have
access  to  a  greater  supply  of  imports  from  lower-cost,  emerging-market  producers,  also
dampening inflation. This impact became particularly important for manufactured goods early in
the 2000s, after China joined the World Trade Organization, and it could still be at work.
A related idea is that global economic slack is becoming more important for domestic inflation,
and domestic slack less so. Since the global economy has become more integrated, excess
global  supply  might  hold  down  inflation,  particularly  of  some  goods,  regardless  of  the  supply-
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
demand balance in any individual economy. Companies need to worry about competition from
other countries, not just local competitors, when deciding whether to raise prices.
The integration of companies in global value chains could also dampen inflation. Since various
production stages can be moved to where costs are lowest, companies and their workers face
additional competitive pressure to keep down prices and wages.
The digital economy
Another set of factors that may be acting as a drag on inflation is related to digitalization of the
economy. This could affect inflation in at least three ways.
First, there is the direct impact of price changes for information and communications technology
(ICT). Given how computer and home electronics prices have plunged over the years, it seems
intuitive that lower ICT prices could push down inflation.
Second,  digitalization  has  an  impact  on  competition  and  market  structure.  In  many  sectors,
digitalization has lowered barriers for the creation of new firms and increased competition. We
have seen the disruptions caused by companies such as Uber and Airbnb. There is also the
impact of e-commerce—the so-called Amazon effect—which can certainly affect how firms set
prices. Think of how easy it is to check a competitor’s price on your phone while you are in a
store, considering a purchase.
Third,  digitalization  can  make  business  processes  more  efficient,  improving  productivity  and
leading to slower price increases. Indeed, productivity has increased more quickly than wages
over the past year, roughly coinciding with the weaker inflation that we have seen.
However, Bank staff have yet to find rigorous empirical evidence to show that these factors add
to our understanding of Canadian inflation beyond what the basic drivers tell us. To be clear, all I
am saying is that the evidence does not pass the formal test for statistical significance. Common
sense  tells  you  that  globalization  and  digitalization  are  affecting  prices.  Over  time,  as  we
accumulate data, we may be more able to identify and statistically quantify these effects.
That said, it seems that, so far at least, the cumulative impact of digitalization is not large enough
to challenge our basic understanding of inflation dynamics. The Amazon effect appears to be
smaller than the impact of the rise of big box stores about 20 years ago—the so-called “Walmart
effect”—and even that was not large enough to force a rethink of the inflation process for policy
purposes.  
The Wage Phillips Curve
So,  if  we  cannot  prove  statistically  that  globalization  and  digitalization  are  restraining  inflation,
what  else  could  be  going  on?  Let  us  take  a  deeper  look  at  the  linkage  I  mentioned  between
unemployment and wages, which economists refer to as the Wage Phillips Curve. The fact is,
despite strong economic growth and plenty of job creation, wage growth has remained relatively
low.
Possible explanations for this are not that hard to find. Even though Canada’s unemployment rate
has  returned  to  its  2007  lows,  suggesting  the  labour  market  is  at  full  employment,  other
indicators suggest that a fair amount of slack remains. In particular, youth participation rates still
seem low, and a lot of people are still working part-time when they would prefer full-time.
As well, we know that many workers who lost high-paying jobs during the oil price collapse in
2014–15  may  be  moving  to  employment  in  other,  lower-paying  sectors.  Similarly,  younger
workers  may  have  lower  wages  than  the  retiring  older  workers  that  they  are  replacing. And
certainly,  the  perception  that  companies  or  workers  are  facing  increased  foreign  competition
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
could lead to slower wage increases. The fact that wage growth has been slower among goods
industries than services—which can be more easily insulated from globalization—supports this
idea.
Another  conjecture  I  will  offer,  which  is  difficult  to  test  empirically,  is  that  prolonged  very  low
interest  rates  have  lowered  the  relative  cost  of  capital  equipment  compared  with  the  cost  of
labour. Firms may be restructuring their operations, making greater use of capital equipment and
thereby limiting the scope for wage increases. Some can do this without even buying equipment,
instead  buying  capital  services  in  the  cloud.  Even  the  threat  of  increased  automation  may  be
sufficient to keep wage rises in check. This conjecture is worth exploring in more depth.
Given all these potential factors that may be holding back wage inflation, it is simply premature to
conclude that there is something amiss in the traditional inflation process. At a minimum, we
need to monitor measures of slack in the labour market to see how it is being absorbed. Over
time, this can be expected to lead to a pickup in wage growth, which in turn will feed its way
through to inflation.  
In short, we believe that there is still a link between labour market slack and wages, just as there
is still a link between inflation and the balance of total supply and demand. What this means is
that the closer we get to full output and employment, the greater the risk that inflation pressures
will appear.
This is just one of the many risks that the Bank will need to manage as we conduct monetary
policy. As we said last month, while the economy is likely to require less monetary stimulus over
time, we will be cautious in making future adjustments to our policy rate. In particular, the Bank
will be guided by incoming data to assess the evolution of economic capacity, the dynamics of
both wage growth and inflation, and the sensitivity of the economy to higher interest rates. A lot of
pieces need to fall into place before we can be certain that the economy has made it all the way
home.
Conclusion
Allow me to conclude. The popular perception that inflation has become inexplicable has been
greatly  exaggerated.  In  part,  this  perception  reflects  a  misunderstanding  of  the  accuracy  with
which  economists  can  predict  inflation,  and  a  misunderstanding  of  the  precision  with  which
central banks can control it. Fundamentally, we know how inflation works—the laws of supply
and demand have not been repealed.
Yes, Canada’s inflation rate has repeatedly fallen short of our 2 per cent target in the past few
years. For the most part, this may be explained by the drag related to the surprising persistence
of excess capacity in the economy, and the fact that inflation reacts to excess demand after a
lag. This drag can persist until all slack in the labour market is absorbed as firms build additional
capacity  through  higher  investment  with  the  economy  approaching  potential.  Beyond  these
factors,  there  have  been  repeated  relative  price  fluctuations—in  electricity  prices  and  from
increased competition in food retailing, for example—which have temporary effects on inflation
and  should  be  looked  through.  Moreover,  there  may  also  be  some  drag  on  inflation  from
globalization  and  digitalization.  When  we  put  it  all  together,  we  see  that  inflation  has  been
behaving well within the normal zone of statistical and policy tolerance.
I am not claiming that our understanding of inflation is perfect, complete and unchanging. Far
from it. We will continue to look closely at forces such as globalization and digitalization so that
we can better understand how they are influencing the inflation process.
There  are  always  uncertainties  in  economics.  That  is  why  forecasts  are  best  thought  of  as
ranges, rather than points, and why our inflation-control framework is based on a target band.
The bottom line is that inflation targeting has worked, through good times and bad, for more than
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
25 years. It continues to work today. And Canadians can be confident that it will continue to work
for years to come.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
