Peter Praet: Interview in Les Echos
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in
Les  Echos,  conducted  by  Ms  Isabelle  Couet  and  Ms  Catherine  Chatignoux  on  25  September
2017 and published on 29 September 2017.
 The German election is over. In your opinion, does the result hamper the chances of
reforming the euro area?
What’s important for us, beyond countries’ electoral calendars, is a stable currency and stable
prices. Today, the institutional reforms needed to strengthen the euro area after this decade of
crises must be successfully completed. The sovereign debt crisis of 2010–12 exposed the euro
area’s  weaknesses,  in  particular  the  lack  of  a  single  system  of  banking  supervision  and  a
collective crisis management mechanism.
In terms of European governance, what is the priority?
The  priority  is  to  finalise  the  banking  union,  in  other  words  to  truly  break  the  bank-sovereign
nexus. It is commendable that financial institutions have reduced their exposures to the public
debt of their respective countries since the crisis. However, banks are still too exposed to their
domestic  economies.  The  banking  union  is  currently  still  too  much  of  a  collection  of  national
banking  systems.  The  euro  area  has  established  a  Single  Supervision  Mechanism  for  the
banking sector and the basis for a Single Resolution Mechanism for distressed banks. But, in the
case of public intervention, too much of the ultimate responsibility still remains at national level. A
genuine Single Resolution Fund needs to be set up, without delay, at European level, to ensure
the stability of Economic and Monetary Union.
In concrete terms, how do we get there?
The banking union will remain incomplete for as long as each banking subsidiary in a country is
obliged to fulfil all the conditions regarding capital and liquidity. The aim of the banking union is for
banks to be able to manage their balance sheets as a single entity, regardless of their location in
the  euro  area.  The  strategy  for  getting  there  is  a  combination  of  reducing  banking  risks,  in
particular  by  strengthening  regulatory  requirements,  and  increasing  the  power  of  the  Single
Resolution  Fund.  Unfortunately,  a  binding 
fundamental
reconfiguration of the European banking landscape has met with reservations. But it is key to
ensuring the stability of the European banking system and the successful transmission of the
ECB’s monetary policy decisions.
So do you support the creation of a European Monetary Fund?
that  would  entail  a 
timetable 
Yes, this is the other main priority for the euro area. The idea is to manage and prevent crises
more  effectively. As  with  the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  the  role  of  an  “EMF”,  or  rather  a
European Stabilisation Fund, would be to lend money to governments under certain conditions.
The  key  questions  are:  who  will  the  decision-makers  be?  What  role  will  the  European
Commission  play?  What  will  the  governance  structure  look  like?  How  much  firepower  will  it
have?
We also need to know whether we want the assistance to be provided to countries on
the condition that they restructure their debt. This is what Germany’s “five wise men”
want...
In general, conditionality does not entail a restructuring of the public debt, which really is a last
resort. This is a topic that must be handled with great care. Let’s not forget the market reaction in
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
2010 when, in Deauville, Angela Merkel and Nicolas Sarkozy talked of engaging investors when a
government was in serious trouble.
The ideas which are currently circulating include that of a euro area budget.
The question is knowing what function to assign to a euro area budget. Personally, I think that the
stabilisation function for a country facing an economic shock is appealing in terms of economic
theory, but I’m sceptical at the political level. The fear is that transfers are always made in the
same direction and that the taxpayers of the countries offering support do not agree with this.
However,  a  common  budget  may  enable  public  goods,  such  as  security  and  defence,  to  be
financed more efficiently. In the euro area one of the urgent problems that needs to be addressed
is the insufficient real convergence of the economies. A labour market that is too rigid in certain
countries may, for example, inhibit the good functioning of the monetary union. Even though it is
the responsibility of individual countries to carry out the necessary structural reforms, incentive
mechanisms at euro area level require careful consideration because of these external effects.
Are the Macron reforms going in the right direction?
I would say so. These reforms are very encouraging. This is no longer the policy of small steps;
this  time  the  bar  has  been  set  very  high.  Now  the  reforms  need  to  be  implemented  and
supported by the public. We can also pay tribute to having the courage to carry out reforms while
the recovery is under way and the efforts no longer seem absolutely essential.
Would you say that the euro is now too weak for Germany, but too strong for France, Italy
and the others?
Before the crisis there were marked differences in wage costs and competitiveness, in Greece in
particular.  These  persistent  differences  have  created  serious  tensions  within  the  euro  area.
Macroeconomic  imbalance  adjustments  are  not  made  via  the  exchange  rate  in  the  monetary
union. That’s why it’s essential that the labour market and the goods and services markets work
well.
The  Bank  for  International  Settlements  is  worried  about  risks  caused  by  monetary
policies that are too accommodative. What’s your reply to that?
Our main objective is to ensure price stability. The financial crisis has created deflationary risks.
Our  monetary  policy  measures  have  played  a  key  role  in  the  economic  recovery,  which  is
necessary  for  inflation  to  gradually  return  to  levels  in  line  with  our  objective.  The  question  is
knowing whether the central bank has gone too far in its monetary policy easing. Now that the
gap between growth potential and real activity is narrowing, have we accomplished our mission?
At  this  stage,  my  reply  is  no.  The  economic  expansion  that  is  under  way  is  not  yet  feeding
through into higher inflation. We are not changing our priorities, but we must take into account the
improvement in economic conditions when calibrating our measures.
Should an end date for QE be announced?
No new decision has been taken since the Governing Council meeting on 7 September. We had
concluded  that  a  very  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  would  remain  essential  to  our
mission and that we would decide in the autumn on the calibration of our purchase programme
for the period beyond the end of the year.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
