Joachim Wuermeling: Operational challenges in the implementation
of monetary policy in the euro area
Keynote speech by Prof Joachim Wuermeling, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche
Bundesbank,  at  the  Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum  (OMFIF)  Lunch
discussion, London, 22 November 2017.
1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,       
 Let’s be honest: monetary policy implementation is not exactly an appealing lunch topic.
As a kind of reward for your audacity to come along regardless, I will focus my remarks on the
implementation  of  the  Public  Sector  Purchase  Programme  (PSPP)  as  the  main  pillar  of  the
Eurosystem’s asset purchases.
As a general reminder, I would like to mention that the question of how to implement purchases
of  public  sector  securities  is  not  the  first  question  that  monetary  policymakers  need  to  ask
themselves. The first question to be asked is whether such purchases should be implemented at
all.  The Bundesbank  has  always  been  critical  of  government  bond  purchases  in  a  monetary
union  because  purchases  of  this  kind  blur  the  boundary  between  monetary  policy  and  fiscal
policy. In our opinion, government bond purchases should only be used as an emergency tool.
That is also why the Bundesbank has called for a clear PSPP expiration date.
I  will  argue  in  my  remarks  that  the  operational  challenge  for  the  Eurosystem  is  to  ensure  a
smooth implementation of the PSPP. Smooth implementation does not only mean achieving the
intended monthly purchase volume; it also means minimising negative side-effects on market
functioning. There have recently been some misconceptions in this regard. Finally, I will argue
that  a  smooth  implementation  of  the  PSPP  does  not  mean  rewriting  the  rules  whenever
compliance would impose any kind of restrictions.
2 Ensuring a smooth implementation of the PSPP
2.1 Achieving the intended monthly purchase volume
So let’s start with the first of two important elements of a smooth implementation of the PSPP:
achieving the intended monthly purchase volume.
The PSPP purchase volume has been very substantial since the inception of the Eurosystem’s
asset  purchase  programme  (APP).  At  present,  overall  Eurosystem  holdings  under  the  APP
amount to about 2.2 trillion euro at amortised cost. PSPP holdings amount to 1.8 trillion euro.
This means that the PSPP holds a share of about 80 per cent in the APP. When it comes to
country allocation in the PSPP, at the end of October 2017 a book value of 437 billion euro had
been purchased in German debt securities, 356 billion euro in French debt securities and 310
billion euro in Italian debt securities. The background is that the Eurosystem is guided by a capital
key allocation in terms of PSPP book value amounts per country.
By  allocating  purchases  to  each  country  in  accordance  with  the  ECB  capital  key,  the
Eurosystem  seeks  to  avoid  the  moral  hazard  that  could  arise  as  a  result  of  purchasing  a
disproportionately large amount of bonds issued by highly indebted governments.
If it is not possible to purchase the envisaged amount of bonds in a given country, the relevant
national  central  bank  conducts  so-called  substitute  purchases,  consisting  of  bonds  issued  by
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
international organisations and multilateral development banks located in the euro area. This is to
ensure a smooth implementation of the national central banks’ share of purchases throughout
the life of the APP.
To this end, the Governing Council of the ECB has also adjusted the parameters of the PSPP
along the way. These adjustments include decisions to
increase issue share limits from 25 per cent to 33 per cent (September 2015)
include bonds issued by regional and local governments located in the euro area (December
2015)
increase the issuer and issue share limit for EU supranational bonds from 33 per cent to 50
per cent (March 2016)
broaden  the  maturity  range  by  decreasing  the  minimum  remaining  maturity  for  eligible
securities from two years to one year (December 2016)
permit  to  the  extent  necessary  purchases  of  securities  with  a  yield  to  maturity  below  the
ECB’s deposit facility rate (December 2016)
In October, the APP was reviewed again by the ECB Governing Council in the regular cross-
check of economic and monetary conditions in the euro area. As a result, the Governing Council
decided to recalibrate the APP. From January 2018, net asset purchases under the APP will be
reduced from a monthly pace of 60 billion euro to 30 billion euro. The ECB Governing Council
pointed  out  that  this  recalibration  is  due  to  improvements  in  the  economic  and  monetary
environment in the euro area.
As far as alleged shortages are concerned, let me emphasise that, since the inception of the
PSPP, the Bundesbank has never faced and does not face difficulties in purchasing the intended
amounts of German government bonds on the secondary markets.
2.2 Minimising negative side-effects on market functioning
But  there  is  more  to  a  smooth  implementation  of  the  PSPP  than  just  achieving  the  intended
monthly purchase volume. The  Eurosystem  at  the  same  time  has  to  minimise  negative  side-
effects on market functioning. There have been some misconceptions in this regard of late.
In August, for instance, a German newspaper reported that the Eurosystem had deviated from
the  capital  key  in  the  PSPP  and  had  bought  disproportionately  large  amounts  of  Italian
government  bonds.  The  Eurosystem  was,  according  to  this  article,  using  the  purchase
programme as a tool to fight political risks. The newspaper referred to the Italian share of net
purchases in July, which – when measured against the capital key – had indeed been slightly
elevated.
Let me be very clear on this point: temporary, limited deviations are not a new phenomenon. In
fact, as some countries have been relying on the substitute purchases I have just mentioned to
achieve  their  intended  volume,  slight  deviations  do  not  come  as  a  surprise.  However,  these
deviations  are  not  a  discretionary  policy  choice  to  support  individual  countries  but  are  purely
mechanical. There are technical reasons for them.
With  regard  to  the  July  purchases:  In  view  of  tighter  liquidity  conditions,  the  reinvestment  of
proceeds  from  French  bonds  maturing  in  July  2017  was  spread  over  several  months.  This
resulted  in  a  temporary  decline  in  the  share  of  French  bonds  in  net  PSPP  purchases  and  a
mechanical over-allocation for other jurisdictions in July – among them, Italy.
The PSPP’s design – and the APP’s design in general – allows for flexibility in its implementation
to limit the interference of bond purchases with the market’s price formation mechanism and to
preserve market liquidity. The pattern of monthly purchases has reflected this flexibility.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let  me  give  you  two  other  examples.  First,  in  view  of  expected  lower  market  liquidity  in  the
summer and towards the year-end, the Eurosystem frontloaded APP purchases, raising them
above  the  target  for  a  number  of  months,  while  reducing  them  below  target  in  August  and
December. Second, in the day-to-day implementation of the programme, bond purchases are
also
responsive to signs of scarcity of individual bonds.
To be more transparent about key factors influencing the monthly gross purchase volume, the
Eurosystem recently started to publish the expected monthly redemption amounts for the APP.
This  decision  reflects  the  increasing  relevance  of  reinvestments,  given  the  higher  redemption
amounts  that  will  be  seen  in  2018.  Principal  redemptions  on  securities  purchased  under  the
PSPP are reinvested by the Eurosystem in a flexible and timely manner in the month they fall
due, on a best effort basis, or in the subsequent two months. As in the case of July, the monthly
net  purchase  volume  per  jurisdiction  may  therefore  fluctuate  owing  to  the  timing  of  these
reinvestments.
Again, the allocation of purchases across countries is clearly rules-based. Temporary deviations
are due to various – in part, even overlapping – technical reasons. These deviations reflect the
fact that we want to be as market-neutral as possible in our monthly purchases.
On  a  side  note: Another  instrument  to  support  market  liquidity  is  the  Eurosystem’s  securities
lending. Bonds purchased under the PSPP have been made available since 2 April 2015, while
bonds purchased under the other programmes were added to the framework later.
2.3 No rewriting of the rules whenever compliance would impose any kind of restrictions
Ladies and gentlemen,
So far, I have explained to you what it means operationally to ensure a smooth implementation of
the PSPP. Namely, to achieve the intended purchase volume and at the same time to minimise
as far as possible negative side-effects on market functioning.
But  it  is  equally  important  to  consider  what  a  smooth  implementation  of  the  PSPP  does  not
mean. Namely, to rewrite the rules whenever compliance would impose any kind of restrictions.
Apart from the detrimental impact this would have on our credibility and reputation, adherence to
our monetary policy mandate is at stake.
For  instance,  there  has  been  talk  of  the  flexibility  of  the  issue  share  and  issuer  limit,  and  of
abandoning the capital key as a reference value for the allocation of the overall purchase volume
to bonds issued by euro area member states.
The limits relating to issue shares and issuers are important to prevent an awkward situation
from arising given that the Eurosystem has a crucial role in any sovereign debt restructuring that
may be deemed necessary. The Eurosystem would have to make use of its blocking minority in
order not to violate the prohibition of monetary financing.
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  by  using  the  ECB  capital  key  as  a  reference  value,  the  Eurosystem
intends to avoid the moral hazard that could arise as a result of purchasing a disproportionately
large amount of bonds issued by highly indebted governments.
It is quite obvious that changes to these parameters – which the ECB Governing Council has set
itself for good reason – would take monetary policymakers deep into the realm of fiscal policy.
Government  bond  purchases  blur  the  line  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  and  they  have
made us the largest creditor of the euro area countries. This poses a threat to our independence.
Furthermore,  if  the  capital  markets  are  to  encourage  fiscal  policymakers  to  embrace  fiscal
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
prudence, it is vital that market mechanisms generally continue to function properly.
I believe that changing the parameters – which is sometimes discussed rather carelessly, in my
opinion – would have considerable negative repercussions for those mechanisms. A clear sense
of scepticism is also apparent in the German Federal Constitutional Court’s decision to refer the
government bond purchase programme to the European Court of Justice.
3 Conclusion / Outlook
So let me recap my main points on the PSPP.
First, the Eurosystem has been successful in smoothly implementing the PSPP. Purchases will
be recalibrated as a result of improvements in the economic and monetary environment in the
euro area.
Second,  temporary  deviations  from  the  capital  key  are  not  a  discretionary  policy  choice  to
support individual countries. They have purely technical reasons and reflect the fact that we want
to be as market-neutral as possible in our purchases.
Third,  smooth  implementation  of  the  PSPP  does  not  mean  rewriting  the  rules  whenever
compliance with the rules would impose any kind of restrictions. Abandoning the capital key as
reference  value  or  increasing  the  limit  for  issue  shares  and  issuers  would  take  monetary
policymakers deep into the realm of fiscal policy – in my view, too deep.
Ladies and gentlemen,
In the last 15 minutes the focus was on the PSPP. But let’s not get too carried away with this
instrument.  I  would  warmly  recommend  that  you  take  the  trouble  to  broaden  your  view  to  the
other  decisions  by 
including  private  sector  purchases,
reinvestments, forward guidance, targeted longer-term refinancing operations and, of course, key
rates.  On  aggregate,  the  monetary  policy  stance  of  the  Eurosystem  will  remain  highly
accommodative for a while yet.
the  ECB  Governing  Council, 
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
