Peter Praet: EMU - how much federalism?
Keynote address by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the 5th Frankfurt Conference on Financial Market Policy, organised by the SAFE Policy
Center of Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, 27 October 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 I would like to thank the organisers Jan-Peter Krahnen and Hans-Helmut Kotz for inviting me to
speak at the fifth edition of the Frankfurt Conference on Financial Market Policy.
The theme of the conference is well-chosen. Despite significant improvements to its architecture
over recent years, there is a clear sense that Economic and Monetary Union, or EMU, remains
incomplete. There is much less clarity and precious little agreement on what a complete EMU
would  look  like,  however.  This  is  why  the  question  posed  by  the  organisers  –  “how  much
federalism” – is so relevant.
In my remarks, I would like to first review how federalism has evolved in the EU, highlighting that
it is as much a process as it is an end-state. I will then – drawing on the economic concept of
fiscal federalism – look more at the question of “how much federalism”, focusing on issue of risk-
sharing and the role of different levels of governance within EMU.
Federalism in the EU
The nature of the discussion on federalism in Europe has changed quite dramatically over time.
Shortly after the Second World War, the ambition for some was to create a “United States of
Europe”, mainly as a way to avoid renewed, devastating war.
This vision was shared by those who laid the foundations of the European Union in the 1950s,
most notably Jean Monnet, the first President of the European Coal and Steel Community. From
today’s perspective, it may seem surprising that the start of such a grand project was confined to
an area as specific as coal and steel. But Monnet and the other early architects of European
integration clearly understood that political federalism was the end-point of long process, which
had to be achieved incrementally and through focused actions in limited policy areas where the
benefits of European cooperation could be clearly seen.
To  quote  one  of  Monnet’s  contemporaries, Alcide  de  Gasperi, “we  must  begin  by  pooling  only
what is strictly essential to the achievement of our immediate aims, and do this by means of
flexible  formulae  which  can  be  gradually  and  progressively  applied”. For  these  “fathers  of
Europe”,  however,  it  was  self-evident  that  such  incremental  measures  would  gradually  move
Europe  deeper  into  federalism.  Indeed,  this  clear  sense  of  direction  was,  in  their  way,  a  key
motor to keep the integration process moving forward.
 Since then, the European integration process has tended to move in waves. There have been
times when it has stalled, such as the during the “empty chair crisis” in the 1960s. And there
have been times when it has unexpectedly sped ahead, such as with the launch of the Single
Market Act in the 1980s, and the commitment to Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) in the
1990s. But today, there is some confusion as to where we stand.
In some ways, the degree of ambition to achieve a full political federation seems to have become
more limited, which has led some to wonder whether the integration process will lose its forward
momentum.  This  reflects  in  part  the  failure  of  the  Constitution  for  Europe  in  2005.  The
unsuccessful referendums in France and the Netherlands can be interpreted in different ways,
but they clearly suggested that the people of the European Union were not ready to embark on
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the road towards full political federalism – or at least not at that point in time. It is also fair to say
that the appetite for such federalism today is not much different from in 2005. In recent years
there have been growing doubts about the European project.
At  the  same  time,  polls  consistently  show  that  European  citizens  support  federal  decision-
making in a wide range of areas, ranging from energy to migration to the fight against terrorism.
This reflects the fact that the benefits of federalism are much broader than its economic, fiscal
and  monetary  dimensions.  Indeed,  since  the  EU  was  originally  devised  as  a  peace-keeping
device, it is not surprising that one of the early initiatives for European integration was a motion to
establish  a  European  Defence  Community,  although  this  failed  in  1954.  While  a  full  defence
union is probably still unrealistic, there are increasing signs that further integration in this area
could happen in the near future.
The  Commission  reflection  paper  published  on  7  June  of  this  year  lays  out  proposals  for
establishing a European Defence Fund, which could form the nucleus of a future defence union.
Last week, the European Council welcomed the significant progress made by Member States in
preparing a Permanent Structured Cooperation (PESCO) in the field of defence, and the work
done  on  the  Commission’s  proposal  for  a  European  Defence  Industrial  Development
Programme (EDIDP). All this clearly chimes with the preferences of European citizens, three-
1
quarters of whom support “a common defence and security policy among EU Member States”.
The conclusion that follows is that we have to distinguish federalism as a state from federalism
as  a process.  It  may  be  the  case  that  a  full  political  federation  is  not  currently  desired  by
European citizens. But that does not mean that they reject the process of federalism – which is
to say, the dynamic allocation and reallocation of responsibilities to different levels of government
according to the preferences and needs of the time. While this process may benefit from the
gravitational pull of a pre-defined end point, it can also advance without it, so long as actions are
taken in areas where the benefits of cooperation are clear and the steps taken are legitimate in
the eyes of citizens. Indeed, what gave the EU both momentum and popular legitimacy in the
years after the war was its achievements – effective actions in specific areas – not necessarily
the visions of a unified Europe.
So how much federalism would satisfy these requirements today? One way to assess this is
through  looking  at  the  economic  aspects  of  federalism.  Certainly,  as  Richard  and  Peggy
Musgrave  wrote,  “economic  analysis  does  not  tell  us  what  degree  of  closeness  the  member
units of a federation should feel toward each other”. Political aspects transcend economic ones.
But economic analysis can help us better understand the consequences of various institutional
arrangements and choose the instruments we should use to pursue our common objectives. In
the rest of my remarks I will zoom in on some of these aspects of federalism.
Economic aspects of federalism
An important theme – one aspect of which will be addressed in the first session today – is risk-
sharing. The crisis has reminded us that both private and public risk-sharing are underdeveloped
in Europe, and that this underdevelopment comes at huge cost.
So, there is general agreement that risk-sharing channels need to be improved. There is less
agreement  on  where  the  emphasis  should  lie.  Some  argue  that  the  priority  should  be  to
strengthen  private  risk-sharing,  by  completing  the  banking  union  and  establishing  a  truly
integrated capital markets union. Others argue that EMU needs to focus on public risk-sharing,
be it through introducing a central euro area fiscal capacity or creating safe assets.
In reality, separating these two channels of risk-sharing is far from the obvious solution. Is private
risk-sharing a substitute for public risk-sharing? Or do they complement each other? There are
several arguments in support of the view that the two channels complement each other – but
only if the right powers are matched at the federal level.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
For example, it is clear that the banking union would not fully achieve its goal of severing the toxic
link between banks and national governments without a central fiscal backstop for the already-
existing Single Resolution Fund, as well as for the European Deposit Insurance Scheme that is
still  under  discussion. At  the  same  time,  fiscal  backstops  generally  raise  legitimate  questions
about  incentive  structures  to  protect  taxpayers,  which  need  to  be  addressed  in  parallel  by
appropriate fiscal governance at the federal level.
The  process  of  building  the  banking  union  also  illustrates  how  important  it  is  to  reach  an
appropriate  degree  of  federalism  to  achieve  the  objective  of  a  stable  and  integrated  financial
system that supports the European economy. Ideally, in a genuine banking union banks would
operate in the Single Market just as they operate in their domestic market. This is essential to
reap the full benefits of financial integration. The country in which a bank is headquartered should
be irrelevant. But, in practice, it remains relevant for as long as the consequences of potential
bank failures are still predominantly national. The irrelevance of a bank’s headquarters, therefore,
depends on the institutional structure of the banking union.
Let  me  take  one  very  specific  example  to  illustrate  my  point.  The  banking  union  is  not  yet
considered  a  single  geographical  area  in  the  supervisory  methodology  applied  to  globally
systematically  important  banks.  These  G-SIBs  are  subject  to  additional  capital  requirements,
which are calibrated on the basis of a cross-jurisdictional indicator. This indicator reflects the fact
that  failures  of  global  banks  are  more  difficult  to  handle  owing  to  coordination  difficulties  and
cross-border spillover effects.
When the responsibility for banks is shared, additional capital buffers for cross-border activities
lose their raison d’être. A single set of harmonised prudential rules for all banks in the European
Union  would  not,  in  and  of  itself,  be  sufficient  for  the  EU  to  be  considered  as  a  single
geographical  area.  But  the  Single  Rulebook,  the  existence  of  a  single  supervisor,  the  Single
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), of a single resolution authority, the Single Resolution Mechanism
(SRM),  and  of  a  common  backstop,  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  (SRF),  when  taken  together,
have equipped the banking union with all the features of a single geographical area. This should
mean  that  the  banking  union  is  treated  as  a  single  geographical  area  in  the  supervisory
methodology in future.
Finally,  there  is  the  question  of  how  to  design  fiscal  risk-sharing  mechanisms  for  EMU,  while
taking into account EMU’s unique nature. In existing federations the stabilisation function of the
central  budget  is  usually  a  by-product  of  redistribution  via  large  tax  transfer  systems. At  this
stage of European integration, it is clear that any politically acceptable euro area fiscal capacity
will be modest in size. So, the key question for the economics profession is whether it is possible
to remove the link between the stabilisation function and the redistributive function, allowing for a
central budget of moderate size to have a meaningful macroeconomic stabilisation effect. If this
were  possible,  such  a  central  budget  could  help  monetary  policy,  especially  in  times  of  deep
recessions when nominal interest rates may reach their effective lower bound. The European
Commission set out some proposals in its reflection paper published on 31 May – these require
further study.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
The answer to the question of today’s conference – “How much federalism?” – is not easy. Yet,
speaking as an economist, I think it is likely that the right answer lies on the side of “more than
today” rather than “less than today”.
Monnet famously said that “Europe will be forged in crises, and will be the sum of the solutions
adopted for those crises.” He was certainly right that further integration will proceed incrementally
rather than in a big bang. What I hope, though, is that Europe will not be forged in crises only.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Significant  progress  towards  a  genuine  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  has  been  achieved  in
times of acute crisis. Today’s improved economic environment offers a window of opportunity to
demonstrate that progress is possible in quieter times, too.
I thank you for your attention and hope you have productive discussions at today’s conference.
 1
 Standard Eurobarometer 87, Spring 2017 (fieldwork: May 2017).
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
