Øystein Olsen: Central bank priorities as the ECB moves towards
normalisation
Remarks by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the J. P.
Morgan Investor Seminar, Oslo, 13 October 2017.
 Thank you for the invitation to this seminar and the opportunity to share the floor with my Danish
and  Swedish  colleagues.  We  represent  three  small  economies  with  many  common  features,
most  notably  in  today’s  context  our  openness  to  trade  and  dependence  on  international
developments.
However, there are also important differences. As you probably all know – Norway extracts and
exports  large  amounts  of  oil  and  gas. As  a  consequence,  Norway  experiences  considerable
terms of trade volatility owing to commodity price fluctuations. This aspect of our economy is vital
in understanding recent developments and when discussing the future.
A small, open, commodity-producing economy is easily hit by shocks originating in international
markets. This was clearly illustrated during the financial crisis and after the fall in the oil price in
2014.  The  oil  price  collapse  triggered  a  strong  decline  in  investment  activity  in  the  petroleum
sector, which in turn affected the wider economy. Last year, growth in mainland GDP was at its
lowest since the financial crisis. Unemployment increased through 2015 and to some extent in
2016, particularly in Norway’s oil-dependent regions.
We  cannot  avoid  being  affected  by  abrupt  changes  in  terms  of  trade  and  other  international
shocks. But we seem to have learned from previous experiences. Since the mid-1990s, a main
purpose of the economic policy framework has been to shelter the economy from fluctuations in
oil prices.
The set-up of the Government Pension Fund Global and the fiscal rule for petroleum revenue
spending is one important defence mechanism in this context. The government’s net cash flow
from the petroleum industry is transferred in its entirety to the Government Pension Fund Global.
A transfer from the Fund to cover a non-oil budget deficit requires a decision by the Norwegian
parliament.  In  addition  to  preserving  the  real  value  of  the  Fund  for  the  benefit  of  future
generations, this set-up insulates the budget from short-term fluctuations in petroleum revenues.
It also leaves space for fiscal policy to counteract economic downturns. In effect, since 2013, the
increase in oil revenue spending has roughly matched the fall in oil investment.
Monetary policy has also played a role. Our monetary policy is oriented towards low and stable
inflation. The operational target of monetary policy is annual consumer price inflation of close to
2.5% over time. Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, so that weight is given
to  both  variability  in  inflation  and  variability  in  output  and  employment.  With  confidence  in  the
inflation target among economic agents, monetary policy in Norway has been able to contribute
to stabilising the business cycle.
Lower  income  from  oil  exports  following  the  fall  in  the  oil  price  meant  cost-competitiveness
needed to improve. A floating exchange rate greatly facilitated this process. In the aftermath of
the oil price fall, the krone exchange rate tracked the oil price and wage settlements remained
moderate.  With  inflation  expectations  well  anchored,  the  Bank’s  target  rate  could  be  reduced,
thus  underpinning  a  weaker  krone.  As  a  result,  relative  labour  costs  declined  markedly,
strengthening  the  position  of  Norwegian  firms  exposed  to  international  competition.  Over  time
this could enable new exports to emerge as the production of oil and gas dwindles.
Over  the  past  few  quarters,  growth  has  picked  up,  the  labour  market  has  improved  and
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
unemployment has fallen. The policy mix has played an important role, helped by a recovery of
the  oil  price.  Competitiveness  in  the  oil  service  industry  has  also  improved  considerably,
particularly after the substantial cost-cutting measures introduced by companies in this industry
in recent years.
With a floating exchange rate, domestic interest rates can differ from external interest rates, but
an interest rate differential that becomes too wide can have a substantial effect on the exchange
rate, generating instability in inflation, output and employment. Thus, the domestic interest rate
will also be influenced by external rates to a large extent under an inflation-targeting regime.
This was illustrated by a positive, but limited, interest rate differential in the first years following
the global financial crisis, when the effect on Norway’s economy was less severe than for most
other European economies. This allowed monetary policy to respond to the economic downturn
that followed in the aftermath of the fall in oil prices. The key policy rate was lowered and has
been kept at 0.5 percent since March 2016.
Our experience has shown us the crucial importance of flexibility in inflation targeting in enabling
us to make the appropriate trade-offs in response to shocks to the economy. The time horizon
for achieving the target must be sufficiently long, and the balance of risks, including risks related
to financial stability, must be taken into account.
The past couple of years have been demanding for the Norwegian economy, and the transition
towards being less oil-dependent is ongoing. New sectors must grow to offset the downturn in
petroleum-related  industries.  Monetary  policy  can  facilitate  this  process,  but  the  necessary
adjustments must take place in the business sector.
At its September meeting, Norges Bank’s Executive Board decided to keep the key policy rate
unchanged  at  0.5  percent.  The  Executive  Board’s  current  assessment  of  the  outlook  and
balance of risks suggests that the key policy rate will remain at today’s level in the period ahead,
followed  by  a  gradual  increase  to  close  to  1.5  percent  towards  the  end  of  2020.  Inflation  is
expected to remain low in the years ahead. At the end of 2020, inflation is projected to be just
below 2 percent. Capacity utilisation for the economy as a whole is projected to rise gradually
and to be somewhat above a normal level in 2020.
This assessment is based on the outlook for economic developments abroad. While inflation is
rising and growth prospects are improving internationally, global interest rates may have passed
their lowest point. Expected money market rates indicate that short-term interest rates among
our trading partners will rise in the years ahead. However, interest rates will probably remain low,
compared with pre-crisis levels, for an extended period of time.
If developments abroad take an unexpected turn, the Norwegian economy will be affected. The
challenges  may  become  more  severe  than  they  seem  at  present.  However,  we  believe  the
economic  policy  setup,  with  substantial  fiscal  policy  leeway,  a  flexible  labour  market  and  our
monetary policy framework, will enable us to face these challenges.
And  not  to  forget  –  a  normalisation  of  monetary  policy  is  most  notably  an  indication  of  a
normalisation of economic developments in the countries surrounding us. This is most welcome.
Thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
