Simon Potter: Implementing monetary policy with the balance sheet
Keynote remarks by Mr Simon M Potter, Executive Vice President of the Markets Group of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the ECB Workshop on "Money markets, monetary policy
implementation and central bank balance sheets", Frankfurt am Main, 6 November 2017.
  I would like to thank Deborah Leonard for her assistance in the preparation of these remarks,
and  colleagues  in  the  Federal  Reserve  System  for  numerous  insightful  comments  and
suggestions.
I’d  like  to  thank  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  both  for  inviting  me  to  give  this  keynote
address and for organizing this conference on money markets, monetary policy implementation,
and  central  bank  balance  sheets.  I’d  also  like  to  congratulate  all  of  the  presenters  and
discussants, whose engaging research and critiques help to foster a deeper understanding of
some  of  the  many  policy  implementation  issues  central  bankers  face  as  we  digest  past
challenges and prepare for future ones.
This conference comes as several major central banks reached milestones using their balance
sheets as active tools for providing monetary policy accommodation. The ECB just announced it
will extend its bond purchasing program but scale back the pace of purchases starting next year.
The  Bank  of  England  completed  purchases  under  its  Gilts  and  Corporate  Bond  Purchases
schemes  and  confirmed  an  upcoming  close  to  the  drawdown  period  for  its  Term  Funding
Scheme. And the Federal Reserve has begun to reduce its sizable holdings of securities, built up
through large-scale asset purchase programs (LSAPs) over the past decade.
My comments today will focus on the role that asset purchases may play in a central bank’s
toolkit  for  implementing  monetary  policy.  I  will  briefly  review  how  the  Federal  Reserve
successfully adapted its operating framework to be able to achieve interest rate control with a
large balance sheet and began its gradual and predictable balance sheet normalization program.
Then, in thinking about the prospective use of asset purchases in providing additional monetary
policy accommodation at the zero lower bound in the future, I will reflect on some lessons from
the Fed’s experience. Among other lessons, we have learned that asset purchases have clear
benefits at the zero lower bound, perhaps with more limited costs than initially raised; that we
had  greater-than-expected  capacity  to  conduct  large  purchases  without  harming  market
functioning; and that credible communications about use of the balance sheet and expectations
for short-term interest rates support adjustments in market pricing and smooth monetary policy
transmission. As always, the views presented here are my own and do not necessarily reflect
those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
The Federal Reserve’s asset purchases and operating regime
The severity of the global financial crisis that began in 2007 challenged central banks to use both
conventional and unconventional measures to address the economic effects of the crisis and the
sluggish  recovery  that  followed.  Using  its  conventional  tool  for  easing  the  stance  of  monetary
policy,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC  or  Committee)  lowered  its  target  for  the
federal  funds  rate  in  a  series  of  steps  from  5¼  percent  in  mid-2007  to  a  range  of  zero  to  ¼
percent in December 2008. With short-term interest rates effectively constrained at their lower
bound,  the  FOMC  provided  further  monetary  policy  easing  with  two  unconventional  tools:
Forward guidance on the expected future path of overnight interest rates and asset purchase
programs  aimed  at  putting  downward  pressure  on  longer-term  interest  rates,  supporting
mortgage markets, and making broader financial conditions more accommodative.  Purchases
of longer-term Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)
expanded the size, duration, and interest rate and prepayment risk profile of the Fed’s domestic
1
2
 1 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
securities portfolio.
In total, from 2008 through 2014, the FOMC undertook three rounds of LSAPs, resulting in an
extraordinary  expansion  in  the  size  of  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet—from  around  $900  billion  (6
percent of U.S. nominal GDP) before the crisis, to $4.5 trillion (23 percent of GDP) today.  For all
but a brief period of that time and until last month, the FOMC maintained the face value of its
securities holdings by reinvesting principal payments received on securities held in its portfolio. I
will discuss reinvestments more specifically later.
3
These  purchases  were  funded  primarily  by  increasing  the  stock  of  reserve  balances  in  the
banking system, which compelled changes in the operating framework the Fed uses to achieve
interest rate control.  With an abundant supply of reserve balances, variations in their supply—
the mechanism through which the Fed implemented monetary policy before the crisis—would no
longer  cause  meaningful  changes  in  federal  funds  rates  or  other  money  market  rates.
Implementation of monetary policy therefore required a new operational approach.
4
The  Fed’s  current  policy  implementation  framework  uses  a  system  of  rates  that  it  directly
administers to influence the level of short-term interest rates, without needing to actively adjust
the supply of reserves. Specifically, the Fed uses the rate of interest paid on excess reserves
(IOER) held by depository institutions as its primary tool for keeping the federal funds rate in its
target  range.  It  supplements  this  tool  by  offering  overnight  reverse  repos  (ON  RRPs)  at  a
specified offering rate to a broad set of counterparties, including eligible money market funds,
government-sponsored  enterprises,  primary  dealers,  and  banks.   Together,  IOER  and  ON
RRPs set a floor on rates, beneath which bank and nonbank financial institutions with access to
6
these facilities should be unwilling to lend funds.
5
This framework has been working very well. Since December 16, 2015, when the FOMC began
the process of normalizing the stance of monetary policy, it has raised its federal funds target
range four times to a current range of 1 to 1¼ percent. The effective federal funds rate (EFFR)
has been within the FOMC’s prevailing target range on all but one day, and changes in the federal
7
funds rate continue to transmit in a predictable and effective way to other money market rates.
Balance sheet normalization commences…
With normalization of the level of the federal funds rate well underway and interest rate control
effectively established, the FOMC has now begun the process of normalizing the Fed’s balance
sheet,  using  a  program  described  this  past  June  in  an  addendum  to  its  Policy  Normalization
Principles and Plans.  Specifically, as of last month, the FOMC is gradually reducing the Fed’s
securities  holdings  by  decreasing  its  reinvestment  of  principal  payments  received  from  those
securities, with payments being reinvested only to the extent that they exceed gradually rising
9
caps.
8
This process for reducing the balance sheet will run in the background, while changes in the
target range for the federal funds rate are the FOMC’s primary means of adjusting the stance of
monetary policy. However, the FOMC said it would be prepared to resume reinvestments if a
“material  deterioration  in  the  economic  outlook  were  to  warrant  a  sizable  reduction  in  the
Committee’s target for the federal funds rate,” and it would be prepared to use its “full range of
tools,  including  altering  the  size  and  composition  of  its  balance  sheet,  if  future  economic
conditions were to warrant a more accommodative monetary policy than can be achieved solely
by reducing the federal fund rate.” These conditions help identify the types of circumstances that
might  lead  to  some  adjustments  in  the  balance  sheet  normalization  process,  although  Chair
Yellen has noted there is a high bar for altering the balance sheet’s current course.
10
The  FOMC’s  balance  sheet  reduction  strategy  lays  out  a  gradual  and  predictable  path  for
portfolio  runoff,  which  should  reduce  the  risk  that  balance  sheet  normalization  will  generate
 2 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
11
undesirably large asset price reactions, volatility, or disruptions to financial markets or Treasury
debt issuance.
 That strategy—together with the FOMC’s steady communications throughout
2017 as the Committee developed it well in advance of implementing any change in policy—has
helped  to  keep  market  expectations  closely  aligned  with  the  FOMC’s  intentions.  The  market
response  to  the  commencement  of  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet  reduction  has  been  calm.  The
removal  of  policy  accommodation  associated  with  the  Fed’s  securities  portfolio  reductions
should  over  time  be  expected  to  put  some  upward  pressure  on  longer-term  interest
rates.
 However, the relatively muted increase in term premiums seen so far may in part reflect
the non-zero probability that market participants assign to the FOMC deploying the balance sheet
again  if  future  economic  conditions  were  to  warrant  more  monetary  easing  than  could  be
achieved  solely  through  reductions  in  the  federal  funds  rate,  consistent  with  the  FOMC’s
normalization plan guidance.
… but where is it headed?
12
13
The FOMC has started the process of normalizing the Fed’s balance sheet and has provided
some  general  guideposts.  The  Policy  Normalization  Principles  and  Plans  state  that  the
Committee intends for the Federal Reserve, in the longer run, to hold no more securities than
necessary to implement monetary policy “efficiently and effectively,” and that it will hold primarily
Treasury securities. In the June addendum, the FOMC noted that reducing the Fed’s securities
holdings will result in a declining supply of reserve balances, and that it anticipates reducing the
quantity of reserve balances to a level “appreciably below that seen in recent years but larger
than before the financial crisis.”
New York Fed staff projections for possible paths of the Fed’s securities portfolio—constructed
using a distribution of market participants’ surveyed expectations for the future size of the Fed’s
balance sheet (conditional on not moving to the zero lower bound at any point between now and
2025), along with some staff modeling to fill in details—suggest it will take at least several years
for the balance sheet to reach its “normal” size.
 Uncertainty about the time of normalization
arises  from  numerous  sources,  including  future  levels  and  variability  of  demand  for  different
types of Fed liabilities, the pace at which the agency MBS portfolio will pay down, and of course
the economic outlook.
14
Assuming  that  balance  sheet  normalization  continues  uninterrupted,  it  seems  likely  that  the
future balance sheet size will be driven largely by changes in longer-run demand for Fed liabilities
—in contrast to the asset-driven balance sheet of the past decade. The FOMC explains in the
June  addendum  that  reserve  balances  will  be  driven  by  the  banking  system’s  demand  for
reserves and the Committee’s decisions about how to implement monetary policy in the future.
Banks’ experiences during the crisis, structural changes in the banking system, and post-crisis
changes  in  financial  regulations  will  likely  increase  the  level  and  variability  of  the  demand  for
reserves relative to before the crisis, but we don’t currently know the precise shape and position
of banks’ demand curves. The FOMC has said that it expects to learn more about the underlying
demand for reserves during the process of balance sheet normalization. In addition, the FOMC
will need to decide what type of operating regime it wishes to run in the future—namely, whether
it believes it will be efficient and effective continuing to use a reserve-abundant operating system
(albeit with less abundance than seen at present) or returning to a reserve-scarce system, as
the Fed used before the crisis. In sizing up the balance sheet, policymakers will also need to take
into account several important non-reserve liabilities that are largely outside the immediate direct
control of the Fed.
15
On  the  asset  side  of  the  balance  sheet,  the  normalized  size  of  the  securities  portfolio  is  one
whose level is consistent with the balance sheet’s longer-run trend. However, even once the Fed
normalizes the size of its balance sheet and securities portfolio, the composition of its securities
portfolio  will  not  yet  be  “normal.”  The  projections  I  mentioned  earlier—which  assume  ongoing
implementation of the FOMC’s capped portfolio reduction strategy—estimate that the domestic
 3 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
securities  portfolio  could  contain  more  than  $1  trillion  in  agency  MBS  at  the  time  the  balance
sheet  reaches  a  normalized  size,  even  though  the  FOMC  has  indicated  a  preference  to  hold
primarily Treasury securities in  the  longer  run.  Meanwhile,  the  maturity  profile  of  the  Treasury
portfolio at that time is projected to be more skewed towards longer-term holdings than it was
before the crisis, when the Fed held one-third of its portfolio in Treasury bills, and about two-
thirds of its holdings matured in less than three years.
A role for asset purchases at the zero lower bound
16
As  they  digest  the  experience  of  the  past  decade,  policymakers,  academics,  and  market
participants are engaged in an active dialogue on appropriate monetary policy strategies and the
role  of  unconventional  policy  tools  in  future  zero  lower  bound  episodes.
  Amid  widespread
concerns of a secular decline in nominal interest rates, this is not just a theoretical discourse.
The  median  of  FOMC  participants’  projections  for  the  longer-run  value  of  the  nominal  federal
funds  rate  is  currently  2¾  percent,  leaving  little  room  to  ease  the  stance  of  policy  through
changes in overnight rates. As a result, the likelihood of a return to the zero lower bound is, in
Chair Yellen’s words, “uncomfortably high, even in the absence of a major financial or economic
crisis.”
17
18
Against  this  backdrop,  Chair  Yellen  has  expressed  her  views  on  the  Fed’s  monetary  policy
implementation tools. She suggests that whenever possible, influencing short-term interest rates
should  be  the  Fed’s  primary  policy  lever,  but  that  enhanced  forward  rate  guidance  and  asset
purchases should be considered again if that conventional tool reaches its limit, as would be the
case if a future economic downturn drove short-term rates back to the zero lower bound. This
view is consistent with her 2016 Jackson Hole remarks, where she presented analysis making
the  case  that  the  Fed’s  use  of  forward  guidance  and  asset  purchases  could  improve
macroeconomic  outcomes  on  average  in  zero  lower  bound  episodes,  and  indicated  that  she
expected these tools to remain “important components” of the Fed’s policy toolkit.
19
The FOMC itself has not made any formal decisions about the Fed’s long-run monetary policy
implementation framework. However, minutes from a November 2016 discussion about potential
choices of policy rates, operating regimes, and balance sheet policies indicate that a number of
policymakers  viewed  expansion  of  the  balance  sheet  as  an  “important  tool”  to  provide
macroeconomic  stimulus  in  situations  in  which  overnight  interest  rates  were  at  their  effective
lower bound.
 This approach is consistent with the balance sheet reaction function described in
the June addendum to the FOMC’s Policy Normalization Principles and Plans.
Lessons learned
20
Of course, whether and under what circumstances the FOMC would again activate large-scale
asset purchases are ultimately decisions for future policymakers. But, to the extent they remain a
possible  tool  for  providing  additional  monetary  easing  when  overnight  interest  rates  fall  to  the
zero  lower  bound,  it  is  worth  considering  some  lessons  about  their  use.  Some  personal
observations follow.
Lesson 1: LSAPs had clear benefits at the zero lower bound
Estimates of the magnitude and persistence of the effects of the Fed’s purchase programs vary,
as  do  assessments  of  the  relative  importance  of  the  possible  channels  through  which  such
programs are believed to work. However, research largely provides evidence that the Fed’s asset
purchases  put  downward  pressure  on  longer-term  interest  rates  and  eased  broader  financial
conditions,  helping  to  improve  macroeconomic  outcomes.
  Studies  of  asset  purchase
programs conducted by other advanced economy central banks also show positive results. In his
survey  of  the  range  of  research  results,  Joe  Gagnon  finds  roughly  similar  median  results  for
studies  focusing  on  programs  in  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  and  euro  area—citing  a
21
 4 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
median effect of about a 50-basis-point reduction in 10-year yields for a purchase equal to 10
percent of GDP.
22
Regarding costs, in a recent exploration of strategies for defeating the zero lower bound, former
Federal Reserve Chairman Bernanke dispels some of the common critiques of balance sheet
programs  (which  he  calls  quantitative  easing).
  He  points  to  unrealized  worries  about  an
upsurge in inflation, collapse of the dollar, currency war, and rise in household leverage, and he
questions  the  effects  in  promoting  asset  bubbles  and  inequality.  He  notes  that  fiscal  risks
associated  with  quantitative  easing  must  be  balanced  against  benefits  of  tools  that  enhance
policymakers’ ability to meet their policy objectives in the face of a serious economic downturn or
disinflation.
Lesson 2: The Fed could control interest rates even with a large balance sheet
23
An  additional  concern—that  the  Fed  would  not  be  able  to  control  interest  rates  with  a  large
balance  sheet—proved  to  be  surmountable.  As  I  described  earlier,  the  Fed  successfully
introduced  new  tools  and  counterparty  relationships  into  a  new  operating  regime  that  delivers
interest rate control irrespective of the level of reserve balances in the banking system. In the
event  policymakers  contemplate  asset  purchases  again  in  the  future,  they  should  be  able  to
undertake  them  with  confidence  that  balance  sheet  expansion  will  not  compromise  the  Fed’s
ability to effectively implement monetary policy when the time comes to lift rates from the zero
lower bound.
Lesson  3:  The  Fed  could  purchase  large  amounts  of  securities  without  damaging  the
market
Absent  a  conflicting  policy  objective,  a  central  bank  should  aim  to  promote  good  market
functioning  in  its  operations  to  help  ensure  effective  transmission  to  the  rest  of  the  financial
system. This objective is a vital one for the Fed because of the importance of the U.S. Treasury
market as a global benchmark. As such, the staff of the New York Fed’s Open Market Trading
Desk considered how to execute asset purchase programs in ways that avoided harming market
structures  and  activity.
  If  the  Fed  became  too  dominant  a  buyer  or  holder,  it  could  have
reduced  the  tradeable  supply  of  targeted  securities  and  discouraged  trading  among  market
participants,  leading  to  diminished  liquidity  and  price  discovery.  A  significant  deterioration  in
liquidity could lead investors to demand a premium for transacting in these markets, ultimately
raising borrowing costs and undermining the program’s policy goal.
24
I do not believe the Fed’s purchase programs had any unintended adverse effects on market
functioning.  In  fact,  over  time,  we  learned  that  we  were  able  to  purchase  in  larger  sizes  and
faster paces than perhaps initially expected. Secondary market purchases of Treasury securities
reached about $100 billion per month during the second LSAP program (a time when proceeds
from agency debt and MBS were being reinvested in Treasuries), and we doubled our per-issue
concentration limit from 35 percent to 70 percent. Meanwhile, monthly purchases of agency MBS
were successfully ramped up from a pace of $25 billion per month for just reinvestments in the
first half of 2012 to more than $70 billion per month later that year when additional purchases
under  the  third  LSAP  program  were  also  conducted.  This  volume  represented  a  substantial
share  of  monthly  gross  issuance.
  Staff  actively  monitored  indicators  of  market  functioning
available  in  the  broader  market  and  through  our  own  operations  for  signs  of  any  material
deterioration.
 As  necessary,  we  modified  our  operational  schedules  (while  still  meeting  the
policy directive we were given) to ensure smooth functioning, such as periods of ramping up or
winding down purchase programs.
25
26
The Fed also put in place active policies to help prevent market dysfunction as a result of its
operations. Preventive measures included concentration limits on holdings of individual Treasury
securities  and  prohibitions  against  purchasing  some  specific,  highly-demanded  securities.
 5 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Agency  MBS  purchases  were  eventually  targeted  at  newly  issued,  to-be-announced  (TBA)
securities,  which  tend  to  be  the  most  liquid  and  readily  available.
  Further,  we  spread  our
agency MBS purchases out across multiple settlement months and used dollar rolls to facilitate
the orderly settlement of unsettled purchases.
 As  a  more  general  practice,  the  Fed  actively
promotes  market  functioning  by  running  a  securities  lending  program  through  which  primary
dealers can borrow Treasury and agency debt securities held in the Fed’s portfolio.
Lesson 4: Reinvestments matter
27
28
Relatively quickly, the Fed came to learn that the reinvestment of principal payments received
from securities held in its portfolio represented a distinct balance sheet tool that could help to
maintain  the  FOMC’s  desired  level  of  monetary  policy  accommodation.  The  FOMC  initially
allowed agency debt and agency MBS acquired in the first LSAP program to run off as principal
was  repaid.  However,  as  purchases  ended,  a  decline  in  mortgage  rates  generated  increased
refinancing activity that accelerated repayments of principal on agency MBS held by the Fed. The
resultant reduction in the Fed’s agency MBS holdings pushed a large supply of securities into the
hands  of  private  investors,  putting  upward  pressure  on  longer-term  interest  rates.  In  August
2010, after considering the implications for financial conditions and the economic outlook of not
reinvesting these repayments, the FOMC announced it would reinvest principal payments from
these  securities  in  longer-term  Treasury  securities.  Then,  in  September  2011,  the  FOMC
announced that repayments from these securities would instead be reinvested in agency MBS to
help  support  conditions  in  mortgage  markets.
  The  FOMC  then  maintained  reinvestments,
including Treasury rollovers, until commencing balance sheet normalization last month.
29
30
Keeping  the  Fed’s  holdings  of  longer-term  securities  at  sizable  levels  helped  to  maintain
accommodative financial conditions as economic conditions strengthened. This is because, in
addition  to  the  acquisition  of  securities  through  asset  purchases,  the  period  over  which  the
central bank intends to hold its securities helps to shape market participants’ expectations about
the  size  and  duration  of  assets  available  to  the  public.  Extending  the  holding  period  through
reinvestments  prolongs  this  so-called  stock  effect.  The  2010  episode  when  the  Fed  was  not
reinvesting  agency-related  principal  payments  demonstrated  both  term  premium  effects  that
might have been expected to be associated with a reduction in the Fed’s securities holdings and
the risks associated with an unexpected increase in the publicly-held stock of agency MBS. As
we normalize the size of the balance sheet, maintaining redemption caps throughout the process
(and continuing to reinvest any principal payments received in excess of those caps) provides an
insurance  mechanism  that  limits  the  amount  of  variation  in  the  pace  at  which  securities,
particularly mortgages, will flow back into private hands.
Lesson  5:  Credible  communications  influence  the  effectiveness  of  asset  purchase
programs
As a general matter, monetary policy transmits more smoothly when market participants are able
to  understand  and  anticipate  central  bank  actions.  Managing  market  expectations  about
monetary policy implementation takes on even more importance in the challenging environment
posed by the zero lower bound. Both in shifting into a regime that uses the balance sheet as an
active tool for policy implementation and then shifting away from such use, there is an important
interaction  that  the  settings  of  overnight  rates,  forward  guidance  on  those  rates,  and  balance
sheet  configurations  have  on  overall 
financial  conditions.  Having  clear  and  credible
communications  that  help  market  participants  understand  the  central  bank’s  intended  use  of
these tools can thus affect overall program effectiveness. Indeed, a central bank’s clarity around
how  it  would  pursue  its  goals  at  the  zero  lower  bound  can,  in  itself,  produce  a  more  stable
environment with fewer and shorter trips to the zero lower bound.
 And even at the zero lower
bound,  the  speed  and  accuracy  with  which  market  participants  understand  the  central  bank’s
reaction function could contribute to better macroeconomic outcomes.
31
32
 6 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
My analysis takes its cue from the framework proposed by Chair Yellen, where unconventional
policy tools are deployed to provide additional policy accommodation at the zero lower bound,
and a supposition that balance sheet expansion would be introduced if the zero bound is viewed
to be more restrictive than can be mitigated by forward guidance alone, just as they were during
the financial crisis and subsequent recession.
Communications are central to the two primary channels through which balance sheet policies
are  believed  to  work.  First,  balance  sheet  policies  can  serve  as  a  signaling  device  that
strengthens forward guidance and reduces expectations for the path of short-term interest rates.
Putting  actions  behind  its  words—either  through  new  asset  purchases  or  by  maintaining
reinvestments—helps  the  central  bank  to  establish  a  credible  commitment  to  maintaining
monetary easing.
 Second, balance sheet actions transmit through a portfolio balance channel,
which—through the stock effect I described earlier—reduces term and risk premiums embedded
in bond yields by reducing the supply of long-term bonds in the market. Many studies conclude
that this channel is likely the dominant one.
33
With  this  in  mind,  the  central  bank  should  provide  clear  guidance  at  the  start  of  its  purchase
program about its intended purchase and reinvestment plans—either in quantitative or qualitative,
state-contingent terms—and then follow through on this commitment.
 It seems sensible for the
central bank to buy assets as quickly as possible, contingent on economic developments and no
disruption  to  market  functioning.
  Once  purchases  have  been  completed,  the  central  bank
should then hold the assets for as long as it says it plans to—including maintaining its holdings
through  reinvestments,  as  appropriate—to  align  realized  actions  with  market  participants’
expectations, again contingent on economic developments.
34
35
36
37
By  making  purchases  state-contingent—that  is,  tying  their  size  or  pace  explicitly  to  the
achievement of broader macroeconomic objectives or other conditions—like the Fed did in its
third  LSAP  program  and  with  reinvestments  following  liftoff,  the  central  bank  can  help  market
participants understand its balance sheet reaction function and expected changes in the public
stock  of  assets.
  However,  policymakers  must  also  consider  how  market  participants
understand the central bank’s approach to its balance sheet in conjunction with its guidance on
the  overnight  policy  rate.  Failure  to  adequately  distinguish  between  the  two  tools  can  lead  to
spillovers and undesirable outcomes. A cautionary example is the 2013 “taper tantrum,” when
Chairman  Bernanke’s  announcement  of  an  eventual  cessation  in  asset  purchases  was
interpreted  by  market  participants  as  signaling  a  sooner-than-expected  increase  in  short-term
interest rates, prompting sharp and unexpected declines in asset prices. Guidance that provides
clarity around both short-term interest rates and the balance sheet might help to anchor interest
rate  expectations—for  example  by  indicating  while  purchases  continue  that  the  central  bank
intends  to  maintain  overnight  interest  rates  at  low  levels  even  after  the  completion  of  asset
purchases.
Lesson 6: Focus on one tool during normalization
38
Uncertainty associated with managing multiple tools and the degree of substitutability between
them  poses  possible  challenges  in  removing  policy  accommodation  after  a  zero  lower  bound
episode,  as  the  central  bank  switches  from  conducting  policy  with  one  lever  to  another.  It
therefore seems prudent to take a gradual approach to normalization, emphasizing one tool at a
time.
The Fed’s adopted normalization approach has thus far been an effective one. Starting to raise
rates  first,  and  waiting  to  start  reducing  the  balance  sheet  until  normalization  in  the  level  of
overnight rates is well underway, has helped to ensure that the economic recovery is sufficiently
advanced  before  making  changes  to  the  balance  sheet.
  This  strategy  has  reduced  the
likelihood  that  an  unexpected  adverse  shock  to  the  economy  not  long  after  the  start  of  policy
tightening would have necessitated a return to the zero lower bound on the federal funds rate and
39
 7 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
potentially a reversal in balance sheet normalization. Instead, the FOMC’s approach promotes
the use of the federal funds rate as the active monetary policy instrument—an instrument with
which it has much greater experience, likely helping to minimize the risk of an error in the early
and still-vulnerable stages of the economy’s recovery.
40
Running  down  the  balance  sheet  passively,  in  a  gradual  and  predictable  manner,  once
normalization  of  short-term  interest  rates  is  well  underway  puts  the  balance  sheet’s
normalization in the background. The stock view of central bank purchase programs holds that
given an expected path of the portfolio, the pace of actual changes in the portfolio should have
little direct effect on asset prices. Assuming markets anticipate a gradual unwind in the portfolio,
asset prices would adjust gradually over time. Nevertheless, central banks may wish to mitigate
any  possible  risk  that  flow  effects  associated  with  overly  fast  flows  of  securities  into  private
hands  interfere  with  monetary  policy  implementation  or  disrupt  market  functioning.  A
conservative feature in the Fed’s approach is therefore a one-year transition period during which
gradually  rising  redemption  caps  are  phased  in,  thus  allowing  financial  markets  and  the  U.S.
Treasury time to adjust to the Fed’s declining market presence.
These design features likely enhance overall program effectiveness. However, this outcome is
traded off against a more rapid achievement of balance sheet normalization—something some
policymakers might hold as a desirable objective. For example, they might see a smaller balance
sheet as one that offers greater capacity for using asset purchases more fully again in the future.
Such capacity may be a concern given the risk that a more normal portfolio size and composition
may not be reached before an adverse shock brings short-term rates back to their effective lower
bound, perhaps warranting renewed balance sheet expansion.
  This  risk  may  be  particularly
pronounced  in  a  low  neutral  rate  environment.  In  principle,  asset  sales  could  accelerate
normalization of the size and composition of the balance sheet, but the market effects of long-
duration  asset  sales  could  be  uncertain,  and  sales  could  affect  the  path  of  short-term
rates.
  Moreover,  a  central  bank  that  does  not  hold  the  assets  it  has  purchased  as  long  as
market participants anticipate could lose credibility, making future asset purchases less effective.
41
42
The central bank must therefore consider the effects of its balance sheet actions in the context of
the overall monetary policy setting, including the interplay between changes in the balance sheet
and  changes  in  interest  rates.  Uncertainties  related  to  this  relationship  help  to  explain  the
FOMC’s  choice  to  make  changes  in  overnight  rates  its  main  tool  for  adjusting  the  stance  of
monetary  policy  in  the  normalization  process  while  balance  sheet  normalization  runs  in  the
background. Still, having both instruments in the central bank’s toolkit raises the importance of
clear and cohesive communications about their respective use.
Lesson 7: Operational flexibility is important
As I noted earlier, the Fed successfully adapted its operating regime to be able to control interest
rates even with a large balance sheet. The FOMC has not decided what kind of operating regime
it wishes to run in the long run, but one lesson from the crisis is that not all operating frameworks
may be robust to a wide range of circumstances, such as implementing policy at the zero lower
bound. If one wished to retain the option that the balance sheet could be deployed as an active
tool for policy implementation at this threshold and then gradually revert to a passive role when
conditions  normalize,  then  one  needs  to  consider  how  to  transition  into  and  out  of  different
operational modalities. This requires operational flexibility.
A byproduct of a central bank’s portfolio-expanding asset purchase programs is an increased
supply  of  reserve  balances  in  the  banking  system.
  Thus,  once  balance  sheet  tools  are
deployed, the central bank will find itself operating in a system with reserve abundance if it wasn’t
already,  and  will  need  to  adopt  instruments  and  arrangements  that  can  deliver  interest  rate
control  accordingly.  This  imperative  could  imply  switching  operating  regimes—from  a  corridor
regime to a floor regime, or from a liability-driven floor to an asset-driven floor—and staying in the
43
 8 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
new regime for an extended period. Some central banks, such as the ECB, have monetary policy
implementation frameworks in which this transition happens relatively seamlessly, while others,
such as the Fed before the crisis, required significant changes to tools and operations.
Timeliness of the transition is important, and overly complex transitions —especially if there is
little time to prepare—could potentially restrain a central bank’s ability to respond aggressively to
rapidly  changing  economic  and  financial  conditions  in  a  crisis.  Perhaps  more  importantly,
delayed  transitions  could  interfere  with  market  expectations  about  any  change  in  the  policy
stance, even though appropriately-calibrated expectations, through their effect on market pricing,
could be stabilizing and lower the risk of a crisis. Additionally, if a central bank chose to employ a
framework that would need to be transitioned, it would need to make sure that the necessary
tools were available to facilitate that transition. New tools and practices could potentially require
new  operational  procedures, 
legal  approvals,  governance  processes,  counterparty
administration, technological systems, and learning curves for both central bank staff and market
participants. Such switching may also be costly for money market participants if resource needs,
infrastructure, and expertise dedicated to certain activities change over time.
A  separate  challenge  for  the  central  bank  to  consider  is  how  to  maintain  operational  and
analytical readiness, both to be able to implement monetary policy in different types of operating
regimes  and  to  be  able  to  transact  in  potential  markets  targeted  for  asset  purchases.  For
example, the Fed had no operational experience transacting in the agency MBS market prior to
the crisis. It initially relied on outside investment advisors to support its first purchase program,
before eventually bringing trading operations in house, and then later developing capabilities to
conduct auctions on its proprietary auction platform.
Conclusion
44
The  Federal  Reserve  and  other  central  banks  initially  proceeded  with  asset  purchases  in  a
cautious way given that the tool was new. However, I believe we have learned that the benefits
are notable and the costs likely less than feared. Moreover, U.S. fixed income markets were able
to withstand more sizable purchase operations than we initially anticipated, and we now know
that we can successfully maintain interest rate control with a large balance sheet as we raise
rates. This experience could give policymakers greater confidence in using this tool to provide
additional monetary policy accommodation in future zero lower bound episodes, and give market
participants greater confidence in the effectiveness of the tool in mitigating the zero lower bound.
With evidence suggesting the neutral fed funds rate has fallen notably, we should continue to
absorb  lessons  from  our  and  other  central  banks’  experiences.  In  particular,  we  will  need  to
consider  the  importance  of  communications,  how  to  organize  an  operating  regime  that
transitions smoothly, and how to maintain operational readiness. As we normalize the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet, we continue to proceed cautiously given our lack of experience with
this  process.  I  think  the  gradual  and  predictable  approach  the  FOMC  has  adopted  has  been
successful so far, but we will learn more as we proceed and as other central banks reach those
milestones as well.
1
2
3
4
My discussion here focuses on the Federal Reserve’s actions to adjust the stance and conduct of monetary
policy in pursuit of its statutory mandate of full employment and price stability.  However, the Fed’s response to
the  crisis  also  included  numerous  temporary  programs  and  facilities  aimed  at  supporting  the  liquidity  of
financial institutions and fostering improved conditions in key financial markets. 
The Fed’s outright purchases of securities did not raise any credit risk exposure.
The  FOMC  also  undertook  a  program  to  extend  the  maturity  profile  of  its  Treasury  holdings.    This  Maturity
Extension Program (MEP) did not affect the portfolio’s overall size, yet still increased the portfolio’s duration risk
—an important characteristic of all asset purchase programs.  A common metric for communicating about the
dollar value of duration risk held in the portfolio is in terms of ten-year Treasury equivalents.
 9 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Even before asset purchases were launched, the reserve-adding effects of the Fed’s crisis-related lending
programs highlighted shortcomings of its pre-crisis monetary policy implementation framework.  In the first year
or so of the crisis, in order to maintain the relatively scarce level of reserves necessary to maintain interest rate
control, the Desk offset balance sheet growth associated with the Fed’s credit and liquidity facilities by reducing
other assets on the Fed’s balance sheet, notably holdings of short-term U.S. Treasury securities.  By September
2008,  amid  a  deepening  crisis  and  widening  policy  response,  the  Fed  lacked  a  sufficient  volume  of
unencumbered  Treasury  securities  to  sell.    Some  additional  reserve-draining  capacity  came  from  the
Supplementary Financing Program (SFP), used from September 2008 through July 2011, through which the
U.S. Treasury issued bills (separate from its regular borrowing program) and maintained the proceeds in an
account at the New York Fed.  Even with this program, the Fed’s sterilization capacity was limited.
The FOMC’s September 2014 Policy Normalization Principles and Plans indicate that the Fed plans to use an
ON RRP facility only to the extent necessary and will phase it out when it is no longer needed to help control the
federal funds rate.  The FOMC’s current directive for open market operations instructs the New York Fed’s Open
Market Trading Desk to undertake ON RRPs in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held
outright  in  the  System  Open  Market Account  (SOMA)  that  are  available  for  such  operations  and  by  a  per-
counterparty limit of $30 billion per day.
In theory, a standing facility that pays IOER should set a floor on wholesale short-term interest rates given the
safety and convenience of this investment, and the fact that competition should bid sub-IOER rates up to levels
close to those paid on reserves.  However, certain institutional aspects of U.S. money markets (including bank-
only access to IOER, credit limits imposed by lenders and other impediments to market competition, and the
costs of balance sheet expansion) appear to create frictions that have made IOER act more like a magnet that
pulls  up  short-term  rates.    ON  RRPs  fortify  the  floor  on  wholesale  short-term  rates  by  providing  a  similar
investment option to a wide range of nonbank institutions that are not eligible to earn IOER.  I discuss the
rationale for the design of this framework and the efficacy of its performance in “Money Markets after Liftoff: 
Assessment to Date and the Road Ahead,” remarks presented at the 70th Anniversary Celebration of the School
of International and Public Affairs, Columbia University, New York City, February 22, 2016.
On December 31, 2015, the EFFR dipped to 0.20 percent, five basis points below the bottom of the FOMC’s
target range.  In general, the EFFR shows temporary softness on month- and quarter-end dates as banks
decrease the size and adjust the composition of their balance sheets around key reporting dates. 
See FOMC Communications related to Policy Normalization.
For maturing Treasury securities, the monthly cap is initially $6 billion and will increase in steps of $6 billion at
three-month intervals over twelve months until it reaches $30 billion per month.  For agency MBS and agency
debt, the initial monthly cap is $4 billion and will increase in steps of $4 billion at three-month intervals over
twelve months until it reaches $20 billion per month.  The Committee anticipates that the caps will remain in
place once they reach their respective maximums.
See Transcript of Chair Yellen’s Press Conference, September 20, 2017.
The gradually rising caps allow market participants to incrementally absorb additional supply and its attendant
duration and prepayment risk.  Leaving the caps in place over the course of the normalization process helps
ensure a gradual pace of the portfolio’s runoff, particularly in light of the lumpiness in the Treasury maturity
profile and the risk of an increase in pay-downs on agency MBS.  I explore these issues in more detail in
“Gradual and Predictable:  Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet,” remarks presented at
SUERF, the European Money and Finance Forum, New York City, October 11, 2017.
Federal Reserve Board staff estimate paths for the term premium effect associated with different balance sheet
scenarios in Brian Bonis, Jane Ihrig, and Min Wei, “Projected Evolution of the SOMA Portfolio and the 10-year
Treasury Term Premium Effect,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System FEDS Notes, September
22,  2017.    Median  responses  to  the  Desk’s  July  2017 Survey  of  Primary  Dealers  and Survey  of  Market
Participants indicated the estimated cumulative effect on the 10-year Treasury yield to be around 25 basis points
over  two  years  following  implementation,  and  the  cumulative  effect  on  the  30-year  production  coupon  MBS
option-adjusted spread to be 15 basis points over the same timeframe. 
Results  from  the  New  York  Fed’s  September  2017 Survey  of  Primary  Dealers  and Survey  of  Market
Participants indicate expectations of about a one in four chance of a return to the zero lower bound at some point
between now and the end of 2020.  Conditional on that scenario occurring, survey respondents on average
assigned probabilities of over 80 percent to the portfolio being larger than $4 trillion at year-end 2020—an
outcome suggesting a renewal of full reinvestments or large-scale asset purchases.  Additional reasons for the
 10 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
muted response in asset prices are examined in a speech cited earlier, “Gradual and Predictable:  Reducing
the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet.”
Projection scenarios considered balance sheet sizes containing long-run levels of reserves of $406 billion,
$613 billion, and $1 trillion, as well as a range of sizes for other Fed liabilities and capital.  However, the balance
sheet’s normal size is not a fixed value, since some factors, such as Federal Reserve notes (U.S. dollar paper
currency)  and  capital,  tend  to  grow  over  time.    See  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York’s  report  and
accompanying data file, “Projections for the SOMA Portfolio and Net Income (July 2017).”
These  liabilities  include  Federal  Reserve  notes  (U.S.  dollar  paper  currency),  the  U.S.  Treasury’s  General
Account, deposits held by designated financial market utilities and government-sponsored enterprises, and
reverse repos conducted with foreign and international account holders.  On average, these line items summed
to over $500 billion in 2017, on top of more than $1.5 trillion in Federal Reserve notes.  Fed liabilities are
discussed more thoroughly in Lorie Logan, “Implementing Monetary Policy:  Perspective from the Open Market
Trading Desk,” remarks before the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York City, May 18, 2017.
It is worth noting that the size and structure of Fed’s securities portfolio and the role the portfolio played have
undergone substantial shifts at various times over the course of the Fed’s history, reflecting changes in policy
implementation imperatives.  See Meryam Bukhari et al, “The SOMA Portfolio through Time,” Federal Reserve
Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics (blog), August 12, 2013.
Throughout this discussion, I focus on forward guidance and use of the central bank’s balance sheet (through
large-scale purchases of additional assets and reinvestment policies, but not funding for lending programs) as
possible tools.  U.S. policymakers have shown little appetite to pursue negative nominal interest rates, although
that is another unconventional tool used by several central banks in recent years.   
See Janet L. Yellen, “A Challenging Decade and a Question for the Future,” Herbert Stein Memorial Lecture,
National Economists Club, Washington, D.C., October 20, 2017.  In a recent set of simulations using traditional
monetary policy strategies based on simple policy rules, Federal Reserve Board economists estimate that the
zero lower bound would bind with significantly higher frequencies than in previous analyses.  See Michael T.
Kiley and John M. Roberts, “Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity Conference Drafts, Washington, D.C., March 23–24, 2017.
She acknowledged, however, that the simulations on which her analysis was based could overstate the FOMC’s
current ability to respond to a recession, given little scope to cut the federal funds rate and the possibility that
stimulus associated with forward guidance and asset purchases could be reduced with long-term rates already
quite low.  See Janet L. Yellen, “The Federal Reserve’s Monetary Policy Toolkit:  Past, Present and Future,”
opening  remarks  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City’s  Economic  Policy  Symposium, Designing
Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 26, 2016.
Most participants did not indicate support for using the balance sheet as an active tool in other situations or for
other purposes.  See Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, November 1-2, 2016.
Some surveys of the numerous studies of central bank bond purchase programs include:  Joseph E. Gagnon,
“Quantitative Easing:  An Underappreciated Success,” Peterson Institution for International Economics Policy
Brief, no. PB16–4, April 2016; Saroj Bhattarai and Christopher Neely, “A Survey of the Empirical Literature on
U.S.  Unconventional  Monetary  Policy,”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis  Working  Paper,  no.  2016–021A,
October 2016; and John C. Williams, “Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound:  Putting Theory into Practice,”
Brookings Institution Hutchins Center Working Papers, January 2014.
Studies show a lower median effect for Japan.  Gagnon hypothesizes this may be associated with Japan’s
much larger government bond market relative to GDP than the other countries studied, perhaps suggesting that
asset purchase effects operate in proportion to the size of the targeted bond market rather than the size of the
economy.
See  Ben  S.  Bernanke,  “Monetary Policy in a New Era,”  presented  at  the  Peterson  Institute  for  International
Economics  conference, Rethinking  Macroeconomic  Policy,  Washington,  D.C.,  October  12,  2017.    Bernanke
argues, however, that deploying unconventional tools may not be sufficient in addressing a sharp downturn, and
that changes in a central bank’s monetary policy framework may improve a central bank’s effectiveness in
defeating the zero lower bound.
In addition, asset purchase programs may actively promote liquidity and improve market functioning during
periods of financial market stress, as was the case with the Fed’s first LSAP program, initiated at the height of
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
 11 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  crisis.    In  turbulent  market  conditions,  the  central  bank’s  willingness  to  purchase  particular  classes  of
assets can boost confidence and lower liquidity premiums that investors would require to hold otherwise illiquid
securities.
More detail about the Fed’s purchases of agency MBS can be found in my “Concluding Remarks at the Monetary
Policy Implementation in the Long Run Conference,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minnesota, October
19, 2016.
Broad market indicators include, among others, trading volumes, bid-ask spreads, trade quote sizes, financing
costs, and settlement fails.  Operations also yield valuable information, including executable prices compared to
those prevailing in the market, counterparty concentration measures, and settlement fails.
The TBA market is a forward market that allows market participants to efficiently trade a wide range of agency
MBS  with  similar  characteristics  without  requiring  them  to  analyze  the  underlying  details  of  each  individual
mortgage security, since any security with the same agency issuer, original maturity term, and coupon can be
delivered into a single TBA contract.  This structure transforms a market of hundreds of thousands of individual
mortgage securities into a limited number of homogenous TBA contracts.  For more information on the TBA
market, see James Vickery and Joshua Wright, “TBA Trading and Liquidity in the Agency MBS Market,” Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 19, no. 1, May 2013. 
A  dollar  roll  sale  is  a  transaction  that  involves  the  sale  of  agency  MBS  for  delivery  in  one  month  and  the
simultaneous  agreement  to  purchase  substantially  similar  securities  in  a  later  month,  thus  effectively
postponing delivery when there is a dislocation in available supply.  The Fed also used coupon swaps to settle
some agency MBS purchases under its first purchase program.  (A coupon swap is the simultaneous sale of
one agency MBS and purchase of another agency MBS, which may have a different coupon, issuer, or both.)
See Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, August 10, 2010 and Minutes of the Federal Open Market
Committee, September 20–21, 2011.
The FOMC suspended Treasury rollovers from July 2012 through December 2012, when it continued the MEP. 
At that time, redeeming Treasury securities expanded the Fed’s scope to lengthen the maturity profile of its
Treasury securities portfolio.
See the paper cited earlier by Ben S. Bernanke, “Monetary Policy in a New Era.”
See Eric M. Engen, Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider, “The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal
Reserve’s Unconventional Monetary Policies,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Finance and
Economics  Discussion  Series,  no.  2015–005,  January  2015.    The  authors  found  that  the  gradual  nature  of
accompanying  revisions  to  the  FOMC’s  policy  expectations  may  have  limited  the  effectiveness  of  forward
guidance and asset purchases. However, in a future crisis, market participants will have the benefit of the
current episode in assessing the FOMC’s likely response, leading to a faster adjustment of expectations.
The importance of a credible commitment for maintaining accommodative policy when the zero lower bound is
reached is explored in Gauti Eggertsson and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal
Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1, Spring 2003. 
Such communications are a form of Odyssean forward guidance about the balance sheet.  See Jeffrey R.
Campbell  et  al,  “Macroeconomic  Effects  of  Federal  Reserve  Forward  Guidance, ” Brookings  Papers  on
Economic Activity, Spring 2012.  The authors distinguish between central bank forward guidance that simply
forecasts macroeconomic performance and likely monetary policy actions (Delphic guidance), and guidance
that publicly commits the central bank to a set of future actions (Odyssean guidance).
Because  market  prices  are  forward-looking,  an  announcement  that  affects  expectations  about  the  stock  of
assets held by the Fed should have an immediate impact on market prices.  However, the overall size of the
market impact will depend on the expected path of portfolio holdings over time.  In addition, completion of
purchases may be perceived as strengthening the central bank’s commitment by making it more difficult to
deviate from announced plans.
However, since term premium effects decay as securities age, selling securities with relatively short remaining
times to maturity may not be materially different than redeeming those securities.
The Fed’s first two purchase programs were launched with pre-announced sizes and time frames (although the
first  program  was  later  expanded).    In  contrast,  the  third  program  was  open-ended  and  state-contingent. 
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
 12 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Following each meeting, the FOMC announced a monthly pace at which it would buy Treasury securities and
agency MBS, and provided guidance that it would continue its purchases until the “outlook for the labor market
had improved substantially in a context of price stability.”  The Committee also advised that it was prepared to
increase or reduce the pace of its purchases to maintain appropriate policy accommodation as the outlook for
the labor market or inflation changed.
The FOMC adopted such guidance throughout its third asset purchase program.  Similarly, on October 12, 2017,
ECB President Draghi pledged to maintain interest rates at their current, low level “well past” the end of the
ECB’s bond-buying program.
Governor  Brainard  recently  suggested  that  in  a  low  neutral  rate  environment,  delaying  balance  sheet
normalization is a means to provide “makeup support” for the economy while enabling the policy rate to escape
the lower bound earlier than otherwise.  See Lael Brainard, “Rethinking Monetary Policy in a New Normal,”
remarks  for  the  panel  on  monetary  policy  at  the  Peterson  Institute  for  International  Economics
conference, Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy, Washington, D.C., October 12, 2017.
This sequencing also allowed the FOMC to meaningfully assess the efficacy of its tools to control short-term
interest rates with a large balance sheet, and thereby judge how patient it could afford to be in reducing the
balance sheet to its longer-run level.
Whether there are diminishing marginal returns on additional purchases or actual limits on capacity for using
this tool—implying a size of the balance sheet beyond which further asset purchases become difficult or less
effective—is a question for further research.  Nevertheless, policymakers may weigh the relative merits and
risks associated with asset purchases differently based on the balance sheet’s starting size.
The FOMC’s Policy Normalization Principles and Plans note that the Committee does not anticipate selling
agency MBS as part of the normalization process, but says that “limited sales might be warranted in the longer
run to reduce or eliminate residual holdings.”
Changing the composition of assets within the portfolio, as was done during the MEP, can similarly influence
financial conditions without changing the portfolio’s size or increasing the supply of reserve balances.  In this
case, capacity to reallocate the portfolio is constrained by existing holdings.
Previously, agency MBS operations were conducted on a commercial dealer-to-customer trading platform.  The
switch  to  FedTrade  minimized  operational  risk,  improved  efficiency  and  competitiveness,  and  increased
transparency around the Fed’s mortgage operations.
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
 13 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
