Ben S Bernanke: Lessons of the financial crisis for banking supervision 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago  Conference  on  Bank  Structure 
and Competition, Chicago, Illinois (via satellite), 7 May 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 After  more  than  a  year  and  a  half  of  financial  crisis,  both  bankers  and  policymakers  must 
contend  with  two  questions:  What  have  we  learned  from  this  extraordinary  episode?  And 
how can we apply those lessons to strengthen our banking system and to avoid or mitigate 
future crises? Getting the answers to these questions right is critical for our future financial 
and economic health.1
The  Federal  Reserve  has  been  intensively  evaluating  the  lessons  of  the  crisis,  both  with 
respect to the companies we supervise and to our own policies and procedures, and we are 
actively  incorporating  what  we  have  learned  into  daily  supervisory  practice.  Increasing  the 
effectiveness of supervision must be a top priority for our institution. In my remarks today I 
will outline some steps that the Federal Reserve has already taken in the wake of the crisis 
to  strengthen  capital,  liquidity,  and  risk  management  in  the  banking  sector,  as  well  as  to 
improve the supervisory process itself. I will also touch on what we have learned about the 
importance  of  effective  consolidated  supervision  and  the  potential  benefits  of  a  more 
macroprudential orientation to financial oversight.  
The Federal Reserve's role in banking supervision 
It may be useful first to briefly review the Federal Reserve's bank supervisory responsibilities 
and  how  they  interact  with  the  other  parts  of  our  mission.  The  Fed  has  supervisory  and 
regulatory  authority  over  bank  holding  companies  (including  financial  holding  companies), 
state-chartered  banks  that  choose  to  join  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (state  member 
banks),  the  U.S.  operations  of  foreign  banking  organizations,  and  certain  types  of  U.S. 
entities that engage in international banking.2 In fulfilling these responsibilities, we work with 
other federal and state supervisory authorities to promote the safety and soundness of the 
banking industry, foster the stability of the broader financial system, and help ensure fair and 
equitable treatment of consumers in their financial transactions. The Federal Reserve Banks 
manage the process of onsite bank examinations, while providing a strong regional presence 
that allows us greater insight into local economic conditions.  
Besides working with other U.S. agencies responsible for the oversight of banking and other 
areas  of  the  financial  system,  we  also  coordinate  closely  with  foreign  supervisors.  These 
relationships  are  fostered  through  regular  interactions  within  bodies  such  as  the  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board.  Through  these 
organizations  we  contribute  to  the  development  of  international  banking  standards.  For 
                                                 
1  
I  introduced  these  questions  and  offered  preliminary  answers  in  speeches  I  gave  last  year.  See  Ben  S. 
Bernanke (2008), "Risk Management in Financial Institutions," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Chicago's Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Chicago, May 15, and Ben S. Bernanke 
(2008),  "Addressing  Weaknesses  in  the  Global  Financial  Markets:  The  Report  of  the  President's  Working 
Group on Financial Markets," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Greater  Richmond's Virginia 
Global Ambassador Award Luncheon, Richmond, Va., April 10. 
2   Edge Act and Agreement corporations are typically bank subsidiaries that conduct activities outside the United 
States that are permissible to foreign banks abroad but may not be otherwise permissible for U.S. banks. 
BIS Review 56/2009 
 1
example,  we  helped  lead  the  Basel  Committee's  development  of  the  revised  Principles  of 
Liquidity Risk Management, which was issued last year and is currently being incorporated 
into  supervisory  guidance  in  the  United  States.3  Our  close  relationships  with  key  foreign 
supervisors, central banks, and other authorities have proved very helpful as we have dealt 
with the challenges of the crisis.  
The  Federal  Reserve's  role  in  banking  supervision  complements  its  other  responsibilities, 
especially its role in managing financial crises – a point I have made on other occasions.4 
The complementary nature of its functions was evident, for example, after the September 11 
terrorist attacks, when the Federal Reserve's supervisory staff provided critical assistance to 
policymakers  in  evaluating  conditions  in  the  financial  sector  in  a  quickly  evolving,  chaotic 
situation.  During  the  current  crisis,  supervisory  expertise  and  information  have  repeatedly 
proved invaluable in helping us to address potential systemic risks involving specific financial 
institutions  and  markets  and  to  effectively  fulfill  our  role  as  lender  of  last  resort.  Our 
supervisors' knowledge of interbank lending markets and other sources of bank funding also 
contributed to the development of new tools to address financial stress, such as our Term 
Auction  Facility.  The  Fed's  prudential  supervision  benefits,  in  turn,  from  the  expertise  we 
develop in carrying out other parts of our mission – for example, the knowledge of financial 
and economic conditions we gather in the formulation of monetary policy and the insight into 
retail financial markets that flows from our consumer protection responsibilities. 
Lessons from the financial crisis  
Since  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  U.S.  supervisors  –  in  many 
cases along with supervisors from other countries – have been working to identify both its 
causes and its lessons. Our contributions have been reflected in reports issued by, among 
others,  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  the  President's  Working  Group  on  Financial  Markets, 
and  the  Senior  Supervisors  Group,  which  includes  representatives  of  seven  industrial 
countries.5 Ongoing international collaboration, which began before the crisis, has enabled 
U.S. supervisors to learn from the international experience and allowed us to compare the 
performances  of  individual  U.S.  institutions  with  those  of  a  broad  cross  section  of  global 
financial firms.  
The Federal Reserve is also in the midst of its own comprehensive review of all aspects of its 
supervisory  practices.  Since  last  year,  Vice  Chairman  Kohn  has  led  an  effort,  with 
participation  from  Board  members,  Reserve  Bank  presidents,  and  staff  from  around  the 
System,  to  develop  recommendations  for  improvements  in  our  conduct  of  both  prudential 
supervision  and  consumer  protection.  We  are  including  feedback  from  the  Government 
Accountability Office, the Congress, the Treasury, and others as we look to improve our own 
supervisory  practices.  Among  other  things,  our  analysis  reaffirms  that  capital  adequacy, 
effective  liquidity  planning,  and  strong  risk  management  are  essential  for  safe  and  sound 
banking; the crisis revealed serious deficiencies on the part of some financial institutions in 
one  or  more  of  the  areas.  The  crisis  has  likewise  underscored  the  need  for  heightened 
vigilance and forcefulness on the part of supervisors to make sure that standards are met.  
                                                 
3   Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (2008),  Principles  for  Sound  Liquidity  Risk  Management  and 
Supervision (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, September). 
4   For  example,  see  Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2007),  "Central  Banking  and  Bank  Supervision  in  the  United  States," 
speech delivered at the Allied Social Science Association Annual Meeting, Chicago, Ill., January 5. 
5   Senior  Supervisors  Group  (2008),  Observations  on  Risk  Management  Practices  during  the  Recent  Market 
Turbulence (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, March 6); President's Working Group on 
Financial  Markets  (2008),  "Policy  Statement  on  Financial  Market  Developments,"  policy  statement 
(Washington:  U.S.  Department  of  the  Treasury,  March  13);  Financial  Stability  Forum  (2008),  Report  of  the 
Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience), (Basel, Switzerland: FSF, April 7). 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2009
Strengthening capital, liquidity, and risk management 
Because capital serves as such an important bulwark against potential unexpected loss, U.S. 
supervisors  have  been  giving  it  very  close  attention  since  the  beginning  of  the  crisis.  We 
have  been  closely  monitoring  firms'  capital  levels  relative  to  their  risk  exposures  and 
discussing  our  evaluations  with  senior  management.  We  have  also  been  revisiting  our 
policies regarding capital; for example, earlier this year we issued supervisory guidance for 
bank  holding  companies  on  dividends,  capital  repurchases,  and  capital  redemptions, 
reemphasizing in the process that holding companies must serve as a source of strength for 
their subsidiary banks. 
As  you  may  know,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  leading  the  interagency  Supervisory  Capital 
Assessment  Program,  which  is  aimed  at  ensuring  that  the  largest  and  most  systemically 
important  U.S.  banking  organizations  have  a  capital  buffer  sufficient  to  remain  well-
capitalized  and  actively  lending,  even  should  macroeconomic  conditions  prove  worse  than 
currently  anticipated.  More  than  150  examiners,  supervisors,  and  economists  from  the 
Federal  Reserve,  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  and  the  Federal  Deposit 
Insurance  Corporation  cooperated  in  a  simultaneous  review  and  evaluation  of  the 
prospective losses and earnings of 19 major institutions, which collectively hold about two-
thirds  of  the  assets  of  the  U.S.  banking  system.  The  exercise  has  been  comprehensive, 
rigorous,  forward-looking,  and  highly  collaborative  among  the  supervisory  agencies. 
Undoubtedly,  we  can  use  many  aspects  of  the  exercise  to  improve  our  supervisory 
processes in the future.  
Although  capital  remains  a  critical bulwark  of a  strong  banking  system,  the  crisis  has  also 
demonstrated the importance of effective liquidity management. Along with our colleagues at 
the other U.S. banking agencies, we are monitoring the major firms' liquidity positions on a 
daily  basis  and  are  discussing  liquidity  strategies,  key  market  developments,  and  liquidity 
risks with the firms' senior managements. As we have learned over the past year and a half, 
adequate  liquidity  management  entails  more  than  holding  assets  that  are  liquid  in  normal 
times;  firms  must  take  into  account  how  their  liquidity  positions  might  fare  under  stressed 
market conditions. We are also requiring firms to consider risks arising from the need to fund 
off-balance-sheet positions. 
The third key element of safe and sound banking, after capital and liquidity, is effective risk 
management. The crisis exposed the inadequacy of the risk-management systems of many 
financial institutions. We have stepped up our efforts to work with banks to improve their risk-
identification practices. For instance, we have emphasized to banks the importance of stress 
testing  to  help  detect  risks  not  identified  by  more-typical  statistical  models,  such  as 
abnormally  large  market  moves,  evaporation  of  liquidity,  prolonged  periods  of  market 
distress, or structural changes in markets.  
As I noted in a speech last month, financial innovation can benefit consumers, the financial 
system, and the broader economy, but it also has risks that must be properly understood.6 
Indeed, as you know, financial innovations in areas such as structured credit products and 
mortgage lending in some degree helped precipitate the current crisis. Accordingly, we are 
requiring banks to evaluate more comprehensively the possible unintended consequences of 
proposed new financial instruments as well as how those instruments are likely to perform 
under stressed market conditions.  
Counterparty credit risk is another area in which the Federal Reserve has been working for 
some time, and, as the crisis has unfolded, we have intensified our monitoring of how firms 
manage this type of risk. Institutions are being pushed to further improve their understanding 
                                                 
6   Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2009),  "Financial  Innovation  and  Consumer  Protection,"  speech  delivered  at  the  Federal 
Reserve System's Sixth Biennial Community Affairs Research Conference, Washington, April 17. 
BIS Review 56/2009 
 3
of  key  linkages  and  exposures  across  the  financial  system.  They  are  also  being  asked  to 
analyze how their own defensive actions during periods of stress might put pressure on key 
counterparties,  especially  when  other  market  participants  are  likely  to  be  taking  similar 
measures.  
A critical component of risk management is understanding the links between incentives and 
risk-taking, such as in the design and implementation of compensation practices. Bonuses 
and other compensation should provide incentives for employees at all levels to behave in 
ways  that  promote  the  long-run  health  of  the  institution.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  been 
working in international forums on compensation and incentives issues; one product of those 
efforts was the publication last month by the Financial Stability Board of new principles for 
sound  compensation  practices.7  Certainly,  an  important  lesson  of  the  crisis  is  that  the 
structure  of  compensation  and  its  effect  on  incentives  for  risk-taking  is  a  safety-and-
soundness issue. 
In this and other areas, one of the key lessons for bankers has been the need for timely and 
effective internal communication about risks. We are putting a high priority on ensuring that 
management and board of directors are well informed about the various risks that confront 
the organization and that they are actively engaged in the management of those risks.  
As  we  have  worked  with  financial  institutions  to  strengthen  their  governance  and  risk 
management, we are also mindful that the crisis has revealed the need for improvement in 
our  own  supervisory  procedures  and  internal  communication.  We  have  updated  and 
strengthened  our  processes  for  disseminating  supervisory  information  within  the  Federal 
Reserve System, for establishing supervisory priorities, for tracking emerging issues, and for 
issuing timely supervisory guidance. In the area of consumer protection, the Fed has recently 
revised  its  compliance  examination  program  to  ensure  that  it  stays  current  with  market 
developments and practices. We have introduced the concept of continuous supervision to 
consumer compliance to ensure ongoing and comprehensive monitoring of our largest state 
member banks. 
Drawing on a particularly important lesson of the crisis, our supervisors are emphasizing to 
institutions  that  maintaining  strong  risk-management  practices  is  at  least  as  important  in 
good times as in bad. It is precisely during those good times, when risks appear low and the 
financial horizon seems clear, that financial market participants can become overly optimistic 
and make costly mistakes. Part of the job of supervisors is to counter such trends. In such 
cases, we must ensure that our supervisory communications are forceful, clear, and directed 
at  senior  management  and  boards  of  directors,  so  that  emerging  issues  are  given  proper 
attention and satisfactorily resolved.  
Consolidated supervision  
As  we  review  the  lessons  of  the  crisis,  another  issue  deserving  attention  is  the  role  of 
consolidated  supervision.  The  crisis  has  demonstrated  that  effective  and  timely  risk 
management that is truly firmwide is vitally important for large financial institutions. To make 
sure that that happens, all systemically important financial firms – and not just those affiliated 
with a bank – should be subject to a robust framework for consolidated supervision.  
Although  the  Federal  Reserve  is  not  the  primary  supervisor  of  the  majority  of  U.S. 
commercial  bank  assets,  under  the  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act  of  1999  it  serves  as 
consolidated  supervisor  of  all  bank  holding  companies, 
financial  holding 
companies. We take this role very seriously. Before the onset of the crisis, we had already 
begun  enhancing  our  consolidated  supervision  of  bank  holding  companies,  working  within 
including 
                                                 
7   Financial Stability Forum (2009), FSF Principles for Sound Compensation Practices (Basel, Switzerland: FSF, 
April 2). 
4 
 BIS Review 56/2009
the framework established by the act. Those efforts resulted in comprehensive supervisory 
guidance on consolidated supervision last year. The guidance directs our examination staff 
to focus on key areas as it supervises large, complex firms with multiple legal entities. For 
instance,  it  directs  the  staff  to  pay  special  attention  to  activities  –  such  as  clearing  and 
settlement  in  critical  financial  markets  –  that  have  the  potential  to  affect  not  only  the 
institution, but the financial system more broadly.  
The  Fed's  guidance  on  consolidated  supervision  also  provides  more-explicit  directions  for 
supervisory  staff  for  evaluating  the  capacity  of  a  banking  organization  to  measure  and 
manage risks across the entire firm. For example, our process for assessing firmwide credit 
risk  management  begins  with  a  review  of  the  overarching  design  of  this  function  at  the 
consolidated  level;  we  then  drill  down  to  individual  business  lines,  such  as  retail  credit  or 
mortgage  lending,  to  ensure  that  they  are  being  managed  in  ways  consistent  with  the 
company's overall framework. The guidance also reaffirms that examiners must assess the 
financial  condition  and  risk  profile  of  a  holding  company's  nonbank  subsidiaries  to 
understand their potential for adversely affecting the affiliated banks or the organization as a 
whole.  
Consolidated  supervision  also  improves  our  evaluation  of  firms'  ability  to  comply  with 
applicable  laws,  rules,  and  regulations.  The  Federal  Reserve  last  year  issued  supervisory 
guidance on compliance risk, which stresses the need for both supervisors and bankers to 
understand those risks both within and across business lines, legal entities, and jurisdictions. 
Compliance  with  consumer  protection  regulations  receives  close  scrutiny,  and  consumer 
compliance  specialists  participate  in  the  evaluation  of  the  risk  assessments,  supervisory 
plans,  and  annual  letters  that  our  supervisors  prepare  for  large,  complex  banking 
organizations.  Last  year,  Federal  Reserve  staff  also  led  an  interagency  pilot  program  to 
examine the practices of subprime mortgage lenders, including two nonbank subsidiaries of 
bank  holding  companies.  The  pilot  provided  important  insight  into  lenders'  practices, 
particularly their oversight of broker relationships. 
Provisions  of  the  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act  limit  the  ability  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  as 
consolidated  supervisor,  to  examine,  obtain  reports  from,  or  take  actions  with  respect  to 
subsidiaries  that  are  supervised  by  other  agencies.  Consistent  with  these  provisions,  we 
have worked with other regulators and, wherever possible, sought to make good use of the 
information  and  analysis  they  provide.  In  the  process,  we  have  built  good  cooperative 
relationships with other regulators – relationships that we expect to continue and strengthen 
further. Moreover, our consolidated supervision guidance has helped to clarify the protocols 
for relying on other supervisors, as well as to identify cases in which we need to take a more 
active role as the consolidated supervisor.  
However,  the  restrictions  in  current  law  still can  present  challenges  to  timely  and  effective 
consolidated supervision in light of, among other things, differences in supervisory models – 
for  example,  between  those  favored  bybank  supervisors  and  those  used  by  regulators  of 
insurance and securities subsidiaries – and differences in supervisory timetables, resources, 
and priorities. In its review of the U.S. financial architecture, we hope that the Congress will 
consider  revising  the  provisions  of  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  to  help  ensure  that  consolidated 
supervisors  have  the  necessary  tools  and  authorities  to  monitor  and  address  safety  and 
soundness concerns in all parts of an organization. 
Financial stability 
I  have  been  discussing  supervisory  policy  aimed  at  ensuring  the  stability  of  individual 
financial  institutions.  However,  the  Federal  Reserve  also  has  the  broader  objective  of 
enhancing  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  Supervision  of  individual 
institutions  and  fostering  broader  stability  are,  once  again,  complementary  activities,  with 
information  and  expertise  gained  in  one  arena  often  proving  highly  useful  in  the  other. 
Drawing on the lessons of the crisis, we have gone beyond efforts to improve our supervision 
BIS Review 56/2009 
 5
of  individual  institutions  to  try  to  bolster  the  capacity  of  the  financial  system  overall  to 
withstand shocks. 
Our efforts to strengthen the financial infrastructure are a good illustration of these initiatives. 
We  have  been  working  since  before  the  crisis  with  the  institutions  that  support  trading, 
payments, clearing, and settlement systems. For instance, the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York,  in  cooperation  with  other  supervisors  and  market  participants,  has  helped  improve 
arrangements  for  clearing  and  settling  credit  default  swaps  and  other  over-the-counter 
derivatives.  As  a  result,  the  accuracy  and  timeliness  of  trade  information  has  improved 
significantly. But the infrastructure for managing these derivatives is still not as efficient or 
transparent as the infrastructure for more-mature instruments. So, along with others, we are 
creating increasingly stringent targets and performance standards for market participants.  
Protecting  consumers  also  contributes  to  financial  stability.  The  increased  complexity  of 
many consumer products, as well as their sale by a range of financial institutions to a larger 
segment of the public, is arguably one of the causes of the current crisis. In the past year or 
so, the Board has developed extensive new disclosures for a variety of financial products, 
most notably credit cards, and we are currently in the midst of a major overhaul of mortgage 
disclosures.  Because  even  the  best  disclosures  are  not  always  adequate,  we  also 
comprehensively  overhauled  our  mortgage  and  credit  card  regulations  to  prohibit  certain 
practices. 
Our  ability  to  foster  financial  stability  depends  on  having  a  staff  with  a  diverse  range  of 
knowledge,  expertise,  and  skills.  The  Fed  is  accustomed  to  using  interdisciplinary 
approaches to solving problems, and that perspective often gives us a more accurate picture 
of financial activities and the potential risks they produce. During the current crisis, we have 
seen  very  close  collaboration  among  our  supervisors,  economists,  accountants,  attorneys, 
and consumer affairs experts. We must ensure that we continue to increase our expertise so 
it  is  properly  matched  with  the  problems  and  challenges  we  will  face  in  both  our  bank 
supervisory role and in meeting our traditional financial stability mandate.  
Looking  forward,  I  believe  a  more  macroprudential  approach  to  supervision  –  one  that 
supplements the supervision of individual institutions to address risks to the financial system 
as  a  whole  –  could  help  to  enhance  overall  financial  stability.  Our  regulatory  system  must 
include the capacity to monitor, assess, and, if necessary, address potential systemic risks 
within the financial system. Elements of a macroprudential agenda include 
• 
monitoring large or rapidly increasing exposures – such as to subprime mortgages – 
across firms and markets, rather than only at the level of individual firms or sectors;  
assessing the potential systemic risks implied by evolving risk-management practices, 
broad-based  increases  in  financial  leverage,  or  changes  in  financial  markets  or 
products;  
analyzing possible spillovers between financial firms or between firms and markets, 
such as the mutual exposures of highly interconnected firms;  
ensuring that each systemically important firm receives oversight commensurate with 
the risks that its failure would pose to the financial system;  
providing a resolution mechanism to safely wind down failing, systemically important 
institutions;  
ensuring that the critical financial infrastructure, including the institutions that support 
trading, payments, clearing, and settlement, is robust;  
working  to  mitigate  procyclical  features  of  capital  regulation  and  other  rules  and 
standards; and  
identifying  possible  regulatory  gaps,  including  gaps  in  the  protection  of  consumers 
and investors, that pose risks for the system as a whole. 
       6 
 BIS Review 56/2009
Precisely how best to implement a macroprudential agenda remains open to debate. Some 
of these critical functions could be incorporated into the practices of existing regulators, or a 
subset of them might be assigned to a macroprudential supervisory authority. However we 
proceed,  a  principal  lesson  of  the  crisis  is  that  an  approach  to  supervision  that  focuses 
narrowly  on  individual  institutions  can  miss  broader  problems  that  are  building  up  in  the 
system.  
Conclusion 
The  events  of  the  past  two  years  have  revealed  weaknesses  in  both  private-sector  risk 
management and in the public sector's oversight of the financial system. It is imperative that 
we apply the lessons of this experience to strengthen our regulatory system, both at the level 
of  its  overall  architecture  and  in  its  daily  execution.  Indeed,  although  reform  of  the  current 
system is necessary, much can be done within the current framework. The Federal Reserve 
has engaged in extensive introspection and review of the lessons of the crisis and is working 
diligently to implement what has been learned. As the past two years have brought home to 
everyone,  the  development  of  a  more  stable  and  sound  financial  system  should  be  of  the 
highest priority. 
BIS Review 56/2009 
 7
