Axel A Weber: The macroeconomy and financial systems in normal times 
and in times of stress 
Dinner speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
joint Bundesbank-Bank of France conference on "The macroeconomy and financial systems 
in normal times and in times of stress", Gouvieux-Chantilly, 8 June 2009. 
 1  
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  warmly  welcome  you  to  this  dinner  on  the  occasion  of  the  joint  Bundesbank-Banque  de 
France  conference  here  in  Gouvieux.  The  regal  ambience  of  this  castle  may  help  us  to 
momentarily forget our everyday events and concerns; however, this will certainly not last. 
The global financial crisis has been keeping the world on edge for nearly two years now. The 
turbulence in the international financial markets that erupted in August 2007 developed into a 
full-blown global financial crisis in September 2008 with the collapse of US investment bank 
Lehman Brothers. The deterioration of the situation in the financial market caused the decline 
in global economic output, which was already starting to take hold, to take a dramatic turn for 
the worse. Industrial and emerging economies underwent a nearly completely synchronised 
sharp economic downturn in the last two quarters. 
Despite growing signs that the intensity of the downturn is subsiding, past experience has 
shown  that  the  economy  is  generally  very  slow  to  recover  from  recessions  that  are 
associated with real estate and financial crises. Although the forecast uncertainty is currently 
particularly  high,  the  crisis  is  likely  to  put  a  strain  on  global  financial markets  and  the  real 
sector for some time to come. 
To quote the opening lines to the Tolstoy novel Anna Karenina: “Happy families are all alike; 
every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.”  This pearl of wisdom is also relevant in 
times  of  financial  crisis.  Although  virtually  the  entire  world  was  bowled  over  by  the  sheer 
force of events, it is small details that set the individual transmission channels apart. 
Allow me to briefly cite Germany as a case in point. In August 2007, right at the beginning of 
the  financial  crisis,  Germany  was  the  first  country  to  see  two  banks  encounter  difficulties, 
even though we had not had any local asset price bubbles. Since the financial crisis is clearly 
a global problem, the risk-bearing capacity of many internationally active financial institutions 
has now been affected severely on a worldwide scale. 
Turning  to  developments  in  the  real  sector,  it  is  striking  that  Germany  saw  a  particularly 
sharp drop in overall economic activity relative to the rest of the world. Germany’s GDP fell 
by 3.8% in the first quarter of this year, and the Bundesbank predicts a fall of 6.2% for the 
year  2009  as  a  whole,  making  Germany  one  of  the  industrial  countries  currently  being 
affected particularly seriously by the crisis. 
The  reasons  are  not  hard  to  find.  Germany  has  an  extremely  open  economy  and  is 
accordingly heavily dependent on exports. In addition, the range of German exports contains 
a large share of capital goods, that is to say goods for which global demand has slumped 
particularly distinctly on account of the crisis. The German example therefore demonstrates 
that the growing export specialisation of an economy is associated with stronger swings in 
the business cycle – at least in those cases in which the world economy is hit by a common 
global  shock.  To  complete  the  picture,  though,  it  needs  to  be  noted  that  the  German 
economy has benefited very strongly in the past few years from the cyclical stimuli emitted by 
exporters  and  their  downstream  industries.  Diversifying  the  export  portfolio  by  region  or 
BIS Review 71/2009 
 1
product,  however,  ultimately  will  not  protect  an  open  economy  such  as  Germany’s  from 
veritable global shocks. 
Let  me  finally  add  with  a  view  to  the  German  banking  system  that  lending  by  banks  in 
Germany to German non-banks grew with an annual rate of merely 0.8% on average in pre-
crisis years (ie 2004 to 2006). Hence, during that time, German banks profited strongly from 
portfolio  investments  in  structured  financial  products  and  booming  real  estate  markets 
abroad. 
Financial crisis and economic research 
2  
Let us return to the global view of the financial crisis. There is no disputing the fact that a 
whole cocktail of micro and macro-level factors caused the global financial crisis. The variety 
of causes leading to the current crisis is also reflected in this conference’s programme. 
This is already the second research conference jointly organised by the Bundesbank and the 
Banque  de  France.  You  will  certainly  be  aware  that  research  plays  an  important  role  in 
central banks. Joint projects, conferences and discussions between researchers both within 
and  outside  the  world  of  central  banking  have  contributed  time  and  again  to  further 
expanding and improving the theoretical foundations of economics and to backing them up 
empirically. 
The  financial  crisis  has  once  again  underlined  clearly  that,  in  this  context,  the  interests  of 
researchers and central bankers are very closely related, and not just in the area of monetary 
policy. A by-product of the crisis, so to speak, is that it has provided numerous ideas for the 
advancement of research in this area. It presents an opportunity to rethink, and examine with 
scepticism, some of the assumptions found in theoretical models. One example that comes 
to mind is modelling how economic agents form expectations, or the degree of sophistication 
with which the financial system can be integrated into macro models. 
There  is  another  quite  interesting  question  from  the  empirical  side.  How  can  the  available 
data in the area of the financial world be better used to identify systemic risks – or do they 
need to be supplemented by certain additional data? Some of the papers presented at this 
conference have found very promising approaches. 
Answers  to  these  and  similar  questions  will  amplify  the  meaningfulness  and  practical 
relevance  of  future  research  findings.  This  is  of  great  interest  to  central  banks,  not  least 
because  we  use  the  knowledge  gained  from  research  as  an  input  in  our  monetary  policy 
decisions. Allow me to discuss two relevant cases in which current events have stimulated 
research. 
Segmentation in the money market 
2.1  
One  concerns  the  question  of  how  central  banks  can  most  effectively  supply  the  financial 
system with liquidity. After the US investment bank Lehman Brothers had filed for insolvency, 
the ability of whole financial market segments to function was severely constrained, requiring 
central  banks  around  the  world  to  inject  a  massive  volume  of  liquidity  into  the  money 
markets. 
Against  this  background,  a  Deutsche  Bundesbank  study1  identified  segmentation  in  the 
German money market. For the behaviour of German banks in the money market, the study 
finds signs that the size of a bank has a systematic effect on the price of liquidity. Taking a 
number  of  other  factors  into  account,  larger  banks  end  up  paying  less  for  liquidity  than 
                                                 
1   See F. Fecht, K. Nyborg, J. Rocholl (2008): The price of liquidity: bank characteristics and market conditions, 
Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper, Series 1, No 30/2008. 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2009
smaller  banks.  This  effect  is  even  more  pronounced  when  there  is  an  increase  in  the 
imbalance of the liquidity positions. 
Thanks to its very broad range of counterparties, the Eurosystem was able to ensure that all 
banks active in the euro area, whether large or small, were given equal access to the ample 
supply of central bank liquidity from the beginning of the financial crisis onwards. In addition, 
over  a  year  ago  the  Eurosystem  had  already  expanded  the  range  of  maturities  of  its 
refinancing operations and now provides liquidity in the form of a fixed-rate tender with full 
allotment with a maturity ranging from one week to 12 months. 
As is borne out by the results of our study, these measures are likely to have made it easier, 
particularly  for  the  smaller  institutions  that  are  less  active  in  the  money  market,  to  obtain 
access  to  liquidity  in  these  turbulent  times.  The  Eurosystem  has  thus  made  a  decisive 
contribution  to  stabilising  the  European  money  market,  including  the  longer-term  maturity 
segment. 
Monetary policy issues 
2.2  
Moreover, the financial crisis has pushed the interplay between monetary policy and financial 
market  developments  back  into  the  centre  of  attention.  In  the  past,  research  was  often 
focused  on  how  central  banks  dealt  with  growing  asset  price  bubbles.  However,  reality 
indicates  that  this  focus  was  too  narrow.  After  all,  maintaining  an  overly  expansionary 
monetary  policy  for  too  long  in  some  currency  areas  was  probably  one  of  the  framework 
conditions that contributed to the emergence of the global financial crisis. 
Boom-bust cycles in financial markets cannot develop completely independently of monetary 
policy. One of the good things a stability-oriented monetary policy can do is to monitor such 
movements in the financial sector and – where possible and consistent with the price stability 
mandate – to dampen them. This requires a more symmetrical monetary policy that already 
recognises  growing  risks  in  times  when  monetary  and  credit  aggregates  are  growing 
dynamically,  asset  prices  are  skyrocketing  and  market  participants’  perception  of  risk  is 
decreasing. 
I  think  the  Eurosystem  is  well  equipped  for  this  task.  First,  our  (often-criticised)  monetary 
analysis  is  a  valuable  analytical  tool  that  forces  us  to  include  the  medium  and  long-term 
development  of  monetary  and  credit  aggregates  in  our  monetary  policy  decision-making 
process. Second, the liquidity policy crisis measures taken thus far still enable us to exit from 
the  policy  of  ample  liquidity  injection  quite  easily.  Should  the  overall  economic  picture 
improve, the Eurosystem will absorb the extra liquidity provided as quickly as possible. In this 
manner, we will counter potential risks to price stability early on and, at the same time, make 
a contribution to avoiding future financial crises. 
Conclusion 
3  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  this  conference  will  be  dealing  with  a  host  of  other  issues  I  could 
discuss at great length. However, allow me to follow a particularly useful suggestion to dinner 
speakers: “Start at the beginning. And when you get to the end, stop.” And this is where I 
have arrived. I thank you for your attention and wish everyone “bon appétit”. 
BIS Review 71/2009 
 3
