Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: The Corporate Governance Code of the 
Kingdom of Bahrain – fundamentals and implementation 
Address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain, at an event, organized by the International Chamber of Commerce, Manama, 4 May 
2009. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
As patron of this event, the Central Bank is proud to take part in today’s proceedings. My 
thanks go out to the organisers of this event, the International Chamber of Commerce, and 
also to the many sponsors who have made this event possible. 
Today’s  conference  focuses  on  the  features  of  good  corporate  governance  and  on 
developments relating to the proposed new corporate governance code for all companies in 
the  Kingdom  of  Bahrain.  This  initiative  by  the  Ministry  of  Industry  and  Commerce  is 
welcomed  by  the  Central  Bank  and  we  will  be  working  with  the  financial  sector  and  listed 
companies  on  the  implementation  of  the  spirit  and  the  letter  of  the  New  Code  upon  its 
publication.  
In my opening comments, I will highlight what the CBB considers to be the key attributes of 
good corporate governance, and how we have encouraged licensees of the CBB and listed 
companies to implement a sound corporate governance environment. 
Effective  corporate  governance  begins  with  establishing  a  clear  dynamic  between  three 
different bodies of persons: the shareholders; the board; and the management. In a perfect 
World, these three bodies would all recognise their interdependence and their responsibilities 
and  act  promptly,  rationally  and  transparently  in  the  best  interests  of  the  concerned 
company. However, events globally over the past decade indicate that we do not live in a 
perfect  World,  and  so  rules  from  regulators,  company  law  and  codes  of  practice  are 
necessary to ensure that one set of stakeholders do not act in their own self-interest to the 
detriment of other stakeholders, or indeed to the detriment of the economy itself in the case 
of the largest companies. 
The  Central  Bank  of  Bahrain  has  recognised  that  the  conduct  and  health  of  the  financial 
sector in particular has a far wider impact than just on shareholders’ wealth. The health of the 
financial sector affects the reputation of the country, the functioning of the payments system 
and  provides  valuable  employment  in  the  domestic  economy.  Therefore  the  CBB  has 
implemented  several  far-reaching  initiatives  on  corporate  governance  standards  over  the 
past five years or so to complement the requirements of the Commercial Companies Law. 
These  Standards  include:  The  Disclosure  Standards  for  Listed  Companies  which  were 
issued in December 2003; The Guidelines for Insiders, issued October 2004; The Guidelines 
for  the  Issue  of  Debt  Securities,  issued  March  2004;  The  Takeovers,  Mergers  and 
Acquisitions Module of Volume 6 of the CBB Rulebook; and also the High Level Controls, 
Public Disclosure and Business Conduct Modules of the CBB Rulebook. 
You will note that the CBB’s emphasis has been on the internal governance, market conduct 
and transparency of listed companies and licensees. Let me deal with these three points in 
turn. 
The  CBB’s  internal  governance  requirements  have  concentrated  first  and  foremost  on  the 
role of the Board, and secondly on sound internal controls and risk management systems. 
The  Board  sets  the  tone  at  the  top  and  its  functions  include  effectively  monitoring  the 
management  and  performance  of  licensees,  and  to  establish  the  objectives  of,  and  to 
develop the strategy of the licensee. In banks in particular, we have asked boards to define 
BIS Review 57/2009 
 1
the  risk  appetite  of  the  institution  and  to  develop  and  approve  its  business  plans.  More 
recently we have specifically asked bank boards to quantify the capital needs of their banks. 
Market  conduct  has  involved  requiring  banks  to  adopt  codes  of  conduct  for  dealing  with 
customers  and  also  to  adopt  staff  codes  of  conduct  in  dealing  with  potential  conflicts  of 
interests, for example. Transparency requirements for licensees and listed companies have 
increased dramatically over the past decade as we have sought to make management and 
boards more accountable for their actions and conduct and to tell stakeholders more about 
the affairs of the company. We therefore see the new Code as a highly useful next step and 
complement  to  the  CBB’s  existing measures,  and  encourage  companies,  their  boards  and 
their management to work further on implementing good corporate governance standards. 
In conclusion, I would like to comment is on the timeliness of this event. 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  badly  affected  investor  confidence  all  over  the  World,  as 
witnessed by falling stock prices across World markets in 2007 and 2008, and a retreat by 
investors into so-called safe havens of Government bonds and high quality investments. In 
such times, if listed companies or financial institutions wish to obtain funding at reasonable 
cost  then  they  must  maintain,  and  in  some  cases,  regain  the  confidence  and  trust  of 
investors by demonstrating good corporate governance. This means demonstrating that the 
company  is  well  run  at  the  top  level  by  an  independent,  well  qualified,  experienced  board 
overseeing high quality management. This also means that the company must show that it 
has  excellent  risk  management  and  internal  control  systems,  including  an  efficient  internal 
audit.  Furthermore,  conflicts  of  interests  should  be  removed  or  minimised,  and  properly 
disclosed where they remain. 
Remuneration  for  management  and  directors  should  be  transparent  and  not  excessive. 
Management  structure  must  be  clear,  and  management  must  be  held  accountable  to 
shareholders and the board for their actions and performance. Above all, the company must 
be  transparent  in  its  communications  with  its  shareholders  and  stakeholders.  This  would 
include  in  particular  the  prompt  reporting  of  full  financial  and  risk  information  and  the 
disclosure of the governance structure and governance performance of the company. I would 
therefore encourage companies, their boards and their management to take the New Code 
seriously and adopt it wholeheartedly if they wish to attract new investment and to retain the 
confidence of existing investors and other stakeholders in a post – Subprime World. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2009
