Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Nurturing successful & ethical finance 
professionals 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  FINEX-CITI  Rafael  B  Buenaventura  Outstanding 
Finance Educators Awards Night, Manila, 28 January 2009. 
 Members of the Monetary Board, the family and friends of Governor Rafael Buenaventura, 
the organizers of the Finex-Citi Rafael B. Buenaventura Outstanding Finance Awards led by 
Mr.  Sanjiv  Vohra  of  Citi  and  Mr.  Eduardo  Francisco  of  Finex  Foundation,  distinguished 
finalists,  my  colleagues  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  special  guests  from  the 
academic, banking and finance communities, good evening.  
I am very pleased to be here today to join you in honoring our outstanding finance educators. 
As a career central banker for more than three decades now, I was fortunate to have good 
mentors;  Governor  Rafael  Buenaventura  stands  out  in  particular.  He  never  lectured,  he 
mentored. He never preached, he showed by example. Thus, his six-year term as head of 
the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  will  be  remembered  for  the  world-class  expertise  and 
wisdom which he generously shared. It is fitting therefore that our awards tonight are given in 
honor  of  a  great  mentor  –  former  BSP  Governor  Paeng  Buenaventura.  Ladies  and 
gentlemen, let us celebrate the memory of Gov Paeng with a long round of applause.  
Teaching  is  a  vocation;  it  requires  intellectual,  emotional,  and  spiritual  commitment.  It  is 
therefore proper for us to reward outstanding educators. 
To me, the discipline, intellectual rigor, and moral values that good educators engender are 
priceless gifts that empower their students to become effective catalysts for economic and 
social advancement in our country.  
Given  the  hard  and  painful  lessons  from  the  ongoing  global  financial  crisis,  we  cannot 
overemphasize  the  importance,  the  value  of  instilling  good  moral  principles  and  good 
governance in the process of educating our youth, the future leaders of our nation.  
For  instance,  we  have  seen  the  destructive  effects,  on  a  global  scale,  of  the  greedy  and 
senseless  race  to  have  ever  fatter  bottomlines  at  all  cost,  in  total  disregard  of  its 
consequences.  
We  have  seen  many  supposedly  finance  experts  lose  their  perspective  when  it  comes  to 
money. Think subprime, Madoff, and the German billionaire, one of the 100 richest men in 
the world, who committed suicide when his investments soured.  
What is clear is that having piles of money that would allow them to live in luxury was not 
enough. The chase for money became the end goal. This is where the value of good and 
ethical finance educators comes in. Educators who will provide their students solid grounding 
on what financial success means and the ethical parameters for achieving it.  
Helping your students develop the ethical compass and the moral fortitude to adhere to doing 
things the right way should help them find their way in a challenging world. For as we know, 
doing the right things is not necessarily the easiest path to follow.  
American civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr. once said that “Intelligence plus character 
– that is the goal of true education.” That is the challenge before our educators.  
As finance educators I hope you will always be mindful that sitting before you in your class 
are the future leaders of our banking and finance institutions. That you have the  power to 
nurture leaders who can truly make a difference in improving the quality of life of our people.  
BIS Review 11/2009 
 1
This is the same philosophy that underpins the economic and financial education program of 
the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas: improving lives through literacy programs that will empower 
them to benefit from opportunities that development brings.  
As you and I know, there are millions of Filipinos who still live in poverty. If we can harness 
the liberating effects of financial know-how, even at its most basic, then we would be able to 
help millions of Filipinos help themselves. Empowerment is the key.  
This is the reason why economic and financial education is at the heart of Bangko Sentral’s 
advocacies. It is a social good, whose value to society is considerably much more than the 
personal gains.  
Financial  learning  empowers  the  citizenry  as  it  helps  the  public  acquire  knowledge  and 
develop skills in making well-informed economic and financial decisions necessary to ensure 
well-functioning markets that, in turn, support economic growth and development.  
And when consumers and producers understand financial issues, they are less vulnerable to 
fraudulent  practices  and  scams.  As  they  grow  in  their  understanding  of  financial  products, 
whose variety and complexity have grown in leaps and bounds, they will be able to prepare 
and  chart  their  financial  future  based  on  their  preferences  for  risks  and  rewards.  Just  as 
financial learning helps to protect the public from unsafe financial practices, it also affords the 
public better opportunities for financial advancement and wealth creation.  
The importance of education to one’s financial future highlights the need to start the process 
of  education  as  early  as  possible.  Many  of  you  here  are  parents  like  myself.  So  I’m  sure 
many  of  us  would  also  be  happy  to  see  our  children  learn  the  importance  of  saving, 
investment and budgeting, as well as other aspects of personal financial management, to set 
them on the right path to a secure and stable financial future. 
On the macroeconomic level, financial education also ensures the efficient transmission of 
macroeconomic  policies.  It  also  facilitates  the  anchoring  of  expectations  as  the  public  is 
better able to understand and respond to policy actions of the various economic agencies of 
the government and the Bangko Sentral. It is for these reasons that the Bangko Sentral and 
many other central banks in the world consider economic and financial education as a key 
advocacy. 
The  private  sector  also  plays  a  major  role  in  raising  the  general  level  of  financial  and 
economic  education.  Tonight’s  awarding  ceremony  to  honor  our  outstanding  finance 
educators is a testament to the commitment of our organizers, FINEX and Citi Foundation, to 
this advocacy. In particular, FINEX has been at the very  forefront of the development and 
advancement  of  knowledge  and skills  related to  the  financial  field.  On  the  other hand,  Citi 
Foundation  is  proactive  in  its  own  educational  campaign  to  help  consumers  better 
understand credit, savings and investment.  
We  are,  therefore,  natural  partners  in  broadening  the  reach  of  our  economic  and  financial 
education  programs.  I  look  forward  to  an  ever-expanding  network  of  similar-minded 
individuals and institutions who will cooperate with us to reach out to broader segments of 
our  society:  from  school  children,  students,  young  adults  and  professionals,  overseas 
Filipinos, and members of the business sector, academe, media and public service.  
To  those  who  wish  to  identify  possible  areas  of  cooperation  with  the  Bangko  Sentral,  our 
initiatives  include  the  launching  of  Economic  and  Financial  Learning  Centers  in  different 
regions; out-reach programs to teach financial management to overseas Filipinos and their 
families;  in-house  education  activities  to  enhance  economic  education  even  among  BSP 
staff; advocacy of microfinance as a tool for poverty alleviation for entrepreneurially-inclined 
but  capital-challenged  Filipinos;  in  partnership  with  the  Department  of  Education  the 
integration of savings and money management lessons in the grade school curriculum; and 
teaching the value of small things including the barya for wealth creation through fund-raising 
projects such as the award-winning Tulong Barya Para sa Eskwela.  
2 
 BIS Review 11/2009
Ladies and gentlemen. The overall success of financial and economic education rests on the 
concerted efforts of the BSP, our educators and our partners in the private sector. Aside from 
the  various  programs  and  initiatives  of  the  BSP,  our  contributions  to  this  advocacy  lie  in 
providing support to similar efforts of individual organizations. That is why we are particularly 
happy to host this awards night, together with FINEX and Citi Foundation. Both the private 
sector, as well as the BSP, stand to gain from a citizenry that better understands economics 
and finance, and we pledge our support to programs and initiatives that will help us attain this 
end.  
For  FINEX  and  Citi  Foundation,  we  look  forward  to  building  upon  our  collaboration  and 
partnerships in the area of promoting financial and economic education.  
For our educators, nominees and winners all, I salute you for your dedication to an ideal that 
we  at  the  BSP  and  the  banking  community  as  a  whole,  hold  dear.  I  know  that  you  do  all 
these  things  not  for  personal  glory  or  monetary  reward.  However,  your  actions  should  be 
recognized  because  they  serve  to  inspire  others  to  do  better  and  to  continue  the  work  at 
hand.  I  challenge  our  educators  to  develop  new  and  innovative  methods  of  reaching  our 
students, and to continue to inspire and enkindle in the hearts of the youth, the thirst and zest 
for knowledge you hope to impart.  
Once again, thank you for your dedication and congratulations to our winners! Mabuhay ang 
Pilipinas! Salamat sa inyong lahat.  
BIS Review 11/2009 
 3
