Njuguna Ndung’u: Kenya’s vision for a strong and accessible financial 
sector 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, during the 2009 
Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) Global Policy Forum, Nairobi, 14 September 2009. 
 The Right Honourable Prime Minister of the Republic of Kenya, Mr. Raila Odinga; 
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance of the Republic of Kenya, Mr. Uhuru 
Kenyatta; 
Permanent Secretaries here present; 
Dr. Alfred Hannig, Executive Director, Alliance for Financial Inclusion; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Right Honourable Prime Minister, let me thank you most sincerely for gracing this important 
Forum. Your personal presence demonstrates the seriousness with which the Government of 
Kenya  takes  the  role  of  the  financial  sector  in  the  process  of  our  nation’s  economic 
development. May I also heartily thank the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) for choosing 
to host its inaugural Global Policy Forum in Nairobi. This is indeed a very great honour to our 
country. I also warmly welcome all the Forum participants and hope that in the course of the 
next three days, we shall have fruitful discussions and emerge with smart policies to expand 
global  financial  inclusion.  In  this  respect,  I  am  delighted  to  be  part  of  the  Forum  and  to 
champion its course. 
Mr. Prime Minister, this Forum is jointly hosted by the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) 
and the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK). The CBK is a member of the AFI Steering Committee. 
The AFI has over 60 member countries that account for the majority, nearly 70 percent, of 
the world’s “unbanked” population. AFI’s vision is to expand financial services to at least fifty 
million people across the globe living on less than two dollars a day by 2012. 
The AFI currently concentrates on six policy areas, namely, Agent Banking, Mobile Phone 
Banking, Diversification of Financial Service Channels and Providers, State Bank Reforms, 
Financial  Identity  and  Consumer  Protection.  AFI’s  mandate,  however,  will  be  widened  as 
need arises. All these thematic areas, which AFI champions are relevant to our country and 
are key to our financial sector if it has to become “a vibrant and globally competitive financial 
sector”  as  stipulated  in  Vision  2030.  A  strong  and  accessible  financial  sector  is  a  key 
ingredient in Kenya’s vision of becoming a middle income country by the year 2030. 
As  a  country  we  are  matching  on  towards  all  these  fronts  that  AFI  espouses.  The 
government  in  the  current  fiscal  year  2009/10  proposed  to  introduce  branchless  banking. 
This  will  enable  banks  to  provide  their  services  through  Agents  with  wide  distribution 
networks  and  therefore  legalizing  Agent  Banking  and  reducing  costs  of  financial  services. 
There  has  been  a  significant  reduction  of  the  proportion  of  our  population  that  remains 
unbanked  from  38%  in  2006  to  33%  in  2009  according  to  the  national  financial  access 
surveys conducted by the CBK and Financial Sector Deepening (FSD) Kenya. This reduction 
in the unbanked is greatly attributed to the contribution of mobile phones as a channel for 
money transfer. 
The  recent  Financial  Access  Survey  also  indicates  that  the  proportion  of  our  population 
accessing banking services increased from 19% to 23% between 2006 and 2009. However, 
33% of the population still has no access to any form of financial service and 27% access 
financial  services  from  the  informal  financial  sector.  Despite  the  progress  we  have  made 
towards  expanding  financial  access,  the  majority  of  Kenyans  still  lack  access  to  formal 
financial  services.  We  are  therefore  keen  to  draw  on  the  wealth  of  experiences  that  are 
brought to the table by participants in this Forum. We will, over the next three days, share 
BIS Review 114/2009 
 1
experiences  on  smart  financial  inclusion  policies  that  have  worked  elsewhere.  We  will 
thereafter adopt these policies to suit our respective countries as we work together to push 
forward the global financial access frontiers. 
Mr. Prime Minister, this Forum also comes at a time when the global economy is suffering a 
slow  down,  with  economic  activities  weakened  considerably.  Although  there  are  signs  of 
improvement, we are yet to see full recovery. Globally, policy actions taken to mitigate the 
crisis have been geared towards maintaining effective and well functioning financial systems 
and to reinforce their resilience in order to guard their integrity. We have acted accordingly to 
ensure that our financial system remains sound, secure, stable, accessible and trusted. We 
are in constant vigilance that this remains the case and any action necessary to achieve this 
will be undertaken. 
With these few remarks, it is now my pleasant duty and honour to welcome the Deputy Prime 
Minister and Minister for Finance to make a few remarks and to welcome you to address this 
Forum. 
Honourable Deputy Prime Minister and Minster for Finance, you have the floor. 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2009
