Svein Gjedrem: Hearing before the Standing Committee on Finance and 
Economic Affairs  
Introduction by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at a 
public hearing before the Storting's Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs, 
together  with  Mrs  Kristin  Halvorsen,  Minister  of  Finance,  and  Mr  Bjørn  Skogstad  Aamo, 
Director General of The Financial Supervisory Authority of Norway, Oslo, 13 February 2009.  
 Government finance fund and government bond fund  
The crisis in the banking sector was initially a problem of liquidity. In October and November, 
there was considerable turbulence and fear was spreading among banks. Credit premiums 
were high. The situation has improved. 
The improvement is to a considerable extent the result of action taken by the authorities. The 
swap arrangement whereby banks can exchange covered bonds for government paper has 
been important. The arrangement is oriented towards larger banks, and a number of banks 
have made use of this facility, in an amount so far totalling more than NOK 70 billion. 
Norges Bank has proposed an extension of the arrangement to provide banks with funding at 
5-year maturities. Maturities so far have been up to 3 years. The extension is important to 
ensure that maturity dates do not all fall within a short period.  
The arrangement provides banks with Treasury bills. Banks have used these as collateral for 
loans,  sold  them  or  kept  them  as  liquidity  reserves.  There  has  been  high  demand  for 
Treasury bills. However, the Treasury bills have to be exchanged every six months. Norges 
Bank has proposed that banks be supplied with government bonds at floating rates and a 
maturity  equivalent  to  the  duration  of  the  swap  agreement.  This  may  simplify  the 
arrangement. 
Norges  Bank  has  also  expanded  its  use  of  its  ordinary  instruments.  We  have  supplied 
additional liquidity through our loan facilities and made arrrangements for banks to furnish a 
greater  range  of  securities  as  collateral  for  the  loans.  We  have  also  provided  loans  with 
longer-than-usual maturities. 89 banks signed up for a two-year fixed rate F-loan, and two 
days  ago  100  banks  signed  up  for  a  three-year  floating  rate  F-loan.  These  F-loans  are 
geared to small banks. As shown in the chart, more than half of the bids have been below 
NOK 100 million. 
Norges  Bank  has  also  supplied  NOK  through  currency  swaps  and  offered  USD  loans  to 
Norwegian banks.  
In all, these measures have provided banks with good access to short and long-term funding. 
However, the interbank market is still not functioning satisfactorily. 
We  have  now  moved  into  a  phase  where  the  main  challenge  may  be  banks’  financial 
strength. This is partly due to the downturn in the global and Norwegian economies, which 
over time will result in higher losses, but also because higher capital adequacy is now being 
required in the markets. The same view has been expressed by the Norwegian supervisory 
authority.  
We see that many banks abroad are raising new capital, with or without assistance from the 
authorities.  
But additional equity capital is now very expensive and perhaps also difficult to procure. The 
alternative for banks may be to hold back on lending. If they do this on a large scale, it will 
have  considerable  negative  effects  on  output  and  employment.  It  is  understandable  that 
BIS Review 17/2009 
 1
credit growth is now slowing, both because demand for credit is lower and because fewer 
investments are profitable. 
But in addition, it appears that banks are applying stricter criteria in credit assessments and 
rationing credit. Norges Bank’s Survey of Bank Lending shows the banks’ own perception of 
this practice. The chart shows that over the past year banks have reported a tightening of 
credit  standards.  It  appears  that  credit  flows  to  households  have  improved  somewhat,  but 
banks are still tightening credit standards for corporate loans.  
An  important  lesson  to  be  learned  from  this  economic  crisis  is  that  compelling  banks  to 
increase  their  equity  capital  when  the  downturn  has  already  started  has  a  considerably 
negative impact. It is important that banks have sufficient capital to make them resilient even 
if  the  downturn  should  persist  over  a  longer  period.  For  this  reason,  we  have  proposed 
government capital injections in banks. 
The government bond fund will buy bank and corporate bonds. In Norges Bank’s view, it is 
particularly important helps to improve demand for corporate bonds. The fund shall primarily 
buy high quality bonds. The chart shows that it is on the whole borrowers with weaker ratings 
that are now being excluded. 
Norges Bank is nevertheless of the view that higher demand for the best bonds will have a 
positive effect. This will reduce the pressure on banks, and it may result in a shift in private 
demand towards bonds with a lower credit rating. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
  2 
 BIS Review 17/2009
    BIS Review 17/2009 
 3
    4 
 BIS Review 17/2009
