K C Chakrabarty: Banking – key driver for inclusive growth 
Address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Mint’s 
“Clarity Through Debate” series, Chennai, 10 August 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  gives  me  immense  pleasure  to  be  here  this  evening  in  front  of  an  august  audience  for 
today’s Mint debate series on the theme “Banking: Key Driver for Inclusive Growth”. I would 
like to thank the sponsors and all of you for inviting me here to share my views and thoughts 
on  a  subject  which  has  become  of  great  significance  today  for  the  growth  of  the  Indian 
economy.  The  previous  Conclaves  organized  by  the  Mint  brought  together  the  eminent 
bankers and the corporate leaders on varied subjects and pressing issues. I am sure, today’s 
debate  by  the  eminent  panelists  on  the  theme  as  mentioned  earlier  will  certainly  generate 
and open new vistas for an inclusive growth in India. The timing of today’s debate could not 
have been more apt if one just considers the existence and extent of “financial exclusion” in 
India  and  the  urgent  need  for  financially  including  the  people  from  all  strata  in  the 
mainstream banking system.  
Some  of  the  glaring  facts  about  financial  exclusion  is  very  much  clear  from  the  following 
figures – 45.9 million farmer households out of a total of 89.3 million households do not have 
access to credit either from the institutional or non-institutional sources (NSSO, 2008); one 
branch  is  catering  to  the  banking  needs  of  16,000  population  (June,  2007);  only  17  credit 
accounts  and  54  saving  accounts  are  there  per  100  persons  with  all  the  institutions  (June 
2007); only 13 per cent are availing loans from the banks in the income bracket of less than 
Rs.50,000;  and  53  per  cent  people  are  still  taking  loans  from  the  institutional  and  non-
institutional sources only for emergency purposes. These figures do tell us something – the 
“urgent need” for extending the banking and financial services to every part of the country for 
achieving  the  objective  of  inclusive  growth.  In  this  context,  the  views  and  various 
perspectives generated out of today’s debate will be of importance in addressing the issue of 
inclusive growth of India from the banking perspectives. 
The “inclusive growth” as a strategy of economic development received attention owing to a 
rising concern that the benefits of economic growth have not been equitably shared. Growth 
is  inclusive  when  it  creates  economic  opportunities  along  with  ensuring  equal  access  to 
them. Apart from addressing the issue of inequality, the inclusive growth may also make the 
poverty  reduction  efforts  more  effective  by  explicitly  creating  productive  economic 
opportunities  for  the  poor  and  vulnerable  sections  of  the  society.  The  inclusive  growth  by 
encompassing the hitherto excluded population can bring in several other benefits as well to 
the economy. The concept “Inclusion” should be seen as a process of including the excluded 
as  agents  whose  participation  is  essential  in  the  very  design  of  the  development  process, 
and  not  simply  as  welfare  targets  of  development  programmes  (Planning  Commission, 
2007).1  
The Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-12) envisions inclusive growth as a key objective. The 
Plan  document  notes  that  the  economic  growth  has  failed  to  be  sufficiently  inclusive 
particularly  after  the  mid-1990s.  The  Indian  economy,  though  achieved  a  high  growth 
momentum during 2003-04 to 2007-08, could not bring down unemployment and poverty to 
tolerable levels. Further, a vast majority of the population remained outside the ambit of basic 
health and education facilities during this high growth phase. In recent decades, economic 
and social inequalities have increased alongside high growth rates which have exacerbated 
                                                 
1   TOWARDS INCLUSIVE GROWTH: THE GENDER DIMENSION, Planning Commission, November 15, 2007. 
BIS Review 98/2009 
 1
regional inequalities. The latest seventh quinquennial survey by the National Sample Survey 
Organisation (NSSO) (61st Round) reveals that growth rate of employment increased from 
an annual 0.98 per cent in the period 1993-94 to 1999-00 to 2.89 per cent in the period 1999-
2000 to 2004-05, while the acceleration in the rate of growth of labour force from 1.03 per 
cent to 2.93 per cent during same period had negative impact on employment rate (Table 1). 
Similarly, poverty ratio has been declining during the recent period, but it continues to remain 
at a very high level of 27.5 per cent (Uniform Recall Period) in 2004-05 from 36.0 per cent in 
1993-94. The most disturbing fact is that the income inequality as commonly measured by 
consumption expenditure (Gini coefficient) has increased in India from 32.9 in 1993 to 36.2 in 
2004 (Ali, I. and J. Zhuang: 2007).  
This  made  “inclusive  growth”  the  focal  point  of  growth  strategy  and  major  concern  for  the 
policymakers in India. 
 Thus,  the  Eleventh  Plan  Document  tries  to  restructure  the  policies  in  order  to  make  the 
growth  faster,  broad-based  and  inclusive  by  reducing  the  fragmentation  of  the  society.  It 
clearly stated that “The development of rural India is an imperative for inclusive and equitable 
growth and to unlock huge potential of the population that is presently trapped in poverty with 
its associated deprivations” (GoI, 2007). Huge investments in education and health, and rural 
infrastructure were the key elements of the inclusive growth strategy as envisaged. Broadly, 
the policies aim at increasing the income and employment opportunities on the one hand and 
on the other; it tries to finance programmes which are capable of making the growth more 
inclusive.  
There are supply side and demand side factors driving Inclusive Growth. Banks largely are 
expected to mitigate the supply side processes that prevent poor and disadvantaged social 
groups  from  gaining  access  to  the  financial  system.  Apart  from  the  supply  side  factors, 
demand  side  factors,  such  as  lower  income  and  /or  asset holdings  also  have  a  significant 
bearing on financial inclusion. Owing to difficulties in accessing formal sources of credit, poor 
individuals  and  small  and  macro  enterprises  usually  rely  on  their  personal  savings  or 
internal  sources  to  invest  in  health,  education,  housing,  and  entrepreneurial  activities  to 
make use of growth opportunities.  
Agriculture not only plays the central role for achieving high growth but also inclusive growth 
for  the  economy  as  a  whole  (generates  about  20  per  cent  of  India’s  GDP  and  provides 
employment  to  nearly  two-third  of  its  population).  Out  of  119  million  farmers,  small  and 
marginal farmers account for 82.1 per cent at 97.7 million. Targeted Eleventh Plan growth (at 
8.5 per cent) warrants a growth of at least 3.9 per cent in the agriculture sector, which would 
presuppose private sector investment and credit flow to agriculture. The Ground Level Credit 
2 
 BIS Review 98/2009
requirements for the agricultural sector has been worked out at Rs.16,40,000 crore for the 
Eleventh  Five  Year  Plan,  indicating  an  annual  compounded  growth  of  17.0  per  cent  as 
compared to Rs.6,39,330 crore of expected GLC during the Tenth Plan period. The role of 
state  governments  is  of  high  importance  in  achieving  the  target  especially  in  providing 
suitable infrastructure/extension support for facilitating enhanced credit flow to agriculture. 
The  draft  11th  Plan  recognizes  the  importance  of  small-scale  industries  (SSI).  It  has  a 
share of over 40 per cent of the gross industrial value added in the economy. About 44.0 per 
cent of the total manufactured exports of the country are directly accounted for by the SSI 
sector. In terms of employment generation, this sector is next to agriculture sector, employing 
approximately  295  lakh  people.  For  the  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  (SME)  sector,  the 
estimated incremental working capital provided by the scheduled commercial banks during 
the Eleventh Five Year Plan would be at Rs.1,67,989 crore, which amounts to a growth rate 
of an average 16.8 per cent per annum. The incremental flow of term loan to the SME sector 
is estimated at Rs.1,48,720 crore, which translates into a growth rate of an average 24.1 per 
cent  per  annum  for  the  Plan  period  (GoI,  2006).  Despite  the  risk,  financing  of  first  time 
entrepreneurs is a must for financial inclusion and growth.  
Role of financial inclusion in achieving inclusive growth  
The  Committee  on  Financial  Inclusion  (Chairman:  C.  Rangarajan,  2008)  defines  financial 
inclusion as the “process of ensuring access to financial services and timely and adequate 
credit where needed by vulnerable groups such as weaker sections and low income groups 
at an affordable cost”. Access to financial products is constrained by several factors which 
include:  lack  of  awareness  about  the  financial  products,  unaffordable  products,  high 
transaction costs, and products which are not convenient, inflexible, not customized and of 
low  quality.  Financial  Inclusion  promotes  thrift  and  develops  culture  of  saving  and  also 
enables  efficient  payment  mechanism  strengthening  the  resource  base  of  the  financial 
institution which benefits the economy as resources become available for efficient payment 
mechanism and allocation. The empirical evidence shows that countries with large proportion 
of population excluded from the formal financial system also show higher poverty ratios and 
higher inequality (Thorat, 2008).  
It has been the endeavour of both the Government and the Reserve Bank to expand banking 
sector across the length and breadth of the country to ensure reasonably priced credit in a 
timely  manner  to  all  the  deserving  borrowers.  Notwithstanding  the  significant  expansion  in 
bank  network  in  unbanked  areas  after  bank  nationalisation  in  India,  there  are  still  large 
segments of the society that remain outside the financial system. A quick look at the data on 
the  sources  of  loans  and  also  percentage  of  persons  having  annual  income  less  than  Rs. 
50,000 show that 28.3 per cent had bank accounts and only 13 per cent had availed of bank 
finance and even in higher income bracket exclusion existed (Tables 2 and 3). Hence, the 
recent focus has been on providing access to affordable banking services to every person.  
BIS Review 98/2009 
  3
 The process of financial inclusion in India can broadly be classified into three phases. During 
the First Phase (1960-1990), the focus was on channeling of credit to the neglected sectors 
of the economy. Special emphasis was also laid on weaker sections of the society. Second 
Phase  (1990-2005)  focused  mainly  on  strengthening  the  financial  institutions  as  part  of 
financial  sector  reforms.  Financial  inclusion  in  this  phase  was  encouraged  mainly  by  the 
introduction  of  Self-  Help  Group  (SHG)-bank  linkage  programme  in  the  early  1990s  and 
Kisan  Credit  Cards  (KCCs)  for  providing  credit  to  farmers.  The  SHG-bank  linkage 
programme  was  launched  by  National  Bank  for  Agriculture  and  Rural  Development 
(NABARD)  in  1992,  with  policy  support  from  the  Reserve  Bank,  to  facilitate  collective 
decision making by the poor and provide “door step” banking. During the Third Phase (2005 
onwards), the “financial inclusion” was explicitly made as a policy objective and thrust was on 
providing  safe  facility  of  savings  deposits  through  “no  frills”  accounts.  A  Synoptic  View  of 
Financial Inclusion is as under:  
• 
• 
Number of No-Frill Accounts – 3,30,24,761 at end-March 2009  
Number of rural bank branches – 31, 727 constituting 39.7% of total bank branches 
(as on June, 31, 2009)  
Number of ATMs – 44,857 (as on May 31, 2009)  
Number of POS – 4,70,237 (as on May 31, 2009)  
Number of Cards – 167.09 million (as on May 31, 2009)  
Number of Kisan Credit Cards – 76 million (Source: CMIE publication 2007-08)  
Number of Mobile phones – 403 million (as on Apr.30, 2009)  
- 
out of which 187 million (46%) do not have a bank account (Source : Cellular 
Operators Association of India)  
 The  number  of  “no  frills”  accounts  increased  from  4,89,497  at  end-March  2006  to 
3,30,24,761 at end-March 2009. Notably, the public sector banks account for the majority of 
these “no frills” accounts as at end-March 2009 (Table 4). Similarly, the number of credit as 
well  as  savings  accounts  per  100  adults  has  also  shown  increasing  trend  over  the  period 
2002 to 2007. 
4 
 BIS Review 98/2009
 Since micro finance has been accepted as the main vehicle to address the issue of lending 
to  small  borrowers  dispersed  over  vast  expenses  of  geographical  areas  involving  high 
transaction costs and also as a business opportunity, it would be worthwhile to devote some 
time to this. 
There  are  over  3  million  SHGs  in  India,  many  of  which  are  already  undertaking  individual 
group micro-enterprises. A large number are also doing advocacy work and many especially 
in  south  India  have  formed  federations.  For  economic  viability  and  greater  effectiveness, 
however, SHGs should be provided means to start group enterprises, especially in the rural 
areas, and provided access to land and other means for this purpose. 
All  self-employment  programmes  integrated  into  Swarnajayanti  Gram  Swarojgar  Yojana 
(SGSY) in April 1999 has made rapid progress over time covering more than 31 lakh (Table 
5). However, only 22 per cent of the SHGs were provided with bank finance for undertaking 
income generating activities including micro enterprises. The bank assistance was abysmally 
low leading to low level of investment activity. This shortcoming has been attributed to failure 
of  public  intervention  to  enhance  the  credit  absorption  capacity  of  SHGs  as  well  as  to  the 
failures of credit delivery systems to reach the poor. The poor credit absorption capacity of 
poor can be illustrated by the prevalent credit-subsidy ratio under SGSY at about two, much 
below the target ratio of 3:1, partly due to failure to strengthen the demand side of the credit 
by improving the capacity of the poor to absorb credit for income generating activities (GoI, 
2009). 
BIS Review 98/2009 
 5
 Even in the better performing State of Andhra Pradesh, the income gain to a swarojgari from 
enterprise  activities  under  SGSY  was  a  mere  Rs.1,228  per  month  (Purushotham,2008). 
Government’s proposal for universalizing the SHG coverage of all poor households by 2013 
and increasing the proportion of assisted persons among swarojgaris to 50 per cent from the 
existing 22 per cent is a welcome initiative in this direction. Ill-trained groups in SGSY would 
be  a  severe  handicap  in  moving  towards  the  Eleventh  Five  Year  Plan  goal  of  inclusive 
growth. The proposal to cover 1.7 crore BPL households by 2015 under skill development 
and placement is to be seen as an encouraging step (GoI, 2008). 
Well  designed  poverty  alleviation  programmes,  if  effectively  implemented,  not  only 
supplement the poverty reducing effects of growth but also could promote pro-poor growth. 
There is need to design financial instruments that would help people to reduce their risk and 
vulnerability whether it is for smoothening incomes or ensuring higher education for family 
members or reducing exposure to health shocks. 
Some of the other measures under implementation are as under: 
(i) 
Increasing the branch network by scheduled commercial banks and Regional Rural 
Banks (RRBs), particularly in un-banked blocks; 
Introducing agency banking (Business Facilitators and Business Correspondents; 
Increasing coverage under mobile banking and satellite banking; 
(ii) 
(iii) 
6 
 BIS Review 98/2009
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Augmenting  agency  arrangements  between  commercial  banks  and  primary 
cooperatives as well as with postal authorities; 
Making effective use of Information Technology (IT) solutions; and 
Reinvigorating the Lead Bank Scheme (LBS) for promoting various banking activities 
in individual districts. 
To address the problem of high transaction cost and outreach, the banks can increasingly 
use Information Technology based solutions, such as mobile phones and smart cards, create 
data base for credit risk management and pricing. There are over 403 million mobile phone 
users  today  of  which  around  187  million  (46  per  cent)  do  not  have  a  bank  account.  The 
Financial Inclusion Fund (FIF) and Financial Inclusion Technology Fund (FITF) can be used 
to (i) fund support for capacity building of BCs and BFs and render promotional support for 
SHGs and other grass root level institutions; and (ii) financial support for rural kiosks, IT and 
such other technological solutions for financial services in rural India in general and excluded 
groups/regions in particular (GoI, 2009). 
Concluding remarks 
Financial inclusion, though well recognised as a means for inclusive growth, is constrained 
by  several  factors  in  India.  The  banks  are  faced  with  high  operating  cost  in  extending  the 
financial services to the remote areas. High maintenance cost of these accounts as well as 
small ticket size of the transactions is also adding to the problem. Further, reaching out to the 
illiterate people or people who can handle only the regional languages is also difficult without 
developing a suitable communication mode. The challenge also lies in offering a single loan 
product which is not based on or linked to the purpose of the loan, the collateral or assets 
held or income earned by the household but is purely based on cash flow and credit record 
of the household (Thorat, 2008). 
With  the  arrival  of  banking  technology  and  realization  that  poor  are  bankable  with  good 
business prospects, financial inclusion initiatives will strengthen financial deepening further 
and  provide  resources  to  the  banks  to  expand  credit  delivery.  The  banking  technology 
initiatives  meant  for  financial  inclusion  should  be  collaborative  and  innovative  with  an 
objective  to  reduce  the  transaction  costs.  Thus,  financial  inclusion  along  with  the 
Governmental  developmental  programmes  will  lead  to  an  overall  financial  and  economic 
development in our country and as in the case for most developing countries, extending the 
banking  services  to  everyone  in  the  country  will  be  the  key  driver  towards  an  inclusive 
growth. 
Thank you. 
Reserve Bank of India (2008), Report on Currency and Finance 2006-08.  
Reserve  Bank  of  India  (2009),  “100  per  cent  Financial  Inclusion  –  Evaluation  by 
References:  
1. 
2. 
External Agencies Broad Findings”, Circular dated January 22.  
3.  Government of India (2006): Report of the Working Group on Savings Eleventh Five 
Year Plan, Planning Commission, December 
4.  Government  of 
Commission.  
5.  Government  of  India  (2008),  The  Committee  on  Financial  Inclusion  (Chairman:  C. 
Rangarajan) 
6. 
 Government of India (2008), Poverty Eradication in India by 2015, MoRD, November 
India  (2007),  Eleventh  Five  Year  Plan  Document,  Planning 
BIS Review 98/2009 
 7
 Purushotham, P. (2008), Institutional Credit for Rural Livelihoods: A Study of SGSY in 
 Government  of  India  (2009)  The  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Credit  Related  Issues 
Rangarajan,  C.,  Padma  Iyer  Kaul,  and  Seema  (2007),  “Revisiting  Employment  and 
7. 
Under SGSY, February 
8. 
the Regions of High Poverty, NIRD, 
9. 
Growth”, Money and Finance, September.  
10.  Ali,  I.  and  J.  Zhuang  (2007):  “Inclusive  Growth  Towards  a  Prosperous  Asia:  Policy 
Implications”, ERD Working Paper Series No. 97, Asian Development Bank. 
11.  Mohan,  R.  (2007):  “India's  Financial  Sector  Reforms:  Fostering  Growth  While 
Containing Risk”, Address at Yale University on December 3. 
12.  Mohan,  R.  (2006):  “Economic  Growth,  Financial  Deepening  and  Financial  Inclusion 
Address at the Annual Bankers” Conference 2006, at Hyderabad on Nov 3, 2006.  
13.  Thorat,  U.  (2008):  Inclusive  Growth  –  the  Role  of  Banks  in  Emerging  Economies, 
lecture  delivered  at  “Independence Commemoration  Lecture,  2008”  at the  Central Bank  of 
Sri Lanka, Colombo, 28 February. 
14.  Thorat,  U.  (2008):  Financial  Inclusion  and  Information  Technology,  Delivered  at 
WIPRO-NDTV Convergence Conference on “Vision 2020 - Indian Financial Services Sector”.  
This BIS Review is available on the BIS website at www.bis.org. 
8 
 BIS Review 98/2009
