Jean-Pierre Landau: Bubbles and macro prudential supervision 
Remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Landau, Deputy Governor of the Bank of France1, at the Joint 
conference on “The Future of Financial Regulation”, organised by the Bank of France and 
the Toulouse School of Economics (TSE), Paris, 28 January 2009. 
 Looking at the future of financial regulation is specially challenging in the current juncture. 
Right  in  the  midst  of  the  crisis,  we  cannot  be  sure  that  we  fully  understand  its  ultimate 
causes, its roots, and its dynamics. Furthermore, we do not want to be fighting the last war. 
We  need  a  vision  on  how  the  financial  system  will  evolve  in  the  future,  something  very 
difficult to figure out right now. And yet, there is a strong political demand for orientations and 
measures to fix the problems and make sure they never happen again. This demand is fully 
legitimate, considering the social costs that the crisis is imposing on our societies, and more 
specifically, the financial burden taken on by tax payers.  
I have chosen to present some remarks on bubbles and macro prudential supervision. They 
should be seen more as a work program than a full-fledged answer to the many questions 
raised for the future. I will deal with three issues: what are we trying to achieve? What are the 
main challenges? Which are the proper instruments? 
What are we trying to achieve? 
Here,  we  have  two  certainties,  and  many  questions.  First,  we  know  for  sure  that  macro 
prudential  supervision  is  preemptive  by  nature.  It  aims  to  avoid  crises  because  crises  are 
costly.  Second,  a  macro  approach  to  financial  supervision  must  encompass  the  whole 
financial system as opposed to any specific or individual institution. 
Beyond that, things become more complicated. 
Macrosupervision is often assimilated to preventing systemic risk. These are closely related, 
but  not  identical  concepts.  Systemic  risk  refers  to  the  internal  dynamics  of  the  financial 
system; whereas, macroprudential supervision is mainly concerned with its interaction with 
the  real  economy.  Occurrence  of  systemic  risk  can  harm  the  financial  system;  but  not 
always, and not necessarily, the real economy. On the other hand, there are cases where a 
(temporarily)  healthy  system,  with  no  obvious  systemic  problems,  may  behave  in  a  way 
which in the long run, is very detrimental to the real economy: a typical example being the 
expansion  of  balance  sheets  and  credit  which,  by  itself,  does  not  threaten  the  short  term 
resilience  of  the  system  but  is  potentially  damaging.  Conversely,  deleveraging  from 
excessive levels of debt may be good from a systemic point of view, but, if done in abrupt 
manner, could create enormous pressures on the real side. So, while a healthy and resilient 
system  may  be  a  necessary  condition,  it  is  not  clear  that  it  is  a  sufficient  one  to  achieve 
appropriate macroprudential objectives.  
Should macroprudential supervision aim at avoiding or dampening volatility in the financial 
system?  Financial  stability  is  not  an  end  in  itself.  It  only  helps  if  it  is  conducive  to  better 
macroeconomic performance. Volatility may be driven by fundamentals. Sharp movements in 
asset  prices  may  help  the  financial  system  to  serve  as  a  cushion,  an  "absorber"  for 
exogenous  economic  shocks.  This  is  welfare  improving  since  it  avoids,  or  mitigates, 
adjustment in more rigid goods of labor markets. 
                                                 
1 
I am indebted to Benoit Mojon for many useful suggestions and remarks. All remaining mistakes are mine. 
Opinions expressed are purely personal and do not necessarily reflect the positions of the Banque de France. 
BIS Review 37/2009 
 1
By  the  same  token,  not  all  procyclicality  is  bad.  It  all  depends  on  the  causal  link:  is  the 
financial system the origin or the amplifier of destabilizing dynamics? Or does it simply react 
to  cyclical  evolutions  in  the  real  economy?  We  should  only  be  concerned  by  "intrinsic 
procyclicality", which is created inside and by the financial system. Finally, cyclicality in the 
real economy can be beneficial to long term growth as it is one mechanism through which 
"creative destruction" can take place in the productive system.  
Real and significant damages occur if and when financial imbalances are allowed to build for 
a  long  time  with  two  consequences:  first  asset  prices  significantly  deviate  from  their 
fundamental  value,  which  creates  distortions  in  the  allocation  of  resources;  and  second, 
those imbalances unwind suddenly and abruptly, triggering major disruptions in growth and 
the  economic  cycle.  This  is  what  is  happening  right  now.  And  this  closely  resembles  the 
definition of a bubble. 
This  clearly  points  to  one  possible  mandate  for  macroprudential  supervision  that,  it  were 
feasible, would be both pragmatic and legitimate: to avoid bubbles. Bubbles are not always 
triggered  within  the  financial  system.  They  may  have  roots  in  productivity  shocks,  for 
instance. But they cannot develop unless permissive financial conditions prevail. There are 
good reasons to prevent bubbles. They impose significant costs on the real economy. They 
may place an undue burden on monetary policy. They raise important questions of fairness 
in the distribution of income.  
Such  a  simple  definition  of  the  objective  of  macroprudential  supervision  is  quite  attractive. 
However,  simplicity  comes  at  a  price.  Avoiding  bubbles  present  enormous  challenges,  to 
which I turn now.  
The challenges of macroprudential supervision 
Analytical challenges 
The first – and most important – challenge is analytical.  
Bubbles are difficult to detect. Asset price boom-bust cycles become clearly apparent only 
after the event. Moreover there is little regularity in the business cycle, which makes it difficult 
to identify with certainty long lasting deviations of asset prices from fundamentals. Looking at 
the path of asset prices, how do we know ex ante if we are confronted with an inflexion in the 
trend,  a  one-step  adjustment  in  equilibrium  levels,  or  the  start  of  a  bubble?  There  is  no 
simple or mechanical answer to that question. This is one of the reasons why "early warning" 
mechanisms have not really worked.  
While bubbles are hard to detect, we nevertheless know from the repetition of financial crises 
through history – including the current crisis – that the economy is always subject to the risk 
of a new bubble. Given this risk, we ought to reflect on the features of financial systems that 
may  create  bubbles  and  allow  them  to  develop  to  proportions  that  threaten  economic 
welfare.  
We  know  a  few  things  about  the  procyclical  characteristics  of  the  financial  system.  Our 
accounting  and  prudential  regimes  may  have  increased  procyclicality  in  recent  years.  In  a 
mark to market environment, asset prices movements quickly translate into changes in the 
capital base of financial institutions. This, in turn, triggers additional demand for assets and a 
further  increase  in  their  prices.  This  kind  of  "inverted  demand  curve";  where  demand 
increases with prices, may create the conditions for a bubble. But it does not have to.  
Strictly speaking, procyclicality refers to bigger amplitudes of fluctuations around a trend. But 
a bubble may induce deviations that are so long lasting that we start wondering about the 
trend itself. Whether wider fluctuations in prices will lead to lasting deviations is uncertain. 
We have good insights on the dynamics of a bubble, once it develops. But we do not know 
much about what actually starts a bubble, and this is a crucial point.  
2 
 BIS Review 37/2009
So there needs to be a rule guiding macroprudential decisions knowing that we have to live 
with this uncertainty. Actually, such a rule may exist, but implicitly. The prudential apparatus 
has worked in the past on the presumption that all movements in asset prices were based on 
fundamentals. The burden of the proof was on those who thought that something was going 
wrong. And, of course, it is impossible to prove the existence of a bubble until it is too late. 
And,  at  least  in  the  initial  phase  of  a  bubble,  there  is  no  lack  of  rational  explanations  for 
observed movements in asset prices. 
It  may  be  useful,  in  a  macroprudential  perspective,  to  consider  some  rebalancing  in  the 
burden of the proof. Significant and lasting departures from past levels or trends in key asset 
prices,  risk  premia  or  credit  aggregates  should  systematically  trigger  a  macroprudential 
review, with the implicit assumption that a bubble may be occurring unless proved otherwise. 
This  seems  to  me  justified  when  looking  at  the  current  social  costs  of previous  hesitation. 
This is also a rational course of action. Bubbles develop because investors have an incentive 
to  ignore  the  "tail  risk"  that  the  bubble  may  burst.  Where  does  this  incentive  come  from? 
Bubbles are mostly financed by credit, which makes it possible for investors to shift most of 
the risk to lenders, while keeping most of the profits for themselves (especially when those 
profits are booked, and distributed, in real time). This asymmetry in incentives is extremely 
difficult  to  eliminate  ex  ante.  To  make  sure  that  bubbles  never  happen,  one  may  need  to 
impose permanently significant constraints on the development of credit or leverage, which 
would prove penalizing in normal times. A better – and less costly – approach would be, for 
supervisors, to closely monitor the financial system and preserve their possibility to intervene 
by establishing the kind of presumption I have just mentioned.  
Two approaches to macroprudential supervision 
As  in  many  matters  of  public  policy,  there  is  a  choice  between  rules  and  discretion  in 
implementing macrofinancial supervision. There are basically two possibilities, which are not 
necessarily mutually exclusive.  
First, (the rule based approach), macrosupervision can be built through automatic stabilizers 
which  would  constrain  institutions  in  their  behaviour,  regardless  of  their  own  individual 
situations. Examples would include contra cyclical capital requirements, for instance, as well 
as dynamic provisioning. As I will develop later, stabilizers should be constructed so as to act 
directly on the incentive to take risk and the rewards provided by risk taking. 
A  second  approach  would  consist  on  discretionary,  "top  down"  interventions  from 
macroauthorities.  Prudential  authorities  would  step  in  and  impose  (or  relax)  constraints 
whenever  they  come  to  the  conclusion  that  dangerous  imbalances  are  building  up  (or 
unwinding). 
We probably cannot dispense of this second approach. The difficulty to date cycles makes it 
dangerous  to  rely  purely  on  automatic  mechanisms,  which  cannot  be  precisely  calibrated. 
Financial cycles, in particular, are driven by changes in risk appetite which are impossible to 
predict. Actually, one essential objective of macroprudential supervision may be to "regulate" 
(not  in  the  legal  sense,  but  economically)  the  aggregate  level  of  risk  appetite  inside  the 
financial  system.  This  unavoidably  involves  some  degree  of  discretionary  judgement  and 
intervention. 
Combining the two components of macrosupervision (systemic and macroeconomic) with the 
two approaches (automatic and discretionary) produces an interesting classification, which is 
presented in the table below:  
  
BIS Review 37/2009 
 3
Purpose 
 Systemic risk 
 Adjustment to 
macroconditions 
Mechanisms 
 Automatic 
 Discretionary 
 •  buffers (capital and/or liquidity) 
•  Loan to Value ratios 
•  accounting framework 
 
•  stress tests 
•  pillar II of Basel 2 
•  time 
ratios 
varying 
capital 
•  dynamic provisioning 
 
•  discretionary 
adjustments 
ratios, 
provisions 
margin requirements 
to  capital 
or 
  Institutional challenges  
The discretionary approach to macrosupervision raises important institutional issues. 
First,  who  makes  the  judgment?  And  should  that  body  be  independent  or  not?  There  is  a 
good  case  for  putting  Central  Banks  in  charge.  If  one  takes  an  historical  perspective,  it  is 
striking that the mandates and missions of Central Banks have taken major turns following 
financial crises. Central Banks have an informational advantage (or at least no disadvantage) 
in  judging  the  cyclical  position.  They  have  an  incentive  to  act,  because  macroprudential 
supervision  alleviates  the  burden  on  monetary  policy,  and  because  they  need  monetary 
transmission mechanisms to work. So they clearly should have a pivotal role in the process. 
But they are not alone in caring about financial stability. And experience has shown that price 
stability – their primary mandate – does not always coincide with financial stability and the 
avoidance of bubbles.  
Furthermore, in an integrated financial system, judgments have to be made on a worldwide 
basis. Another alternative is the IMF. But the IMF is mostly controlled by governments and 
decisions are made according to voting shares. Implementing macrosupervision will involve 
delicate decisions (like strengthening lending standards in good times) to which governments 
may not spontaneously agree. A fully independent body would certainly be necessary.  
Second, how is that judgment passed on to regulators and supervisors and translated into 
supervisory decisions. This is totally unchartered territory. I would just mention it as a matter 
for future research in the governance of the financial system.  
The instruments  
The  most  important  instrument  in  our  current  toolkit  are  capital  requirements  put  on  some 
financial intermediaries.  
Those capital requirements perform a dual function. They act as compulsory buffers imposed 
on  banks  and  their  shareholders.  They  also  have  an  incentive  function:  to  prevent 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2009
shareholders from taking too much risk with deposits. It has proven more and more difficult to 
reconcile those two objectives. In theory it could be done, just as taxes can be used both to 
raise  revenues  and  allocate  resources.  But,  in  practice,  they  both  may  be  lost  into  an 
increasingly complex system.  
In addition, capital requirements may not be binding when they need to. If assets market are 
booming  and  perceived  returns  are  high,  banks  will  always  find  the  necessary  capital. 
Conversely,  capital  dries  up  during  downturns,  when  it  is  most  necessary.  Introducing 
counter cyclical capital requirements will certainly help. But we may not have looked enough 
into the interrelated dynamics of stock and credit markets; or, put differently, on how capital 
flows  in  and  out  of  the  financial  sector  during  different  phases  of  the  economic  cycle  and 
what are the consequences on credit flows. 
Finally,  tailoring  capital  requirements  to  the  definition  of  economic  capital  by  banks 
themselves strengthens the incentive function. But from, a macroprudential perspective, by 
replicating closely private risk management methods and metrics, this encourages uniformity 
in behaviour, which, by itself, is a source of instability.  
It is becoming increasingly clear, it seems to me, that if we want prudential supervision to 
effectively pre-empt the build up of imbalances, it has to act more directly on individual and 
collective  incentives.  This  should  push  us  to  look  more  closely  at  the  "accounting-
compensation"  nexus.  When  looking  at  revenues  drawn  from  a  financial  investment,  it  is 
generally impossible to distinguish excess return from additional risk taking. Ignorance of tail 
risk  fits  perfectly  in  this  framework.  This  points  to  a  possible  solution:  regulatory  systems 
should force the pricing of risk in all its dimensions, including liquidity risk. Again, there is a 
clear  analogy  with  tax  theory:  "internalizing"  the  risk  eliminates  market  failures.  The 
conceptual challenges in quantifying, for instance, liquidity risk, are enormous. But we live in 
a world of second best, and even very approximate measures would do better than nothing 
at all.  
I will stop here, knowing, once again, that I have raised more questions than I have provided 
answers.  But  looking  at  what  is  happening  in  this  very  moment,  in  our  economies,  it  is 
necessary  to  think  "out  of  the  box"  and  look  at  all  possibilities.  Those  in  charge  of 
macroeconomic policies are doing just that. Those responsible for financial regulation should 
not hesitate to emulate them, at least partially.  
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
Aglietta M. at B. Mojon (2008), Central Banking, in A. Berger, Ph. Molyneux and J. Wilson 
(eds), The Handbook of Banking, Oxford University Press.  
Alessi L. and C. Detken (2009), “Real Time” Early Warning Indicators for Costly Boom-Bust 
Cycles: A Role for Global Liquidity, European Central Bank Mimeo.  
Allen, F. and D. Gale (2000), Bubbles and crises, The Economic Journal 110, 236-55. 
Bernanke B., M. Gertler and S. Gilchrist (1999), The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative 
Business  Cycle  Framework,  in.  J.  Taylor  and  M.  Woodford  (eds),  The  Handbook  of 
Macroeconomics, North Holland.  
Blanchard, O. (2008), The Crisis: Basic Mechanisms, and Appropriate Policies, MIT Working 
Paper 09-01. 
Borio C. and P. Lowe (2002), Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability: Exploring the 
Nexus, BIS Working Paper 114. 
Borio, Claudio (2008), The macroprudential approach to regulation and supervision: where 
do we stand? Mimeo.  
BIS Review 37/2009 
 5
Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole (1997), Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds and the Real 
Sector. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110-3, 663-691. 
Kiyotaki N. and J. Moore (1997), Credit Cycles, The Journal of Political Economy 105, 211-
48.  
Meltzer  A.  (2003),  Rational  and  Non  rational  Bubbles,  in  Hunter,  Kaufman,  Pomerleano 
(eds), "Asset Price Bubbles". MIT Press. 
6 
 BIS Review 37/2009
