José Manuel González-Páramo: Some reflections on the future of the 
market for credit derivatives 
Keynote address by Mr José Manuel González-Páramo, Member of the Executive Board of 
the European Central Bank, at the 30th International Bürgenstock Meeting, organised by the 
Swiss Futures and Options Association (SFOA), Interlaken, 9 September 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a privilege and pleasure to be here at the 30th International SFOA Bürgenstock Meeting 
in  front  of  such  a  distinguished  professional  audience.  The  annual  Bürgenstock  Meetings 
have indeed become a unique gathering of representatives of a number of relevant market 
participants  –  exchanges,  clearing  organizations,  banks,  brokerage  entities,  servicing 
institutions and industry associations – as well as regulatory agencies from all over the world. 
Today, I would like to share with you my reflections on what we have learned about credit 
derivatives  since  this  business  took  off,  on  some  of  the  weaknesses  of  these  markets, 
particularly those that have become evident in the past few years, and on the measures that 
should contribute to strengthening these markets.  
I  will  first  recall  the  tremendous  growth  of  the  use  of  CDS  and  some  milestones  in  their 
development, and reflect on their economic rationale. In particular, I will recall the potentially 
important  contributions  that  – under  the  appropriate  framework –  over-the  counter  (OTC) 
derivatives and credit default swaps (CDS) can make in terms of achieving a more efficient 
financial system. Then, I will look at what we may have learned concretely during the crisis, 
recalling  also  that  a  number  –  if  not  most  –  of  the  financial  vulnerabilities  associated  with 
these instruments, had been evident already before the summer of 2007. Then I shall move 
to a financial stability perspective. This financial stability assessment will suggest that, going 
forward, both private initiatives and public sector action are needed in order to improve the 
use of credit derivatives. I shall analyse both in turn, and then conclude.  
To preview my intervention today, I would tend to conclude with a positive assessment of the 
future for these products, subject to the condition that they are appropriately organised and 
regulated, and traded through an adequate infrastructure. It is worthwhile to note that there is 
a broad consensus on this assessment, which is in line with for example the “Observations 
on Management of Recent Credit Default Swap Credit Events” which were submitted by the 
so-called Senior Supervisors Group to the Financial Stability Forum on 9 March 2009. 
Economic and financial background 
1)  
It is often assumed that financial innovation is beneficial to society because of its presumed 
contribution  to  nurturing  more  efficient  financial  intermediation.  Following  this  line  of 
argumentation,  credit  derivatives  in  general  and  particularly  CDS  have  tended  to  be 
considered as a mechanism for improving economic well-being because they allow to trade 
credit risk, thereby facilitating its more efficient re-allocation.  
For  central  banks,  the  development  of  CDS  market  is  of  interest  for  at  least  the  following 
three reasons:  
• 
first, central banks as key contributors to macroprudential supervision are conscious 
that CDS, as any OTC derivatives, have to be reflected adequately in the regulatory 
framework;  
second  and  also  in  its  supervisory  role,  central  banks  have  been  attentive  to  the 
implications of the enormous size of the created exposures; 
 BIS Review 105/2009 
 1
 third, financial innovation affects the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, and 
is hence relevant for the central banks’ core task of conducting monetary policy.  
Let me recall briefly some well-known facts about the development of these instruments.  
The credit derivatives market segment was probably the most innovative and fastest growing 
derivative market since the start of this decade. CDS were first traded in the late 1990 and 
rapid  growth  started in  the  early  years  of  the present  decade.  According  to  the  half-yearly 
BIS  OTC  derivative  statistics,  the  notional  outstanding  amount  of  credit  default  swaps 
increased  from  approximately  USD  10  to  40 trillion,  i.e.  by  a  factor  of  4,  in  the  two  years 
between June 2005 and June 2007. After reaching a record notional outstanding amount of 
more  than  USD 55 trillion  in  December  2007,  notional  values  of  credit  default  swaps 
contracted  throughout  2008  as  a  result  of  the  financial  crisis,  falling  to  USD 42 trillion  by 
December 2008. It needs to be highlighted that the decline also reflects efforts, encouraged 
by regulators, to net out positions.  
It is worth mentioning that gross market value of the outstanding CDS market increased in 
2007 and 2008, owing to the re-pricing of credit risk in this period, reaching USD 5.7 trillion 
by December 2008, according to BIS data.  
In addition to stunning growth rates, a key milestone in the world of credit risk was the launch 
in  June  2004  of  the  two  single  European  and  US  credit  default  swap  indices,  iTraxx  and 
CDX. This allowed credit risk to become a separate asset class, and price discovery for this 
risk  increasingly  took  place  in  the  derivatives  market  segment.  These  two  indices  have 
provided valuable information throughout the crisis, reflecting the fact that, overall this market 
has continued to function.  
However,  credit  derivatives  have  three  interrelated  structural  implications  which  may  have 
gradually affected the efficiency of the financial markets since their outset. 
• 
First, credit derivatives and, more generally, structured credit markets have affected 
banks’ perceptions of risk and propensities to lend when granting credit. However, it 
is  not  enough  to  consider  in  this  regard  the  enhanced  potential  to  clearly  separate 
credit  and  liquidity  risks  and  thus  to  enhance  specialisation.  As  we  have  clearly 
witnessed  over  the  last  couple  of  years,  by  apparently  transferring  the  credit  risk 
associated with the issuance of credit, some banks may have eroded issuing criteria 
and thus contributed to an overvaluation of assets. 
Second,  credit  derivatives  and  structured  credit  markets  have  transformed  the  way 
banks  operated.  Innovations  in  credit  portfolio  management  practices  have  had 
profound implications for the banking business model. Many banks have moved from 
the  “buy-and-hold”  model  to  the  “originate-and-distribute”  model,  whereby  they 
distribute  credit  risks  they  originated  to  other  market  participants.  In  this  respect, 
banks have increasingly performed the role of active portfolio credit risk manager in 
addition to credit provider. In particular, they have increasingly found structured credit 
products an attractive mechanism for reducing exposure concentrations in their loan 
books,  while  also  allowing  them  to  meet  the  needs  of  their  corporate  customers. 
These evident advantages of the new way of operating, together with the possibilities 
offered 
the 
disadvantages, such as the excessive focus on returns and short-termism.  
Third, credit derivatives and structured credit markets have transformed the financial 
system  at  large,  whereby  the  risk  re-allocation  activity  may  have  become  just  as 
important as – and in  some cases a full substitute for - the more traditional capital 
allocation. Whilst the aggregation and structuring of credit risks and their subsequent 
transfer  to  market  participants  with  different  investment  horizons,  asset/liability 
structures and risk appetites made evident the virtues of the model, it downplayed the 
now  evident  fact  that  the  recipients  of  the  risks  were  often  vulnerable  in  terms  of 
managing liquidity, interest rate and systemic credit risks. 
regulatory  arbitrage,  seem 
to  have  overshadowed 
for  capital 
  2 
 BIS Review 105/2009
Overall, these three structural implications of credit derivatives and structured credit markets 
may  in  a  normally  functioning  financial  system  bring  about  increased  opportunities  and 
productivity in the banking intermediation business. Whether this partially explained the fast 
growth of bank credit in the euro area during the years before the crisis, possibly above the 
level that can be explained on the basis of its traditional determinants, is a conjecture that 
remains to be substantiated. What is clear is that, going forward, we cannot afford to ignore 
the  downside  risks  embodied  in  the  nature  of  credit  derivatives  and  we  need  to  take  the 
necessary steps to appropriately weigh the advantages against such risks. 
Financial stability perspective  
2)  
From  the  investors’  point  of  view,  credit  derivatives  represent  an  asset  class  that  allows 
investors  to  assume  risks  in  exchange  for  a  corresponding  remuneration  that  suits  their 
investment  profile.  At  the  same  time,  banks  use  credit  risk  transfer  instruments,  including 
securitisation, to distribute lending-related credit risk exposures to such investors. 
However,  the  development  of  the  market  for  credit  derivatives  also  embodies  features 
affecting the balance of risks of the different actors in the financial landscape. To begin with, 
the following features related to market structure should be taken into account: 
1. 
Concentration in CDS trading is very high and has probably further increased since 
July 2007 with the exit of several major players. Such a high degree of concentration 
increases  liquidity  risk  in  the  market.  A  recent  report  by  the  ECB1  focusing  on  a 
sample of leading European banks active in the CDS market found that the top ten 
counterparts for each large surveyed bank accounted for between 62-72% of its CDS 
gross market value exposure. 
The CDS market is highly interconnected, making it susceptible to contagion. One of 
the central lessons of the past two years is that – despite the appearance of netting 
positions  falling  outside  the  banking  sector  –  credit  risk  has  not  been  effectively 
transferred outside of the financial sector, with a number of contractual arrangements 
preventing a true separation of credit risks from the lending institutions. Furthermore, 
counterparty risk has taken as a result a prominent role, as indicated at least since 
2005 by the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group in the so-called “Corrigan 
report”. 
CDS  have  increasingly  become  an  important  tool  in  the  pricing  of  credit  in  other 
markets.  While  this  pricing  mechanism  has  been  shown  to  function  well  in  normal 
times, during episodes of financial turbulence the transmission of information may be 
impaired, with spillovers for the access to credit, the cost of funding and, due to the 
increasing interlinkages between markets, the functioning of other market segments, 
notably equities.  
2. 
3. 
These risks related to market structures are not the only concerns from the point of view of 
financial stability. The opacity of the credit derivatives  market, and especially of structured 
synthetic  instruments,  has  been  a  potential  source  of  concern  long  before  the  start  of  the 
crisis,  as  underlined  by  the  Corrigan  report.  The  complex  interaction  between  cash 
instruments  and  credit  derivatives  makes  it  difficult  to  monitor  where  different,  possibly 
sizeable  positions  are  taken  and  where  risks  are  concentrated.  It  is  similarly  difficult  to 
establish  the  mechanism  through  which  simultaneous  attempts  by  market  participants  to 
unwind their positions have a disproportionate impact on market prices and liquidity. 
Some of the conditions needed to avoid the materialising of risks related with opacity under 
both normal and stressed market conditions are well known – namely that (1) risks must be 
                                                 
1   ECB, “Credit Default Swaps and Counterparty Risk”, August 2009. 
BIS Review 105/2009 
 3
accurately measured and priced, and (2) they have to be properly managed. There is though 
a third condition that has proven more elusive, namely that an appropriate heterogeneity of 
both investors’ behaviour and risk appetite must be preserved in all market circumstances. 
This  condition  ensures  that  systemic  liquidity  is  preserved  even  under  stressed  market 
conditions.  
The ECB raised concerns already before the start of the financial crisis, in particular in its 
Financial Stability Review of June 2007, on whether these three conditions were always met. 
In  particular,  as  the  instruments  for  sharing  credit  risk  had  not  been  stress-tested,  it  was 
extremely  difficult  to  ascertain  the  resilience  of  the  market  accurately.  However,  it  is  likely 
that, had stress testing been carried out at that stage, even the most adverse scenario would 
have  not  considered  the  simultaneous  failure  or  near-failure  of  several  key  market 
participants  tied,  among  other,  by  contractual  arrangements  related  to  off-balance  sheet 
positions – such as credit derivatives. 
In  addition,  aggressive  investors  display  a  volatile  risk-taking  attitude,  and  in  response  to 
unanticipated events, their investment strategies may react in a way that can suddenly lead 
to  herding  behaviour  and/or  counterparty  problems  for  banks,  and  thus  giving  rise  to 
concerns for systemic liquidity. Even though the resulting vanishing of market liquidity or of 
the funding liquidity of a significant individual market participant were typically considered as 
low-probability events, the potential loss to the financial system if they were to materialise is 
great.  Already  in  the  middle  of  this  decade,  the  fear  that  a  large  proportion  of  market 
participants  may  have  become  excessively  complacent  –  a  situation  which  may  well  have 
been exacerbated by high levels of liquidity, the stability of which is difficult to predict – was 
real.  Unfortunately,  it  took  only  the  developments  following  August  2007  to  realise  how 
relevant these fears 
What can then be done to enjoy the advantages of credit derivatives, while simultaneously 
minimising  the  systemic  risks  they  can  generate?  I  believe  that  this  objective  can  only  be 
achieved  through  a  combination  of  interventions  from  both  market  participants  and  the 
authorities. 
Market standards and initiatives  
3)  
I shall therefore now try to assess the main initiatives in the area of credit derivatives with 
regard  to  market  standards  and  practices.  One  feature  is  that  these  initiatives  are 
multi-faceted, covering legal aspects, accounting, disclosure, etc. Another feature is that the 
credit  derivatives  market  has  in  principle  a  global,  complex  and  predominantly  wholesale 
nature. It may therefore be argued that global market standards are particularly required to 
meet related regulatory challenges. 
In  the  legal  domain,  the  International  Securities  Dealers  Association  (ISDA)  is  widely 
recognised  as  playing  a  leading  role  amongst  market  participants  in  promoting  market 
standards  and  mitigating  legal  risk.  In  this  regard,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the 
development of ISDA’s library of standard-form contracts for credit derivatives has played a 
substantial role in promoting the development of this market. It is nevertheless important that 
market participants clearly understand the precise rights and obligations which they assume 
when entering into credit derivatives transactions, as standardised contracts do not always 
work out in the way that contracting parties anticipate. Also, in some instances, case law has 
demonstrated  that  the  Courts  can  take  divergent  views  regarding  the  meaning  of  ISDA’s 
definitions of credit derivatives. These issues have been swiftly addressed by the ISDA. 
Turning  to  the  overarching  legal  framework  within  which  these  standard-form  contracts 
operate,  the  legal  enforceability  of  close-out  netting  and  collateral  arrangements  plays  a 
central  role  in  the  smooth  functioning  of  all  over-the-counter  derivatives  markets,  reducing 
counterparty  risk.  The  need  for  a  high  degree  of  legal  certainty  regarding  the  validity  and 
enforceability  of  such  arrangements  has  long  been  reflected  in  the  regulatory  capital 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2009
requirements  under  the  Basel  Capital  Accords.  Legislative  recognition  of  close-out  netting 
and  collateral  arrangements  (e.g.  through  the  EU  Financial  Collateral  Directive  and  the 
Settlement  Finality  directive)  has  played  a  positive  role  in  supporting  the  evolution  of 
derivatives  markets.  I  note  that  the  European  Commission,  echoing  the  views  of  the 
European Financial Market Lawyers Group and ISDA, has recently stated that it intends to 
explore the possibility of further improving the general EU (and global) framework for netting. 
In the field of accounting, I would like to recall the current debate on International Accounting 
Standards.  The  ECB  is  contributing  to  the  debate  and  is  aware  that  accounting  standards 
can have a significant impact on the financial system, in particular via their potential influence 
on  the  behaviour  of  economic  agents.  The  ECB’s  opinion  is  that  the  introduction  of  the 
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), if implemented consistently and reliably, 
should lead to a substantial increase in comparability and transparency. This should enhance 
the  level  playing-field  between  financial  institutions  worldwide  and  strengthen  market 
discipline.  In  this  way,  the  IFRS  can  also  provide  various  stakeholders  with  some  early 
warning  signals  concerning  exposures  or  risks.  This  holds  particularly  true  for  investment 
banking  activities  and  for  the  measurement  and  reporting  of  risk  transfer  instruments. 
However  it  has  been  widely  recognised  that  there  is  a  need  to  simplify  the  accounting  for 
financial instruments and we actively support the current work of the International Accounting 
Standards Board in this area. 
Another  field  comprises  the  statistical  work  towards  an  adequate  transparency  framework. 
More and improved data on net credit risk exposures and on the concentration of positions – 
which tend to build up easily in highly leveraged and opaque markets – could help to mitigate 
sizeable shortcomings in both counterparty and systemic liquidity risk management. In fact, 
such  data  could  help  market  participants  and  competent  authorities  to  value,  price  and 
manage more effectively the increasing risks posed when investors behave in a homogenous 
way. The data on gross and net notional amounts published by the US Depository Trust and 
Clearing Corporation (DTCC) since November 2008 are a welcome step in this direction.  
Moreover,  private  sector  initiatives  to  address  specific  shortcomings  which  have  been 
identified  in  the  OTC  market  during  the  crisis  have  been  forthcoming  and  are  to  be 
welcomed. In cooperation with the ISDA and the US Federal Reserve, major CDS dealers 
committed in 2008 to implementing best practices for portfolio reconciliation, in an effort to 
improve counterparty risk management. Further work is being undertaken and the ISDA is 
currently  reviewing  the  valuation  dispute  resolution  processes  that  may  be  necessary  in 
dealing with unsecured exposures. Regarding operational risk, measures have been taken to 
reduce trade confirmation backlogs. The DTCC have been instrumental in establishing the 
necessary infrastructure in this regard, and they have been supported in this by the major 
dealers. Finally, regarding CDS contracts, several initiatives have recently been concluded in 
the US and Europe. In April of this year, the so-called Auction Supplement was introduced, 
along  with  amendments  to  the  Big  Bang  Protocol.  These  introduced  various  measures, 
including  the  ISDA  Determination  Committee,  a  body  charged  with  making  market-wide, 
binding decisions in the case of a credit event, and the requirement of market participants to 
use an auction settlement methodology rather than physical settlement. In Europe, contract 
coupons  were  standardised,  aligning  them  with  the  standardised  North  American  contract, 
and the Small Bang Protocol was introduced to address settlement issues. 
I  strongly  believe  in  responsible  and  comprehensive  private  sector  initiative.  In  the  global, 
dynamic, and complex credit derivatives market, industry initiatives are of the essence. The 
ECB,  therefore,  recognises  the  progress  that  has  been  made  in  this  regard  and  seeks  to 
encourage further joint initiatives to promote transparency, in particular: 
1. 
The extension of disclosure on counterparty risk, including indicators of counterparty 
concentration exposure, both for individual institutions and for the market as a whole; 
BIS Review 105/2009 
 5
2. 
3. 
The  bridging  of  major  data  sources,  in  terms  of  their  data  coverage  and 
methodologies, to allow market participants and regulators to obtain and benefit from 
a broad and consistent market overview; 
The  enhancement  of  transparency  with  regard  to  turnover  volumes  in  the  market, 
would be beneficial for both non-dealer market participants and regulators. 
I  also  trust  that  the  ISDA  Determination  Committee  will  act  in  a  transparent  manner  in 
exercising  its  decisions  surrounding  credit  events  in  the  best  interests  of  all  market 
participants. 
Public sector measures 
4)  
Notwithstanding their merits, market-led initiatives need to be complemented by public sector 
interventions. This is particularly clear as regards market infrastructures. The deficiencies of 
the clearing and settlement arrangements for OTC derivatives, arising in large part from the 
failure of arrangements to keep pace with the rapidly developing market, heighten concerns 
surrounding  counterparty  credit  risk  and  strengthen  the  case  for  improving  market 
infrastructure.  
Indeed, central counterparty clearing or exchange trading has the potential to greatly improve 
the  resilience  of  OTC  derivatives  trading.  The  use  of  central  counterparties  (CCPs)  could 
significantly  reduce  counterparty  risk  by:  1) diversifying  and  netting  risk  exposures; 
2) applying  stringent  risk-based  margining  procedures  to  ensure  appropriate  management; 
and 3) collateralising outstanding exposures on a daily or intra-day basis. CCPs bring further 
benefits,  including  increased  market  transparency  and  integrity,  to  say  nothing  of  the 
significant operational efficiency gains that may be achieved. In recognising these benefits, 
both national authorities and industry bodies have embraced the establishment of CCPs for 
CDS  markets.  It  is  essential,  however,  to  take  this  opportunity  to  ensure  that  this  new 
infrastructure is carefully implemented, in particular to avoid level-playing field concerns and 
to minimise the potential for regulatory arbitrage.  
In recognising the role CCPs may play in the future, the Governing Council of the ECB has 
confirmed the importance of having at least one CCP clearing facility for OTC derivatives in 
the  euro  area.  To  that  end,  the  forthcoming  ESCB-CESR  recommendations  for  central 
counterparties  and  the  FSB  Promotion  of  OTC  Derivative  Market  Standards  both  provide 
guidance  on  the  application  of  CCPs  for  OTC  derivatives;  similar  recommendations  have 
been  proposed  by  the  US  Treasury.  These  communications  highlight  the  importance  of 
reviewing  the  standards  recommended  for  central  counterparties.  The  Committee  for 
Payments and Settlements Systems (CPSS) and the International Organisation of Securities 
Commissions  (IOSCO)  recently  initiated  such  a  review  of  their  CCP  recommendations. 
Moreover,  efforts  to  apply  them  in  a  coordinated  manner  were  deemed  to  be  necessary. 
Market  participants  also  have  a  role  to  play  in  developing  this  infrastructure  and  reducing 
risks  in  the  OTC  market.  They  should  be  ambitious  in  their  aims  for  adopting  the  CCP 
approach;  for  those  trades  that  remain  outside  the  CCP,  they  should  seek  to  refine  risk 
management measures and ensure that they are registered with regulated trade repositories. 
By implementing CCPs and by actively supporting market participants in reducing the risks of 
OTC  derivatives,  national  authorities  can  effectively  mitigate  the  risks  inherent  in  these 
markets, thereby fostering financial stability. 
Let me also inform you about another initiative, regarding the measurement of the credit risk 
transfer. Following an initiative of the ECB, the Committee on the Global Financial System 
(CGFS)  mandated  in  September  2008  a  Working  Group  (chaired  by  the  ECB)  to  review 
credit  risk  transfer  statistics collected  under  the  auspices  of  the  CGFS.  The  main  focus  of 
attention was on enhancing the biannual CDS statistics published by the BIS. Moreover, the 
Working Group investigated (1) how to make best use of available data, notably those which 
I already mentioned from the US DTCC, which has been publishing weekly statistics since 
6 
 BIS Review 105/2009
November 2008, and (2) the convergence with other statistics (in particular the BIS triennial 
survey  and  BIS  consolidated  banking  statistics).  To  this  end,  the  Working  Group  weighed 
carefully users’ needs against the estimated reporting costs and concluded on a number of 
short and medium-to-longer term proposals to enhance the availability of statistics on CDS 
that are now being implemented, with first results expected during the course of next year.2 
These  enhanced  CDS  statistics  will  provide  a  better  insight  into  the  use  of  CDS  across 
economic  sectors  allow  the  monitoring  of  the  size  and  sector  composition  of  credit  risk 
transfer  by  financial  intermediaries.  Moreover,  the  new  statistics  will  provide  a  better 
measure of cross-border credit risk transfer through a regional breakdown of counterparties. 
Conclusion 
5)  
Notwithstanding  their  potential  benefits  for  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  system  and  their 
rapid  diffusion  before  the  start  of  the  turmoil,  credit  derivatives  have  not  prevented  the 
materialisation  of  risks  they  were  conceptually  aimed  at  addressing.  The  financial  crisis 
revealed that certain risks that credit products were expected to transfer away from banks 
and spread across the economies, had never really left the confines of the banking sector 
and that returns that previously appeared generous had overshadowed risks being taken. In 
the future, more cooperation between market participants and public authorities is needed to 
jointly address certain shortcomings of the markets for credit derivatives. We see the seeds 
of such cooperation already in the work undertaken by various fora, but it is important that all 
the  relevant  public  authorities  continue  to  pursue  the  objective  of  strengthening  the  credit 
derivative markets in co-operation with market participants and regulatory bodies. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                 
2   See “Credit risk transfer statistics”, CGFS Papers No 35, forthcoming. 
BIS Review 105/2009 
 7
