Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Financial system stability and market confidence  
Speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Japan 
Society of Monetary Economics’ Spring Annual Meeting, Tokyo, 16 May 2009.  
 Preface  
1.  
I am grateful for this opportunity to speak before the time-honored Japan Society of Monetary 
Economics. Taking  advantage  of  the  occasion to  address  leading  scholars,  I  would  like  to 
make half of my remarks today as a Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, and the other 
half  as  a  former  Economics  Professor  of  the  University  of  Tokyo,  where  we  meet  today.  I 
hope that I can in some way contribute to your debates over the current financial crisis. 
When  Lehman  Brothers  went  bankrupt  last  September,  the  financial  crisis  entered  a  new 
level  of  acuteness,  though  more  recently  it  has  begun  to  subside  thanks  to  bold  policy 
initiatives  taken  by  countries  around  the  world.  Nevertheless,  the  financial  crisis  has  had 
significant negative impacts on the real economy. The IMF has revised its 2009 real growth 
rate  forecast  for  the  world  economy  down  to  negative  1.3  percent.  At  the  current  point  in 
time,  the  Japanese  financial  system  is  stable  on  the  whole  and  our  financial  institutions 
remain sound. However, it is also a fact that Japanese financial institutions are facing a much 
more difficult earnings environment. We will therefore continue to carefully monitor whether 
the  banking  sector  is  able  to  maintain  a  sufficient  level  of  robustness  and  appropriately 
provide financial intermediation functions.  
While governments and central banks have been focused on current crisis management, the 
G20 Summit and many other fora have seen vigorous discussions of policies that will prevent 
recurrence of financial crisis. However, the primary interest in most of these debates is how 
to  strengthen  regulation,  and  it  is  my  impression  that  critical  re-examination  of  the 
effectiveness  of  existing  regulations  or  consideration  of  the  possible  side  effects  of  re-
regulation have taken a back seat.  
As  a  central  banker  whose  mission  is  to  maintain  the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  I 
believe we should genuinely reflect whether our previous policies led financial institutions in 
the  correct  direction.  Where  there  are  mistakes,  we  must  correct  them  and  help  financial 
institutions to set off again on the proper path. At the same time, we should recognize that 
regulation must not impede the growth of the financial services sector. The ultimate goal of 
regulation  should  be  the  creation  of  a  sufficiently  flexible  financial  system  that  is  able  to 
smoothly absorb internal and external shocks.  
In my remarks today, I would like to focus on how we design systems that will prevent the 
recurrence of financial crisis, and consider this from a broad perspective that is not bound by 
established  concepts  and  approaches.  Obviously,  the  design  of  desirable  policies  and 
regulations  requires  a  deep  understanding  of  what  is  behind  the  crisis.  Therefore,  while  it 
may  strike  many  of  you  as  being  a  bit  roundabout,  I  would  like  to  begin  my  remarks  by 
reviewing the background to the current crisis and the mechanisms that have exacerbated it.  
BIS Review 74/2009 
 1
Emergence of the "credit bubble"1
2.  
At the outset, I would like to set out the causes of the current financial crisis in my own way. 
We are currently in the midst of financial crisis. The global financial system may be in a lull, 
but we do not know when another challenging issue could erupt. The situation surrounding 
us does not allow for premature conclusions. Therefore, I would like to ask you to understand 
that my remarks are based on the information that is available to us at the current point in 
time and necessarily represent a provisional diagnosis.  
No one would deny that the prologue to the current financial crisis was the subprime housing 
loan crisis in the United States. But that was essentially a problem in a portion of the home 
mortgages  in  a  single  country  –  albeit  the  United  States  –  and  it  would  normally  be 
inconceivable for that alone to plunge global financial markets into chaos. It is therefore more 
appropriate  to  look  to  macro  global  problems  as  the  true  background  to  today's  financial 
crisis.  It  is  undeniable  that  the  low  interest  rates  and  excess  liquidity  that  have  prevailed 
around the world since the collapse of the IT bubble are behind the crisis. In that sense, we 
were in a situation in which it would have been quite plausible for a financial crisis to occur 
anywhere and in any form. 
Why did the US subprime housing loans trigger the crisis? The US current account deficit 
has begun to expand rapidly since the latter half of the 1990s. Meanwhile, emerging Asian 
economies,  including  China  and  oil  producing  countries,  have  begun  to  see  their  current 
account  surpluses  expand.  This  is  the  phenomenon  that  has  come  to  be  called  "global 
imbalances." I am sure that you will recall a variety of discussions over whether this situation 
would be sustainable.  
In  fact,  when  there  are  significant  differences  in  the  degree  of  development  of  individual 
countries' financial markets, a situation like the global imbalances that appear on the surface 
to be a disequilibrium can in fact be one kind of equilibrium itself.2 In emerging economies 
and oil producing countries, many imperfections may be observed in the domestic financial 
markets.  Stock  markets  are  undeveloped,  deposit  interest  rates  are  fixed  at  low  levels  by 
regulation, and so on. Because of this, these countries may lack financial assets that offer a 
safe store of wealth gained by rising incomes. One solution is to purchase "safe" financial 
assets  from  other  countries.  The  development  of  information  and  telecommunications 
technologies has made it far easier to purchase foreign assets than it was in the past. And it 
was the United States that supplied those "safe" financial assets. For emerging economies 
and  oil  producing  countries,  this  translated  into  current  account  surpluses,  since  the 
purchase  of  foreign  assets  is,  ultimately,  the  export  of  capital.  Conversely,  for  the  United 
States, this resulted in current account deficits because the savings shortfall due to excess 
consumption was covered by importing capital. This set the stage for the spread of a US-
made "credit bubble" to the rest of the world.  
Obviously, the global imbalance on its own is insufficient to generate a "credit bubble" that is 
completely  divorced  from  economic  fundamentals.  For  that,  we  must  turn  to  the  problems 
inherent  in  the  process  by  which  subprime  housing  loans  were  turned  into  securitized 
                                                 
1   The word "bubble" should be used according to its strict economic definition, but usage is often much looser, 
as can be seen in policy debates, for example. In this paper, I have placed "credit bubble" within quotation 
marks to indicate that is being used colloquially rather than in its strictly defined sense. 
2   Cabarello,  R.  J.  (2006),  “On  the  Macroeconomics  of  Asset  Shortage,”  The  Role  of  Money:  Money  and 
Monetary  Policy  in  the  Twenty-First  Century,  The  Fourth  European  Central  Banking  Conference,  9-10 
November 2006, edited by Andreas Beyer and Lucrezia Reichlin, pp. 272-283. 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2009
instruments. On this point, I would like to focus on the question of the agency problem and 
how it relates to the expansion of the securitization business.3  
The primary characteristic of the securitization business is its complexity. Today's securitized 
instruments  have  extraordinarily  complex  structures.  For  example,  they  bundle  together 
thousands of subprime housing loans, dissect the cash flow that these loans produce and 
turn  them  into  a  number  of  different  financial  instruments  with  different  levels  of  priority. 
Furthermore,  these  financial  instruments  are  again  bundled  together  and  chopped  up  to 
create more financial instruments. As this process of synthesis and partition is repeated, the 
risk  structure  becomes  too  complex  and  it  is  no  longer  an  easy  task  to  measure  risk 
exposure. Certainly, one could argue that instruments should not be purchased if the risks 
are  not  clear,  but  what  happened  was  that  many  investors  placed  excessive  faith  in  the 
ratings issued by ratings agencies for these securitized instruments and began to gobble up 
complex products regardless.  
There  is  the  second  feature  of  securitization  that  we  must  also  discuss:  "functional 
differentiation."  Most  of  the  subprime  housing  loans  in  the  United  States  were  issued  by 
financial  operators  called  "mortgage  banks."  Instead  of  continuing  to  hold  the  credits  after 
making  the  loan,  these  operators  sold  them  to  investment  banks  and  other  institutions. 
Investment banks and others then took the home mortgage credits that they had purchased, 
pooled  them  together  and  used  them  to  back  securitized  instruments  that  were  sold  to 
investors. This is called the "Originate To Distribute" (OTD) model, whose process starts with 
the origination of home mortgages and ends with the sale of securitized products based on 
them.  One  of  the  problems  with  the  OTD  model  is  that  it  lends  itself  to  moral  hazards.  If 
mortgage banks are able to sell home mortgage credits and transfer the risks, they have no 
incentive  to  seriously  screen  the  loans.  It  is  not  hard  to  imagine  loans  being  made  to 
applicants  who  could  not  meet  credit  standards  in  normal  times.  This  is  a  typical  moral 
hazard, and I believe it is what planted the seeds of the "credit bubble."  
Through this process, an enormous volume of securitized instruments backed by and related 
to subprime housing loans came onto the market. Moreover, many of these instruments were 
given  "AAA"  ratings,  indicating  the  highest  levels  of  creditworthiness.  What  is  surprising  is 
that  the  yield  on  these  AAA-rated  securitized  instruments  was  often  much  higher  than  the 
yield on Treasuries even though they also had the same AAA rating. Had market functioned 
normally, this price distortion could not have been maintained over the long term. But in point 
of fact, no one questioned this state of affairs; not the banks, not the rating agencies, not the 
investors, not the regulators. Whether people thought the situation strange or not, everyone 
seems to have agreed to ignore it.  
Why could such an abnormal situation continue for so long? Some would argue on this point 
that  an  important  factor  came  from  organizational  behavior  and  a  certain  "responsibility 
avoidance" attitude on the part of organization members – what is referred to in the literature 
as "plausible deniability".4 The sellers of securitized instruments maintain that they bear no 
responsibility,  and  to  demonstrate  that  there  were  no  problems  with  their  instruments  they 
point to the fact that other operators were selling the same kinds of instruments. They claim 
that they, like others, calculated the prices of their instruments on the basis of historical data 
and  experience,  and  they  were  given  the  blessing  of  ratings  agencies.  In  other  words, 
nobody  could  have  possibly  foreseen  the  current  price  drops,  and  therefore  nobody  is 
responsible. It just happened. Meanwhile, the buyers of securitized instruments – institutional 
                                                 
3   For a more detailed analysis from a slightly different perspective, see the following. Nishimura, K. G. (2007), 
"Lessons from the Subprime Debacle: The Trust Is the Key in the Rating of Securitized Instruments", Nikkei 
Shimbun "Keizai Kyoshitsu," 14 December 2007 (in Japanese). 
4   Calomiris, C. W. (2009), “The Subprime Turmoil: What's Old, What's New, and What's Next,” in: Maintaining 
Stability in a Changing Financial System,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 19-110. 
BIS Review 74/2009 
 3
investors  –  use  the  similar  logic  to justify  their  purchases. Everybody  else  was  buying  the 
same financial instruments and nobody had a problem with it, the excuse goes. It is natural 
to  believe  that  this  plausible  deniability  was  one  of  the  reasons  that  the  “credit  bubble”  in 
securitized instruments emerged and was maintained for such a long period of time.  
Along with the emergence of the “credit bubble,” there is another feature that distinguishes 
the current crisis – the fact that virtually very few market  participants believed that such a 
serious financial crisis could actually occur. How is it that market participants came to believe 
this? It has something to do with the phenomenon of so-called "Great Moderation." Beginning 
in the 1990s, the United States and other countries saw a significant decline in the volatility 
of their GDPs and other real economy indicators and, as a result, the volatility of financial 
indicators  was  stable  as  well.  This  situation  remained  in  place  for  a  long  time  and 
presumably market participants had an illusion that the same situation would persist in the 
future and economic upheavals could never occur.  
There is an opinion that such an illusion was reinforced by the "Greenspan Put," named after 
Alan Greenspan, former chairman of the Federal Reserve Board (FRB). In other words, even 
if financial crisis were to occur, former chairman Greenspan and the FRB would certainly be 
able to use monetary policy to fix it. If the Greenspan Put were true, it could be rational for 
market participants to take risks on the assumption that the tail risk (the rarely-occurring risk 
such  as  financial  crisis)  would  never  emerge.  In  short,  the  misplaced  faith  of  market 
participants in monetary policy generated overconfidence in the market.  
Erosion of confidence and deepening of the crisis  
3.  
I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  the  collapse  of  the  “credit  bubble”  and  the  deepening  of  the 
financial crisis that resulted. One of the distinguishing features of the current financial crisis is 
the liquidity crisis caused by the materialization of counterparty risk. On July 10, 2007, S&P 
and  Moody's  announced  that  they  would  be  reviewing  the  ratings  of  several  residential 
mortgage-backed  securities  (RMBS)  backed  by  subprime  housing  loan  assets.  As  a 
consequence, the AAA ratings of asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) backed by these 
instruments were also downgraded. Indeed, an unremarkable change in the ratings of risk 
assets that were not all that important in the context of the market as a whole directly shook 
the global financial system.  
In  the  United  States,  money  market  funds  (MMFs)  have  been  considered  to  be  extremely 
safe financial assets. One of the primary reasons for this is that MMFs are only allowed to 
invest  in  AAA-rated  assets.  When  ratings  were  downgraded  for  ABCP,  MMFs  did  not 
reinvest. Naturally, funds that originated ABCP and used it to raise money found themselves 
in  fund-raising  difficulties:  Funds  under  the  Bear  Stearns  umbrella  went  bankrupt;  BNP 
Paribas  moved  to  freeze  its  affiliated  fund’s  new  applications  and  redemptions.  The 
structured  investment  vehicles  (SIV)  created  by  banks  to  issue  ABCP  were  unable  to  find 
funding sources, and then these banks were forced to provide liquidity enhancement instead. 
Banks,  which  frequently  lend  each  other  money,  suddenly  became  aware  of  counterparty 
risk, the risk that the other party of a transaction might suddenly go belly up. They began to 
worry  that  some  bank  somewhere  might  suddenly  be  unable  to  secure  liquidity  and  fail. 
Indeed, on August 9, a liquidity crisis actually occurred, with liquidity drying up quickly in the 
interbank market. The event has come to be known as the "Paribas Shock." Many European 
banks  were  among  those  facing  liquidity  difficulties.  Confronted  with  this  situation,  the 
European Central Bank (ECB) promptly announced that it was prepared to supply massive 
amounts of liquidity into the short-term money market.5
                                                 
5  
In point of fact, MMFs played a role in deepening the crisis during the "Lehman Shock" of September 2008 as 
well, as will be discussed below. The Reserve Primary Fund, a major independent MMF, held large amounts 
of CP issued by Lehman Brothers. The fund incurred large losses because of the bankruptcy, plunging it into 
4 
 BIS Review 74/2009
Some  argue  that  there  may  be  an  excessive  maturity  mismatch  on  financial  institutions’ 
balance  sheets  as  a  background  factor  that  triggered  the  liquidity  crisis.  Certainly,  a  close 
observation of the facts in the current financial crisis exposes not only the maturity mismatch 
but  also  the  "liquidity  uncertainty"  that  is  the  fundamental  risk  inherent  in  all  financial 
instruments.  It  is  a  truism  that  liquidity  is  largely  unrecognized  while  it  exists  and  only 
understood once it disappears. For example, the design of ABCPs assumes that they can be 
sold  on  the  market  at  any  time  if  necessary,  but  when  crisis  actually  occurred,  these 
instruments could not immediately be sold. Had institutional fund-raising been a little more 
long-term, there would have been a time cushion that might have enabled them to deal with 
the crisis in liquidity. Although it may not be possible to take every possibility into account in 
the selection of assets, a constant awareness of the uncertainty of liquidity and continuous 
assessment of the maturity gaps between assets and liabilities are key factors in improving 
the soundness of financial institutions.  
One  often-heard  opinion  is  that  credit  default  swaps  (CDS)  and  other  financial  derivatives 
amplified  the  instability  of  the  financial  markets  in  the  current  financial  crisis.  Opinions  will 
differ on the merits of CDSs themselves, but no one would deny that the dysfunction of the 
over-the-counter (OTC) market, where these instruments were primarily traded, undermined 
confidence  in  financial  markets  as  a  whole.  On  September  15,  2008,  Lehman  Brothers 
declared bankruptcy. Right around the same time, the market began to talk about American 
International Group, Inc. (AIG) being on the rocks as well, and its share price plummeted. 
AIG  sold  large  volumes  of  CDS  protection,  in which  it  was  believed  that  there  were  many 
contracts that used Lehman Brothers as a reference company. The bankruptcy of AIG would 
nullify  CDS  hedges.  Were  this  to  happen,  financial  institutions  that  had  dealings  with  AIG 
would  be  unable  to  fulfill  their  CDS  contracts  with  other  financial  institutions,  raising  the 
specter  of  a  chain  reaction.  Market  participants  were  suddenly  forced  to  recognize  this 
counterparty risk. Faced with these circumstances, the US government had little choice but 
to place AIG under its de facto administration.  
Most CDSs are traded directly. As long as counterparty risk is limited to the parties directly 
involved in the negotiated transaction, the market as a whole does not recognize any broad 
risk.  The  reason  the  market  as  a  whole  became  aware  of  this  risk  is  that  the  market 
participants recognized that they are in complex intertwined relationships among themselves 
arising  from  the  negotiated  transaction  network.  If  counterparty  risk  is  recognized  in  some 
transaction somewhere – in other words, if there is thought to be a risk that the other party 
will go bankrupt – everyone who has dealings with that party is at risk of being pulled down 
too in a chain reaction of bankruptcies. So the initial counterparty risk spreads and spawns 
new  counterparty  risks  for  the  parties  that  have  dealings  with  the  counterparty.  These 
"network  externalities"  certainly  played  a  major  role  in  the  process  by  which  the  current 
financial  crisis  expanded.  Counterparty  risk  can  be  significantly  reduced  by  centralizing 
transactions  (institutionalizing  a  "central  counterparty"),  but  in  practice,  many  of  the 
transactions were so complex that the creation of a central counterparty was a daunting task. 
I  do  not  think  that  the  current  sense  of  paralysis  that  pervades  financial  markets  can  be 
explained  merely  as  the  rupture  of  a  “credit  bubble.”  When  bubbles  rupture,  one  would 
ordinarily expect economies to return to their fundamentals. In other words, economies get 
back to functioning as they should. But I do not think there is anyone who would say that 
economies at the moment are functioning properly. The global economy today has fallen far 
beneath its potential and is seemingly unable to pull itself up.  
The root cause of this is the erosion of confidence in the market. When confidence is eroded, 
market  participants  become  extremely  fearful  that  they  might  be  confronting  a  completely 
                                                                                                                                                      
"break the buck" (net assets per dollar face value worth less than one dollar) status. This greatly undermined 
the confidence in MMFs as a whole, triggering a rapid outflow of money that translated into a major upheaval 
for the short-term money markets. 
BIS Review 74/2009 
 5
unpredictable and uncertain world. In this case, for market participants who want to behave 
rationally, the most natural course is to assume the most pessimistic scenario and make the 
best of it.6 Such market participants will react more readily to bad news, to information about 
the worst conceivable circumstances, than they will to good news. What is more, in situations 
such as these, market participants tend to adopt a strategy of standing still until confidence 
has been restored.7 Actions that may be rational at the level of individual market participants 
can lead to a "fallacy of composition," which delays the restoration of functions for the market 
as a whole.  
Institutional issues on the financial system  
4.  
I would next like to explore the background of the current financial crisis from the following 
two perspectives: monetary policy implementation and financial system design. Let me begin 
by considering monetary policy in the context of the so-called “bubble” phenomena.  
It  is  extremely  difficult  for  central  banks  to  be  aware  in  real  time  of  the  emergence  and 
collapse  of  “bubbles”.8  There  are  two  schools  of  thought  about  how  to  deal  with  bubbles. 
One says that you should wait and clean up after the collapse because it is difficult to be 
aware of bubbles as they emerge. The other argues that they should be dealt with quickly by 
reading  the  signs  of  a  bubble  from  numerous  indicators  like  asset  prices.  Both  positions, 
however, acknowledge that it is difficult to identify the emergence and collapse of bubbles in 
real time. 
When a large bubble collapses and severely damages the financial system, monetary policy 
has extremely limited effects, as we have seen in the current financial crisis. Furthermore, if 
the process of bubble formation involves "Greenspan Put"-type expectations among market 
participants, it may lead to excessive risk-taking activities.  
Thus,  the  current  financial  crisis  raises  the  extraordinarily  difficult  question  of  how  central 
banks  should  conduct  monetary  policies  to  stabilize  financial  systems,  and  ultimately, 
economies. While it is very important that this be discussed in detail, I will refrain from doing 
so in my remarks today because I wish to highlight another important question regarding the 
design of financial systems. 
The “credit bubble” and its collapse we have witnessed have resulted in a growing impetus in 
Europe  and  the  United  States  to  reconsider  the  existing  regulatory  framework.  In  the 
background is the financial deregulation that made great strides after the 1990s. The United 
States,  under  the  Glass-Steagall  Act,  maintained  a  clear  delineation  between  the  banking 
and securities businesses ever after 1933. The Glass-Steagall Act came out of the lessons 
learned  from  the  Great  Depression  and  was  designed  to  protect  depositors  by  separating 
banking  business  from  securities  business  so  as  to  improve  the  soundness  of  banks. 
However,  in  1999,  amidst  a  global  deregulatory  movement,  the  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act 
effectively  tore  down  the  walls  between  banking  and  securities  businesses.  This  enabled 
large commercial banks to enter the securities business.  
Meanwhile, in 2004, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) relaxed the leverage 
restrictions on investment banks. This deregulation was of decisive importance in the current 
                                                 
6  
If a decision maker’s confidence is “contaminated” or eroded in the sense that she thinks, though with a small 
probability (say ε), she is ignorant about the situation she faces, her rational behavior can be described as 
“maximin”  optimization.  See,  Nishimura,  K.  G.,  and  H.  Ozaki  (2006),  “An  Axiomatic  Approach  to  ε-
contamination,” Economic Theory, Vol. 27, 2006, pp. 333-340. 
7   Nishimura,  K.  G.,  and  H.  Ozaki  (2007),  “Irreversible  Investment  and  Knightian  Uncertainty,”  Journal  of 
Economic Theory, Vol. 136, pp. 668-694. 
8  Shirakawa, Masaaki (2009), "Way Out of Economic and Financial Crisis: Lessons and Policy Actions" (Speech 
to the Japan Society, New York), Bank of Japan, April 23, 2009. 
6 
 BIS Review 74/2009
financial crisis.9 It is said that this deregulation resulted in a sharp increase in the leverage of 
US investment banks from a multiple of 12 to 33.  
Recent  years  have,  in  addition,  seen  a  growing  role  for  the  "shadow  banking  system"  of 
financial  operators  outside  the  framework  of  banking  regulation.  Hedge  funds  and  private 
equity funds epitomize the rise and fall of this shadow banking system. Able to freely engage 
in financial transactions without being bound by banking regulation, these financial operators 
used  leverage  to  earn  large  profits.  Investment  banks  can  also  be  considered  part  of  this 
shadow  banking  system  because  their  regulation  was  looser  than  that  imposed  on 
commercial  banks.  There  is  nothing  particularly  wrong  with  the  enlargement  of  shadow 
banking  system  itself  if  failure  here  does  not  pose  a  systemic  risk.  However,  large 
commercial  banks  also  developed  close  ties  with  the  shadow  banking  system  by  having 
hedge  funds  under  their  umbrellas  or  by  creating  special  purpose  companies  off  their 
balance sheets to transfer related operations. It reached the point where the performance of 
these companies began to impact the soundness of major commercial banks themselves. In 
addition,  the  shadow  banking  system  also  had  greater  influence  on  the  global  financial 
system.  When  it  began  to  face  liquidity  shortfalls,  it  accelerated  the  sale  of  its  assets, 
bringing  a  downward  spiral  to  asset  prices,  which  in  turn  became  one  of  the  factors  in 
systemic risk. The current financial crisis indicates that some form of regulation is necessary 
for the shadow banking system.  
Another  important  point  to  be  raised  concerns  the  relationship  between  the  Basel  Accord 
(BIS  rules)  and  the  financial  crisis,  specifically  the  procyclicality  of  capital  adequacy 
requirements.  When  the  economy  improves,  bank  lending  increases  and  the  economy 
accelerates because capital requirements become smaller, corresponding with reductions in 
downside risk. Conversely, when the economy deteriorates, bank lending decreases and the 
economy  decelerates  because  capital  requirements  become  larger  as  downside  risk 
increases.  Thus,  capital  adequacy  requirements  are  considered  to  have  the  effect  of 
amplifying business cycles.10 The procyclicality of capital adequacy requirements has been 
criticized for exacerbating the economic downturn in the current financial crisis. Nonetheless, 
it  does  not  appear  that  a  consensus  has  been  reached  on  exactly  how  serious  the 
procyclicality  is.  It  will  be  important  in  the  future  that  a  new  quantitative  analysis  be 
performed of the procyclicality to facilitate a more objective debate.  
Re-stabilizing the financial system  
5.  
For  the  remainder  of  this  speech,  I  would  like  to  trace  the  recent  debates  from  those 
concerning regulations to maintain the soundness of individual financial institutions to those 
about safety nets to maintain the stability of the entire financial system. In so doing, I will add 
some theoretical examinations.  
In reviewing the recent debate, the framework of the "3 Cs" can be of some assistance.11 
The  3  Cs  stand 
the  words  "comprehensive,"  "contingent"  and  "cost-effective." 
"Comprehensive" regulations are best understood as regulations without loopholes. Unless 
the regulatory net spans all financial institutions comprehensively, the more regulations are 
beefed up, the more funds will flee from strictly regulated sectors to more loosely regulated 
sectors. 
for 
                                                 
9   Blinder, A. S. (2009), “Six Errors on the Path to the Financial Crisis,” The New York Times, January 25, 2009. 
10   Kashyap,  A.  K.,  and  J.  C.  Stein  (2004),  “Cyclical  Implication  of  the  Basel  II  Capital  Standards,”  Economic 
Perspectives, 1Q/2004, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.  
11   Rajan, R. G. (2009), “Cycle-Proof Regulation,” The Economist, April 8, 2009. 
BIS Review 74/2009 
 7
"Contingent"  regulations  have  the  following  properties.  During  the  up-phase  period,  they 
should mitigate overconfidence to prevent the accumulation of systemic risks Once systemic 
risk  actually  emerges,  however,  they  should  impose  few  restrictions  to  avoid  reinforcing 
economic  deterioration.  In  preparation  for  a  severe  erosion  of  confidence,  they  may  be 
furnished with some policy incentives to restore confidence. To sum up, it is desirable that 
regulations be contingent on risk-taking attitudes of market participants, and thus strict during 
booms and loose during busts.  
"Cost-effective"  regulation  is  a  concept  which  is  important  in  the  evaluation  of  regulations. 
This standard dictates that when one or more regulations could achieve the same results, the 
least expensive approach should be chosen. For example, if it is desirable to induce financial 
institutions to raise capital, it is better to do so during boom times when funding is readily 
available  as  opposed  to  slump  times  when  the  economy  has  begun  to  turn  sour  and  the 
funding cost is higher. This standard is also important when considering how to use public 
funding. When making the decision between injecting capital and purchasing nonperforming 
credits, one must consider costs involved as well as benefits of policy effects.  
Currently, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and many other fora, interest groups 
and ad hoc groups are floating many different proposals about how best to regulate finance. 
Taking the "3 Cs" in mind, I would like to take up several regulatory reform proposals that 
have come out of the international debate and examine their significance. In doing so, it is 
perhaps easiest to divide regulations into two categories: "ex ante measures" to be taken to 
prevent  the  crisis  and  "ex  post  measures"  to  influence  how  the  crisis  plays  out  when  it 
happens. These could also be termed "policies for normal times" and "policies for emergency 
times."  
Ex ante measures  
(1)  
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision is taking the lead in a discussion on ways to 
alleviate the procyclicality of capital adequacy requirements. As I explained, current capital 
adequacy  requirements  are  considered  to  have  procyclicality  properties.  In  response,  the 
discussions  focus  on  the  idea  of  introducing  variable  "buffer  capital."  This  would  make  it 
acceptable for institutions to accumulate capital when the economy is booming and draw it 
down when the economy slumps. However, one can also critique this argument in terms of 
the  "3  Cs."  Capital  adequacy  requirements  are  meaningless  if  they  do  not  apply  to  all 
broadly-defined financial institutions, not just banks.  
Even if this proposal is understood as being desirable from a qualitative standpoint, there are 
still  many  problems  that  would  be  involved  in  actual  implementation.  For  example,  on  the 
idea of accumulating capital during boom times, there still is the question of specifically how 
much  capital  and  at  what  pace  it  should  be  accumulated.  And  therein  is  the  even  more 
difficult  question  of  how  one  defines  and  determines  the  business  cycle.  Implementation 
involves  real-time  judgments  about  when  it  is  allowed  to  begin  drawing  down  the  buffer. 
However,  as  can  be  seen  from  the  business-cycle  dating  problem  for  the  Japanese 
economy,  a  long  period  of  time  is  required  before  the  peaks  and  troughs  of  the  business 
cycle can be identified. There is also the need to clearly articulate how time lags between 
national  business  cycles  will  be  treated.  These  are  just  a  handful  of  issues  that  must  be 
resolved before any such regulations could be fleshed out.  
There  is  another  international  debate  taking  place  on  liquidity  monitoring.  As  I  noted,  the 
current financial crisis initially emerged as a liquidity crisis. At the time, the system used by 
regulators  to  monitor  the  liquidity  of  internationally-active  banks  was  inadequate.  The 
discussion therefore turned to ways to increase the effectiveness of international monitoring 
by  developing  common  liquidity  metrics  and  sharing  information  among  regulators.  At  the 
current point in time, the debate focuses on which liquidity metrics would be appropriate to 
use. However, there are significant differences from country to country in the effectiveness of 
liquidity  monitoring.  Japan  engages  in  detailed  monitoring  with  the  cooperation  of  the 
8 
 BIS Review 74/2009
institutions involved, but there are some countries where the quality of monitoring is not very 
high.  One-size-fit-all-type  arguments  are  therefore  not  very  realistic.  Mechanisms  must  be 
sufficiently flexible and adaptable to the circumstances of individual countries.  
With this in mind, I would like to mention a very interesting approach to the liquidity risk.12 
Without a doubt, when the financial crisis is viewed as a liquidity crisis, the root cause is the 
excessive maturity mismatch on the balance sheets of funds and the like. Therefore, it would 
be  desirable  to  have  regulations  that  would  provide  incentives  to  alleviate  this  maturity 
mismatch,  thereby  preventing  crisis.  One  possible  solution  would  be  to  link  the  maturity 
mismatch between assets and liabilities with the capital requirement. For example, a bank 
raising  funds  from  longer-term  deposits  would  have  a  lower  capital  requirement  than  one 
raising funds in the overnight money market. This scheme would give banks an incentive to 
take  longer  maturities  on  the  liabilities  side  in  particular.  Putting  aside  the  question  of 
whether it is desirable to link maturity mismatches with capital requirements, it is clear that 
the continuous monitoring for appropriate liquidity at financial institutions is an effective tool 
for detect the early-warning signs of financial crisis.  
The G20 meetings held in April decided to reorganize the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) as 
a new "Financial Stability Board" (FSB). Previously, four international institutions, the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions, 
International  Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  and  International  Accounting  Standards 
Board, made independent judgments and took independent actions. The FSB is expected to 
serve as a kind of supervisory body of these institutions and provide coordination functions. 
The measure aims to overcome the differences among sectors and create regulations and 
rules that are consistent throughout the financial system. The G20 also decided to regulate 
hedge funds. This is the first step in bringing the shadow banking system within the net of 
regulations.  
Ex post measures  
(2)  
The  global  economy  is  in  the  midst  of  a  financial  crisis.  The  ex  post  measures  that  I  am 
about  to  describe  are  the  policies  and  programs  that  are  actually  being  implemented  by 
governments and central banks today.  
The  United  States  and  European  countries  have  taken  initiatives  to  address  liquidity  and 
fund-raising difficulties as part of steps to stabilize the financial system. These efforts can be 
organized  into  two  categories:  "granting  government  guarantees  for  market-based  fund-
raising" and "expanding deposit protection." Government guarantees for market-based fund-
raising  attempt  to  stabilize  the  market  conditions  for  fund-raising,  particularly  for  bond 
issuance by financial institutions, at a time when financial markets are increasingly strained. 
Most countries have also taken measures to raise deposit insurance ceiling in their deposit 
insurance schemes and/or to guarantee the unlimited protection of personal deposits. These 
measures  succeed  in  alleviating  the  perceived  uncertainties  of  depositors  regarding  the 
financial system, avoiding serious upheavals such as bank runs and providing banks with a 
stable source of fund-raising through deposits.  
During  the  current  financial  crisis,  countries  have  responded  with  comprehensive  policy 
packages.  Public  capital  injections  were  an  important  component  in  those  packages. 
However,  specific  nature  of  these  injections  differs  from  country  to  country  and  even  from 
time  to  time  in  the  same  country.  In  some  cases,  injections  were  made  across  the  board, 
even to sound banks, as a preemptive measure, while in other cases injections were to bail 
out  financial  institutions  that  had  recorded  large  losses  and  significantly  impaired  their 
                                                 
12   Brunnermeier, M., A. Crockett, C. Goodhart, A. Persaud and H. Shin (2009), “The Fundamental Principles of 
Financial Regulation,” International Centre for Monetary and Banking Studies & Centre for Economic Policy 
Research, Geneva Report on the World Economy, Vol. 11, 2009. 
BIS Review 74/2009 
 9
capital.  There  are  also  a  number  of  differences  in  the  design  of  instruments  and 
accompanying conditions.  
The  United  States  and  European  countries’  governments  purchase  nonperforming  assets 
and  provide  loss  compensation  schemes  for  these  assets  in  order  to  cap  loss  amounts. 
These measures differed in terms of whether these assets were taken off balance sheets, 
timing when accounting losses on these assets are recognized and necessity for pricing of 
individual  assets.  Despite  these  differences,  however,  the  aim  was  to  remove  concerns 
about  the  soundness  of  financial  institutions  by  relieving  uncertainty  about  their  asset 
holdings.  
When  Japan  confronted  a  severe  financial  system  problem  in  the  late  1990s,  it  began  by 
buying up nonperforming assets and later moved to injections of public capital. In contrast, 
the  first  step  for  the  United  States  and  European  countries  in  dealing  with  the  current 
financial  crisis  was  to  inject  public  capital,  and  then  they  moved  on  to  purchasing 
nonperforming  assets.13  The  reason  for  this  difference,  presumably,  was  the  difficulty  of 
valuing  nonperforming  assets  and  the  speed  with  which  the  crisis  was  progressing.  The 
nonperforming  assets  in  the  current  crisis  are  complex  securitized  instruments,  generally 
backed by home mortgages. With market functions significantly impaired, it is no easy task to 
arrive at pricing.  
In the United States, the public and private sectors joined together to create a fund for the 
purchase of nonperforming assets in an attempt to take them off balance sheets. It remains 
to be seen whether this system will function as intended. As the real economy worsens, the 
scope of nonperforming assets is moving from securitized products to commercial and other 
loans. A further development must be watched very closely.  
The  impacts  of  the  upheaval  in  international  financial  and  capital  markets  vary  across 
countries  and  regions.  While  the  financial  systems  of  the  United  States  and  European 
countries  have  been  visibly  shaken,  the  Japanese  financial  system  remains  stable  on  the 
whole.  However,  there  is  no  guarantee  that  Japan  will  be  spared  a  decline  in  financial 
intermediation  functions  because  worsening  earnings  and  falling  share  prices  are  now 
impinging on institutions' capital. Japan has taken a number of measures to achieve its policy 
goal  of  maintaining  financial  intermediation  functions.  On  December  16,  2008,  the  Act  on 
Special  Measures  for  Strengthening  Financial  Functions  was  amended  to  provide  for 
injections of public capital. On April 10, the Bank of Japan decided to provide subordinated 
loans  to  financial  institutions  in  order  to  help  them  increase  their  capital.  Prior  to  this,  on 
February  3,  it  restarted  a  program  to  purchase  equities  from  financial  institutions  so  as  to 
ensure the stability of the financial system by supporting to mitigate equity holding risks of 
financial  institutions.  This  is  a  unique  policy  that  is  geared  towards  Japanese  financial 
institutions,  which  tend  to  have  large  equity  holdings.  The  government  also  restarted  a 
purchasing program in March.  
Approach to new safety nets  
6.  
Separate from the political movements to expand and strengthen regulation, there has also 
been  a  completely  new  approach  proposed  for  stabilizing  the  financial  system.  What  this 
financial crisis has clearly taught us is the extreme difficulty of strengthening banks' capital 
when  a  financial  crisis  is  under  way,  that  is,  when  macro  systemic  risk  has  materialized. 
Viewed from the opposite perspective, the creation of a safety net that would facilitate bank 
capital  increases  during  times  of  crisis  would  greatly  contribute  to  the  stabilization  of  the 
                                                 
13   The  United  States  attempted  unsuccessfully  to  introduce  a  scheme  called  "M-LEC"  to  purchase 
nonperforming assets similar to what was done in Japan. Since September 2008, it has instead opted to inject 
public funding, just as the European countries.  
10 
 BIS Review 74/2009
financial system. The new approach that I will explain focuses on this point. I would first like 
to  introduce  the  idea  of  private-sector  "capital  insurance,"  which  is  an  expansion  on  the 
concept  of  ordinary  insurance.  Then,  while  reviewing  some  of  the  problems  involved  in 
private-sector capital insurance, I would like to discuss the potential for capital insurance in 
the form of a public-private partnership to overcome them. Finally, several other schemes are 
also introduced from a variety of schemes proposed so far. These schemes come under the 
general  rubric  of  "contingent  capital"  in  that  they  are  safety  nets  that  attempts  to  increase 
capital when necessary during crisis while having as little impact as possible on the market.  
Private sector "capital insurance"14
(1)  
Let me begin with an overview of private-sector "capital insurance." As its name suggests, 
this scheme involves an insurance policy. The bank has the same position as the insured in 
an  ordinary  insurance  policy,  while  the  investor  has  the  position  normally  occupied  by  an 
insurance  company.  When  an  insurance  policy  is  agreed,  the  bank  pays  the  investor  a 
premium. In response, the investor locks away liability reserves in a "lock box." Should there 
be a financial crisis, it pays insurance benefits to the bank from the lock box. The bank can 
use those funds to increase its capital. If the policy term elapses without a financial crisis, the 
liability reserves in the lock box return to the investor. This is the basic idea behind capital 
insurance.  
What sorts of banks are envisioned as the insured? Professor Kashyap and other advocates 
of  private  sector  capital  insurance  say  that  it  should  be  open  to  all  financial  institutions 
subject to the Basel Accord (BIS rules). What is crucial is that all financial institutions with the 
potential to cause systemic risk be enrolled, although the proponents say that it should be up 
to the institutions to decide whether or not to enter into an insurance policy. I would like to 
return  to  this  issue  in  a  moment  and  discuss  it  more  fully,  since  this  issue  is  important  in 
determining whether this will be an effective tool for avoiding systemic risk.  
The next question is: Who are envisioned as insurers? Professor Kashyap and others argue 
that all investors not subject to the Basel Accord should be able to provide insurance. If an 
investor  is  subject  to  the  Basel  Accord,  when  financial  crisis  occurs,  capital  is  merely 
transferred from one bank to another with no improvement in the soundness of the banking 
system as a whole. In other words, when crisis breaks out, maintaining the stability of the 
financial  system  requires  the  injection  of  capital  from  outside  the  system.  According  to 
Professor  Kashyap  and  others,  possible  investors  could  be  pension  funds  and  sovereign 
wealth funds (SWF), but the problem is that there is no guarantee that these investors will 
invest in capital insurance. 
Finally, there is a question of how to identify the "insured events" that will trigger payouts of 
insurance benefits. The standard advocated by Professor Kashyap and other proponents is 
that the payout is triggered when a moving average (e.g., an average over four quarters) of 
the total losses of all financial institutions entering into insurance policies exceeds a certain 
threshold value. Their point is that it is important to look at losses for the banking system as a 
whole, not those for individual institutions. It reflects the fact that the capital insurance they 
propose is ultimately an insurance against systemic risk or financial crisis. However, putting 
aside  clear  cases  such  as  what  we  find  now,  it  can  be  a  very  difficult  and  subtle  task  to 
determine what constitutes a financial crisis. This is another important point that needs to be 
addressed from the perspective of risk management, since it relates to the questions of how 
quickly the scheme would be able to strengthen capital without mistakes. 
While the proposal of Professor Kashyap and others can seem a bit novel, it does constitute 
an  attempt  to  provide  a  safety  net  for  the  financial  system  by  attaching  insurance  so  that 
                                                 
14   Kashyap, A. K., R. G. Rajan and J. C. Stein (2009), “Rethinking Capital Regulation,” in: Maintaining Stability in 
a Changing Financial System, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 431-471. 
BIS Review 74/2009 
 11
capital  is  above  a  certain  threshold.  It  is  also  an  excellent  attempt  to  internalize  external 
diseconomies. During the 1990s, Japan injected enormous amounts of capital into its banks 
in order to stabilize its financial system. Likewise, enormous amounts of capital have been 
injected into European and US financial institutions during the current financial crisis. While 
there  are  some  institutions  that  anticipate  being  able  to  repay  the  funds  quickly,  there  are 
others that will continue to require larger and larger injections. If this capital is not returned, it 
will be the taxpayers that ultimately bear the costs. As I touched upon in the discussion of the 
"credit bubble," financial institutions engaged in excessive risk-taking under the assumption 
that governments and central banks would do something if there were a problem. That is, 
financial  institutions  generated  the  external  diseconomies  of  systemic  risk,  not  bearing  the 
cost  of  its  cleanup,  but  keeping  all  of  the  profits  for  themselves.  This  proposal  asks 
institutions  to  bear  the  cost  of  materialized  systemic  risk  in  the  form  of  premiums.  In  that 
sense, it internalizes external diseconomies.  
That  being  said,  the  proposal  tabled  by  Professor  Kashyap  and  others  also  has  many 
problems.  First,  the  capital  insurance  that  they  advocate  is  entirely  private  and  the  main 
insurers will be private-sector investors. Will private-sector investors on their own be able to 
come up with the enormous liability reserves that would be required to halt systemic risk? 
They  look  to  pension  funds  and  SWFs  to  play  this  role,  but  will  we  always  rely  on  them? 
Obviously,  you  might  be  able  to  attract  enough investors  if premiums  are  sufficiently  high. 
But if premiums are too high, most financial institutions would forgo insurance altogether.15  
Also,  as  crisis  deepens,  institutions  may  require  capital  injections  beyond  the  amounts 
initially  envisioned.  There  is  the  potential  for  systemic  risk  to  materialize  after  all  of  the 
liability reserves have been paid out of the lock box. A crisis like the current one that is global 
in  its  dimensions  may  be  beyond  what  private  sector  funds  alone  can  deal  with.  In  these 
situations,  will  it  really  be  possible  to  stop  the  erosion  of  confidence?  That  said,  this  idea 
should be better combined with additional government-based insurance as a set to deal with 
large  losses,  and  only  by  doing  so,  will  it  be  possible  to  maintain  confidence  in  capital 
insurance.  
The  proposal  by  Professor  Kashyap  and  others  is  that  enrollment  in  capital  insurance  be 
voluntary. There is no guarantee, therefore, that all financial institutions that impact financial 
system stability would purchase capital insurance. This is the classic free-rider problem. In 
particular, a bank that considers itself "too big to fail" might very well decide not to purchase 
capital insurance. If it is indeed "too big to fail," then its bankruptcy would generate systemic 
risk and the government could be expected to bail it out regardless of whether it enrolled in 
capital insurance. If that assumption is correct, the bank has no incentive to purchase capital 
insurance. What we end up with is a situation in which no one purchases capital insurance 
as long as they believe that the government will never allow financial crisis to occur. 
There  is  also  the  question  of  capital  insurance  pricing.  For  ordinary  insurance  products, 
pricing is based on the law of large numbers. However, a financial crisis is a "tail event" that 
rarely  occurs,  or  it  is  a  phenomenon  for  which  the  probability  distribution  is  completely 
unknown. In either case, the law of large numbers cannot be used to price capital insurance.  
Capital insurance as a public-private partnership  
(2)  
As  I  have  noted,  the  scheme  proposed  by  Professor  Kashyap  and  others  has  many 
problems. However, some of them can be solved if public institutions are used to back up 
private  capital  insurance.  First,  by  having  public  institutions  responsible  for  a  part  of  the 
insurance, it is possible to provide liability reserves of sufficient size. Moreover, there is no 
need to actually put liability reserves away. It is sufficient for there to be a commitment to 
                                                 
15   Professor Blinder made similar comments regarding the paper of Professor Kashyap et. al. at the symposium 
sponsored last year by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
12 
 BIS Review 74/2009
fiscal  outlays  if  an  insured  event  occurs.16  In  addition,  government’s  involvement  would 
prevent private premiums from becoming too high in the face of phenomena that carry large 
uncertainties.17  
Private sector expertise must be marshaled in order for any such insurance program to be 
effective. Therefore, one option that is quite possible is to create a public-private partnership 
in which efficient private sector institutions originate capital insurance that is, for all purposes, 
"re-insured"  by  the  government.  That  is  the  form  that  Japan  uses  to  provide  "earthquake 
insurance."  A  public-private  partnership  for  capital  insurance  enables  the  system  to  draw 
upon the expertise of the private sector to achieve greater efficiency than would be seen if 
capital insurance were provided by public institutions only.  
To have a well-functioning capital insurance, we need not only its public nature, but also an 
element of mandatory enrollment. More specifically, financial institutions with the potential to 
trigger systemic risk must be required to enroll in an insurance program. This solves the free-
rider problem. It might also allow financial institutions to opt out of the insurance program. 
However, in such cases, the financial institution would be required to scale back its business 
and demonstrate that it will not trigger systemic risk. Even still, it is no easy matter to come 
up with objective criteria that can be used to identify "financial institutions with the potential to 
trigger systemic risk." There is also a question of whether only banks need be covered by the 
insurance.  It  is  impossible  to  foresee  which  business  models  will  be  the  source  of  future 
instability in the financial system. Therefore, regulators must constantly review the definition 
of a "financial institution with the potential to trigger systemic risk" as their financial sectors 
develop and evolve. 
The remaining issue is that of pricing the insurance. The involvement of public institutions in 
the  provision  of  insurance  means  that  the  burdens  ultimately  revert  to  the  public.  It  goes 
without saying that it is only fair for the public to bear some of the cost because they enjoy 
the  benefits  of  a  stable  financial  system.  An  important  issue  in  this  will  be  convincing  the 
public of the appropriateness of insurance pricing.  
This  will  require  a  bit  of  creativity  in  the  mechanisms  used  to  set  premiums.  As  a  rather 
simple example, consider a mechanism by which premiums are based on a measurement of 
the institution's systemic risk, defined in terms of its gross assets. In such cases, a financial 
institution  that  is  right  on  the  border  between  enrolling  and  not  enrolling  in  insurance  may 
elect to reduce the size of its assets so that it is not compelled to enroll. If premiums are set 
on the low side to encourage these financial institutions to participate, they will be too low to 
provide  a  deterrent  to  further  risk-taking  by  financial  institutions  that  carry  large  systemic 
risks. Without going into detail here, this problem can be solved with a progressive premium 
geared to the size of the institution. 
If  the  government  is  involved  in  insurance,  it  may  be  impossible  to  avoid  giving  the 
impression that this is a government-funded "bailout insurance." If that is the case, there may 
be new moral hazards for financial institutions. Indeed, it is not overstating the case to say 
that the biggest hurdle to the involvement of public institutions in capital insurance is how to 
suppress  moral  hazards.  Therefore,  the  introduction  of  capital  insurance  with  public 
institution  involvement  cannot  be  allowed  to  undermine  the  importance  of  the  regulatory 
supervision of enrolled institutions.  
                                                 
16   Rochet, J. C. (2008), “Comments on 'Rethinking Capital Regulation' by A. Kashyap, R. Rajan and J. Stein,” 
prepared  for  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  symposium  on  “Maintaining  Stability  in  a  Changing 
Financial System,” Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 21-23, 2008. 
17   Nishimura, K. G. (2009), “'The Past Does Not Repeat Itself, But It Rhymes’: Four Lessons Learned from the 
Financial Crises,” Remarks at the Panel Session “Responding to the Financial Crises: Lessons Learned” at 
the 45th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago on May 8, 2009. 
BIS Review 74/2009 
 13
Likewise,  even  if  such  an  insurance  program  were  to  be  created,  it  would  not  in  any  way 
reduce the importance of accurately communicating information on financial system stability 
to  market  participants  and  the  general  public  in  a  manner  that  avoids  amplifying 
uncertainties. The more complex the insurance program becomes, the less effective it will be 
in alleviating the "fear and panic" psychology of investors. For instance, if uninsured financial 
institutions were to fail during a financial crisis, would it be possible to maintain confidence? 
No one has ever tested this point, and no one can predict the outcome with any certainty.  
Other discussions  
(3)  
In addition to these schemes, there have been many other proposals put forward to enable 
capital to be strengthened when financial institutions are in crisis, and they have served as 
the starting points for active discussions on how to deal with macro systemic risk. I would like 
to give you a brief overview of some of them.  
The first is an instrument called a "catastrophe bond." Most people use the abbreviated form 
"cat  bond."  The  issuer  of  this  instrument  is  relieved  of  its  obligation  to  repay  principal  to 
investors if certain conditions are satisfied. By selling investors a bond in which redemption is 
waived in the event of major losses, a bank is able to maintain its capital even if losses are 
incurred.  For  example,  if  the  bank  is  holding  nonperforming  credits,  it  could  forgive  large 
amounts of debts so that it could simultaneously downsize both the asset and liability sides 
while keeping its capital untouched.  
Another similar instrument is called the "reverse convertible debenture."18 This is a bond that 
is automatically converted to equity if certain conditions are satisfied. Putting aside the issue 
of accounting treatment, this instrument has very similar effects on capital to a cat bond. By 
selling investors a bond that is converted to equity in the event of major losses, a bank would 
be able to raise its capital automatically even if losses were incurred.  
Finally, there is a contract known as the "margin call on shareholders."19 This contract allows 
an issuer to compel shareholders to purchase additional shares when certain conditions are 
satisfied. For example, by issuing equity with this kind of agreement attached, a bank that 
incurs large losses could cause its existing shareholders to purchase new equity, reducing 
the need to raise capital from the market.  
With all of these instruments, it is possible to set the triggers differently according to specific 
purposes. For instance, if the objective is to maintain the soundness of a specific financial 
institution,  the  trigger  would  probably  be  the  losses  of  that  institution.  If  the  objective  is  to 
prevent systemic risk, the trigger would be the total losses of all financial institutions enrolled 
in the system. In the latter case, uniform triggers would need to be set so that all contracts 
are fulfilled at the same time.  
In  this  section,  I  have  tried  to  give  you  an  overview  of  several  different  forms  of  financial 
instrument that could be part of a safety net for the financial system. There would need to be 
some  form  of  mechanism  in  place  for  all  financial  institutions  with  the  potential  to  trigger 
systemic risk to hold such instruments. Mandatory purchases are one  approach, but there 
should also be some thought given to incentives so that financial institutions purchase them 
of  their  own  accord.  One  effective  method  might  be  to  allow  institutions  to  count  such 
instruments as capital.  
                                                 
18   Flannery, M. J. (2005), “No Pain, No Gain? Effecting Market Discipline via 'Reverse Convertible Debentures',” 
Chapter  5  of  Capital  Adequacy  beyond  Basel:  Banking,  Securities,  and  Insurance,  edited  by  Hal  S.  Scott, 
Oxford University Press, 2005. 
19   Hart,  O., 
Try 
http://experts.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2009/03/30/to_regulate_finance_try_the_market. 
“To  Regulate 
Finance, 
Zingales 
(2009), 
and 
L. 
14 
 the  Market,” 
in 
BIS Review 74/2009
Conclusions  
7.  
There  is  a  growing  momentum,  particularly  in  Europe,  for  stronger  bank  regulation.  The 
argument  is  based  on  the  opinion  that  the  current  global  financial  crisis  would  not  have 
occurred  if  regulation  had  been  sufficiently  strong.  However,  one  must  question  whether 
stronger  regulation  by  itself  will  prevent  future  financial  crises.  There  has  been  no 
demonstration  on  this  point,  and  indeed,  it  has  not  even  been  fully  discussed,  even  in 
academic  circles.  There  is  an  undeniable  impression  that  most  of  the  debate  on  banking 
regulation  in  recent  months  has  accepted  the  assumption  that  stronger  regulation  is 
necessary to prevent the recurrence of crisis without any critical investigation.  
There  should  also  be  a  careful  and  cautious  discussion  of  the  side  effects  from  more 
regulation. If one takes a step back to the fundamental economic perspective of government 
involvement versus economic efficiency, there are two trade-offs in particular that could be 
considered  to  be  of  importance.  The  first  is  the  relationship  between  improved  financial 
intermediation  functions  and  financial  system  stability.  Stronger  regulation  may  indeed 
increase the stability of the financial system. On the other hand, government interference has 
the  potential  to  reduce  economic  efficiency.  Inefficiency  in  the  financial  services  sector 
manifests itself in the form of reduced financial intermediation functions. These questions can 
be viewed as issues of public economics and the tools of this discipline need to be applied to 
a cost-benefit analysis from the two perspectives of quality and quantity. Such an analysis 
should  be  applied  to  a  wide  range  of  candidate  regulations  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  best 
balance between economic efficiency and government regulation and interference.  
The  second  point  to  consider  is  the  trade-off  between  financial  sector  innovation  and 
financial system stability. When unease in the financial system surfaces, there is always an 
argument  about  restricting  the  operations  that  financial  institutions  can  undertake,  as 
manifested by “narrow banking” approaches. However, in many cases, this argument is lack 
of  a  perspective  of  financial  innovation.  It  would  be  very  difficult  indeed  to  enhance  value 
added in the finance industry without using innovation to flexibly adapt to dynamic economic 
developments.  
We must therefore consider approaches to promoting innovation while also maintaining the 
stability of the system. In doing so, we must pay attention to the two forms of innovation: One 
is achieved by the consolidation and attrition of companies and the other is achieved within a 
single  company.  Japan  has  a  large  number  of  "long-established"  companies,  a  fact  that 
illustrates the process of innovation in the latter sense that has taken place again and again 
over  time.  Financial  sector  is  no  exception:  Innovation  occurs  primarily  within  banks. 
Therefore,  promoting  innovation  in  the  financial  sector  can  be  seen  as  a  question  of 
promoting a "scrap and build process" within organizations as the environment changes. 
The  current  global  financial  crisis  raises  significant  issues  for  financial  institution  risk 
management and supervisory regulation. In my remarks today, I have described some of the 
very  active  debates  that  are  currently  taking  place.  Japan  experienced  the  rupture  of  an 
asset bubble in the early 1990s and a prolonged period of financial and economic stagnation 
thereafter. We therefore have the advantage of being able to discuss issues realistically on 
the basis of our experiences. I look forward to greater contributions to the debate from the 
Japanese academic community, and with that hope I would like to close my remarks today. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS Review 74/2009 
 15
