Mohammed Laksaci: Financial system developments in Algeria – 
resilience and risks in the face of the international financial crisis and its 
spillover effects 
Speech by Dr Mohammed Laksaci, Governor of the Bank of Algeria, at a Meeting with the 
Algerian Bankers Association, Algiers, 22 January 2009. 
 Algeria’s  strong  macroeconomic  performance  over  the  past  nine  years  and  the  gradual 
strengthening  of  the  banking  sector’s  stability  have  contributed  to  establishing  a  relative 
resilience to external shocks. Key achievements include: 
• 
sound  management  of  international  reserves  (no  investments  in  risky  assets), 
paying  due  attention  to  the  strategic  objective  of  safeguarding  asset  portfolios 
against any loss of capital;  
significantly reducing external debt, in 2005 and 2006, after strictly limiting external 
borrowing since early 2000. By end 2008, total medium and long term debt stood at 
only  $4  billion  (less  than  3%  of  GDP).  Furthermore,  banks’  external  liabilities 
represent  less  than  1%  of  their  total  liabilities,  and  banks  are  required  to  deposit 
their end-of-day foreign exchange balances at the central bank which manages the 
country’s overall exchange position; 
saving part of the fiscal revenue windfalls, with an annual budget saving averaging 
23% of GDP during the period 2005-2008. By end 2008, savings in the stabilization 
fund (FRR) , totaled DA 4113 billion ( equivalent to $57,8 billion); 
domestically  financing  the  economy’s  large  investments,  in  the  context  of  excess 
saving rates over investment rates; 
developing  the  bond  segment  of  the  financial  market,  with  access  limited  to 
domestic investors; 
Advancing the restructuring of the banking sector following failure and bankruptcy of 
small  private  banks  which  resulted  in  withdrawing  their  licences  over  2003-2006 
while compensating depositors through the Deposits Guarantee Fund. 
     The strengthened macroeconomic stability, as evidenced by subdued inflation (4.4 % in 2008 
despite the surge in world commodity prices) and a real exchange rate of the Dinar near its 
equilibrium level, as well as important foreign exchange reserves ($143 billion, by end 2008) 
and low external debt, have constituted sound safeguards against the inherent shocks of the 
current international financial crisis. In addition, indirect monetary policy instruments (deposit 
auctions,  marginal  deposit  facility,  …)  have  been  successfully  used  to  limit  the  impact  of 
structural excess liquidity on inflation.  
Although  the  direct  contagion  impact  of  the  international  financial  crisis  on  the  Algerian 
banking  system  is  limited,  in  view  of  its  small  exposure  to  international  financial  markets, 
increased attention is directed to further strengthening and preserving its soundness. In this 
regard, the required minimum capital for banks and financial institutions have recently been 
substantially increased to strengthen their resilience and increase their lending capacity. 
Despite  the  structural  nature  of  the  excess  liquidity  since  2002,  growth  of  credit  to  the 
economy  has  been  relatively  moderate  (14%  in  2008).  For  a  better  contribution  to  the 
diversification of the economy, banks are expected to enhance their efforts in financing the 
development of SMEs while further improving credit and operational risk management. 
BIS Review 21/2009 
 1
initiatives  of 
The  role  of  banks  in  investment  financing  is  crucial  given  the  limited  development  of  the 
financial  markets.  The  2009  government  budget  provides  for  appropriations  to  strengthen 
public banks’ capital base. Government financial support to the public banks (bailing out of 
public banks’ portfolios and strengthening of their capital assets) averaged 2.6% of GDP for 
the period 1991-2002 and 1.7% for the period 2005-2006. 
The  Bank  of  Algeria  will  continue  to  pay  due  attention  to  potential  risks  arising  from  the 
deepening international financial and economic crisis, particularly risks to the banking sector. 
In this respect, particular attention will be attached to the flexible use of available monetary 
policy instruments and to maintaining a flexible exchange rate policy to reflect the economy’s 
fundamentals. 
At the same time, banking supervision will continue to be strengthened, in accordance with 
the  ongoing 
the  modernization  and 
consolidation  of  banks’  reporting  system  and  the  recent  increase  in  required  minimum 
capital,  sustained  efforts  are  being  devoted  to  strengthen  the  operational  and  regulatory 
frameworks  of  the  banking  sector  over  the  first  half  of  2009  (conformity  of  bank  assets, 
liquidity and credit risks management, …), in accordance with international standards. In this 
regard, a stress testing system, introduced in 2007, already contributes to better assessing 
banks’ risk management and evaluating adequacy of capital assets to potential risks. In view 
of  the  large  number  of  foreign  banks  presently  operating  in  Algeria,  continued  efforts  are 
being made to develop bilateral cooperation on their supervision. 
In  conclusion,  prudent  management  of  resources  and  continued  strengthening  of  the 
financial  and  banking  system  stability  allow  Algeria  to  consider  its  medium  term  economic 
objectives with a relative confidence. However, the deepening of the international financial 
crisis and its drastic spillover effects on the world economy is already affecting the country 
through a number of channels, notably: 
• 
the  Basel  Committee.  Following 
a  reduction  in  its  savings  capacity.  The  sharp  decline  in  oil  prices  is  drastically 
reducing  hydrocarbon  export  receipts  and  consequently  government’s  savings 
capacity.  A  prolonged  weakness  of  oil  prices  would  inevitably  erode  the  financial 
wealth  accumulated  in  the  stabilization  fund  with  a  correlative  reduction  in 
international reserves; 
a  reduction  in  the  yields  on  the  investment  of  international  reserves,  as  a 
consequence of low interest rates in international markets. 
 2 
 BIS Review 21/2009
