Mark Carney: Statement on the July Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 23 July 2009. 
 Good morning. Senior Deputy Governor Paul Jenkins and I are pleased to be here with you 
today to discuss the July Monetary Policy Report, which we published this morning. 
• 
Global economic activity appears to be nearing its trough, and there are increasing 
signs that activity has begun to expand in many countries in response to monetary 
and fiscal policy stimulus and measures to stabilize the global financial system.  
However,  this  recovery  is  nascent.  To  sustain  global  growth,  effective  and  resolute 
policy implementation remains critical.  
The Bank has long expected that economic growth in Canada would resume in the 
second  half  of  this  year  and  pick  up  in  2010.  Indeed,  growth  in  Canada  should 
resume  this  quarter.  The  dynamics  of  the  recovery  projected  in  today's  MPR  are 
broadly consistent with the Bank's medium-term outlook in April.  
Stimulative  monetary  and  fiscal  policies,  improved  financial  conditions,  firmer 
commodity prices, and a rebound in business and consumer confidence are spurring 
domestic demand growth.  
However,  the  higher  Canadian  dollar,  as  well  as  ongoing  restructuring  in  key 
industrial sectors, is significantly moderating the pace of overall growth.  
Some  of  the  early  strength  in  domestic  demand  represents  a  bringing  forward  of 
household  expenditures,  which  modestly  alters  the  profile  of  growth  over  the 
projection period relative to the April MPR. We now expect the Canadian economy 
will contract by 2.3 per cent this year and then grow by 3.0 per cent in 2010 and 3.5 
per cent in 2011.  
Total  CPI  inflation  declined  to  -0.3  per  cent  in  June  and  should  trough  in  the  third 
quarter of this year. While core inflation held up at 1.9 per cent in the second quarter 
of this year, the Bank still expects core inflation to diminish in the second half of this 
year.  
The Bank expects both total and core inflation to return to the 2 per cent target in the 
second quarter of 2011 as aggregate supply and demand return to balance.  
A stronger and more volatile Canadian dollar represents an important downside risk 
to output and inflation.  
On Tuesday, the Bank reaffirmed its conditional commitment to maintain its target for 
the overnight rate at the effective lower bound of 1/4 per cent until the end of June 
2010 in order to achieve the inflation target.  
The  Bank  retains  considerable  flexibility  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  at  low 
interest rates, consistent with the framework outlined in the April MPR.  
          With that, Paul and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
BIS Review 92/2009 
 1
