Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Career executives in government – making lives 
better for Filipinos 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the CES Circle Forum, Manila, 26 January 2009. 
 Executive  Director  Allones  of  the  Career  Executive  Service  Board,  distinguished  panelists, 
the elite corps of government employees who make up the Career Executive Service Officers 
and Eligibles, colleagues in government service, special guests, good afternoon.  
On behalf of the men and women of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I welcome all of you to 
our head office for the inaugural CES CIRCLE Forum.  
CIRCLE, which stands for Creative Innovations and Reforms for Committed Leadership and 
Effectiveness,  is  a  most  appropriate  symbol  for  this  program  that  aims  to  nurture  thought 
leadership  in  government:  a  circle  is  never-ending  and  so  should  our  efforts  to  learn  and 
continuously find better and more efficient ways of doing things.  
I also find the timing for this new program for  CESOs and CES eligibles quite auspicious. 
This  is  the  first  month  of  the  year  and,  coincidentally,  the  celebration  of  the  Chinese  New 
Year  –  the  beginning  of  the  year  of  the  Ox,  one  of  the  most  hardworking  and  productive 
creatures on earth.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  for  its  resolute  efforts  to  strengthen  and  broaden  professional 
competence in government let us give the CES Board a well-deserved round of applause!  
The theme for this Circle Forum is thought-provoking and challenging:  Bagong Taon, Mga 
Bagong Hamon, CESO’t Eligibles, Paano Ka Tutugon?”  
Earlier, you heard about the labor situation as well peace and national security issues. On 
my part, I cannot overemphasize that this will be a particularly challenging year for us as a 
country as we grapple with the impact of the ongoing global financial crisis. What began with 
the  market  turmoil  surrounding  U.S.  subprime  mortgages,  has  become  an  economic  and 
financial crisis that threatens the global community in magnitudes reminiscent of the 1930s 
“Great Depression”. 
No economy has been unscathed by the global headwinds. And the crisis has landed on our 
shores as well. As leaders and managers in our respective government agencies and offices, 
the  burden  is  upon  us  to  craft  and  implement  policies  and  measures  that  will  enable  our 
country and our people to ride out this economic and financial storm.  
Current situation 
How should we respond to the challenges before us? The first step is to recognize where we 
stand at the moment. Thus, allow me to share with you some insights on the impact of the 
global financial crisis on the Philippine economy. 
As we all know, 2008 has turned out to be one of the most challenging years we’ve had, as 
we  coped  with  two  major  challenges.  In  the  first  half  of  the  year,  we  were  confronted  by 
surging prices of oil and non-oil commodities which caused inflation to accelerate globally. In 
the  second  half,  we  faced  the  international  financial  turmoil  that  was  ignited  by  the  U.S. 
subprime  mortgage  problem  and,  which  subsequently,  turned  into  a  global  financial 
meltdown.  
While the Philippine economy has remained generally resilient and has been described by a 
ratings  executives  as  an  “island  of  calm”,  it  does  not  mean  that  we  are  totally  immune  to 
adverse  global  developments.  As  in  most  other  countries,  our  currency  has  generally 
BIS Review 9/2009 
 1
weakened, credit spreads have widened, and the stock market has fallen. Some economists 
believe that 2009 could even be tougher than 2008 once the impact on the real economy is 
felt.  
Nevertheless, it is not all gloom and doom for us. The Philippines has buffers that can help 
us through the current global economic crisis.  
Our  output  growth  continues  to  be  demand-driven,  led  by  consumption  as  well  as  capital 
spending.  Moreover,  the  country’s  GDP  growth  for  the  first  three  quarters  of  2008  is  still 
within  the  country’s  long-term  growth  trend.  Compared  against  our  neighbors,  this  growth 
performance is quite respectable.  
Meanwhile,  easing  prices  of  oil  and  other  non-oil  commodities  in  the  world  market  and 
moderating  inflation  expectations  have  reduced  inflation  pressures  and  protected  the 
people’s  purchasing  power.  Easing  inflation  pressures  provide  flexibility  for  the  BSP  to 
formulate policies supportive of the real economy while keeping an eye on the risks to stable 
prices. 
Recent adjustments in fiscal targets also provide some policy space to support growth. The 
postponement of the balanced-budget objective to 2010 should provide additional resources 
to  government  to  boost  infrastructure  spending  and  enhance  social  safety  nets  that  will 
protect the vulnerable segments of our population.  
The country’s stable external payments position also provides additional buffer against the 
global economic slowdown. The country’s balance of payments, although significantly lower 
than in 2007, has remained in surplus in 2008 with our Gross International Reserves at an 
all-time high.  
Finally, the banking system remains sound due to continuing policy and structural reforms. 
Our banks have limited exposure to structured credit and related derivative products which 
were the main cause of the large losses of crisis-affected international institutions. Liquidity in 
our banking system remains adequate and bank lending operations continue to expand at a 
healthy pace. Furthermore, our banks are capitalized above the global standards and BSP 
regulatory requirement.  
Moving forward  
The next question is how do we move forward?  
First, given the buffers I have mentioned earlier, we should face the global headwinds with 
an underlying belief in the resilience of the Philippine economy. The message is that 2008 
has been a tough year and 2009 will most likely be tougher – but our economy is in a better 
shape to weather this global storm. This is not our first crisis, nor will it be the last. This time 
around, we are entering the crisis from a position of relative economic strength.  
The key is to manage the factors that are within our control, to maintain a positive mindset, 
and  to  capitalize  on  our  time-tested  resiliency  and  ability  to  innovate  amidst  challenging 
times.  
This brings me to my second point. We should press on with the strategy that has so far kept 
us in good stead – macroeconomic prudence. Sound macroeconomic fundamentals are the 
first  line  of  defense  during  these  trying  times.  Our  experience  in  the  past  years  has 
demonstrated that sound monetary, fiscal and structural policies have a salutary effect on the 
economy. The key challenge is to continue to have a consistent and coordinated monetary, 
financial and fiscal policy response to the ongoing crisis.  
The commitment to tackle policy challenges boldly through purposeful reforms to strengthen 
institutional  underpinnings,  improve  productivity  and  boost  international  competitiveness 
should  ensure  a  steady  anchor  to  the  country’s  economic  prospects  amidst  the  inevitable 
global storms. 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2009
On  the  part  of  the  BSP,  we  will  continue  to  craft  monetary  and  financial  policies  that  will 
support broad-based economic growth while keeping prices stable. In other words, the BSP’s 
monetary policy will continue to focus on achieving price stability while allowing room for the 
economy to grow.  
The  BSP  will  also  continue  to  stabilize  financial  conditions  through  reforms  that  will  foster 
healthy  financial  balance  sheets.  We  will  guard  against  systemic  failures  through  liquidity 
provision when necessary, while keeping inflation under control. This will ensure the effective 
functioning  of  transmission  channels  for  monetary  policy.  In  turn,  this  should  reinforce 
confidence in the financial markets and in the economy as a whole. The ultimate goal is to 
have  a  more  balanced  and  inclusive  economic  growth  and  development  that  will  sustain 
durable wealth creation.  
However, you and I know that improved frameworks and policies will be useless if we don’t 
have competent and dedicated professionals to implement them. Beyond policies therefore, 
what we should nurture in the career executive service is the drive for excellent leadership. 
This, to me, is the value of the CIRCLE Forum.  
Indeed,  this  is  what  we  need  in  our  government:  innovative  and  committed  leaders, 
trailblazers in their fields and effective in the way they do things, wherever they are. Given 
the  hard  times  that  confront  us,  our  challenge  is  to  find  opportunities  for  productive  and 
innovative activities. This is a call for active participation at a time when the economy needs 
us the most.  
Now, more than ever, we should be conscious that as civil servants, our actions or inaction 
affect the lives of millions of our countrymen the Filipinos we have pledged to serve to the 
best of our abilities.  
Concluding remarks  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  One  of  the  many  positive  traits  associated  with  us  as  a  people  is 
resiliency the Filipino can-do spirit. Thus, even as we look at 2009 as a serious challenge for 
our country, I am confident that as long as we remain united, we can ride out this crisis and 
emerge  stronger  and  better  prepared  to  benefit  from  the  opportunities  that  the  next  global 
economic upturn shall bring.  
As leaders and managers in our respective agencies, let us look for opportunities where we 
can improve our services and inspire confidence in the government and in our economy. Let 
us strive for constant change for the better. Together as one team in the civil service, let us 
work with vigor and dynamism as we face the challenges ahead confident that we can make 
a difference in making lives better for Filipinos.  
Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! Mabuhay po tayong lahat!  
Maraming salamat! 
BIS Review 9/2009 
 3
