Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Süddeutsche Zeitung 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,   
and Süddeutsche Zeitung, conducted by Ms Helga Einecke and Mr Martin Hesse, published
on 29 April 2009. 
 Mr. President, when will the end of the crisis finally be in sight? 
It  is  an  on-going  phenomenon.  That  is  why  we  have  to  remain  constantly  alert.  In  the 
summer  of  2007  we  experienced  unusual  events  in  the  money  market  and  were  the  first 
central bank to respond. Since mid-September 2008 we have been in a very serious crisis. 
The new, globalised financial world that has been created over the last 10 to 15 years is for 
the first time being put to the test. It is proving to be much more fragile and less resilient than 
it should be. 
Can this world ever be brought back to health? 
Yes, certainly. It calls for bold decisions today as well as credible exit strategies to improve 
confidence of our fellow citizens and of the corporate sector on our capacity to go back to 
medium – long term sustainable path. This is true for fiscal policies as well as for monetary 
policies.  And  we  have  to  implement  effectively,  efficiently  and  as  rapidly  as  possible  the 
decisions the decisions taken in the G-20 meetings.  
Who must accept responsibility for this crisis? 
I  don’t  see  any  value  in  looking  for  scapegoats.  For  instance,  some  may  make  banks  or 
rating  agencies  the  whipping  boys.  But  to  me  the  entire  financial  system  has  proved 
unsatisfactory.  It  must  be  reformed  from  the  bottom  up.  All  parts  and  parcels  of  global 
finance together have not delivered the stability that citizens rightly demand. Thus, significant 
improvements must be introduced everywhere. We owe this to the citizens and to the whole 
world. 
Have central banks not been able to prevent this crisis?  
In the past we have made no compromises on our objective of price stability. From 2003 to 
2004 we were publicly urged by the heads of the governments of three large countries to cut 
rates. We said no. In December 2005 ten out of 12 governments in the euro area called on 
us not to raise rates. We still did it and we have delivered  what our democracies and our 
fellow citizens had asked us to deliver, namely stable prices.  
How great is the political pressure? 
We are not subject to political interference or short-term thinking. The EU Treaty is crystal 
clear on this point and guarantees fully our independence.  
Why did central banks not see the crisis coming? 
In 2006 and 2007 I said – on behalf of the Governors of Central Banks meeting in Basel – 
that the quantity of risk and the price of risks were underestimated in global finance. Spreads 
were  very  low,  risk  premia  were  abnormally  meagre  and  volatility  was  very  modest.  This 
called for a market correction and we asked market participants to prepare for that market 
correction. 
You forecast the crisis?  
Not the extent and the depth of this global crisis. But if anyone saw warning signs and voiced 
them, it was the central banks. 
BIS Review 52/2009 
 1
How can the central banks now help to find a way out of the crisis? With rates near to 
zero, can you do any more than print money?  
The  present  circumstances  are  extraordinary.  Central  banks  and  governments  must 
therefore resort to extraordinary measures. To prevent the collapse of the financial system, 
we have provided the banks with an exceptional framework of liquidity providing. But citizens 
can have full confidence that we will guarantee stable prices over the medium and long term. 
The 329 million citizens of the euro area are very clever. They would not improve their level 
of  confidence  and  help  restarting  the  economy  if  they  had  the  sentiment  that  we  were 
forgetting our primary medium term goal.  
Do you think that governments will be able to quickly pay off the debts they are now 
accumulating?  
We call upon the governments to do that. We support strongly the European Commission in 
its  task  of  ensuring  the  respect  of  the  Stability  and  growth  pact  in  such  exceptional 
circumstances. 
Many people expect either a massive reduction in the value of money or tax increases 
– or both? Are the fears justified? 
We are here to preserve the value of the money of our fellow citizens. They can count on us. 
As  regards  governments’  fiscal  policies  they  must  be  designed  to  incorporate  the  exit 
strategies to reassure people that these policies are on a medium term sustainable path.  
Many  experts,  however,  are  worried  about  deflation,  i.e.  a  lasting  fall  in  prices.  Are 
there grounds for such fears? 
We  should  not  confuse  disinflation  and  deflation.  At  the  moment  I  am  speaking,  we  are 
experiencing  very  low  inflation  and  in  the  months  to  come  negative  inflation  due  to  the 
decrease of the prices of oil, energy and commodities, before it increases again at the end of 
the year. This is good for the purchasing power of households and is a correction of the high 
prices  of  the  past.  Deflation  means  steady  decrease  of  all  prices  and  negative  inflation 
expectations. This is not the case today. As you know our definition of price stability is below 
2% but close to 2%. And today’s medium term inflation expectations, at 1,9%, are in line with 
this definition.  
German companies are complaining of a credit crunch. Are they right?  
Everything  that  we  have  done  since  the  beginning  of  the crisis  has  been  aimed  at  putting 
banks in the position to lend money. In the euro area 70% of all financing is via banks. We 
are  doing  everything  we  can  so  that  banks  can  do  their  job.  In  addition,  the  governments 
have provided assistance for banks. It is the core function of banks to lend money and we 
are strongly encouraging them to do their job... 
Have  the  banks  given  you  any  sign  that  they  are  satisfied  with  your  liquidity 
provision?  
The banks are in different situations. Some are better off, others are worse off. But they are 
receiving an enormous amount of support. All the risks and credit that have been taken over 
by the state amount to almost one-quarter of GDP in the euro area. I would not call for even 
more  aid.  The  measures  launched  by  governments  now  have  to  be  implemented  as 
professionally and expeditiously as possible. 
Do we need a “bad bank” through which the state relieves banks of their risks? 
I  am  not  sure  about  that.  But  all  options  to  deal  with  impaired  assets  should  be  carefully 
examined. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2009
Does  the  euro  ensure  stability  in  the  financial  crisis  or  are  weak  countries  such  as 
Ireland and Greece proving to be a burden? 
The euro ensures a very high level of stability. The years 1992/93 demonstrate what would 
happen  in  a  crisis  situation  if  the  euro  did  not  exist.  At  that  time,  there  was  dramatic 
turbulence in the European exchange rate system. Every member of this community must of 
course make its own contribution, in particular by keeping government finances in order. 
Wouldn’t  it  then  be  a  good  idea  to  bring  the  euro  more  quickly  to  the  struggling 
countries in eastern Europe? 
Participating in the euro area means joining a community and deciding to share a common 
destiny.  No-one  can  simply  adopt  the  euro  because  they  are  having  a  period  of  major 
difficulties. It is an alliance forever. We are open, we started with 11 countries and are now at 
16. There are rules and criteria spelled out in the Treaty. Our position is “all the criteria of the 
Treaty, nothing but the criteria of the Treaty”. These rules guarantee that the euro is good for 
new members and good for old members. 
Wouldn’t  it  be  better  to  introduce  the  euro  in  Eastern  Europe  than  to  let  those 
countries go bankrupt?  
This is not about short-term thinking or to avoid temporarily  major difficulties. It is about a 
commitment for life. 
Can Eastern Europe survive the crisis on its own? 
Yes, of course, even if the situation is difficult. Eastern Europe isn’t alone and countries in 
this region are not at all in the same situation. First of all, the euro area economy is Eastern 
Europe’s  main  customer.  And  those  which  need  it  are  receiving  help  from  the  European 
Union, from the IMF and other institutions. 
The crisis will change the world. What role should Europe play in this changed world?  
Europe, which, as regards trade, is significantly more open to the rest of the world than US 
and  Japan,  will  continue  to  play  a  major  role  in  the  global  economy.  It  will  participate  as 
actively as possible in making the global economy and global finance as resilient as possible 
in  the  future.  And  it  will  continue  to  bring  at  the  global level  its own  sense  of  stability  and 
medium term perspective. 
BIS Review 52/2009 
 3
