Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: A single market for cards: the missing piece 
in the SEPA puzzle 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the EFMA Conference on Cards & Payments, Paris, 9 September 2009. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to participate in the EFMA conference once again. 
The market for cards reminds me of ancient Greece. Why? In ancient Greece there was a 
strong  military  state  called  Sparta  where  trade  was  forbidden  for  free  citizens  and  the 
currency  consisted  of  huge  iron  bars,  making  money  circulation  very  difficult,  creating  a 
barrier to transactions. Sparta concentrated on warfare and was outlived by a more creative 
people, namely the people of Athens. Since the time of Sparta trade has become a major 
factor for wealth creation. Trade requires open markets for payment services. 
7 years after the start of the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) project, we are not yet there 
– and with cards even less than with other transactions. Today, I would like to focus on card 
payments and share with you the expectations that we have in this field. But let me begin 
with the progress we have made so far in the SEPA process. 
SEPA progress 
The  SEPA  credit  transfer  (SCT)  scheme,  although  its  use  is  still  relatively  low,  is  growing 
every month. The forthcoming launch of the SEPA direct debit (SDD) scheme, the expected 
use of the SCT and SDD by public authorities and corporates and the definition of an end-
date are all elements that will further boost SCT migration. 
With respect to the SDD migration, I am pleased to see that developments moved in the right 
direction: 
1. 
the Payment Services Directive (PSD)1 will be transposed into national legislation by 
1 November 2009 providing a single harmonised legal framework across Europe; 
the updated Regulation on cross-border payments2 requires the SDD scheme to be 
reachable in full by November 2010; and 
the European Commission has provided the necessary long-term perspectives for the 
multilateral interchange fees (MIFs) for direct debits in March this year: the European 
Commission,  supported  by  the  ECB,3  has  clarified  that  there  is  no  reason  for  per-
transaction MIFs to remain in place at the national and at cross border level for either 
SEPA direct debits or national “legacy” direct debits after 31 October 2012. Although 
2. 
3. 
                                                 
1   Directive 2007/64/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  13 November  2007  on  payment 
services in the internal market amending Directives 97/7/EC, 2002/65/EC, 2005/60/EC and 2006/48/EC and 
repealing Directive 97/5/EC (OJ L 319, 5.12.2007, pp. 1-36). 
2   Regulation (EC) No 2560/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 December 2001 on cross-
border payments in euro (OJ L 344, 28.12.2001, pp. 13-16). 
3   Joint  statement  by  the  European  Commission  and  the  European  Central  Bank  clarifying  certain  principles 
underlying a future SEPA direct debit (SDD) business model, 24 March 2009. 
BIS Review 105/2009 
 1
this guidance falls short of the expectations of some national banking communities, 
we now have clarity in the market. 
I very much welcome, therefore, the subsequent decision of the European Payments Council 
(EPC) to launch the SDD scheme in November 2009. 
As regards the migration end-date for both SEPA credit transfers and SEPA direct debits, let 
me  emphasize  that  the  definition  of  an  ambitious  but  realistic  migration  end-date  is  a  key 
factor  to  provide  certainty,  to  speed  up  the  migration  process,  to  reduce  the  cost  of 
maintaining dual systems and to limit the “wait-and-see” attitude. Moreover, the possibility of 
setting  earlier  national  end-dates  will  ensure  that  migration  does  not  slow  down  in  certain 
countries. 
I would also like to say a few words on e-payments and m-payments, the “newcomers” in the 
SEPA world. An e-payment, is an internet banking payment, but has the additional feature 
that  the  web-merchant  receives  a  payment  confirmation  in  real  time.  An  m-payment  is 
initiated on a mobile phone and could be used for both proximity and remote transactions. 
SEPA provides a unique opportunity for a break-through regarding these e and m-payments, 
building on the basic SCT and SDD schemes, and on SEPA for cards. Linking up with the 
cards dossier, e-payments could be the answer to the security concerns many professionals 
and consumers have in the field of “card-not-present” transactions. 
In the domain of e and m-payments, banks will, of course, face fierce competition from other 
market  players.  Therefore,  I  see  the  risk  that  banks  may  lose  ground  in  this  field  if  not 
adapting  fast  enough  to  the  changing  technological  environment  and  to  the  changing 
payment  habits  of  the  younger  generation.  Therefore,  we  urgently  need  sufficient  co-
ordination and commitment at the European level for establishing competitive solutions for e 
and m-payments that at the same time ensure an appropriate security level. 
SEPA for cards 
Let me now turn to SEPA for cards, the main focus of my speech today. 
When being on business travel, I usually conduct my own little “taxi test”, trying to pay with a 
credit card for the taxi fare. The results – though the sample may statistically not be large 
enough – are disappointing. Even in Paris, London and Frankfurt, taxis still mainly rely on 
cash payments. Only Helsinki is an exception. 
This illustrates only one of the many obstacles and hurdles we still have to overcome in order 
to  provide  the  citizens  of  Europe  with  a  cashless  means  of  payment  that  can  be  used 
throughout the region in a harmonised manner. 
We need to overcome the current stagnation in the work underlying SEPA for cards. To bring 
the cards dossier forward, this requires to urgently tackle three important issues, namely the 
business  rules,  the  technical  standards,  and  finally  one  or  more  new  European  card 
schemes. I will review each of these elements, focusing in particular on the work that needs 
to be carried out. 
1) Let me start with business rules. The SEPA Cards Framework (SCF), the ECB’s “SEPA 
for Cards” report of November 2006 and the additional explanations4 provided by the EPC at 
the request of the Commission’s DG Competition set out the basic rules for SEPA for cards. 
However,  as  I  have  already  said  on  other  occasions,  the SCF  is  a  general  document  that 
requires further elaboration. 
                                                 
4   EPC, “Questions and Answers clarifying key aspects of the SEPA Cards Framework”, June 2008. 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2009
The EPC has started in depth work on the SCF. We at the ECB see this as an opportunity to 
provide  clarity  and  more  detailed  rules.  The  EPC  should  reflect  on  the  creation  of  a  card 
transaction  processing  framework  which  was  also  highlighted  in  the  6th  SEPA  Progress 
Report. 
However, not only the EPC needs to continue its work. Individual card schemes apply rules 
that function as barriers to competition and need to be removed. 
Let me give you some examples from a long list of issues: 
• 
the  charges  or  reporting  requirements  that  some  schemes  impose  on  issuers  and 
acquirers for transactions carried out with cards on which their brand is present even 
if their brand was not used; 
the  pre-setting  of  priority  at  terminals  regarding  the  brand  that  will  be  used  without 
giving the retailer and/or cardholder any choice; and 
the rule that in the case of cross-border acquiring, it is always the interchange fee of 
the country of the merchant that applies; 
  Therefore,  I  would  like  to  invite  the  EPC  and  the  individual  card  schemes  to  take  further 
action in the domain of business rules and to abolish practices that act as obstacles. 
2)  The  second  element  that  lays  the  foundations  for  SEPA  for  cards  are  the  technical 
standards (i.e. card and terminal specifications, applications, messages and protocols). The 
EPC has published the “SEPA Cards Standardisation Volume”, which is now available to the 
market for comments.  
Moreover,  various  market  initiatives  have  developed  or  are  developing  more  detailed 
standards. The EPC will need to adopt these detailed standards as to complement its own 
work in the field. This would be a guarantee for interoperability, security and market access. 
Without such detailed standards, I fear that technical fragmentation in Europe will remain in 
place or will even be re-established. Therefore, I believe that SEPA for cards will not be a 
realistic undertaking unless there are implementable standards. 
In  addition,  SEPA  for  cards  needs  a  certification  framework  that  will  ensure  trust,  an 
appropriate  level  of  security  for  cards  and  terminals,  and  “one-stop  shopping”  for 
manufacturers of terminals. 
On  top  of  this,  it  is  important  not  only  to  set  standards,  but  also  –  equally  so  –  to  control 
them! The EPC needs to decide on whether it should become a member of EMVCo and the 
PCI SSC. The ECB is of the opinion that a stake on the part of the EPC in these standards-
setting bodies would be a way for Europe to increase its coordinated influence in them. 
Therefore, the selection of standards, a certification framework and a decision on its future 
role  in  the  standards-setting  bodies  are  areas  in  which  the  EPC  needs  urgently  to  take 
action. 
3) In my view, yet another ingredient necessary for the success of SEPA for cards is a new 
European  card  scheme.  The  ECB  has  made  a  clear  request  to  the  European  banking 
industry for the creation of such a scheme. Joint research by De Nederlandsche Bank and 
the ECB5 has shown that a new European card scheme could provide a decisive impetus to 
solving  interoperability  and  overcoming  costly  fragmentation  in  the  European  market  for 
cards.  Consumers  and  merchants  in  the  card  payments  market  are  likely  to  benefit  most 
from SEPA if there is sufficient competition. 
                                                 
5   W. Bolt  and  H. Schmiedel:  “SEPA,  efficiency  and  payment  card  competition”,  Working  Paper  series,  ECB, 
forthcoming. 
BIS Review 105/2009 
 3
for  replacing 
So far, a critical factor in the emergence of an additional European card scheme has been 
the  uncertainty  surrounding  interchange  fees.  Clarity  has  now  been  provided  through  the 
“tourist test” or “equivalence test” methodology. The market would feel more comfortable with 
a list of “what is allowed” and “what is not allowed” regarding interchange fees. However, we 
need to accept that DG Competition’s mandate is to act on specific cases and not to define 
the rules. 
I  am  aware  of  the  uncertainty  within  the  banking  community  on  whether  the  “equivalence 
test”  will  from  now  on  be  the  guiding  methodology  or  whether  it  will  just  be  an  interim 
solution. Of course, I cannot answer this for the Commission, but the “equivalence test” is, in 
my view, one of the possible methodologies, and it has the advantage that the competition 
authority  seems  to  be  comfortable  with  it.  This  does  not  mean,  however,  that  market 
participants cannot conceive other models and methodologies – but they will clearly have to 
be in line with competition rules. 
Allow me a final reflection on interchange fees: one can certainly find alternative ways and 
arrangements 
into  complicated 
undertakings and setting up new structures, a banker should not disregard the possibility of 
lower  interchange  fees  being  translated  into  higher  earnings  through  the  volume  effect. 
Recent research work focusing on the Spanish market in the period from 1997 to 2007 found 
evidence that banks were even better off after the intervention of authorities on interchange 
fees  because  the  increase  in  the  volume  of  transactions  offset  the  decrease  in  per-
transaction revenue.6
The  market  for  card  schemes  is  in  a  decisive  stage  of  development.  We  are  very  much 
concerned about the possibility that small national schemes such as Dutch, Finnish and Irish 
schemes will be replaced by the international schemes. I would invite the banks behind these 
schemes  to  also  consider  the  possibility  of  joining  one  of  the  new  European  card  scheme 
initiatives. Let me clarify once more that Europe needs Visa and MasterCard, since they are 
currently  the  only  schemes  that  offer  a  pan-European  card  payment  solution.  But  we  also 
need sufficient competition. 
For the moment, there are three new card scheme initiatives, each with their own strengths 
and weaknesses. What is now needed is that the parties involved in the various initiatives 
clarify their commitment and go ahead. Whether all independently or with joined forces, this 
is of course up to the market. But we need to get down to business now.  
the  MIFs.  However,  before  entering 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, encouraging work is taking place in the cards area. However, efforts have to 
be intensified. 
Coming back to the payment habits of ancient Sparta, I would like to note that cards have the 
potential to become a serious alternative for the huge iron bars of our times, which is cash! 
However, this can only be done with harmonised business rules, standards and one or more 
additional card schemes in place at the European level. 
To get there, we need leadership and vision. Regarding the rules and standards for the cards 
business, I call upon the EPC to show this leadership and vision. Regarding the additional 
European  card  scheme,  I  call  upon  the  various  parties  to  the  individual  initiatives  to  show 
leadership and vision, to set up additional European card schemes. 
                                                 
6   S. Carbó Valverde, S. Chakravorti and F. Rodriguez Fernandez: “The Costs and Benefits of Interchange Fee 
Regulation: An Empirical Investigation”, paper presented at a joint conference organised by the ECB and De 
Nederlandsche Bank, 25/26 May 2009. 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2009
Let  me  close  by  emphasising  that  harmonised  European  card  schemes  are  not  only  the 
piece still missing in the SEPA puzzle, but it would also be a crucial additional piece of the 
puzzle  necessary  for  completing  the  European  vision  of  a  single  market  in  general.  Our 
currency,  the  euro,  has  made  an  important  contribution.  But  the  area  of  card  payments 
shows that the single market is still a case of work in progress, and that a lot more can be 
done – in the long term interest of the customer and the industry. 
BIS Review 105/2009 
 5
