José Manuel González-Páramo: Financial market failures and public 
policies – a central banker’s perspective on the global financial crisis 
Closing remarks by Mr José Manuel González-Páramo, Member of the Executive Board of 
the European Central Bank, at the XVI Meeting of Public Economics, Granada, 6 February 
2009. 
 Introduction1
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to participate in the XVI Meeting of Public Economics here in 
Granada,  and  to  be  able  to  share  with  you  some  analyses  and  reflections  on  the  current 
financial crisis and the role of public policies in responding to it. 
The subject of my speech today deserves some explanation. We are currently experiencing 
one of the deepest and most complex crises witnessed by the world in many decades. At the 
root  of  the  crisis,  we  find  the  combined  effect  of  a  number  of  market  failures  as  well  as 
regulatory failures that explain how the turmoil stemming from a relatively small segment of 
the US mortgage market has translated into a global crisis posing a number of challenges for 
our economies and societies. The notions of market and regulatory failures are at the heart 
of the Public Economics field.  
The  current  crisis  also  represents  an  extraordinary  example  of  how  stabilising  the 
international  and  domestic  financial  systems  and  invigorating  them  in  the  medium-term 
required  and  will  continue  to  demand  cooperation  among  different  public  policies,  ranging 
from macroeconomic to liquidity-related, regulatory and supervisory policies. 
I  will  structure  my  intervention  in  four  parts.  I  will  devote  the  first  part  to  analysing  the 
underlying causes that have contributed to the crisis. Later, I will broadly describe the policy 
responses  given  by  the  major  players  in  the  global  economy  from  four  different  angles: 
liquidity policy, monetary policy, fiscal policy and regulatory reform. In the third section, I will 
discuss  in  depth  the  actions  undertaken  by  central  banks  –  with  especial  focus  on  the 
policies deployed by the ECB and the Eurosystem – and their rationale, as well as some of 
the challenges ahead. Finally, in the last part, I would like to make some considerations on 
the potential new environment for policy makers, and in particular for central banks, that may 
be a key legacy of the current crisis. 
Section 1. Market failures in the financial system 
Highlights of the crisis 
The start of the financial crisis was triggered in the summer of 2007 by the realisation that the 
risks associated with the US market for sub-prime mortgages were not properly reflected in 
the  price  of  related  instruments,  particularly  mortgage-backed  securities.  A  market-wide 
reassessment  of  financial  risk  led  to  sharp  increases  in  premia  and  spreads  across  all 
segments of the credit market. The rapidly falling market values of credit instruments hit both 
the net worth and the profitability of the banking system. 
                                                 
1  
I am grateful to R. Adalid, M. Blix, A. Consolo, M. Hoerova, K. Nikolaou, R. Peronaci, F. Pires, E. Rentzou, D. 
Rodríguez Palenzuela and S. Sauer, for inputs into this speech. 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 1
Tensions in the markets for credit instruments spread to the money markets in early August 
2007,  giving  rise  to  concerns  about  systemic  disruptions.  Indeed,  inter-bank  trading  came 
almost  to  a  halt  on  9  August  as  a  result  of  the  combination  of:  (1)  exceptionally  high 
uncertainty  about  potential  direct  exposures  of  banks  to  “toxic”  assets;  and  (2)  increased 
demand  for  liquidity  to  honour  credit  lines  committed  to  so-called  conduits  (i.e.  bank-
sponsored off-balance sheet investment vehicles). 
Lack  of  transparency  about  the  extent  of  exposures  compounded  uncertainty,  preventing 
market participants from distinguishing good banks from bad banks, leading to a decline in 
trading  in  a  real-life  version  of  Akerlof’s  “lemon  market”.  In  addition,  conduits  had  become 
over  time  increasingly  reliant  on  the  issuance  of  short-term  paper  for  the  funding  of  their 
securitisation  activities.  However,  with  the  outbreak  of  the  turmoil,  they  became  unable  to 
roll-over  short-term  financing  in  the  asset  backed  commercial  paper  market  amidst  great 
uncertainty  about  asset  valuations.  Against  this  background,  money  market  interest  rates 
and  spreads  rose  sharply,  while  liquidity  dried  up,  prompting  central  banks  to  intervene 
through large-scale liquidity injections.2
As the year 2007 went on, the fall in US housing prices accelerated against the backdrop of 
the  rising  number  of  foreclosures  and  the  slowdown  of  the  US  economy.  This  led  to  an 
increase in the number of defaults in mortgages, not only for sub-prime mortgages but also 
for  the  prime  segment  of  the  markets.  Thus,  an  increasing  number  of  securities  linked  to 
mortgages turned out to be much riskier than previously thought. 
All  major  central  banks around  the  globe  continued  to  address  market  disruptions  through 
significant liquidity injections. However, the losses in several important markets for financial 
assets continued to mount and in March 2008, the Fed had to engineer the rescue of Bear 
Stearns, then the fifth largest U.S. investment bank, by JP Morgan and grant direct access to 
its financing to the other main investment banks for the first time since the Great Depression. 
The financial turmoil deepened in the weeks following the collapse of the Lehman Brothers in 
mid-September 2008, more than a year after the onset of the crisis, eventually developing 
into  a  full-blown  crisis  with  adverse  spillovers  into  real  activity.  Within  two  weeks  from  the 
bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, mounting losses from the sub-prime mortgage markets led 
to  both  the  US  largest  insurance  company  (AIG)  and  largest  savings  and  loan  institution 
(Washington  Mutual)  being  seized  by  the  government.  Widespread  concerns  about  the 
solvency  of  financial  institutions  ensued  and  spread  to  Europe,  where  government 
assistance was needed to avert the collapse of several institutions. 
Underlying causes 
It  goes  without  saying  that,  determining  the  appropriate  policy  responses  to  the  crisis 
requires a thorough understanding of its underlying causes. For this purpose, it is important 
to distinguish the macroeconomic factors from those of a microeconomic nature. 
As for the macroeconomic factors, the roots of the current crisis may go as far back as the 
late  1990s,  when  global  imbalances  in  current  account  positions  and  capital  flows  across 
major economies, particularly in the US, started to build up. At the time, several emerging 
economies  enhanced  fiscal  discipline  and  recorded  a  collapse  in  investment,  which 
contributed,  alongside  other  factors,  to  substantial  surpluses  in  savings-investment  and 
current account balances. In the industrialised countries, corporate investment fell after the 
collapse  of  the  IT  bubble  in  2001.  Meanwhile,  in  the  US  private  saving  was  falling,  while 
domestic  demand  was  expanding.  Excess  savings  in  the  world  outside  the  US  –  the  so-
                                                 
2   See  CGFS  (2008)  and  Cassola  et  al.  (2008)  for  further  details.  The  effects  of  asymmetric  information  and 
counterparty credit risk on the structure of the interbank market and various policy responses are analysed in 
Heider et al. (2008). 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2009
called “savings glut” – together with accommodative global monetary conditions led to ample 
liquidity in the world financial markets and low interest rates across the maturity spectrum. 
Turning to more micro factors, financial innovation allowed the repackaging of mortgages – 
traditionally, illiquid assets originated and held by local banks – into higher-yielding complex 
securities with triple-A rating. Mortgage backed securities or more complex products based 
on those securities were in high demand by banks and investors around the world who were 
“searching  for  yield”  in  an  environment  characterised  by  low  interest  rates.  The  situation 
endured,  as  sustained  appetite  of  foreign  investors  for  debt  securities  issued  by  the  US 
government and government-sponsored agencies as well as by the corporate sector allowed 
the country to smoothly finance its current account deficit. 
The “search for yield” fostered the demand for more complex forms of securitisation, which 
led to the creation of instruments that entailed risks that were difficult to assess and price. No 
active secondary market existed for many of the new instruments, and the associated opacity 
of the credit risk distribution made it difficult to keep track of the exposures. 
A key question is why investors did not look more closely into the risks associated with the 
securities  purchased,  thereby  playing  a  disciplining  role  in  the  securitisation  process.  The 
answer  leads  us  to  an  important  microeconomic  factor  behind  the  current  crisis:  the 
existence  of  agency  problems  associated  with  the  implementation  of  the  “originate  and 
distribute”  model.  This  model  –  that  became  prevalent  among  large  banks  over  the  past 
twenty years – was designed to deliver a more efficient allocation and distribution of risks in 
the economy. 
However,  because  of  information  asymmetries  and  frictions,  the  “originate  and  distribute” 
model in practice gave rise to inefficient outcomes and distorted the behaviour of the various 
parties involved in the securitisation process: investors, rating agencies, intermediaries, and 
originators.3 The main reason for this is that the goals of the parties involved differed, and in 
some instances may even have been in conflict. Besides, the different categories did not fully 
internalise the consequences of their individual actions in the overall process, and therefore 
did not have the right incentives to share information efficiently. 
In  particular,  investors  became  over-reliant  on  the  ratings  provided  by  the  rating  agencies 
and often did not properly conduct their due diligence. The fact that regulators gave ratings a 
prominent  role  in  the  risk  assessment  framework  might  have  indirectly  affected  investors’ 
incentives. Investors often ignored the fact that rating agencies’ risk measures offer only a 
partial  account  of  the  risks  embedded  in  the  securities,  as  they  focus  primarily  on  the 
expected loss and do not take into account the tail of the loss distribution. In addition, they do 
not take liquidity risks into account. 
Moreover, rating agencies were themselves subject to potential conflicts of interest that may 
have diminished their incentives to undertake timely downgrades of structured products and 
provide  adequate  information  to  investors  regarding  the  analysis  underlying  the  rating 
decision.  In  fact,  because  ratings  are  paid  for  by  issuers,  rating  agencies  may  have 
incentives to expand coverage to products whose risk assessment is difficult and, potentially 
unreliable,  in  order  to  maximise  their  revenues.  Besides,  agencies  may  also  provide 
commercial advice to the issuers of those securities that are then requested to rate. 
As regards originators of loans, their incentives to screen and monitor borrowers may have 
been reduced under the “originate and distribute” model, once they sold the originated assets 
to  intermediaries  that subsequently  took  care of  repackaging  them  into  securities.  Instead, 
the  loan  originators  may  have  concentrated  on  expanding  volumes  of  loans  originated  to 
boost  their  profits.  The  diminished  incentive  to  screen  and  monitor  borrowers  implies  that 
investors may have ultimately acquired assets of relatively lower quality and performance. 
                                                 
3   See Ashcraft and Schuermann, (2008), Rajan (2005) and Sufi and Mian (2008). 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 3
This is compounded by the fact that the intermediaries, who purchased assets and bundled 
them into pools prior to securitising them, focused on maximising revenues stemming from 
the servicing fees charged to investors, without necessarily delivering the risk/return balance 
desired by investors. 
More  in  general,  remuneration  schemes  based  on  rewarding  short-term  profits  tended  to 
predominate throughout the financial system, often to the detriment of the longer-term health 
of  the  financial  institution.  For  example,  compensation  structures  at  the  top  management 
level  are  based  on  the comparison  of  latest  results  vis-à-vis  those  of  their  peers  and  thus 
tend 
to  encourage  short-termism  and  risk-taking  by  managers  keen  on  avoiding 
underperformance.  The  pressure  to  deliver  quick  profits  makes  it  more  difficult  for  risk 
management departments, that are often viewed as “party spoilers”, to curb excessive risk 
taking in their financial institutions. The job of risk managers is also complicated by the fact 
that  certain  risks  are  hard  to  quantify  and  measure  (for  example,  tail  risks)  and  that 
commonly agreed valuation models are missing for more complex securities. 
These  factors  magnified  the  more  general  “pro-cyclical”  tendencies  of  financial  systems, 
which also stemmed from a host of other factors, such as accounting standards (e.g. mark-
to-market accounting) and the dependence of collateral values and leverage ratios on asset 
prices. 
These structural incentive problems have not been fully taken into account by regulators and 
supervisors. The Basel I framework that was prevalent at the time of the turmoil’s outbreak 
(and still is) underestimated banks’ exposures by not capturing the bulk of the risks related to 
off-balance-sheet vehicles as well as liquidity and reputational risks. 
Supervisors  and  regulators  should  also  have  paid  more  attention  to  the  challenge  of 
regulatory  arbitrage.  In  fact,  some  financial  innovation  processes  were  triggered  –  among 
other considerations – in order to circumvent  the existing regulation, particularly on capital 
requirements. This aspect is even more pressing in the current environment, with large and 
complex  financial  institutions  operating  across  borders,  under  different  national  regulatory 
and supervisory regimes. As I will mention below, an improved and closer cooperation and 
information  sharing  among  central  banks,  regulators  and  supervisors  at  both  national  and 
international levels seems, therefore, essential. 
To  sum  up,  we  have  seen  that  the  causes  of  the  current  crisis  can  be  traced  back  to 
macroeconomic imbalances and, at the micro level, to incentive problems and that regulatory 
and supervisory deficiencies have also played a role. Nonetheless, the crisis has once again 
shown  the  importance  of  system-wide  externalities  in  propagating  and  exacerbating  the 
crisis.  Problems  of  individual  banks  may  have  wide  and  serious  implications  for  both  the 
financial system itself and the economy as a whole. Overall, banks must ultimately respond 
to losses on risky assets by raising new capital. New equity, however, may be difficult to be 
issued in sufficient amount in the short run. As a consequence, banks’ first responses have 
been both asset “fire sales” and the scaling back of their lending activity. 
These two effects affect the banking system widely. Widespread liquidation of assets in the 
current  market  conditions  pushes  prices  down.  Through  mark-to-market  accounting, 
declining  asset  prices  lead  to  unwarranted  contagion  to  other  banks  with  similar  assets. 
Those  banks  may  be  forced  to  adjust  their  positions  by  selling  assets  themselves,  thus 
leading to further asset price declines. Similarly, when deciding to cut lending, banks may not 
internalise  the  repercussions  of  their  decisions  on  the  real  economy  in  terms  of  foregone 
profitable investment opportunities, output and employment. 
Policy responses 
2. 
Let me now turn to the public policy responses to the crisis, with a special emphasis on the 
common elements of the responses of the major players in the global economy. 
4 
 BIS Review 13/2009
Liquidity policies 
Central banks have established the first line of policy defence against the adverse dynamics 
set  in  motion  by  the  financial  crisis,  particularly  through  the  massive  provision  of  liquidity. 
Although the specific responses have varied across central banks, since 9 August 2007 the 
common  objective  of  these  institutions  has  been  to  address  the  global  liquidity  squeeze, 
particularly  in  order  to  mitigate  as  much  as  possible  the  risk  that  protracted  liquidity 
shortages turned into solvency problems. 
Central bank liquidity policies have not been limited to the shortest end of the money market 
rates, but have in some cases also sought to ease pressures in term funding markets. This 
has been pursued through an increased supply of longer-term funds. Access to central bank 
funding has also been facilitated by enlarging the list of collateral eligible for the central bank 
lending  operations  and  by  widening  the  range  of  counterparties  with  access  to  these 
operations. In some countries, central banks have also extended lending to non-depositary 
banks  and  to  non-bank  financial  institutions.  Additionally,  some  central  banks  have 
established  securities  lending  facilities  to  improve  the  functioning  of  their  interbank  repo 
markets. 
An important characteristic of the global liquidity policy response to the financial crisis has 
been the strengthened cooperation among central banks. Cooperation has taken place first 
through  enhanced  information  sharing  and  collective  monitoring  of  market  developments, 
and  later  on  by  taking  coordinate  steps  to  ease  liquidity  tensions  in  the  global  money 
markets. 
The first initiative in this direction was the agreement in December 2007 between the ECB 
and  the  US  Federal  Reserve  to  grant  loans  in  US  dollars  to  euro  area  counterparties  in 
connection with the Fed’s Term Auction Facility (TAF). The US dollar-denominated loans to 
euro area banks were financed through a currency arrangement (swap line) between the two 
central banks. 
The US dollar liquidity-providing bilateral agreements between the Fed and the ECB (as well 
as between the Fed and a growing number of central banks4) under the TAF programme – 
that has become a symbol of the determination of the central banking community to address 
global  liquidity  tensions  –  has  been  significantly  expanded  over  time  in  terms  of  scale.  In 
addition, the Eurosystem has signed agreements with the central banks of several European 
countries in order to improve the provision of euro liquidity to their banking sectors. 
Finally, in a fortunately limited number of cases, central banks have assisted their domestic 
governments in providing emergency liquidity assistance to institutions under stress. 
Monetary policies 
Let me now quickly review the common elements of the measures taken by central banks 
from  the  perspective  of  monetary  policy.  The  distinction  between  (1)  liquidity  management 
and (2) monetary policy is very important in the case of the ECB, since its strategy clearly 
separates the role of monetary policy in determining the optimal interest rate level required to 
maintain price stability from the role of its operational framework in ensuring that interest rate 
decisions  are  transmitted  to  the  financial  markets  and  the  real  economy  in  an  effective 
manner. 
Although at different paces, reflecting differences in domestic macroeconomic conditions and 
specific monetary policy objectives, from the start of the crisis the major central banks around 
the  world  have  also  adjusted  their  respective  monetary  policy  stances  to  reflect  the 
diminished risks for price stability. By doing so, these institutions have clearly signalled the 
                                                 
4   14 with the Fed. 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 5
strong  commitment  of  the  international  central  banking  community  to  anchor  inflation 
expectations  and  addressing  the  macroeconomic  background  and  the  implications  of  the 
financial crisis. 
Fiscal policies 
On the fiscal side, governments around the world have announced a number of initiatives in 
order  to  tackle  the  effects  of  the  financial  crisis.  The  nature  of  the  fiscal  measures  has 
evolved with the development of the financial crisis and its propagation to the real economy. 
Government  interventions  initially  focused  on  addressing  problems  at  single  institutions, 
mainly through rescues and provisions of guarantees. Some governments also announced 
measures to provide relief to struggling homeowners, and attempted to stimulate domestic 
economies, particularly in those countries where the slowdown in housing markets was more 
significant.  
Next, as the financial turmoil intensified and the need to support the entire financial system 
became  clearer,  the  fiscal  response  in  Europe  and  in  the  US  evolved  into  more 
comprehensive  plans  designed  to  support  entire  domestic  financial  industries  rather  than 
individual institutions. Such plans typically comprised capital injections in exchange for equity 
and the more systematic provision of state guarantees. Finally, stimulus packages aimed at 
fostering aggregate demand have also been announced, as the adverse effects of the crisis 
have worked through the real economy. 
In parallel to the increase in the scope of fiscal measures, there has also been a rise in the 
degree of international policy coordination, reflecting the global nature and amplitude of the 
current  crisis.  The  G-7  and  G-20  summits  have  represented  major  steps  for  policy 
coordination  at  the  global  level,  while  at  the  EU  level  international  cooperation  has  been 
shaped  by  the  exceptional  procedures  from  the  European  Commission  to  coordinate  and 
accelerate national rescue plans, as well as by the European Economic Recovery Plan. This 
plan provides a common framework for the efforts made by Member States and by the EU, 
with  a  view  to  ensuring  consistency  and  maximising  their  effectiveness,  always  in 
accordance with and within the framework of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
In addition, other types of fiscal measures are currently at work. As the economic crisis has 
deepened,  a  significant  contribution  to  the  fiscal  adjustment  may  come  from  the  so-called 
automatic  stabilisers.  These  are  programmes  linked  to  social  security  and  unemployment 
benefits,  which  are  generally  more  comprehensive  in  Europe  than  in  the  US.  As  they  act 
immediately and are proportionate to the depth of the business cycle, automatic stabilisers 
can be more timely and targeted than discretionary policies, and do not suffer from political 
economy risks that can undermine the effectiveness of the discretionary measures. 
The  volume  of  public  resources  made  available  or  committed  by  governments  has  no 
precedent. In this context, fiscal authorities should not forget that sustainability of the public 
finances is a pre-condition for the effectiveness of the extraordinary measures. Some of the 
fiscal  stimulus  packages  that  have  been  adopted  recently  in  Europe  have  raised  some 
concerns, as some of them have been adopted in countries where the fiscal situation already 
calls for particular prudence regarding its sustainability. Governments around the world, but 
especially in countries where the presence of automatic stabilisers is significantly important, 
should  take  the  prospective  burden  of  such  stabilisers  into  account  when  designing  their 
overall fiscal plans. 
Regulatory reforms 
Regarding regulatory reforms, the competent authorities at both the European and the global 
level have been actively involved in the development of measures aimed at restoring market 
confidence and enhancing the stability of the financial system. 
6 
 BIS Review 13/2009
At  the  European  level,  policy  action  has  been  guided  by  the  ECOFIN  Roadmap  which 
identified four priority areas: (1) enhancing transparency, (2) improving valuation standards, 
(3) reinforcing prudential rules and risk management, and (4) improving market functioning. 
These priorities have been mirrored at the international level by the Financial Stability Forum 
in  its  proposal  of  April  2008  (consisting  of  a  set  of  67  recommendations),  subsequently 
endorsed by the G7 ministers and central bank governors). To recall, the Financial Stability 
Forum  brings  together  central  banks,  banking  supervisors  and  finance  ministries  from  the 
largest  world  economies.  The  Forum  also  involves  international  institutions  such  as  the 
International Monetary Fund and the Bank for International Settlements. In recognition of the 
global dimension of the current financial crisis, the G20 Finance Ministers and central bank 
Governors’ acknowledged in their November meeting last year, the need to expand the FSF 
membership to include also key emerging market economies. This is expected to contribute 
to  further  enhancing  the  FSF’s  ability  to  coordinate  global  efforts  towards  a  more  resilient 
financial system. 
Section 3. What did central banks do? Why did they do it? 
Central  banks  have  acted  on  three  different  fronts  to  tackle  the  crisis,  namely  liquidity 
management, monetary policy and financial stability. Over the next few minutes I would like 
to share with you some reflections on the policy actions that central banks in general – and 
the ECB in particular – have undertaken and on the challenges that we are likely to face in 
each of these three areas. 
Liquidity policy 
Before  discussing  liquidity  management  interventions,  it  is  useful  to  recall  that  the  ECB’s 
measures  to  provide  support  to  money  markets  have  been  based  on  the  fundamental 
principle of the separation between monetary policy decisions and their implementation. 
This principle is important in order to reduce the risk that economic agents may mistakenly 
interpret  volatility 
temporary  and 
unpredictable  fluctuations  in  liquidity  conditions,  as  containing  information  on  the  desired 
monetary policy stance (which is instead given by the rate applied to the main refinancing 
operations).  The  separation  principle  has  proved  to  be  particularly  effective  during  the 
financial market turmoil and at times of high volatility in the short-term money market rates. 
in  short-term  money  market  rates, 
triggered  by 
(i)   Addressing liquidity risk through increased intermediation 
Let  me  now  try  to  explain  in  somewhat  greater  detail  the  rationale  behind  the  operational 
measures of the Eurosystem during the financial market turmoil. 
From the start of the turmoil until the collapse of Lehman Brothers in mid-September 2008, 
the ECB engaged in active liquidity management by adjusting the temporal and quantitative 
distribution  of  its  liquidity  provision  within  the  maintenance  period.5  Besides,  from  October 
2007, the Eurosystem has engaged in increasing international cooperation to ease tensions 
in  global  money  markets,  particularly  by  facilitating  the  access  of  euro  area  banks  to  US 
dollar liquidity. 
Through the adjustments to its euro operations, the ECB responded to the perceived change 
in  the  pattern  of  banks’  demand  for  liquidity  over  the  maintenance  period,  in  particular 
                                                 
5   For illustration, one may adapt the Poole 1970-paradigm to liquidity management during a financial turmoil: 
when  the  demand  for  liquidity  becomes  unstable  (different  demand  pattern),  the  central  bank  focuses  on 
stabilising  interest  rates  directly,  rather  than  stabilising  interest  rates  by  managing  the  quantity  (“excess” 
allotments above benchmark). 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 7
responding to the increasing evidence that interest rates were no longer necessarily linked to 
liquidity conditions on the last day of the maintenance period (as postulated by the so-called 
“martingale hypothesis”). Indeed, unlike in normal times, banks seemed to no longer regard 
reserve  holdings  on  different  days  of  the  maintenance  period  as  substitutes.  By  contrast, 
there  was  evidence  of  the  emergence  of  precautionary  demand  for  liquidity  early  in  the 
maintenance period. 
As mentioned earlier, the shift in the time pattern for liquidity demand was related not only to 
the fact that counterparties were reluctant to lend to each other on unsecured terms, but also 
to their fear of being confronted with unexpected liquidity shocks. As a consequence, banks 
seemed  to  prefer  reducing  their  so-called  “liquidity  gaps”,  also  by  fulfilling  their  reserve 
requirements relatively early in the maintenance period. 
The rise in precautionary demand implied a pricing of liquidity that was inconsistent with the 
martingale hypothesis, which prompted the ECB to bringing its supply of liquidity forward in 
the maintenance period – i.e. to “ frontload” – in order to achieve the same level of short term 
interest rates as before. Concretely, the ECB accommodated banks’ preference for the front-
loading of reserves by systematically allotting more than the so-called “benchmark” amount 
in  its  weekly  main  refinancing  operations.  The  allotments  above  the  benchmark  were 
reduced in the course of the maintenance period so that the average supply of liquidity over 
the entire maintenance period remained unchanged.6
In  the  same  vein,  the  ECB  increased  the  amount  of  refinancing  provided  via  longer-term 
refinancing operations, with a view to reduce the liquidity gaps of the banking system and to 
smooth  conditions  in  the  term  money  market.  It  correspondingly  reduced  the  amounts 
allotted  at  the  weekly  main  refinancing  operations  so  that  the  total  amount  of  outstanding 
liquidity supply remained unchanged. 
Indeed, during the early phases of the turmoil, the Eurosystem aimed at keeping the overall 
level of euro refinancing provided to the banking sector at levels close to those prevailing just 
before the turmoil, in line with its longstanding policy of providing the banking system only 
with the amount of liquidity needed to smoothly fulfil its aggregate liquidity deficit over each 
maintenance  period.  The  Eurosystem’s  intermediation  role  in  support  of  the  affected 
segments  of  the  euro  money  market  was  therefore  mainly  achieved  by  adjusting  the 
modalities of the liquidity supply operations. 
Following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  last  year,  the  financial  market 
turmoil entered a more intense and disruptive phase, in which the money market became to 
a  large  extent  dysfunctional.  In  response  to  the  deterioration  of  market  conditions,  the 
Eurosystem stepped up its temporary intermediation activity to ensure that the dysfunctions 
of  the  money  market  did  not  drive  solvent  banks  out  of  business.  Out  of  the  various 
measures  implemented,  perhaps  the  most  important  was  the  switch  to  fixed-rate  tender 
procedures with full allotment in all refinancing operations – not only euro credit operations 
with  maturities  of  1  week  up  to  6  months,  but  also  the  ECB’s  US  dollar  operations  with 
maturities from 1 week to 3 months – against a temporarily enlarged set of collateral. 
In  practice,  these  measures  imply  that  the  ECB’s  counterparties  –  which  represent  a  very 
large number of euro area credit institutions – can now borrow as much euro and US dollar 
liquidity as they wish, both at the weekly and at some key term maturities, against a larger 
than usual set of eligible assets. As a result, the amount of euro refinancing provided by the 
Eurosystem in collateralised dollar operations in euro and US dollar is currently close to EUR 
900 billion. 
                                                 
6  
In  order  to  keep  the  average  supply  of  liquidity  over  the  entire  maintenance  period  unchanged  the  ECB 
conducted liquidity-absorbing fine tuning operations on the last day of the maintenance period. 
8 
 BIS Review 13/2009
Overall,  the  ECB’s  liquidity  measures  during  the  more  recent  phase  of  the  turmoil  have 
focussed on addressing liquidity shortfalls in the interbank market, but have not (and could 
not) address the problem of heightened counterparty credit-risk aversion. The situation in the 
euro money market is still far from normal, being still significantly affected by elevated level 
of risk aversion and information asymmetry. 
Reactivating the money market 
(ii)  
The Eurosystem has moved from the situation before the start of the turmoil, in which it did 
not  provide  more  refinancing  to  the  banking  system  than  was  needed  to  satisfy  the 
aggregate liquidity needs arising from autonomous factors and reserve requirements, to the 
present situation in which it effectively intermediates liquidity flows among individual banks. 
Therefore,  the  clearing  of  intra-bank  liquidity  flows  has  to  a  large  extent  moved  from  the 
dysfunctional  money  market  to  the  Eurosystem’s  balance  sheet.  Reflecting  the  increased 
role played in financial intermediation, the Eurosystem’s consolidated balance sheet (weekly 
financial statement) has increased by around 60% since the start of the turmoil.7
Taking  up  a  significant  intermediation  role  to  guarantee  the  orderly  functioning  of  our 
economy was certainly essential in the wake of the collapse of Lehman Brothers, when an 
unprecedented  deterioration  in  the  degree  of  public  confidence  in  the  banking  sectors  of 
most  developed  economies  seemed  to  undermine  in  a  fundamental  manner  the  ability  of 
banks to perform their institutional financial intermediation function. It should not be forgotten 
that, while the euro area financial landscape has significantly changed in recent decades as 
a result of a number of structural developments (including the introduction of the euro), it is 
still  predominantly  “bank-based”.  As  a  result,  dysfunctions  of  the  banking  system  have  a 
relatively larger potential to cause disruptions to the economy in the euro area than in other 
regions of the world. 
Of course, taking up an extensive intermediation role is not acceptable in the long-term for a 
market-oriented  economy  like  the  euro  area.  The  increased  intermediation  role  of  the 
Eurosystem  is  only  a  temporary  answer  to  the  dysfunction  of  money  markets  and  is  now 
without potential disadvantages, including disincentives for banks to resume normal trading 
activity  and  also  potentially  increased  financial  risks  for  the  Eurosystem  (which  are 
nevertheless mitigated through adequate risk control measures). 
Thus,  while  the  Eurosystem  is  determined  to  continue  supporting  the  banking  system 
through  its  enhanced  liquidity  policy  for  as  long  as  needed,  it  also  looks  forward  to  the 
reactivation  of  inter-bank  lending  and  to  banks  resuming  their  traditional  intermediation 
activity.  Indeed,  an  exit  strategy  from  the  exceptional  temporary  measures  undertaken  in 
support of the banking sector will be considered in conjunction with the progressive restoring 
of normal conditions in money markets. 
In  the  meantime,  banks  must  show  willingness  to  re-establish  credit  lines  and  to  de-
stigmatise interbank borrowing. In this regard, while it is clear that the financial market turmoil 
must necessarily imply an adjustment in banks’ risk management, it seems to me that the 
current very conservative behaviour of individual banks, characterised by a strong reduction 
in  credit  lines  and  little  appetite  to  actually  assess  and  price  credit  risk,  even  at  the  very 
shortest  segments  of  the  money  market,  is  not  in  the  long-term  interest  of  the  banking 
system. 
Extending facilities to non-banks  
(iii)  
Financial intermediation in the euro area has traditionally been to a large extent conducted 
via the banking system, rather than via capital markets (unlike in the US and other Anglo-
                                                 
7   From EUR 1 546 billion at end-July 2007 to EUR 2 500 billion at end-January 2009. 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 9
Saxon countries). The difference in relative importance of the banking systems and capital 
markets  may  explain  to  a  large  extent  why,  in  the  course  of  the  current  crisis,  the 
Eurosystem’s  efforts  have  focused  on  providing  support  to  traditional  banks,  while  other 
central  banks,  such  as  the  Fed,  have  also  extended  their  support  to  other  financial 
institutions. 
Since the inception of the euro, the Eurosystem’s operational framework has granted access 
to the Eurosystem’s credit operations to a very large number of counterparties8, both via the 
marginal lending facility and the open market operations. Counterparty eligibility criteria have 
been defined in general terms so that a wide range of depository institutions, including small 
saving  banks  and  co-operative  banks,  have  direct  access  to  central  bank  liquidity.  The 
combination of a large list of counterparties and a similarly wide range of assets eligible as 
collateral  (recently  expanded  further  on  a  temporary  basis),  has  proven  very  useful  during 
the turbulence, since it has allowed the Eurosystem to reach a very large number of financial 
intermediaries at a time when short-term interbank markets are not functioning properly. 
Monetary policy 
The financial crisis has radically changed the environment of monetary policy making. The 
rises in oil and commodity prices that generated concerns about upside risks to price stability 
in  recent  years  suddenly  stopped  in  the  course  of  2008.  The  materialisation  of  downside 
risks  to  growth  and  the  decline  in  inflationary  pressures  (largely  due  to  falling  commodity 
prices  and  the  effect  of  the  deepening  of  the  financial  crisis  and  its  spread  to  the  real 
economy) have led to a significant reduction in upside risks to price stability.  
From  today’s  perspective,  the  Great  Moderation,  the  era  of  remarkable  macroeconomic 
performance started in the mid-1980s, appears surprisingly remote. Monetary policy makers 
have had to adapt quickly to the present macroeconomic and financial environment, which 
can be best characterised by the concept of non-measurable risk, or “Knightian” uncertainty. 
As you know, the economist Frank Knight developed a distinction between “risks” ( to which 
probabilities  can  be  assigned),  and  “uncertainty”  (for  which  even  these  probabilities  are 
unknown).  The  very  sharp  increase  in  uncertainty  that  is  typical  of  periods  of  financial 
instability had immediate consequences in the risk premia that lead to a strong preference for 
safe and liquid assets.  
Allow me to focus for a second on the evolution of the risk premia and its implications for the 
conduct of monetary policy over the more recent period. Since the beginning of the financial 
turmoil in the summer of 2007, financial markets have gone through a dramatic process of 
gradual  revaluation  and  re-pricing  of  risk,  not  only  in  the  US  and  the  euro  area,  but  also 
across  the  world.  Following  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008,  the 
deterioration of financial markets accelerated. Investors’ loss of risk appetite, as well as the 
reassessment of credit and liquidity risk, has been reflected in significant rises in credit and 
CDS spreads. This is a phenomenon that has particularly affected firms with lower ratings 
(both in the financial sector and in other sectors). 
During  this  turbulent  period,  we  have  faced  substantial  impairments  to  the  transmission  of 
policy  rates  to  the  money  markets.  This  is  most  evident  from  the  strong  increase  in  the 
spread between the Euribor rates (indicative rates for unsecured lending among banks) and 
the  corresponding  euro  overnight  index  swap  rates  (Eonia  swap  rates),  compared  to  the 
levels prevailing before the turmoil. This development reflects the reluctance of banks to lend 
to each other and is closely related to a general lack of transparency – as I mentioned earlier 
– about the magnitude of exposures that individual banks carry on their books. 
                                                 
8   Currently, around 2100 credit institutions are eligible for Eurosystem’s open market operations, almost 2300 
credit institutions can access the Eurosystem’s marginal lending facility. 
10 
 BIS Review 13/2009
The transmission of monetary policy decisions to very short-term money markets is just the 
first  step  along  the  transmission  mechanism.  Such  decisions  are  subsequently  passed 
through  to  bank  lending  rates,  which  represent  one  of  the  key  channels  through  which 
monetary policy affects the economy. We know that, reflecting contractual arrangements and 
banking practices, in many countries a variety of bank lending interest rates tend to adjust in 
line with the three-month Euribor rather than the policy rate. This implies that the borrowing 
costs of households and firms increased considerably before October 2008, also relative to 
the policy rate. More recently, most bank interest rates have started to decrease substantially 
reflecting the lowering of policy and money market rates started in October 2008. As a result 
of the continuing decrease of Euribor rates, we can expect further reductions in bank lending 
rates.  We  have  also  observed  some  signs  of  easing  conditions  for  risk  premia  in  financial 
markets at the end of 2008. 
Looking in particular at the monetary policy reaction to the crisis, the size of the cumulated 
interest rate reductions, especially since the coordinated interest-rate cut on 8 October 2008 
with five other major central banks (Bank of Canada, Bank of England, the Federal Reserve, 
Sveriges Riksbank and Swiss National Bank) has been exceptional and has left the policy 
rates of most central banks at historically low levels. 
This environment is not devoid of challenges for monetary policy. It is quite obvious that if a 
central  bank  keeps  cutting  rates,  sooner  or  later  it  will  hit  its  lower  bound.  However,  this 
alone  should  not  necessarily  imply  the  end  of  monetary  policy  effectiveness,  as  other 
channels may remain available for the central bank to additionally stimulate the economy in 
order to achieve its monetary policy objective. The central bank, for instance, can change the 
size and/or the composition of its balance sheet, two categories of unconventional measures 
which  nowadays  are  commonly  referred  to  as  “quantitative  and  qualitative  easing”, 
respectively. Through both these channels and specific commitment technologies, the central 
bank might influence term and credit risk premia, and thus shape the yield curve and the cost 
of funds to the private sector even when the short-term nominal interest rate is constrained 
by the lower bound. 
In this respect, it is crucial not trying to make a virtue of necessity. Dramatic unconventional 
measures entail non-trivial risks and their impact is subject to a high degree of uncertainty. It 
is important to stress that a precondition for more radical unconventional quantitative easing 
measures (e.g. the large-scale purchase of government bonds by the central bank) is that 
the  standard  interest  rates  policy  and  what  we  could  define  as  more  “conventional” 
quantitative  easing  measures  (e.g.  the  provision  of  support  to  the  banking  sector  and  the 
economy at large through expanded liquidity provision and inclusive collateral policies), are 
deemed insufficient to ensure the credible anchoring of price stability. As I will discuss in the 
Section 4, before embarking on more unconventional measures, a central bank is likely not 
only to fully use its policy rate instrument, but also to exhaust all other options in its existing 
toolbox in order to preserve price stability. 
And, of course, a successful outcome of the more dramatic unconventional actions depends 
on  a  sound  communication  with  the  public  and  on  the  existence  of  a  clear,  credible 
commitment  of  the  central  bank  with  respect  to  achieving  its  monetary  policy  objective  (a 
well-defined  definition  of  price  stability  in  the  case  of  the  ECB).  The  central  bank  must 
explain the reasons and the mechanism through which these unconventional monetary policy 
channels  operate.  It  is  of  crucial  importance  that  the  public  does  not  receive  the  wrong 
impression  that  the  central  is  powerless  in  the  face  of  deflationary  pressures  in  an 
environment  of  extremely  low  nominal  interest  rates.  By  contrast,  the  public  must  be 
convinced that the central bank will take the necessary actions to prevent the entrenchment 
of  unacceptable  deviations 
into  private  sector 
expectations. 
This being said, an environment of zero or almost zero interest rates may bring other policy 
challenges that go beyond the strict effectiveness of monetary policy. For example, in such 
its  monetary  policy  objective 
from 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 11
an environment the interbank money markets are likely to be disrupted – as the Japanese 
experience demonstrates –, and institutions such as money market funds may be put under 
threat. While monetary policy could still be effective, an impaired money market has serious 
consequences for the private financial intermediation and eventually poses difficulties for the 
transmission of monetary policy and the optimal asset allocation within the economy as well 
as risks to financial stability. 
An  additional  challenge  for  central  banks  is  the  concern  that  the  lower  rates  go  the  more 
difficult might become to reverse this policy, thus making it more likely that today’s monetary 
policy  may  compromise  future  price  stability  and  financial  stability.  The  experience  of  the 
Eurosystem in 2005 is a clear reminder of the pressures that a central banks faces when it 
decides to start removing policy accommodation. 
Moving to a different subject, let me now recall that the adjustment to the ECB policy rate 
started with a coordinated move with five other major central banks (Bank of Canada, Bank 
of England, the Federal Reserve, Sveriges Riksbank and Swiss National Bank) on October 
2008. This coordinated interest rate cut was unprecedented by historical standards and was 
very much welcomed as a sign of the strong commitment of the international central banking 
community to addressing the macroeconomic implications of the financial market turmoil. It 
also gave rise to the question whether the financial crisis may have ushered in a new era in 
which  the  global  nature  of  the  challenges  faced  by  central  banks  requires  increased 
international monetary policy coordination. 
The economic literature on policy coordination9 suggests that, under normal conditions, the 
international integration of goods and services markets provides a relatively high degree of 
risk  pooling  that  makes  mechanisms  of  formal  policy  coordination  less  necessary.  This 
conclusion is derived from the fact that rule-based policies funded on common principles and 
with  medium-term  orientation  anchor  expectations  and  confidence  so  that  the  symmetric 
stabilisation of domestic conditions brings about stable global conditions as well. 
The  financial  crisis,  however,  has  shown  that,  if  not  from  policy  coordination,  there  are 
important  benefits  from  cooperation  in  an  increasingly  integrated  world  economy,  where 
adverse  shocks  to  one  market  are  not  confined  by  national  borders  but  rather  propagate 
globally  at  a  rapid  pace.  Indeed,  while  a  coordinated  rate  cut  is  by  nature  exceptional, 
cooperation in different areas among world major central banks has proven to be an effective 
policy  response  to  global  and  domestic  challenges,  supporting  confidence  at  times  of 
heightened  uncertainty.  As  explained  before,  during  the  current  crisis,  cooperation  among 
central  banks  has  been  pursued  in  two  main  directions:  (1)  through  enhanced  information 
exchanges and collective monitoring of markets developments; and (2) through coordinated 
steps to provide liquidity. 
Financial stability 
As a third front for central bank policy action, let me now discuss the measures taken in the 
financial  stability  field.  Contributing  to  financial  stability  is  one  of  the  core  responsibilities 
assigned by the EC Treaty to the ECB. By pursuing its primary objective of maintaining price 
stability  and  by  contributing  to  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  money  markets,  the  ECB 
prevents  unnecessary  volatility  from  being  introduced  into  economic  activity  and  financial 
markets,  thus  providing  an  important  contribution  to  safeguarding  financial  stability  in  the 
euro area, particularly at times of crisis like the present. 
In addition, central banks (of course, including the ECB) have actively participated in a wide 
range  of  international  committees  and  fora  entrusted  with  the  task  of  restoring  market 
functioning and enhancing the resilience of the financial system. 
                                                 
9   See, among others, Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002), Oudizi and Sachs (1984) and Trichet (2008). 
12 
 BIS Review 13/2009
Priority has been given to restoring market confidence. In this context, initiatives designed to 
strengthen  transparency  and  valuation  standards  should  be  singled  out  as  pivotal.  In 
particular, improvements were warranted in the disclosure standards for financial institutions’ 
exposures to structured products as well as in the practices followed for their valuation. In 
this respect, many large global banks have consistently applied the disclosure methodology 
set  out  in  the  FSF  report  to  their  holdings  of  complex  and  illiquid  instruments,  thus 
demonstrating  the  willingness  of  the  private  sector  to  contribute  to  strengthening  market 
confidence. Furthermore, guidance has been provided by the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision on assessing banks’ fair value practices for financial instruments. 
In the same vein, the International Accounting Standards Board has intensified its work to 
enhance accounting and disclosure standards of off-balance sheet entities and released draft 
guidance on fair value measurement when markets become inactive. Central banks as well 
as  banking  supervisors  have  contributed  to  this  work  by  participating  in  the  related  expert 
advisory panel. Furthermore, the ECB is also a member of the newly-created Financial Crisis 
Advisory  Group  whose  primary  role  is  to  advise  the  International  Accounting  Standards 
Board (IASB) and the US Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) about the standard-
setting  implications  of  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  potential  changes  to  the  global 
regulatory environment. 
While  the  aforementioned  measures  significantly  improved  the  information  available  to 
markets, investors and competent authorities, the failure of Lehman Brothers last September 
generated an unprecedented deterioration in the degree of confidence in the banking sector 
triggering  the  coordinated  action  of  governments.  In  this  context,  the  European  Heads  of 
State  adopted  a  set  of  common  principles  aimed  at  addressing  the  financial  turmoil  and 
ensuring that the design of national stabilisation measures did not lead to negative spill-over 
effects across countries. The “EU common principles” endorsed at the European Council of 
15-16 October laid down the common features for granting guarantees on new issuance of 
bank debt and recapitalisation measures adopted by the Member States. 
The Governing Council of the ECB contributed to this work by proposing recommendations 
encompassing  the  provision  of  government  guarantees  for  bank  debt  and  recapitalisation 
measures. First, the Governing Council of the ECB proposed a set of recommendations on 
the  framework  for  granting  government  guarantees,  which  identified  the  following  main 
objectives  for  this  measure:  (1)  addressing  the  funding  problems  of  solvent  banks;  (2) 
safeguarding  the  level-playing  field  among  financial  institutions  in  order  to  avoid  market 
distortions; and (3) ensuring consistency with the operational framework of the Eurosystem, 
to  avoid  impairing  the  implementation  of  the  single  monetary  policy.  Furthermore,  these 
recommendations included a pricing system for the government guarantees on bank debt. 
The EU governments agreed to provide guarantees for new medium-term bank senior debt 
(up to 5 years) under a scheme to expire on 31 December 2009. Banks have begun to make 
use  of  this  measure:  at  the  beginning  of  2009,  the  outstanding  volume  of  government 
guaranteed unsecured bank bonds amounted to EUR 58 billion in the euro area, and EUR 97 
billion in the EU. More banks have indicated their intentions to issue similar bonds. It should 
be  noted  that  the  issuances  have  so  far  been  oversubscribed  and  spreads  of  such 
government  guaranteed  bonds  are  lower  than  those  for  secured  bonds  from  the  same 
country and with a comparable maturity. 
Second,  with  regard  to  recapitalisation  measures,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  also 
provided  recommendations.  The  main  aim  of  these  measures  has  been  to  improve  the 
functioning and stability of the banking system and to foster an adequate flow of credit to the 
economy by providing Tier I capital to fundamentally sound institutions. This would be carried 
out  by  acquiring  equity  in  the  form  of  ordinary  shares,  preferred  shares  or  other  hybrid 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 13
instruments,  such  as  subordinated  debt.  The  total  commitments  regarding  recapitalisation 
schemes reached EUR 255 billion in December 2008.10
Also  in  this  regard,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  proposed  a  methodology  for 
benchmarking  the  pricing  of  State  recapitalisation  measures  for  fundamentally  sound 
institutions in the euro area. These recommendations are without prejudice to guidance from 
the European Commission aimed at avoiding undue distortions to competition in accordance 
with State aid rules of the Treaty. 
The  pricing  system  proposed  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  considered  that  any 
recapitalisation should take into consideration the specific market situation of each institution, 
distinguishing  in  particular  between  fundamentally  sound  and  distressed  banks.  Based  on 
this premise, it provided for a required rate of return, captured by a “price corridor”, which 
varies  depending  on  the  type  of  instrument.  The  lower  band  of  this  corridor  is  applied  to 
instruments with features similar to those of subordinated debt and the higher band to those 
with features similar to ordinary shares. It is also recommended that the temporary nature of 
recapitalisation  measures  should  be  ensured  by  providing  financial  institutions  with 
incentives to redeem such instruments and that the pricing system be revised periodically to 
reflect possible changes in market conditions. 
Overall, I am fully confident that the actions taken by central banks and national governments 
provide  an  appropriate  response  to  the  challenges  raised  by  recent  events.  Still,  restoring 
market  functioning  and  returning  to  normal  market  conditions  ultimately  depends  on  the 
banking  sector.  In  this  context,  reactivating  the  interbank  market  and  ensuring  the  proper 
financing of the economy is of the utmost importance. 
Section 4. Going forward: A new environment for central banking? 
Up  to  now,  I  have  delved  into  the  underlying  causes  of  the  current  situation,  and  have 
discussed the various policy responses announced or implemented by different competent 
authorities, and the envisaged challenges ahead, especially for those areas that are under 
the partial or exclusive competence of central banks. Looking forward, the current crisis is 
likely  to  bring  important  changes  for  the  future  of  the  economic  and  financial  systems  in 
which we live. These include revisions to the regulatory and supervisory domains, reforms of 
the international financial architecture as well as changes in the nature of the relationships 
and coordination among the different policies and public authorities. Therefore, we are likely 
to witness a number of institutional changes that are likely to bring a new environment for 
policy making in a number of areas, including several aspects related to central banking. 
In  the  last  part  of  my  intervention,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  some  thoughts  on  this 
potential new environment. 
More international convergence in liquidity frameworks? 
Since August 2007 central banks have responded in a variety of ways to the financial market 
disruptions,  reflecting  differences  in  the  extent  to  which  markets  have  been  hit  by  the 
turbulences,  and  differences  in  the  design  of  their  operational  frameworks.  However,  in 
general all major central banks stepped up their intermediation role with a view to addressing 
the  liquidity  squeeze  and,  in  doing  so,  they  showed  a  certain  degree  of  convergence  in 
operating procedures. In particular, central banks: 
• 
Pursued more active reserve management, reassuring banks of their orderly access 
to overnight funds and increasing the frequency of their operations. 
                                                 
10   Please note that there were also capital injections outside government recapitalisation schemes (from BE, DE, 
FR, LU and NL), amounting to EUR 42 billion, which dealt with troubled institutions such as Fortis and Dexia. 
14 
 BIS Review 13/2009
   Increased the supply of funds (notably long-term); expanded to varying degrees the 
definition of collateral accepted in collateralised lending operations; provided access 
to collateralised lending to a large number of counterparties. 
Adapted  tender  procedures  for  open  market  operations  in  the  direction  of  price- 
rather than quantity-based schemes, akin to those used for standing facilities. 
As the turbulence developed, central banks strengthened their cooperation through 
enhanced communication and collective market monitoring and co-ordinated actions 
to provide liquidity. In this respect, a significant number of inter-central bank swap 
lines  have  been  set  up  to  facilitate  the  distribution  of  foreign  currency  liquidity  to 
domestic counterparties. 
Overall, one lesson we can draw from the turmoil is that are certain key operational features 
that facilitate the implementation of monetary policy under stress. In particular, central banks 
are better positioned to distribute reserves effectively when the inter-bank lending is impaired 
if they are capable of providing access to collateralised lending operations on a large scale to 
a wide set of counterparties and against a broad range of collateral. 
Yet, a very important issue, on which I have myself no clear answer, is how – not so much 
whether but rather how – this convergence in the understanding of the “optimal” features of 
the operational framework under stress, should be reflected by the design of the operational 
framework  in  the  steady  state.  For  this  we  need,  in  particular,  to  develop  a  better 
understanding  of  the  optimal  mix  between  private  market  and  central  bank  intermediation 
and we need to carefully liaise with supervisory bodies. 
I  should  clarify  that  when  I  say  “optimal”  in  this  context,  I  do  not  mean  “uniform”.  To  the 
extent  that  monetary  policy  strategies,  central  banks’  status  vis-à-vis  governments  and 
certain  specific  features  of  domestic  financial  systems  persist,  the  optimal  liquidity 
frameworks of each country or monetary union should reflect such country- or area-specific 
factors. 
More scope for direct lending to the real economy? 
In the previous section, I have discussed an issue that has come to fore in the current crisis: 
the provision of central bank liquidity to financial institutions other than banks. An additional 
issue that has come up in the last few months concerns the extent to which central banks 
may engage in direct lending to the real economy. This is not a purely theoretical subject for 
central banking conferences, as the recent establishment by the Federal Reserve System of 
several liquidity facilities directed to non banks shows (for instance, those in support directed 
to money market funds and issuers of commercial paper). 
In  principle,  the  scope  for  direct  lending  by  the  central  bank  to  the  real  economy  should 
depend on the extent that the malfunctioning of the money and credit markets distorts bank 
lending  and  prevents  aggregate  households  and  businesses  from  obtaining  credit.  In  that 
sense, some central banks have decided to bypass the banking system and start lending to 
households  and  firms  directly  for  the  sake  of  preserving  the  orderly  functioning  of  the 
economy. 
In practice, even abstracting from possible legal constraints (i.e. monetary financing to state), 
there  are  several  issues  that  central  banks  must  ponder  before  deciding  on  the 
appropriateness for their own economies of providing directly financing to the real sectors. I 
stress the term “own” because this is one of those cases in which there is no unique answer. 
Whether or not a central bank engages in direct lending will very much depend on a number 
of considerations referring to structural features of the economy, the gravity of the crisis, the 
state of the financial system and a number of institutional factors, notably those governing 
the relationship between the central bank and the government. 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 15
For  instance,  one  apparently  straightforward  observation  is  that  the  need  to  provide  direct 
credit to the economy at times of dysfunctions in banking activity, is likely to depend on the 
relative  importance  of  the  banking  sector  for  financial  intermediation.  Following  this 
argument, one may argue that in a bank-based economy there may be relatively less need to 
provide  credit  to  agents  other  than  banks  than  in  a  market-based  economy.  Indeed,  by 
focusing  on  providing  support  to  the  banking  sector,  the  central  bank  may  increase  its 
chances  to  sustain  the  economy  as  a  whole.  However,  under  extreme  circumstances 
(notably,  when  the  banking  sector  reneges  on  its  institutional  role  as  the  main  engine  of 
financial intermediation), a central bank may reach the opposite conclusion: exactly because 
of the banking sector’s predominance in financial intermediation, its dysfunctional state might 
prompt a central bank to intervene before the entire economy comes to a halt. 
If so, the central bank will need to decide which sectors to target. Once again, this is not an 
easy  choice.  It  may  imply  the  need  for  the  central  bank  to  take  decisions  on  the  optimal 
allocation of resources in the economy that, historical experience shows, are better left to the 
private sector. 
Other  concerns  may  relate  to  the  risk  of  political  pressure  and  government  interference, 
especially in case the scale of the financing programme requires support from the Treasury. 
If financing is ensured through the expansion of the central bank’s liabilities, this may give 
rise  to  more  general  concerns  about  the  fiscal  costs  of  actions  taken  by  the  monetary 
authority.11 Finally, but related to the previous arguments, direct lending to the real economy 
may imply an increase in the financial risks taken by the central bank, potential exposing the 
latter to risk to its financial independence and, ultimately, to its institutional independence. 
The purpose of these remarks is certainly not to suggest that central banks should abstain 
from direct lending to the real sectors, but rather to point out that the number of aspects to 
consider  before  doing  so  are  so  many  and  of  such  complexity  that  no  central  bank  would 
ever take such decision with a light heart. This is why, before embarking in such policy, some 
central banks may prefer pursuing to the maximum extent the opportunities provided by its 
operational  framework  to  provide  indirect  support  (i.e.  using  the  banking  sector  as  an 
intermediary) to the real economy. 
One  practical  way  of  providing  indirect  support  to  the  private  sector  pursued  by  the 
Eurosystem is through its liquidity operations and collateral framework. Indeed, by providing 
banks with unlimited access at fixed rates to its refinancing operations and by accepting a 
wide range of private paper as collateral, the Eurosystem effectively supports the provision of 
credit to the real economy. 
More domestic policy coordination? 
As  we  have  seen,  policy  responses  both  at  the  global  and  European  level  have  been 
characterised by an increasing degree of coordination. A natural question therefore seems to 
be whether, looking forward, more policy coordination at the level of the EU/euro area should 
be warranted. Given the existence of the single currency in the euro area, I will first focus on 
the coordination among national fiscal policies. 
On  the  fiscal  side,  a  key  challenge  for  the  future  is  to  prevent  the  financial  crisis  from 
eventually undermining the sustainability and credibility of public finances. What can we do to 
prevent this from happening? At this point, let me reiterate that the Stability and Growth Pact 
already  provides  a  coordination  device  for  fiscal  policies  and  especially  provides  peer 
pressure mechanisms for sound and sustainable public finances. It provides the appropriate 
framework for the conduct and coordination of fiscal policies in good times and also in bad 
times. 
                                                 
11   See Cukierman (2006). 
16 
 BIS Review 13/2009
The challenge at times of crisis is thus to use this existing mechanism to the best effect. To 
put it rather bluntly, we should not tinker with the keel just because the wind is strong; the 
pact is already flexible enough to allow room for the policy to adjust without undermining the 
foundations  for  a  sustainable  path.  Indeed,  EU  countries  are  already  facing  considerable 
long-term challenges from the costs associated with population ageing that should be borne 
in mind when considering short term demand policies. If the starting position is less strong, 
an  inappropriate  short-term  response  may  make  us  literally  “age  faster”  by  exposing  even 
more strongly the need for adjustments to cope with the long-term challenges. Countries with 
large deficit and/or debt levels may be particularly vulnerable in this regard. 
Unfortunately,  many  euro  area  countries  entered  the  financial  crisis  and  the  economic 
downturn with unnecessarily weak fiscal balances, having missed the opportunity presented 
by past years’ revenue windfalls to consolidate their budgets. While this is never a popular 
message even in normal times, it still deserves mention so that the mistakes can be avoided 
once the crisis has passed. Indeed one of the fiscal policy errors prior to and including 2000-
01  was  to  mistakenly  interpret  budgetary  improvements  in  good  times  as  evidence  of 
structural improvements, which were often used to motivate spending increases or tax cuts. 
On  a  positive  note  we  can  note  that  while  compliance  with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact 
during its first ten years has been somewhat uneven, the EU’s overall fiscal performance in 
terms of avoiding high budget deficits and the build-up of government debt was much better 
than in the decades preceding the Pact.12 Indeed, some of the EU countries that comply with 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  can  now  take  advantage  of  their  relatively  large  automatic 
stabilisers  to  do  much  of  the  work.  These  accomplishments  should  be  a  guiding  beacon 
ahead.  Sound  fiscal  policies  with  a  strong  keel  provide  the  basis  for  stability  and  the 
necessary conditions for good long-term growth in the challenging seas ahead. 
One additional dimension of policy coordination in the euro area is that between the single 
monetary  policy  and  the  national  fiscal  policies  of  the  member  states.  In  this  respect,  the 
institutional  set-up  of  the  European  Monetary  Union  consists  of  a  clear  and  efficient 
assignment  of  objectives  and  instruments  to  the  different  authorities,  together  with  a  strict 
division of responsibilities. The ECB must focus on its primary mandate of delivering medium 
term  price  stability  under  conditions  of  full  independence.  Fiscal  policy  must  focus  on  its 
traditional objectives related to allocation, redistribution and stabilisation (to varying extents), 
while contributing to maintaining an environment of macroeconomic stability. 
Of course, in setting monetary policy the ECB takes into account the fiscal policy stance, as 
one of the factors which contribute to the outlook for price stability over the medium term. It 
goes  without  saying  that  an  open  exchange  of  views  and  information  among  the  different 
authorities is welcome if it enhances a common understanding of desirable objectives and 
strategies to pursue them. 
However,  there  cannot  be  any  scope  for  an  active  co-ordination  of  fiscal  and  monetary 
policies. Indeed, a commitment to ex ante co-ordination between fiscal and monetary policies 
may blur the responsibilities of the various authorities at the expense of accountability and 
may  ultimately  reduce  their  incentives  to  pursue  their  objectives.  Thus,  the  current 
macroeconomic policy framework in the euro area based on a separation of responsibilities 
is the most appropriate to ensure sustained and non-inflationary economic growth. 
More international monetary policy coordination? 
While cooperation in the field of liquidity management on an unprecedented scale has been 
certainly  one  of  the  hallmarks  of  public  responses  to  the  current  turmoil,  another  example 
without precedents of central bank coordination was the decision by the ECB and other five 
                                                 
12   See the article “Ten years of the Stability and Growth Pact”, ECB Monthly Bulletin, October 2008. 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 17
transmitted  around  the  globe  almost  simultaneously.  Through  the 
major central banks to ease global monetary conditions on 8 October 2008. Commentators 
and observers have wondered whether this concerted policy decision may be the beginning 
of a new era of increased international monetary policy coordination in response to economic 
and financial globalisation. 
It is important to stress that this coordinated interest rate cut was taken in a specific context 
and  with  a  specific  objective.  There  was  extraordinary  uncertainty  at  the  time  about  the 
economic outlook and strong evidence that upside risks to price stability had diminished at 
the global level. The coordinated cut addressed the need to respond to a common shock that 
was  being 
joint 
communication, the international central banking community provided a signal of its strong 
commitment to responding to the macroeconomic implications of the financial market turmoil. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  over  the  past  three  decades  the  trade,  economic  and  financial 
linkages among the different regions of the work have grown tighter, and of course policy-
makers  take  this  into  account  in  the  design  of  their  policies.  However,  when  talking  about 
international  policy  coordination,  it  is  important  to  define  clearly  what  we  mean.  Policy 
coordination does not mean, of course that all central banks need to adopt the same policy 
stance  for  the  entire  world  and  certainly  it  cannot  not  be  a  surrogate  for  domestic 
macroeconomic  prudence  nor  weaken  the  commitment  of  each  central  bank  to  its 
institutional objective. 
Indeed, differences in cyclical positions, structures of the economies (e.g. in terms of market 
rigidities and frictions, sectoral leverage, financial systems, etc.), monetary policy institutional 
frameworks as well as shocks hitting the economy almost necessarily lead to differences in 
deciding  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  stance.  Thus,  systematic  monetary  policy 
coordination may eventually come at the cost of weaken a central bank’s commitment to its 
institutional objective. 
International  policy  coordination  is  better  understood  as  the  continuous  cooperation  and 
exchange  of  information  at  both  staff  and  decision-making  levels,  shared  experienced  and 
mutual  understanding  and  trust,  which  very  much  lies  on  the  consensus  among  central 
banks that monetary policies geared towards domestic price stability, sound public finances 
and  flexible  economic  structures  create  the  conditions  for  long-term  economic  growth  and 
financial stability. 
More weight given to asset prices in monetary policy? 
Another  interesting  debate  that  has  gained  –  for  obvious  reasons  –  renewed  interest  and 
strength over the past year is the role that asset prices should take in the monetary policy 
design.  Indeed,  as  we  are  experiencing  at  present,  large  volatility  in  asset  prices  can 
jeopardise  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  potentially  undermine  macroeconomic 
stability.  The  repetition  of  boom-bust  cycles  and  the  potentially  very  high  costs  for 
macroeconomic stability associated with the typically abrupt reversal of excessive valuation 
of assets beg the question: should monetary policy give more weight to asset prices? 
What have we learned on asset price bubbles and monetary policy? We know that bubbles 
are extremely difficult to identify in real time. Given that the assessment of whether or not 
asset price are being driven by fundamentals is surrounded with uncertainty, perhaps even 
sometimes uncertainty in the “Knightian” sense, central banks should refrain from targeting 
asset  prices.  Moreover,  while  monetary  policy  actions  can 
influence  asset  price 
developments,  the  magnitude  of  the  swings  in  policy  rates  that  would  be  needed  to  curb 
boom  and  bust  cycles  in  asset  prices  could  have  adverse  implications  for  macroeconomic 
stability in the short term. 
Based on these conclusions, which are broadly shared in the central banking and academic 
community, one option is to do nothing until the bubble bursts and then ease monetary policy 
aggressively to provide support to the banking system and the economy (the so-called “mop 
18 
 BIS Review 13/2009
up  after”  approach).  The  downside  of  this  strategy  is  of  course  that  it  risks  creating  moral 
hazard. A possible alternative approach that has been suggested consists of “leaning against 
the  wind”.  According  to  this  approach,  the  central  bank  should  conduct  a  slightly  tighter 
monetary  policy  than  warranted  by  its  price-stability  objective,  when  the  build-up  of  a 
potentially detrimental asset price boom is identified. By doing so, the central bank would buy 
insurance  against  the  risk  of  a  harmful  asset  boom-bust  cycle,  with  its  potential  costs  in 
terms of macroeconomic and financial stability. 
The main argument against this approach is that the premium stemming from such a policy 
framework may be excessively high. In fact, a policy response to asset price increases may 
end  up  destabilising  the  economy  if  the  asset  price  revaluation  is  driven  by  fundamentals. 
This risk is related to the difficulty that I have just mentioned concerning the identification of 
asset price misalignments in real time. This risk, however, should not act as a perfect alibi 
justifying policy inaction. As the recent literature on early indicators started by researchers at 
BIS  shows,  different  indicators  can  help  the  policy  maker  figure  out  the  nature  and  the 
consequences  of  the  reverse  phase13  of  extraordinary  asset  price  developments,  and 
thereby define the need for policy action. 
Overall, the very high costs of the current financial crisis seem to provide support to the case 
for a flexible “leaning against the wind” strategy. How can one implement such a policy in 
practice?  I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  ECB’s  two-pillar  monetary  policy  strategy  is  well 
suited to cope with the challenges brought about by asset price developments.14 There is a 
close link between monetary and credit developments and evolving imbalances in asset and 
credit markets. By exploiting this link, our monetary analysis (consisting of a comprehensive 
assessment of the liquidity situation) may provide early information on developing asset price 
imbalances  and  therefore  allow  for  a  timely  response  to  the  implied  risks  to  price  and 
financial  stability.  Thus,  the  ECB’s  two-pillar  strategy  may  represent  a  practical  way  of 
mimicking the “leaning against the wind” approach. 
More central bank involvement in supervision? 
The  recent  financial  market  crisis  has  also  highlighted  the  important  role  that  not  only  the 
ECB  but  all  central  banks  play  in  safeguarding  financial  stability  and  the  need  to  increase 
interaction  between  central  banks  and  banking  supervisors.  This  need  for  increased 
interaction,  also  identified  by  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  in  one  of  its  recommendations, 
would further support and enhance the central banks’ role in financial stability assessments, 
crisis management and resolution, and liquidity provision. 
First, with regard to financial stability assessment: central banks can benefit from extended 
access to supervisory information especially in relation to systemically relevant institutions, in 
order  to  identify  risks  and  vulnerabilities  for  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  in  a  more 
efficient  way.  In  this  context,  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  and  the  International  Monetary 
Fund are already intensifying their cooperation with a view to enhancing the assessment of 
financial stability risks on a global scale, while in the EU the same is valid for the Banking 
Supervision Committee and the Committee of European Banking Supervisors. These efforts 
should also be mirrored at the national and regional levels, through the intensification of the 
cooperation and exchange of information between central banks and supervisory authorities 
for an overall better monitoring and assessment of risks to the financial system. The other 
side of this coin relates to the issue of incorporating the outcome of the financial stability risk 
analysis into policy action in the field of supervision, which also needs to be reinforced. 
                                                 
13   Alessi L. and C. Detken (2009). 
14   See also the April 2005 Monthly Bulletin article, Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy and Trichet (2005). 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 19
Second,  in  the  area  of  crisis  management  and  resolution:  the  global  nature  of  financial 
markets  and  the  increased  interlinkages  between  markets  and  institutions  requires 
competent  financial  authorities,  central  banks,  supervisors  and  ministries  of  finance  to 
strengthen  their  coordination  mechanisms  for  the  management  of  crisis  involving  cross-
border  financial  institutions.  In  the  EU,  an  important  milestone  has  been  reached  with  the 
Memorandum of Understanding signed by the competent authorities of all Member States in 
June  2008.  This  MoU  establishes  common  principles,  procedures  and  terminology  to  be 
used by all parties involved in a cross-border crisis. 
Third,  in  relation  to  liquidity  provision:  in  order  to  maintain  stable  money  markets,  central 
banks  would  benefit  from  enhanced  access  to  supervisory  information,  including  liquidity 
stress-testing and contingency funding plans of banks. At the same time, supervisors would 
benefit from information available at central banks, such as banks’ bidding behaviour. 
Overall,  while  the  need  for  enhanced  interaction  between  central  banks  and  supervisory 
authorities  is  widely  acknowledged,  recent  events  have  called  into  question  whether 
improved interaction in cooperation suffices. In this context, the debate has recently turned 
towards the future supervisory architecture. The financial crisis has underscored the urgency 
of reviewing the EU supervisory framework, which is still based on national responsibilities 
against  the  background  of  increased  financial  market  integration  and  the  growing  role  of 
large cross-border financial institutions. In the EU, a High Level Group was set up under the 
chairmanship  of  Mr  Jacques  de  Larosiére  with  the  mandate  to  examine  the  allocation  of 
tasks  between  the  national  and  the  European  level  and  submit  proposals  to  strengthen 
European  supervisory  arrangements.  The  expectations  regarding  the  recommendations  of 
the  Group,  to  be  issued  in  February  2009,  are  high,  and  could  encompass,  among  the 
possible  options,  a  stronger  role  of  central  banks  and  the  ECB  in  particular  in  EU 
supervision, thus recognising the crucial role central banks have currently played in fostering 
financial stability. 
Concluding remarks 
The financial turmoil which began in the summer of 2007 has developed over time into one of 
the most disruptive crises that the world has experienced in many decades. This is why from 
the  start  of  the  turmoil  public  authorities  –  both  in  the  euro  area  and  in  other  parts  of  the 
world  –  have  reacted  with  determination  to  prevent  the  turbulences  from  undermining 
financial stability and destabilising our economic systems.  
Despite  the  large  range  of  actions  undertaken  by  public  authorities,  key  financial  markets 
remain under stress and the banking sector must yet recover its strength and initiative, while 
each day brings us new reports of job losses and output cuts that provide only a partial and 
limited account of the strains and costs that the current crisis imposes on our societies. 
From the beginning of the crisis, we have put a premium on understanding how disturbances 
stemming  from  a  relatively  small  segment  of  a  market  presumably  linked  to  local  and 
regional  conditions  (such  as  the  US  subprime  mortgage  market)  could  spread  through 
continents and markets at such a rapid pace, undermining the strength of our economies and 
financial systems and, ultimately, giving rise to concerns about systemic stability.  
At  the  root  of  the  crisis,  we  find  a  combination  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  and 
microeconomic  factors,  including  market  failures  and  deficiencies  in  the  design  of  our 
regulatory and supervisory frameworks. Public authorities have reacted to the current crisis 
through  a  range  of  interventions  in  key  fields,  including  liquidity  management,  monetary 
policy  and  fiscal  policy.  In  addition,  many  initiatives  have  been  undertaken  to  address 
weaknesses  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  in  order  to  provide  sounder 
foundations to our financial systems and, ultimately, to our economies and societies.  
Despite our best efforts, we cannot yet see the light at the end of the tunnel. However, it is 
fairly easy to predict that when we get out of the tunnel, the world will look different in many 
20 
 BIS Review 13/2009
respects. I venture to say that, if we are able to draw the right lessons from the crisis, the 
world will not look only different, but also better. For this reason, it is crucial to increase our 
efforts  to  implement  those  urgent  reforms,  especially  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory 
frameworks, and to reassure the public that it can be confident of our determination to do 
whatever is necessary to preserve price stability and financial stability.  
References 
Alessi, L. and C. Detken (2009). “ ‘Real time’ early warning indicators for costly asset price 
boom/bust cycles: A role for global liquidity”, presented at the EABCN and CREI Conference 
on  Business  Cycle  Developments,  Financial  Fragility,  Housing  and  Commodity  Prices, 
Barcelona, 21-23 November 2008. 
Allen, F. and D. Gale (2005). “From cash-in-the-Market pricing to Financial Fragility,” Journal 
of the European Economic Association 3, pp. 535-546. 
Brunnermeier,  M.  and  L  Pedersen  (2009).  “Market  Liquidity  and  Funding  Liquidity,” 
forthcoming in the Review of Financial Studies. 
Ashcraft,  A.  and  T.  Schuermann  (2008).  “Understanding  the  Securitization  of  Subprime 
Mortgage Credit”, Fed New York Staff Reports N. 318.  
Cassola,  N.,  M.  Drehmann,  P.  Hartmann,  M.  Lo  Duca,  and  M.  Scheicher  (2008).  “A 
Research Perspective on the Propagation of the Credit Market Turmoil,” Research Bulletin 
No. 6, June, European Central Bank. 
Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  (CGFS)  (2008).  “Central  bank  operations  in 
response to the financial turmoil”, CGFS Publications No. 31.  
Cukierman, A. (2006). “Central bank finances and independence – How much capital should 
a central bank have? Forthcoming in The Capital Needs of Central Banks, M. Blejer and S. 
Milton (eds.), Bank of England Press. 
Heider, F., M. Hoerova, and C. Holthausen (2008). “Liquidity Hoarding and Interbank Market 
Spreads: The Role of  Counterparty  Risk”, presented at the  2008 UniCredit Conference on 
Banking and Finance, Vienna, 6-7 November. 
“Financial Stability Review,” European Central Bank, December 2007, June 2008, December 
2008. 
“The  Incentive  Structure  of  the  ‘Originate  and  Distribute’  Model,”  European  Central  Bank, 
December 2008. 
Kashyap, A., R. Rajan, and J. Stein (2008). “The Global Roots of the Current Financial Crisis 
and its Implications for Regulation,” presented at the Fifth ECB Central Banking Conference. 
Obstfeld,  M  and  K.  Rogoff,  2002,  Global  implications  of  Self-Oriented  National  Monetary 
Rules, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 503-535. 
Oudiz  G.  and  J.  Sachs,  1984,  Macroeconomic  Policy  Coordination  among  Industrialized 
Countries, Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1-64. 
Rajan, R. (2005), “Has financial development made the world riskier?”, NBER WP 11728. 
Sufi A. and A. Mian (2008) The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from 
the 2007 Mortgage Default Crisis. 
Trichet, J.C., 2005, Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy, Speech at the Mas Lecture, 
Singapore. 
Trichet, J.C., 2008, International Interdependencies and Monetary Policy: A Policy Maker’s 
view, Speech at the Fifth ECB Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt am Main. 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 21
