Duvvuri Subbarao: Impact of the global financial crisis on India – 
collateral damage and response 
Interview by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, with Claire Jones, 
Editor, CentralBanking.com, published in London, 2 July 2009. 
 Central  Banking  (CB):  You  are  a  highly-respected  civil  servant  who  has  spent  a 
significant  portion  of  your  career  in  various  government  departments.  How  does 
heading the Reserve Bank of India compare? 
Duvvuri Subbarao (DS): As a career civil servant for 30 years, I have worked at the district 
level,  the  state  level  and  the  national  level.  I  also  worked  at  the  World  Bank,  and  now 
towards the end of my career it is a privilege to come to the Reserve Bank of India. 
I've also been fortunate to work for a long period in the area of public finance. The Reserve 
Bank  is  different  from  what  I  did  before  as  a  civil  servant  in  terms  of  work  content  and 
accountability mechanisms. 
Work  content  is  of  course  the  quintessential  central  bank  work  which  is  a  much  narrower 
canvas than many of my assignments as a civil servant. The responsibility is of course much 
larger,  and  accountability  as  the  governor  is  at  an  individual  level  as  opposed  to 
accountability at an aggregate level in civil service jobs. 
In  a  typical  ministry,  a  civil  servant  would  be  responsible  to  the  minister.  And  the  ministry 
itself  would  be  accountable  to  the  government.  As  the  governor,  I  am  responsible  at  an 
individual level and I am hoping that my experience in the real sector would be an advantage 
in my current position as governor. 
CB: And do you think that experience has proven useful so far? 
DS: Yes, I would think so. As we went the crisis and distress signals kept coming, I had a 
good  understanding  of  what  was  causing  the  distress.  That  made  me  better  equipped  to 
respond to the crisis. 
For  example,  in  the  wake  of  the  crisis  exports  were  hit:  in  India  certain  sectors  are  more 
export-centred than others, for example, textiles and gems and jewellery. Similarly, there are 
certain geographic locations that are more reliant on exports than others. My experience in 
the real sector made our responses better, more grounded in these realities. 
CB: Do you have a clear agenda for what you want to achieve during your first three-
year term? 
DS: India achieved growth of 9% over the four years to 2008, and the crisis clearly came as 
a setback to us. Last year (2008-09) the growth rate was 6.7%. This was certainly better than 
most people had expected, but evidently lower than trend growth. For me, the single most 
important objective is returning the economy to a high growth path. 
CB: So that would imply that you believe growth of 9% to be achievable in the medium 
term? 
DS: Yes, of course. The challenge for the Reserve Bank will be to create the stage for a 9% 
growth in an environment of price and financial stability. 
BIS Review 92/2009 
 1
CB:  Do  you  think  that  concentrated  wealth  could  hinder  medium  term  growth  as  a 
recent ADB-sponsored report has found? 
DS: I have not seen the ADB report but I do know that reducing disparity across regions has 
been one of the key objectives of the government. At the heart of the 11th Five-Year Plan is 
inclusive growth, and that aims to address precisely the issue of narrowing disparities. 
CB: So you'd broadly concur with the finding that concentrated wealth could hinder 
the achievement of trend growth of 9%? 
DS: I know that higher growth in India cannot be meaningful unless the gains of growth are 
distributed more widely. 
CB: If there were three things that you could achieve in your first three years, what 
would those three be? 
DS: First, I would like the RBI to acquire greater proficiency in managing monetary policy in a 
globalised context. India is going to become more and more integrated. And we are going to 
be impacted by what's happening around the world. 
Second, we have to make the RBI more transparent. We need to improve communication at 
both technical and non technical levels. 
Third, at a very personal level, I would like to de-mystify the office of the governor. What I 
mean  by  this  is  that  I  want  our  staff  to  understand  that  even  governors  do  not  know 
everything, that they have to make judgement calls in a context of uncertainty when the pros 
and cons of their actions are not completely clear. I want them to understand that they will 
serve  me  better  by  disagreeing  with  me  and  telling  me  what  to  do  rather  than  trying  to 
outguess me. I want them to understand that the Governors do not know everything and that 
they should feel free and comfortable about speaking up. 
CB: The Reserve Bank of India is now in its 75th year. How does the Reserve Bank 
plan to mark this anniversary? 
DS: Our plans are still somewhat fluid and I expect that we will look ahead as we look back. 
It's my privilege to be heading the RBI at such an historic moment. First of all, I want to say 
that the RBI has earned an enviable reputation for competence, for its professionalism and 
its integrity. 
We will of course be having events to commemorate the anniversary. But what I do want to 
do  is  to  use  the  jubilee  as  an  occasion  to  have  RBI  understand  that  they  must  make  a 
difference and I want the people of India to understand that the RBI does something that's 
important in their daily lives. I want our staff to understand that they can make a difference. 
CB:  Looking  back  on  the  Reserve  Bank's  first  75  years,  are  there  any  lessons  from 
history that the institution could usefully apply in the current circumstances? 
DS: I'm afraid I'm not a student of history but 75 years is a long time and there are certainly 
lessons from our experience. The central bank has performed the role of being an effective 
counterpoint to government which often has to concentrate on short-term objectives. On its 
part, the Reserve Bank has been able to take a medium-term view and what is prudent and 
optimal comes out of this synthesis. We should continue to do that. 
RBI  has  had  a  culture  of  gradualism,  moving  forward  decisively  but  only  after  weighing 
carefully the pros and cons. It's like the crossing a river by feeling the stones metaphor. 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2009
Moving  forward  we  need  to  understand  that  monetary  policy  is  going  to  be  more  difficult 
because of the increasing forces of globalisation. As I mentioned earlier, we need to acquire 
greater proficiency in that. 
CB:  Where  do  you  believe  your  views  differ  from  those  of  your  predecessor,  Y.V. 
Reddy? Where are there similarities? 
DS: Dr Reddy is an eminent economist who has served the RBI with dignity and distinction. 
He's a difficult act to follow. 
We are similar in that our aims are to keep the economy on a high-growth path with price 
stability and increasingly, financial stability. 
However,  the  difference  between  him  and  me  will  be  the  specific  circumstances  that  we 
encounter when we try to deal with that mandate. 
Dr. Reddy has had to deal with two episodes of inflation, one demand driven and the other 
supply driven. He has also had to deal with a flood of capital flows. I have had a baptism by 
fire, taking over at a time of crisis, where I've had to act quickly. It has been a steep learning 
curve. 
CB: Do you feel that the Reserve Bank of India's relative scepticism towards inflation 
targeting has been vindicated by recent events? 
DS: Yes, to a large extent. Because, in India, inflation is influenced by a number of factors 
besides excess demand in the context of easy liquidity. We're an import-dependent economy 
that is reliant on importing commodities. So, import prices can drive up inflation. Capital flows 
could impact inflation. Decisions by other central banks could also cause inflation, especially 
in  a  globalising  world.  In  a  crisis  such  as  this,  inflation  could  also  come  through  the  trade 
channel.  Also,  India  is  largely  an  agricultural  economy,  even  though  agriculture  now 
accounts  for  less  than  20%  of  GDP.  So,  our  agriculture  prices  are  vulnerable  to  monsoon 
and adverse weather conditions, and beyond the pale of monetary policy action. Because of 
this, inflation targeting is neither possible nor advisable for the Reserve Bank. 
CB:  You've  said  that  you're  unconcerned  that  there  is  a  threat  of  serious  deflation 
despite  wholesale  prices  being  in  negative  territory.  Can  you  go  into  a  little  more 
depth on why you hold this view? 
DS: WPI inflation went into negative territory two weeks ago and remains there. Given the 
talk about deflation around the world, especially in the advanced economies, there has been 
some concern in India whether what we have is a structural deflation. It is important for the 
central bank to communicate the message that this is not a structural deflation and that what 
we are seeing is purely statistical in its nature. 
The  WPI  went  into  negative  territory  because  a  year  ago,  at  this  point  of  time,  the 
administered  oil  prices  were  raised.  Our  negative  inflation  does  not  reflect  a  demand 
constraint. Far from it. We are a supply-constrained economy not demand constrained. 
Negative inflation has also triggered speculation about further rate cuts. I want to reiterate 
here that the Reserve Bank looks at a number of indices, including the WPI, the four indices 
of CPI. We also look at the inflation expectations survey that we do. So I want to reiterate 
that  the  current  temporary  negative  inflation  is  not  structural  in  nature,  but  rather  it's  only 
statistical. 
CB: In an article written for The Banker, published 5 January, you wrote: "It was not 
supposed to happen this way. The decoupling theory was supposed to kick in." Why 
did it not? 
BIS Review 92/2009 
 3
DS:  The  decoupling  theory  held  that  because  of  the  substantial  rise  in  foreign  exchange 
reserves, the improved  policy framework, robust corporate balance sheets and a relatively 
healthy  banking  sector,  emerging  economies  could  steam  ahead  on  their  own  even  if 
advanced countries went into recession. 
The  reality  turned  out  to  be  otherwise.  We've  seen  in  the  last  several  months  capital  flow 
reversals, sharp currency depreciations, and a widening of spreads on both corporate and 
sovereign  debt.  The  decoupling  theory  was  never  totally  persuasive  in  a  globalising  world 
and its credibility has been seriously dented by the events of the past few months. 
We should now have a modified decoupling theory which is that if the downturn in advanced 
economies  is  relatively  mild,  then  emerging  economies  could  do  enough  through  policy 
responses to insulate their economies. But if the downturn is severe, they will be impacted, of 
course differently in different economies. 
Again, India has not been able to decouple through this crisis not so much because demand 
collapsed, but because we have been impacted through the finance channel and through the 
confidence channel. Because capital flows, which have been larger than our current account 
deficit over recent years, have substantially declined in the wake of the crisis. 
CB: Do you think that scenario would change if domestic consumption in the likes of 
India or China was boosted? 
DS: I can't comment on China. But as far as India is concerned, our consumption at 57% of 
GDP is relatively high for an economy of our per capita income level. So the important thing 
for India is to increase investment, especially in infrastructure, and not so much consumption. 
I admit that private consumption has to go up as indicator of poverty reduction, but what is 
more important is that investment increase. 
CB:  Could  you  clarify  your  position  on  the  stability  of  the  current  international 
monetary order? 
DS: I have studied the debate about the dollar as the reserve currency, whether there could 
be  alternatives  to  that,  what  are  the  implications  for  the  world  economy  and  for  emerging 
economies. At this time I'm not sure if there is a currency that can replace the dollar. In any 
case,  replacing  the  dollar  can't  happen  by  fiat.  It  has  to  happen  on  the  strength  of  that 
alternate currency. But I do want to say that in terms of the international monetary order, we 
are facing a situation where finance is globalised, but we still have regulation at the national 
level. We need to look at the implications of this for monetary policy, especially for countries 
with fixed exchange rates and for emerging economies. 
It's also important to focus on global imbalances. If we accept, as seems to be the current 
consensus, that these imbalances were one of the structural causes of the crisis, and given 
that you cannot have a world without imbalances, what can we do to ensure that the world is 
in  a  better  position  to  minimise  imbalances,  and  to  the  extent  that  they  exist,  to  manage 
them. 
CB: What do you think is the right forum in which to conduct this debate? 
DS:  Several  international  fora  are  appropriate.  There  is  the  IMF,  the  BIS's  bi-monthly 
meetings and the very effective G20. Important topics such as this must be discussed at all 
these fora. And I believe that they are likely to be discussed for much longer than we think 
before we reach an agreed view on a minimum acceptable programme. 
CB: The first official summit of BRIC leaders recently took place in Russia.  How do 
you view the relationship between yourself and your Brazilian, Russian and Chinese 
counterparts? 
4 
 BIS Review 92/2009
DS: As a first point, BRIC is a Goldman Sachs acronym that emerged out of some similarities 
between the Brazilian, Russian, Indian and Chinese economies, which are growing rapidly 
and have an increasing influence on global growth. Since Goldman Sachs came up with that, 
these economies have had different developments, including in terms of the impact that the 
crisis has had on each of them. It has been useful for central bank governors and finance 
ministers to meet at international fora to have a shared understanding on some of the issues 
that  are  common  to  us,  such  as  a  common  minimum  programme  on  regulation,  the 
management and the governance of Bretton Woods institutions. 
CB:  I  see  your  point  about  BRIC  being  a  construct  of  Goldman  Sachs,  but  I've  also 
heard people say that if it didn't exist then somebody would have to invent it. 
DS:  I  would  think  that  there  are  enough  similarities  that  it  is  worthwhile  discussing  policy 
responses  together.  Not  on  all  issues.  But  to  the  extent  that  we  are  seen  as  large,  high-
growth countries, and as contributors to incremental global growth, we have issues in which 
we have a common interest. It is not as though we must have a common view on every issue 
that emerges in international fora. But I believe that the consultation has so far been value 
adding. 
The  four  of  us  saying  something  collectively  has  absolutely  more  clout  than  if  we  say  the 
same thing separately. Even if there is an understanding that we have differences, is itself 
value adding. 
CB: Is there anything else that you'd like to mention? 
DS: One issue that has come up in India in the context of the crisis is why we are not doing 
everything  that  other  central  banks  around  the  world  have  been  doing.  Our  response  has 
been that even as the origins of the crisis have been common, the evolution of crisis and its 
impact  has  been  different  across  countries.  Countries  have  had  to  respond  to  the  specific 
situation  in  their  countries.  In  the  advanced  economies,  the  transmission  of  the  crisis  has 
been  from  the  financial  sector  to  the  real  sector.  In  contrast,  in  a  number  of  countries 
including India, the transmission of the crisis has been from the real sector to the financial 
sector and iterations thereon. While we have studied and reflected on the responses of other 
countries, our policy action has been tailored to the Indian situation and aimed at minimising 
the  impact  of  the  crisis.  This  has  meant  both  conventional  and  non-conventional  policy 
action. 
Copyright(c) Central Banking Publications 
BIS Review 92/2009 
 5
