Lim Hng Kiang: Singapore’s insurance industry – investing in future 
growth  
Congratulatory remarks by Mr Lim Hng Kiang, Deputy Chairman of the Monetary Authority of 
Singapore  and  Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry,  at  the  opening  of  the  AXA  University  Asia 
Pacific Campus Singapore, 8 April 2009. 
 Mr Henri de Castries, Chairman of AXA Management Board and CEO of AXA Group 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  with  you  this  evening  to  commemorate  the  opening  of  the  AXA 
University Asia Pacific Campus. 
This  establishment  of  a  full-fledged  corporate  training  campus  here  reflects  AXA  Group’s 
continued commitment to people development, in Asia and to Singapore. We welcome the 
leadership and foresight demonstrated by AXA in investing in future growth of the industry. 
This investment is especially significant given the current difficult economic environment. 
Allow me to first comment on global economic and financial developments.  
Overview of economic and financial developments in the world, including Asia 
As  you  know,  global  financial  markets  are  going  through  very  turbulent  times.  The  sharp 
downturn  in  global  economic  activities  has  taken  many  by  surprise.  Some  say  that  this 
current  macroeconomic  condition  is  like  the  perfect  storm.  Sharp  tightening  of  credit 
conditions, loss of confidence in banking and capital markets and sharp declines in output 
have resulted in a gloomy outlook for the global economy with projected growth of a meagre 
½ percent for 2009. This is probably the lowest rate since World War II.  
The  global  insurance  industry  was  not  spared  the  impact  of  the  volatile  financial  markets. 
While the industry has generally been fairly resilient to date, business conditions this year are 
expected to be very challenging. Insurance companies not only have to manage their capital 
bases in this fluctuating market, they also need to cope with lower business volumes as a 
result  of  the  recession.  Forecasts  are  for  very  tempered  growth  in  the  industry  this  year. 
However, the long term potential of the insurance sector in Asia remains promising. As such, 
insurance  companies  should  stay  engaged  and  take  this  opportunity  to  strengthen  your 
operational  capabilities.  This  will  help  us  ride  the  crisis  and  position  for  the  upturn.  In  this 
respect, I would like to share two potential areas that insurance firms can focus on:  
Insurance industry to focus on core competencies 
(i) 
First, if there is one thing that this crisis has taught us, it is for us to go back to fundamentals. 
The financial crisis is a timely reminder for the insurance industry to stay focused on their 
core  competencies  and  to  continually  improve  and  strengthen  their  risk  management 
systems.  MAS  has  long  emphasised  the  importance  of  sound  risk  management  to  all 
financial institutions. In February 2006, MAS issued risk management guidelines to enhance 
financial  institutions  efforts  in  this  area.  This  was  further  supplemented  by  additional 
guidelines  issued  for  insurance  businesses  in  November  2007,  covering  areas  such  as 
product development, pricing, underwriting and claims handling. Although it is difficult for the 
industry to be insulated from an economic downturn, there is scope for more forward-looking 
evaluation and management of the risks facing the insurance industry as a whole. Rigorous 
stress testing and risk mitigating strategies for the asset side of the books are examples of 
BIS Review 45/2009 
 1
areas  that  insurance  companies  should  be  paying  particular  attention  to  in  these  difficult 
times. 
Encouraging investments in research and talent development 
(ii)  
Second, I would like to encourage the industry to take advantage of the current downtime to 
channel resources to research and training. Companies should not lose sight of the long term 
and use this opportunity to invest in trying to identify new risks, new trends and in capacity 
building. 
For research, this is very important. As the insurance industry in Asia develops, there is an 
increasing need for better understanding of insurance risks in Asia in order to allow for more 
robust risk modelling. For instance, systemic demographic shifts in Asian countries will pose 
many  retirement  planning  challenges.  Just  to  cite  a  quick  statistic,  from  the  year  2000  to 
2050, the old-age dependency ratio in Asia is projected to rise from 9% to 27%. There is a 
need  for  everyone  to  have  a  better  grasp  of  this  relatively  new  challenge  of  managing 
longevity  risk.  Many  countries  have  been  reviewing  and  improving  their  pension  systems 
given this trend. For the insurance industry, longevity risks for the different markets will need 
to  be  better  understood  before  appropriate  products  and  services  can  be  developed  and 
offered. To support such efforts, I am glad to note that our local universities have initiated 
research  institutes  and  projects  in  these  areas.  One  example  is  the  new  Centre  for  Silver 
Security under SMU’s Sim Kee Boon Institute for Financial Economics. The Centre will focus 
on  research  in  retirement  security  issues  such  as  retirement  planning  and  pensions.  AXA 
University could thus leverage on the research community here to enhance the knowledge of 
risks in our region.  
The other aspect is the competency and availability of skilled professionals in the insurance 
industry. Having a pool of talent with the necessary skills is critical for the industry to maintain 
its  competency  and  remain  competitive.  To  support  the  specialised  need  of  the  insurance 
sector, the Nanyang Technological University launched a new minor for Risk Management 
and  Insurance  this  year.  We  are  also  pleased that  the  General  Insurance  Association  has 
launched  the  Global  Internship  Programme  in  May  last  year  to  provide  deserving 
undergraduates with exposure to the wider insurance industry, both locally and overseas.  
We believe that the current downturn is also an opportunity to invest in developing talent for 
the  longer  term.  We  have,  as  part  of  a  nation  wide  effort  to  encourage  manpower 
development,  recently  announced  enhancements  of  up  to  90%  co-funding  for  training 
schemes  under  the  Financial  Sector  Development  Fund.  We  want  to  share  the  risks  and 
costs with financial institutions in this climate to retain and develop talent. In addition, MAS 
has  also  announced  that  it  would  set  aside  S$15  million  to  support  fresh  local  university 
graduates in industry attachments over the next 1-2 years. 
Closing 
As an international financial centre, Singapore needs to continually build on its fundamentals. 
We have to retain and enhance trust and confidence among investors and businesses here 
by continuing to provide socio-political stability, respected regulatory standards and a well-
regarded  legal  regime.  Underpinning  all  these  efforts  is  a  highly  skilled  and  professional 
talent pool. AXA’s decision to locate its training centre here will therefore go a long way to 
support  this  effort.  On  that  note,  I  would  like  to  extend  my  heartiest  congratulations  once 
again  to  the  AXA  Group  for  the  launch  of  the  AXA  University  Asia-Pacific  Campus  in 
Singapore. I wish you every success in this very important endeavour.  
Have a great evening, thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2009
