Njuguna Ndung’u: Financial sector collaboration 
Opening remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 
breakfast meeting for domestic financial sector regulators, Nairobi, 31 August 2009. 
 Hon. Deputy Prime Minister and minister for Finance 
Board Members and Chief Executive Officers of RBA, CMA and IRA, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It is my pleasure to be with you this morning and I am indeed honored to be accorded this 
opportunity  to  give  brief  remarks  at  this  important  breakfast  meeting  where  the  Domestic 
Financial  Sector  Regulators  will  be  signing  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MOU)  on 
financial sector Collaboration. 
At the onset, allow me to extend my gratitude to the Hon. Deputy Prime Minister and Minister 
of Finance for agreeing to grace the ceremony and deliver a key note address. In the same 
token,  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  recognise  the  work  of  The  Technical  Committee  on 
Collaboration which has been instrumental in organising the event. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  is  a  caucus  of  Central  Bank 
Governors  under  the  East  African  Community  Monetary  Union  which  is  mandated,  among 
others,  to  harmonize  regulatory  regimes  and  supervisory  frameworks  in  the  region  in  the 
banking  sectors.  During  the  12th  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  (MAC)  Governors’  Meeting 
held in Kigali, Rwanda in May 2009, my fellow Governors and I celebrated the execution of 
the  MOU  amongst  the  five  Central  Banks,  which  was  put  into  effect  in  early  2009.  It  was 
indeed pleasing for Governors to note that the Bank of Uganda had already signed an MOU 
with  other  domestic  financial  sector  regulators  in  Uganda.  Other  MAC  Governors  were 
therefore urged to implement a similar arrangement with their respective domestic regulators 
by  June  2010.  This  is  to  demonstrate  that  collaboration  amongst  domestic  regulators  is in 
line with regional aspirations. Consequently the celebrations that we mark today will enable 
CBK  achieve  a  milestone  set  by  MAC  Governors  ahead  of  the  set  time  of  June  2010.  I 
cannot  thank  my  fellow  domestic  regulators  enough.  But  for  the  Kenyan  side,  let  me 
commend RBA and Edward Odundo for the time and effort he has put on this initiative. 
As you are aware, there has been increased integration of economic and financial markets 
globally.  Globalization  is  creating  new  business  opportunities  and  opening  new  markets. 
However,  the  forces  of  globalization  and  the  ensuing  competition  are  prompting  financial 
companies  to  engage  in  business  operations  that  make  group  management  and  risk 
aggregation  more  challenging.  Similarly,  a  new  concept  of  cross-ownership  and  trading  is 
emerging in our market, thus blurring sector boundaries and product lines. For example, we 
have  banks  that  want  to  offer  bancassurance  while  insurance  companies  are  underwriting 
financial  risks  that  were  once  a  domain  of  investment  banks.  As  a  result,  it  is  becoming 
increasingly  difficult  for  one  regulator  to  set  up  a  regulatory  regime  without  taking  into 
consideration the impact it bears on the other financial sub-sectors. In the same vein, we are 
increasingly seeing banks acquiring brokerage firms in the capital market. Harmonisation of 
regulatory  regimes  in  the  entire  financial  sector  is  therefore  critical  in  order  to  offer 
consistency and maintain financial stability. 
The  ongoing  global  financial  crisis  has  only  served  to  underscore  the  inter-linkages  of 
financial systems. The crisis has demonstrated that risks and shocks that originate from one 
area can be transmitted internally within a group or externally through converging products, 
markets  or  cross  borders.  In  this  regard,  financial  sector  regulators  should  base  their 
supervision on a consolidated basis by reviewing risks across the entire financial spectrum 
rather than purely on an industry solo basis. 
BIS Review 112/2009 
 1
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  before  I  conclude  my  remarks,  allow  me,  on  behalf  of  my  fellow 
regulators,  and  on  my  own  behalf,  to  express  our  sincere  gratitude  to  all  the  guests  who 
responded to our invitation and set aside time to grace this ceremony. I am sure also, the 
totality of the financial market will appreciate this move by the regulators. 
Finally,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  being  aware  of  the  task  ahead  of  us,  let  me  take  this 
opportunity to invite our chief guest to address this gathering. 
Welcome Deputy Prime Minister, Hon. Uhuru Kenyatta. 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2009
