Caleb M Fundanga: Campaign to keep Zambia clean and healthy 
Opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the review 
walk  of  the  “Keep  Lusaka  clean,  green  and  healthy  campaign  project”,  Lusaka,  17 
September 2009. 
 The Acting Minister of Local Government and Housing, Hon Bradford Machila 
His Worship the Mayor of Lusaka, His Worship Robert Chikwelete 
The Chairman of the BAZ, Mr Saviour Chibiya 
Chief Executive Officers of Commercial Banks 
Distinguished Invited Guests 
Members of the Press 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  am  honored  to  officiate  at  this  important  occasion  at  which  banks  have  undertaken  to 
conduct a review of the “Keep Lusaka Clean, Green and Healthy Campaign”. 
Hon  Minister,  as  you  are  aware,  the  “Make  Zambia  Clean  and  Healthy”  campaign  was 
launched by the Government in 2007 and was aimed at keeping our surroundings clean and 
green in order to improve the health standards throughout the country. 
You may wish to know that the banking sector through the Bankers Association of Zambia 
and the Bank of Zambia commenced work immediately after the national launch. A project 
committee  was  formed  and  each  bank  including  the  BoZ  embarked  on  implementing  the 
campaign  by  making  financial  contributions.  To  ensure  a  uniform  landscape  on  all  islands 
along  Cairo  Road,  a  single  company  was  employed  to  carry  out  landscaping  and 
maintenance  works  including  maintaining  and  keeping  the  pavements    and  gardens  clean 
and  green.  The  programme  also  included  placing  dustbins  along  the  pavements  and 
ensuring that the street lights were repaired and lit. It is highly gratifying to see how much 
work  has  been  accomplished  and  I  am  sure  that  the  results  are  clear  for  all  of  us  to  see 
today. 
This initiative, Ladies and Gentlemen, is one sure way of inculcating and promoting a culture 
of cleanliness amongst our people. It is also an effective way of expressing our Corporate 
Social Responsibility. Beautiful and clean surroundings also go a long way in complementing 
Government’s  efforts  of  developing  tourism.  In  fact  another  dimension  of  the  initiative 
required that all banks including the BoZ maintain and keep their offices and surroundings 
clean  at  all  times.  In  this  regard,  we  at  the  Bank  of  Zambia  have  introduced  regular 
inspections of offices while ensuring that all staff are aware of their responsibilities towards 
the clean campaign. 
Furthermore,  by  keeping  their  premises  or  business  environment  clean,  banks  provide  the 
satisfaction that customer need. You would all agree with me that a business done in a clean 
environment leave the customer totally relaxed and in good spirit, prompting another visit in 
future. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  line  with  “Goal  8”  of  the  Millennium  Development  Goals  on 
“Environmental Sustainability”, we are all expected to work together and reverse the losses 
of environmental resources. I am glad to report that the financial sector has taken the bold 
step and has become one of, if not the first, to contribute positively towards achieving this 
goal. In this regard I would like to call upon other corporate entities and business houses in 
Lusaka and other cities around the country to emulate the efforts of the financial sector and 
help keep Zambia a beautiful, clean and healthy place to live in. I must hasten to mention 
here  that,  by  undertaking  such  initiatives,  we  are  in  no  way  trying  to  take  over  the 
responsibility  of  the  local  authorities  but  merely  supplementing  their  efforts  of  keeping  the 
country clean and healthy. 
BIS Review 112/2009 
 1
Hon  Minister,  allow  me  to  make  an  earnest  appeal  to  the  local  authorities  through  “His 
Worship  the  Mayor”  to  assist  in  the  maintenance  of  the  islands  by  providing  security  to 
minimize  the  rampant  vandalism,  theft  and  destruction  of  plants  and  other  essentials  that 
occur  on  a  daily  basis.  We  also  make  a  humble  request  to  the  Lusaka  City  Council  to 
consider  working  on  the  water  reticulation  system,  as  this  is  one  area  posing  a  great 
challenge in the maintenance of the islands. 
Furthermore,  there  are  still  a  number  of  places,  which  require  urgent  attention  in  the  City. 
Your  Worship,  we  have  observed  that  a  number  of  incomplete  buildings  have  been 
abandoned posing a danger to the lives of many while others remain without a colour wash 
for  years  giving  an  unattractive  sight  to  our  beloved  capital  city.  We  would  like  to  request 
your good office, “Your Worship” to issue mandatory directives to all business houses in 
the  country  to  complete  construction  sites  within  a  stipulated  period  and  to  ensure  that  all 
buildings are properly maintained and where necessary repainted on a regular basis. 
In conclusion, Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish to commend the Bankers Association of Zambia 
and in particular the Project Committee for the effective and efficient manner in which this 
initiative  has  been  implemented  thus  far.  My  hope  is  that  the  initiative  will  not  only  be 
confined to Cairo Road but to all areas of the country. 
Finally, I would like to urge all of us present here today to extend this initiative to our homes. 
Let  us  keep  our  homes,  communities  and  the  country  clean  as  cleanliness  is  next  to 
godliness. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2009
