Jean-Claude Trichet: The times of unprecedented challenges 
Address  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference “20 years after the collapse of the socialist economy: transformation, economic 
growth  and  convergence  in  Poland  and  other  central  and  eastern  European  countries”, 
organised by the National Bank of Poland, Warsaw, 5 June 2009. 
 Dear President Kaczyński, 
dear President Klaus, 
dear President Skrzypek, 
dear Joaquín, 
dear Governors, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
We  are  celebrating  today  the  20th  anniversary  of  Poland’s  first  free  elections  after  the 
Second World War. This is a historic moment not only for Poland but also for Europe as a 
whole. Without the courageous actions by the Polish people at the time, this country might 
not be part of the European Union today, and Europe might even be still divided in East and 
West. By holding its first democratic elections two decades ago, Poland – together with the 
other Central and Eastern European countries – had set the most important pre-accession 
requirement  to  join  the  European  Union  in  May  2004.  It  was  a  historic  re-unification  of 
Europe  after  decades  of  division.  Today,  the  EU  is  a  family  of  27  members,  16  of  which 
share the euro as a common currency.  
On the road to the EU: convergence and integration 
During the past two decades, Poland has gone through a long and challenging process of 
transformation.  The  fruits  of  this  process  are  clearly  visible  today.  Over  the  past  20  years 
Polish GDP per capita more than tripled. In recent years Poland has also made progress on 
the structural side, for instance, by improving labour market flexibility and by limiting the very 
costly  early  retirement  schemes  that  were  in  place.  At  the  same  time,  the  adoption  of  an 
inflation  targeting  framework  at  the  National  Bank  of  Poland  back  in  1998  has  been  an 
important  step  towards  bringing  inflation  down  and  closer  to  a  level  that  is  consistent  with 
price stability. 
The  catching-up  process  has  been  accompanied  by  a  strong  economic  and  financial 
integration with the EU. Jacques Delors – the former Commission President – once defined 
the  European  integration  as  a  triad:  competition,  which  stimulates  us,  cooperation,  which 
strengthens us, and solidarity which unites us. Let me briefly spell out his words in today’s 
context. 
First, competition. The historic enlargement of the European Union in 2004 has extended the 
border  of  our  common  internal  market  eastwards,  thus  unleashing  the  beneficial  forces  of 
competition  in  these  countries  whilst  providing  for  a  solid  regulatory  framework.  Polish 
businesses are part of a single market of half a billion people.  
Second,  cooperation.  The  joint  efforts  to  tackle  the  financial  crises  are  perhaps  the  most 
prominent recent example. But cooperation has gone a long way in Europe. In the EU we 
have  developed  common  institutions  and  common  policies.  And  we  have  found  ways  to 
overcome differences and find common solutions. 
Third,  solidarity.  Solidarity  is  an  essential  part  of  Europe’s  common  roots  and  values. 
Solidarity  among  the  peoples  of  Europe  was  the  explicit  aim  of  the  founding  fathers.  Why 
was this? Because they believed that a de facto solidarity, a linkage of their interests, would 
prevent a new war. Let me quote a passage from the Schuman declaration of 9 May 1950: 
BIS Review 70/2009 
 1
“Europe will not be made all at once, or according to a single plan. It will be built through 
concrete achievements which first create a de facto solidarity.”  
It  is  in  this  spirit  that  EU  solidarity  has  bolstered  EU  integration.  In  the  case  of  Poland, 
concrete signposts of EU solidarity can be spotted all along Poland’s long road towards EU 
integration.  EU  solidarity  started  well  before  accession,  with  Poland  joining  the  PHARE 
programme  already  in  1989  and  receiving  pre-accession  support.  This  solidarity  continued 
after accession, in the form of an important flow of EU funds, especially in the context of EU 
cohesion and agricultural policy. To give but one example, net transfers from the EU budget 
to Poland amounted to EUR 5.1 billion in 2007. 
Solidarity did also not come to a halt during the crisis. Poland – like virtually all countries in 
the  global  economy  –  has  been  affected  by  the  financial  crisis.  Not  because  its  financial 
institutions  were  particularly  exposed  to  the  US  sub-prime  market,  but  because  it  has 
become an integral part of the global economy. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that Poland 
has so far fared relatively better than some of its neighbouring countries.  
In coping with the crisis within the EU, solidarity was fundamental. Let me just mention some 
concrete  achievements  in  terms  of  solidarity  within  the  European  Union:  first,  increased 
financing available under the Medium Term Financial Assistance (MTFA) facility, which rose 
from EUR 12 billion in 2002 to EUR 25 billion in 2008 and then again to EUR 50 billion in 
May this year; second, increased ceilings for EIB lending of at least EUR 8.5 billion during 
2009  and  2010;  and  third,  accelerated  payments  of  structural  funds  of  EUR  6.3  billion  in 
2009.  In  addition,  only  a  few  days  ago,  the  Commission  put  forward  plans  to  accelerate 
payments  under  the  European  Social  Fund  for  an  amount  of  EUR  19  billion  in  2009-2010 
alone,  an  important  part  of  which  [(35%)]  is  destined  for  Central  and  Eastern  European 
countries.  Together  with  the  liquidity  provisions  extended  by  the  ECB  to  a  number  of 
countries, the total amount of funds earmarked by the EU to its members and neighbours to 
tackle the crisis exceeds EUR 70 billion. It is indeed quite natural for the EU to exercise its 
solidarity in these days. It is solidarity that makes us a community and a union, not just a 
market. 
But  solidarity  is  not  a  panacea.  It  is  no  substitute  for  sound  macroeconomic  policies  and 
structural  reforms.  In  fact,  the  crisis  has  highlighted  once  again  the  importance  of  a  solid 
structural economic foundation for sustainable growth. In this respect, it is striking to see how 
different the impact of the global financial crisis has been across individual countries, both in 
terms of financial market responses and with respect to real economic activity. The fact that 
the impact of the global financial crisis has been considerably less pronounced in Poland as 
compared to its regional peers, might have various reasons. The most important one, in my 
view,  is  that  Poland  has  built-up  less  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  that  it  has 
implemented a set of policies and reforms that have overall been appropriate in recent years.  
In contrast, some other countries had accumulated large domestic and external imbalances, 
and  these  made  them  vulnerable  to  changes  in  international  investor  sentiment.  Larger 
current  account  deficits  imply  a  greater  reliance  on  external  finance  and  thus  a  larger 
sensitivity  to  a  disruption  in  cross-border  capital  flows.  Sound  macroeconomic  policies  are 
therefore not only prerequisites for a successful participation in the economic and monetary 
union, but they are also necessary for the catching-up process to operate smoothly. It is after 
the  elimination  of  major  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  when  sufficient  convergence  has 
been achieved, that countries can expect to reap the full benefits of euro area membership.  
The ECB’s response to the financial crises 
The experience of the past year and a half bears testimony that the euro has continued to be 
an anchor of stability in times of stress. Let me explain to you why this is so. The financial 
turmoil crystallises two principal tenets behind our monetary policy strategy: swift and flexible 
action guided by a steady and unwavering compass. From the onset of the crisis in August 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2009
2007  we  were  determined  to  do  what  was  needed  to  alleviate  the  tensions  in  money 
markets. We did not hesitate to charter unknown territory and to move forcefully to counter 
the  adverse  consequences  of  the  financial  crisis.  At  the  same  time,  we  always  kept  our 
medium-term perspective fade in mind, and inflation expectations remained fully anchored. 
The Governing Council made always clear that we would not compromise – in any respect – 
the  longer-term  achievement  of  the  price  stability  objective  or  encourage  or  tolerate 
imprudent behaviour by market participants. 
The  specific  and  targeted  changes  to  our  operational  framework  –  some  of  which  can  be 
called “non-standard” – have played a critical role: they have been instrumental in organising 
the defence against the systemic liquidity risk that occurred in September last year and in 
preserving  the  availability  of  credit  for  households  and  companies  at  accessible  rates, 
thereby creating the conditions for the best possible transmission of our subsequent easing 
of  monetary  conditions.  We  cut  our  key  interest  rate  in  a  series  of  seven  unprecedented 
steps by a cumulative 325 basis points within about half a year. The Eurosystem is currently 
providing unlimited refinancing at 1.0% in its main refinancing operations. From a historical 
perspective, these measures are unprecedented in terms of their breadth and depth.  
At  the  same  time,  these  measures  have  been  taken  in  full  consistency  with  our  monetary 
policy framework and our primary objective of maintaining price stability. The crisis has not 
changed  this  objective.  In  contrast,  the  fundamental  principle  on  which  our  actions  were 
based  on  is  that  any  course  of  policy  –  conventional  or  unconventional  –  should be  firmly 
grounded  on  and  directed  to  the  achievement  of  the  Eurosystem’s  primary  objective  of 
preserving price stability over the medium term. This objective will always provide the context 
and limits within which our course of action is framed and enacted.  
The evidence on our bold yet solidly anchored response to the crises is encouraging. While 
long-term inflation expectations continue to remain broadly anchored at levels consistent with 
price stability, our measures show some signs of revival in the functioning of money markets 
in Europe. Banks are at the heart of the financial system in the euro area. This is the main 
reason why our policy response so far has been tailored to the specific nature of Europe’s 
financial structure. It is also the reason why the Governing Council decided in its meeting in 
May to proceed with its enhanced credit support approach. Our enhanced liquidity provision 
supports  banks  in  continuing  their  lending  operations  to  firms  and  households.  In  full 
continuity and consistency with the operations we have undertaken since October 2008, we 
have  delivered  an  array  of  policy  decisions  that  provide  further  support  to  improve  market 
liquidity in important segments of the private debt security market.  
Yesterday,  we  decided  on  the  implementation  of  the  programme  for  purchases  of  euro-
denominated covered bonds issued in the euro area. The decision to buy covered bonds was 
motivated from the fact that these bonds are a segment of the private securities markets that 
has been particularly affected by the financial turmoil.  
We  trust  that  all  these  measures  will  continue  to  contribute  to  restoring  and  fostering 
confidence among banks, companies and households. Confidence today relies equally upon 
our immediate agility of action and upon the soundness and credibility of our exit strategy. 
Once the macroeconomic environment improves, the Governing Council will ensure that the 
measures  taken  can  be  quickly  unwound  and  the  liquidity  provided  absorbed.  Hence,  any 
threat  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  and  longer  term  will  be  effectively  countered  in  a 
timely fashion. I observe, in particular, that the concentration of our non-standard measures 
on the supply of liquidity, with full allotment, to banks, provides for an in-built exit strategy. 
That  is,  when  tensions  in  financial  markets  ease,  banks  will  automatically  seek  less  credit 
from the ECB. This will be a decisive element in ensuring a non-inflationary recovery in the 
euro area. 
BIS Review 70/2009 
 3
Conclusions 
Let me conclude. This is a time of unprecedented uncertainty and challenges. We all have to 
live up to our responsibility. We have to respond forcefully to the challenge, but we should 
never forget the principles for sound macro-economic policy making that are at the heart of 
the European Union.  
The people of Poland know what it means to go through times of unprecedented uncertainty 
and  challenges.  Their  courage  and  their  determination,  which  we  celebrate  today,  is  a 
reminder of how to cope with challenging situations. We are looking forward to overcoming 
this crisis. The ECB’s commitment to maintaining price stability over the medium term, as laid 
down  in  the  Treaty,  will  contribute  to  paving  the  way  for  future  sustainable  growth,  job 
creation and economic prosperity in all Member States.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 70/2009
