Duvvuri  Subbarao:  Information  technology  and  banking  –  a  continuing 
agenda 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Banking Technology Awards 2008 of the Institute for Development & Research in Banking 
Technology, Hyderabad, 18 May 2009. 
 I  am  delighted  to  be  here  today  to  celebrate  outstanding  Information  Technology 
achievements  in  the  Indian  banking  sector.  We  are  all  well  aware  of  the  significant 
contributions  that  Indian  IT  professionals  have  made  in  the  world  arena.  In  fact,  when  the 
phrase “Indian talent” is used, it is often meant as a synonym for IT excellence.  
IT in the Indian financial sector – the beginnings 
The use of technology in expanding banking has been a key focus area of the Reserve Bank. 
Technological  innovation  not  only  enables  a  broader  reach  for  consumer  banking  and 
financial services, but also enhances its capacity for continued and inclusive growth.  
There  are  several  factors  attributed  to  India’s  high  growth  in  the  recent  period  –  improved 
productivity, growing entrepreneurial spirit, and higher savings, to name the most important. 
But  one  factor  usually  goes  unacknowledged  –  that  is  financial  intermediation.  I  believe 
improvement  in  the  quantum  and  quality  of  financial  intermediation  ranks  along  with  other 
factors that I mentioned above as a key growth driver. And one of the factors that drove the 
improvement in the quantum and quality of financial intermediation is more wide spread and 
more efficient use of IT.  
Implementing IT in an Indian banking system dominated by government-owned banks has 
not been easy. In his book “Imagining India – Ideas for the New Century”, Nandan Nilekani 
makes interesting references to this issue. He writes about his travels around the country in 
the early 1990s, speaking about the role of, what was then called in typical Indian English as 
“electronification”  in  Indian  banking.  After  one  such  presentation,  Nandan  writes,  the 
chairman of a bank advised him to stop preaching, warning him that (quote), “The unions will 
gherao  you  in  your  house!”  (unquote)  Nandan  goes  on  to  describe  another  presentation 
before  an  incredibly  hostile  audience,  who  dismissed  out  of  hand  all  his  ideas  and 
suggestions. But at the end of the presentation, the union leader told him privately that both 
his  sons  were  working  for  Microsoft  on  software  solutions.  I  am  told  that  during  the  initial 
days of IT implementation at the Reserve Bank, systems had to be smuggled into the office 
when “the world was sleeping”. Happily for us, IT implementation no longer faces opposition 
from  any  quarter.  Indeed,  everyone  welcomes  it.  Even  the  trade  unions  have  become 
extensive users of technology.  
On this occasion, as we honor achievement in technology implementation, I want to share a 
few thoughts on the role of IT in the Indian financial sector. 
IT in the Indian financial sector – status today 
First,  let  me  briefly  review  the  current  status  of  IT  in  the  financial  sector.  More  than  most 
other industries, banks and financial institutions rely on gathering, processing, analyzing and 
providing  information  in  order  to  meet  the  needs  of  customers.  Given  the  importance  of 
information  in  banking,  it  is  not  surprising  that  banks  were  among  the  earliest  adopters  of 
automated  information  processing  technology.  The  visible  benefits  of  IT  in  day-to-day 
banking  in  India  are  quite  well  known.  There’s  “Anywhere  Banking”  through  Core  Banking 
Systems,  “Anytime  Banking”  through  new,  24/7/365  delivery  channels  such  as  Automated 
BIS Review 62/2009 
 1
Teller  Machines  (ATMs),  and  Net  and  Mobile  Banking.  In  addition,  IT  has  enabled  the 
efficient, accurate and timely management of the increased transaction volume that comes 
with a larger customer base. It has also facilitated the movement from class banking to mass 
banking. 
The  past  few  years  saw  us  marking  some  major  milestones  in  the  Indian  payment  and 
settlement systems. The introduction of the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) System has 
resulted  in  compliance  with  the  Basle  Core  Principles  for  Systemically  Important  Payment 
Systems of  the Bank for International Settlements. It also has paved the way for  risk-free, 
credit push-based fund transfers settled on a real-time basis and in central bank money. The 
facility  for  inter-bank  funds  settlement  through  RTGS  is  today  available  across  more  than 
55,000 bank branches, in more than 2500 regional centers across the country – a coverage 
span perhaps not seen anywhere else in the world.  
Now,  let’s  compare  today’s  situation  with  what  was  in  place  in  2004,  when  only  4,800 
branches offered RTGS. The rapid acceptance of RTGS by users can be measured by the 
daily transaction volume: today, we settle close to 100,000 transactions a day in the RTGS 
mode,  up  from  just  about  6000  transactions  a  day  in  2004-05.  In  fact,  quick,  safe  and 
efficient  electronic  movement  of  funds  from  virtually  any  part  of  the  country  to  any  other 
location  is  now  almost  guaranteed.  This  is  enabled  by  the  coordination  with  the  National 
Electronic  Funds  transfer  (NEFT)  System  and  the  National  Electronic  Clearing  Service 
(NECS). In 2005, RBI was clearing about 2.70 lakh NEFT transactions a month. This number 
has jumped exponentially to nearly 40 lakh a month today. The establishment of the legal 
framework for all of this – in the form of the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 – 
provides the requisite supportive structure for these systems. 
I also want to highlight here the extent of customer migration to electronic payments in India. 
From  less  than  half  a  percent  of  transactions  in  the  electronic  mode  in  2001,  today  we 
process  close  to  about  30  crore  transactions  per  year  in  the  electronic  mode.  The  same 
holds true for RBI’s recent initiative away from High Value Clearing to electronic modes – a 
move aimed at creating a safer, secure and credit-push based funds transfer route that has 
gained considerable traction.  
We have also seen developments in the communication network and messaging system in 
India.  This  institute,  the  Institute  for  Development  and  Research  in  Banking  Technology 
(IDRBT),  set  up  by  the  RBI  in  1997,  implemented  the  INdianFInancialNETwork  –  the 
INFINET – a “one-of-a-kind” initiative for the banking sector aimed at sharing expensive IT 
resources so as to achieve economies of scale. One of IDRBT’s notable achievements has 
been the implementation of Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) – based electronic data transfer 
with  very  high  security  levels.  The  Institute  also  developed  a  messaging  standard  called 
Structured  Financial  Messaging  System  (SFMS)  with  security  features  superior  even  to 
SWIFT. Today INFINET has migrated to the latest MPLS technology in an effort to provide a 
state-of-the-art network. 
IDRBT also set up the National Financial Switch for interconnecting ATMs. It’s interesting to 
note  that  at  the  turn  of  the  century,  there  were  only  about  4000  ATMs  in  all  of  India,  and 
today  there  are  more  than  ten  times  this  number,  and  all  of  them  interconnected.  These 
changes have enabled RBI to take two major steps in this area in recent months. First, ATM 
card  holders  can  use  any  ATM  in  the  country  irrespective  of  which  bank  issued  them  the 
card; and second, use of ATMs has become free of charge since April 1, 2009. So, now a 
customer can go to any ATM and withdraw money free of charge regardless of which ATM is 
being used and which bank issued the card.  
IDRBT  also  spearheaded  research  in  the  field  of  banking  technology  and  has  been  the 
centre  for  excellence  in  training  in  this  area.  Over  the  years,  the  role  of  the  institute  has 
extended beyond research to providing various services to the banking community. Now, a 
committee  headed  by  Dr  C  Rangarajan 
IDRBT’s  role. 
Recommendations from this committee are anticipated soon.  
into  redefining 
looking 
is 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2009
Given the growing importance of IT in the banking sector, it is appropriate that the IDRBT 
provides  incentives  to  the  IT-based  operations  of  commercial  banks  by  evaluating  their  IT 
capabilities and motivating them to push for improvements by instituting these awards, which 
are going to be presented today.  
IT in the Indian financial sector – the continuing agenda 
Information technologies and the innovations they enable are strategic tools for enhancing 
the value of customer relationship. They reduce the costs of financial transactions, improve 
the  allocation  of  financial  resources,  and  increase  the  competitiveness  and  efficiency  of 
financial institutions.  
Even as the achievements of IT in the banking sector are impressive, we have a big agenda 
on the way forward. Current financial sector leaders still need to take greater advantage of 
new  technologies  and  information-based  systems  and  expand  the  coverage  of  the  Indian 
banking and financial system. 
What do I mean by this? For instance, the potential of IT in extending banking services to 
under-served  markets  in  rural  and semi-urban  areas  is  enormous.  The  use  of  Smart  Card 
technology,  mobile  ATMs,  coverage  of  post  offices  under  electronic  payments  networks  in 
out-of-reach  areas  –  all  could  play  significant  roles  in  providing  financial  services  to  more 
people and thereby serve financial inclusion.  
There  is  tremendous  potential  for  the  business  growth  of  financial  institutions  on  the  one 
hand  and  the  inclusive  growth  of  India  on  the  other.  We  have  already  seen  banks  using 
innovative  approaches  such  as  solar  power-  and  mobile  technology-based  connectivity  for 
branches. A variety of options are available which enable extended reach of such services. I 
urge banks to identify the technological model that is right for them. We have already seen 
the  positive  benefits  that  come  from  extending  the  reach  of  banking services  through  pilot 
projects  in  Andhra  Pradesh  and  parts  of  the  North  East.  The  Reserve  Bank  also  has 
announced  its  intention  to  expand  the  reach  of  banking  in  the  North  East  even  further  by 
funding the cost of connectivity using VSAT technology. IBA is working on the details of this 
effort. 
India is experiencing an explosion in the use of mobile communication technology. And this 
is a development that the financial sector can exploit. Mobile phone users belong to all strata 
of  society,  spread  across  metropolitan  centres,  towns  and  villages.  Banks  can  take 
advantage of this expanded reach of telecom if they provide services through this medium. 
The  phone’s  integrated  chip  can  function  as  a  multi-application  smart  card,  thus  making 
banking  services  available  to  virtually  every  mobile  phone  owner.  This  holds  substantial 
promise  as  the  delivery  vehicle  of  the  future:  there  is  huge  potential  and  an  exciting 
opportunity.  However,  the  expansion  of  such  capabilities  must  be  accompanied  by  a 
minimum  level  of  essential  security  features  and  continued  compliance  with  established 
covenants relating to privacy of customer transactions. 
The potential of IT for the near future also includes:  
Enabling differentiation in customer service;  
• 
Facilitating  Customer  Relationship  Management  (CRM)  based  on  available 
• 
information, which can be stored and retrieved from data warehouses;  
Improving asset-liability management for banks, which has a direct bearing on the 
profits of banks;  
Enhancing compliance with anti-money laundering regulations; and  
Complying with Basel II norms  
  BIS Review 62/2009 
 3
Implementation challenges 
New technologies set off a process of change. That, in turn, poses its own set of challenges 
to institutions as well as to consumers. IT is not yet a very comfortable choice for millions. 
Therefore, if we are to encourage IT proliferation, we must facilitate a change in customer 
mindsets and attitudes. Consumer awareness is a major challenge. It must be addressed as 
a whole. As automation increases and as products come with ever more technology based 
components,  bank  customers  must  understand  up  front  the  pros  and  cons  of  various 
products.  Banks  have  to  share  the  responsibility  of  providing  this  education.  It  is  not  just 
about the mere listing of all the terms and conditions on the agreement which, if we are being 
honest,  rarely  get  the  attention  or  focus  that  they  deserve.  People  should  read  this 
information,  but  do  they?  Beyond  that,  people  should  understand  all  that  is  written  in 
technical  and  legal  language,  but  can  they?  Real  education  will  lead  to  breakthroughs  in 
understanding. More consumers would be more eager and willing to move towards use of 
technologically-enhanced products. In turn, this will act as a multiplier, with a positive impact 
on bank performance.  
Banks  also must  pass on  the  benefits  of  lower  costs  from technology-based  products  and 
services to their customers. I was surprised to note that transfer of funds from one branch of 
a bank to another, both under the Core Banking System, entailed a service charge for the 
remitting customer. It does not make sense that the charge for such funds movement within 
a  bank  is  much  more  than  for  inter-bank  funds  transfers!  Let  me  be  candid.  The  entire 
institution of banking is built on consumer trust. By imposing charges not commensurate with 
the cost of services provided, we risk losing this fundamental trust that underlies a banking 
relationship.  
No doubt deployment of IT offers ample rewards. But these rewards can be claimed only by 
organizations  which  successfully  address  the  alignment  challenge.  Alignment  of  IT  and 
business, alignment of IT and HR and alignment of IT and organizational structure. These 
are all critical to derive true value. Working in silos deprives several benefits. All this should 
culminate in IT governance as an important component of corporate governance.  
Security in an IT-based transaction processing environment is also critical. Adequate security 
controls  must  be  in  place.  This  includes  the  validation  of  transactions  using  the  maker-
checker concept, transmission of electronic messages over a network in encrypted form, due 
authentication by means of providing for digital signatures and storage of electronic records 
in conformity with the provisions of the IT Act, 2000 and amendment Act 2008. There is also 
the human element, and this is an issue as well: studies from around the world show that a 
significant  proportion  of  IT  frauds  is  the  work  of  insiders.  This  underscores  the  need  for 
ensuring that proper controls are in place and that they work properly.  
Another serious challenge, particularly for public sector banks, is capacity building and talent 
retention. The success of IT implementation is ultimately manifested at the counters of the 
bank  or  at  the  ATMs  and  not  in  the  data  centres.  If  IT  implementation  in  the  early  stages 
faced challenges from the trade unions today banks face different kinds of challenges. If a 
customer  is  turned  back  on  the  last  day  of  tax  payment  (any  facility  will  not  change  this 
habit!) or a cheque gets returned because CBS can not be accessed at the branch, the entire 
edifice  of  efficiency  collapses  in  the  eyes  of  the  common  man!  Banks  must  make  sure  to 
avoid such interfaces which erode trust and confidence.  
Conclusion 
Let  me  now  conclude. We  know  that  investments  in  newer  technologies  must  be made  to 
modernize  existing  operations,  to  face  competitive  challenges,  and  to  meet  customer 
expectations. Some of these investments will also be made with the goal of achieving cost 
savings, energy efficiency and environmental friendliness. In the years ahead, the ability of 
banks to harness new technologies to meet the demands of households and businesses will 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2009
be  tested.  I  am  confident  that  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  will  meet  these 
challenges head on, continue to find new and better ways to put technology to their and their 
customers’ best use, and that they will manage the technology and business risks associated 
with these investments.  
The  identification  and  recognition  of  technology  leaders  in  the  form  of  these  Technology 
Awards underscores our ability to excel in our respective fields. The awards of today are not 
a  culmination;  instead  they  mark  another  milestone  in  our  journey  towards  an  efficient, 
effective and, may I add, sensitive and user friendly financial system. 
My congratulations to all the award winners today. 
BIS Review 62/2009 
 5
