Jean-Claude Trichet: Celebration of 130th Anniversary of the Bulgarian 
National Bank 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Gala 
Event of the Celebration of 130th Anniversary of the Bulgarian National Bank, Sofia, 12 June 
2009. 
 Dear President, 
Dear Prime Minister, 
Your Excellencies, 
Dear Governor Iskrov, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great honour and a pleasure for me to be here this evening and to address you on the 
occasion of the 130th Anniversary of the Bulgarian National Bank. I should like to start by 
thanking my colleague, Governor Iskrov for inviting me to do so.  
The Bulgarian National Bank has good reasons to proudly celebrate this historical date: The 
achievements during the last 130 years have been many. The Bulgarian National Bank, like 
most of the other central banks with a long history, did not arise as the institution we know 
today. It has evolved over time. Since its establishment in January 1879 as a government 
credit  institution  with  an  authorised  capital  of  two  million  French  francs,  the  Bulgarian 
National  Bank  has  come  a  long  way.  Progressively,  it  acquired  new  and  increasingly 
complex functions and duties. It has also established over time close relationships with the 
rest of the banking and financial system, both at home and in the international sphere. Being 
the guarantor of the Bulgarian people’s money, the Bulgarian National Bank has become one 
of the most respected public institutions in this country.  
During  its  long  existence,  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank  has  been  confronted  with  several 
challenges,  some  of  them  of  great  significance.  Equally,  since  1881,  the  year  of  the 
introduction  of  the  lev  –  which  I  have  been  told  in  ancient  Bulgarian  means  “lion”  –,  the 
Bulgarian  National  Bank  has  to  deal  with  several  major  institutional  changes.  The  most 
recent took place in 1997 when a currency board arrangement to the Deutsche Mark was 
adopted. In 1999, the latter was replaced by the euro. 
Before the actual accession of Bulgaria into the EU, a Cooperation Agreement was signed by 
the ECB and the Bulgarian National Bank in January 2005. Moreover, under the leadership 
of Governor Iskrov, the ECB and the Bulgarian National Bank worked intensively together on 
the Bulgarian National Bank’s Law to bring the independence of the central bank generally in 
line with EU legislation However, some additional changes still need to be made to ensure 
that legislation in the monetary field is fully in line with the provisions of the Treaty. 
Following  Bulgaria’s  entry  into  the EU  on  1  January  2007,  the  integration  of  the  Bulgarian 
National Bank into the European System of Central Banks has been smooth, and the work 
carried out by the Bulgarian National Bank members in the respective ESCB committees has 
been noticeable, delivering high quality standards.  
The work of the Bulgarian National Bank, and its commitment to maintaining price stability, 
has  also  contributed  to  improving  the  living  standards  of  the  Bulgarian  people.  No  doubt, 
during the last years, Bulgaria has accomplished significant progress. 
Yet,  as  you  know,  the  current  economic  situation  is  extremely  challenging.  So  far,  the 
Bulgarian economy has been relatively resilient to the global financial crisis inter alia, thanks 
to the sound supervisory policies conducted by the Bulgarian National Bank. But this is no 
time  for  complacency  in  any  respect.  It  remains  essential  for  all  economies,  including 
BIS Review 76/2009 
 1
Bulgaria,  to  pursue  very  actively  the  reform  process  and  to  pave  the  way  for  sustainable 
macroeconomic developments that are of the essence in the medium term. 
Bulgaria doesn’t have to take on these challenges alone. Solidarity is a key feature of the 
European Union and thus an inseparable part of the integration process. For instance, net 
transfers  from  the  EU  budget  to  Bulgaria  amounted  to  close  to  EUR  600  million  in  2007, 
about  2%  of  GDP.  And  recently,  the  Commission  has  put  forward  plans  to  accelerate 
payments under the European Social Fund for an amount of EUR 19 billion in 2009-2010, an 
important part of which (35%) is destined for Central and Eastern Europe.  
There is of course no substitute for sound policies. That is why I should like to encourage the 
Bulgarian authorities in this very important occasion to be ambitious. To be ambitious enough 
in  pursuing  sound  and  stability-oriented  economic  policies  that  can  bring  sustainable 
economic growth in the medium and long term. This applies, in particular, to the conduct of 
sound  fiscal  policies  and  to  the  implementation  of  timely  and  consistent  structural  reforms 
that support the sustainability of the convergence process. All economic policy actors without 
exception  need  to  be  committed  to  the  achievement  of  this  goal.  As  the  beautiful  words 
written  in  front  of  the  Bulgaria’s  National  Assembly  remind  us  –  “There  is  strength  in 
numbers”. 
At  the  ECB,  we  stand  ready  to  preserve  and  reinforce  our  dialogue  with  the  Bulgarian 
National Bank, a dialogue that has proven very fruitful in the past. I am confident that our 
excellent working relationships will continue to serve both our institutions well. 
Happy birthday, Bulgarian National Bank! CHESTIT ROZHDEN DEN BNB! 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2009
