Jean-Pierre Landau: Procyclicality – what it means and what could be 
done  
Remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Landau, Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, at the Bank of 
Spain's  conference  on  Procyclicality  and  the  Role  of  Financial  Regulation;  Madrid,  4  May 
2009. 
 It is a great pleasure and privilege to be in Madrid for this conference hosted by the Bank of 
Spain  and  the  Financial  Stability  Institute.  I  would  like  to  present  a  few  remarks  on 
procyclicality, what it means, what role it played in the current crisis and which policy options 
are available to mitigate its amplitude and impact on financial systems. 
What is procyclicality? 
Strictly  speaking,  procyclicality  refers  to  the  tendency  of  financial  variables  to  fluctuate 
around  a  trend  during  the  economic  cycle.  Increased  procyclicality  thus  simply  means 
fluctuations with broader amplitude.  
Such  a  simple  description  seldom  fits  the  behaviour  of  financial  systems  in  real  life.  More 
likely, following a shock, the path of asset prices and evolution of financial aggregates will 
display  various  and  highly  irregular  forms  of  volatility,  with  possible  non  linearities  and 
discontinuities (a good example being liquidity freezes). These are characteristic features of 
complex systems. "Once such a system is destabilized, it moves away from the linear regime 
and experience non linear behaviour such as path dependance … sustained oscillations … 
and regime shifts"1.  
Indeed,  financial  systems  can  be  seen  as  complex  systems2.  They  are  based  on 
interdependence between multiple actors and counterparties. Transmissions occur through 
networks  whose  structure  and  architecture  is  constantly  changing  through  financial 
innovation  and  regulatory  arbitrage.  Also,  financial  systems  are  "human"  systems.  Their 
behaviour  is  shaped  by the  way  human  beings  react  to  shocks in  their  environment.  Herd 
behaviour has long been known to be an essential feature of financial markets. More subtly, 
individual  reactions,  by  themselves  rational,  can,  by  the  virtue  of  their  mutual  interaction, 
produce strong amplification effects3.  
A broader definition of procyclicality would thus encompass three components, which cannot 
easily be distinguished in real life: (1) fluctuations around the trend (2) changes in the trend 
itself and (3) possible cumulative deviations from equilibrium value. This points to the policy 
challenges  regulators  face.  They  have  to  try  and  identify  when  pure  cyclical  fluctuations 
morph into something different: either a change in the trend itself or the start of a cumulative 
process.  
A  good  operational  approach  to  procyclicality  would  look  at  all  amplification  mechanisms 
which  provoke  (or  allow)  the  financial  system  to  deviate  durably  or  permanently  from  its 
predetermined path) so that the trend itself may be affected in the short or medium run.  
                                                 
1   Quote from FRBNY Economic Policy Review Issue on Systemic Risk (November 2007, page 26). 
2   See Haldane (2009). 
3   This has been luminously shown by Danielsson and Shin in their seminal article on "endogenous risk", based 
on the now famous parable of the Millennium Bridge. 
BIS Review 94/2009 
 1
What are the mechanisms at work?  
Analytically,  it  is  useful  to  distinguish  between  procyclicality  of  capital  and  procyclicality  of 
leverage. 
Procyclicality  of  capital  is  easy  to  understand.  When  conditions  are  good,  financial 
institutions are profitable and their strong capital base allows them to take larger positions in 
the markets. This mechanism has been amplified by mark to market accounting4. In a mark 
to  market  environment,  an  increase,  for  instance,  in  asset  prices  quickly  translates  into 
stronger capital for financial institutions. This, in turn, triggers additional demand for assets 
and a further increase in their prices. This kind of "inverted demand curve", where demand 
increases with prices, potentially creates powerful feed back loops.  
Procyclicality in leverage is more subtle. It has been shown that financial institutions' balance 
sheets  expand  and  contract  with  the  economic  cycle5.  Many  different  mechanisms  are  at 
work:  
• 
First, risk management techniques: tools used to measure and value risk, such as 
VaR  are  naturally  and  strongly  procyclical,  especially  when  constructed  with  very 
short  data  series.  Risk  management  practices  hardwired  to  valuations  (such  as 
margin calls) strongly amplify fluctuations in leverage and may lead to fire sales and 
"one sided" markets.  
Another mechanism6 relates to the dynamics of short term money markets : when 
liquidity  is  perceived  as  abundant,  there  is  strong  incentive  for  dealer-brokers  to 
engage in maturity transformation through strongly leveraged positions.  
Finally, risk appetite itself moves along the economic cycle. Animal spirits obviously 
play a role.  Also, valuation gains and losses may encourage risk taking or trigger 
sharp pull-backs.  
  Should procyclicality be avoided? 
Not necessarily:  
• 
Financial  stability  is  not  an  end  by  itself.  It  only  helps  if  it  is  conducive  to  better 
macro  economic  performance.  Volatility  may  be  driven  by  fundamentals.  Sharp 
movements in asset prices may help the financial system to serve as a cushion, an 
"absorber"  for  exogenous  economic  shocks.  This  is  welfare  improving  since  it 
avoids, or mitigates, adjustment in more rigid goods or labor markets. 
By the same token, not all procyclicality is bad. It all depends on the causal link: is 
the financial system the origin or the amplifier of destabilizing dynamics? Or does it 
simply  react  to  cyclical  evolutions  in  the  real  economy?  We  should  only  be 
concerned  by  "intrinsic  procyclicality",  which  is  created  inside  and  by  the  financial 
system. 
                                                  
4  
It should be noted that there no consensus on whether accounting rules matter. According to one 
view, accounting is "neutral" and procyclicality in financial variables faithfully reflect an exogenous 
reality. An opposite view would state that accounting creates incentives, influences behaviour and, 
therefore,  accounting  rules  have  a  significant  impact  on  the  dynamics  of  financial  systems.  The 
views presented here are my own. 
5   See Adrian and Shin (2007). 
6   See Adrian and Shin (2008). 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2009
 Finally, cyclicality in the real economy can be beneficial to long term growth as it is 
one  mechanism  through  which  "creative  destruction"  can  take  place  in  the 
productive system.  
Real and significant damages occur if and when financial imbalances are allowed to build for 
a  long  time  with  two  consequences:  first  asset  prices  significantly  deviate  from  their 
fundamental  trend,  which  creates  distortions  in  the  allocation  of  resources;  and  second, 
those imbalances unwind suddenly and abruptly, triggering major disruptions in growth and 
the  economic  cycle.  This  is  what  is  happening  right  now.  And  this  closely  resembles  the 
definition of a bubble. 
This  clearly  points  to  one  possible  mandate  for  macro  prudential  supervision  that,  it  were 
feasible, would be both pragmatic and legitimate: to avoid bubbles. Bubbles are not always 
triggered  within  the  financial  system.  They  may  have  roots  in  productivity  shocks,  for 
instance. But cyclical fluctuations cannot develop into a bubble – like process unless some 
amplification  mechanisms  are  allowed  to  work  fully  in  an  overall  permissive  financial 
environment.  
What role did procyclicality play in the current crisis?  
During the first phase of the crisis, it was possible to take a "short term view" of procyclicality. 
It  may  have  looked  as  if  mark  to  market  accounting,  together  with  highly  illiquid  markets, 
generated downward spirals in asset prices and created "excessive" losses, with no relation 
to real underlying economic reality. Such liquidity spirals may have occurred at some critical 
moments7.  
However, it now seems that the disproportion between banking losses, on the one hand, and 
movements in underlying asset prices, on the other, can (almost) fully be accounted for by 
the extraordinary degree of leverage which accumulated in the financial system over the last 
decade. Procylicality was at work, but on a much longer time horizon, and during the upward 
phase of the credit cycle.  
The following stylized facts describe what happened8:  
• 
• 
• 
overall leverage grew strongly during the last decade 
there was an upward break in the trend growth around 2003 / 2004 
"inside" leverage (between financial institutions) grew faster than "outside" leverage 
(in the real economy) 
the growth in leverage was closely associated with a dramatic increase in maturity 
transformation 
risk measurement methodologies played a role in minimizing the impact of leverage 
in financial and risk reporting 
accounting  methodologies  also  played  a  central  role.  Instant  recognition  of  profits 
led  to  a  disconnection  in  time  between  measuring  the  return  on  an  asset  and 
recognizing  the  risk;  this  created  a  powerful  incentive  to  take  risk  and  strongly 
amplified the credit cycle. 
                                                    
7   At  times,  CDS  indices  appeared  mispriced  with  implied  probabilities  of  default  clearly  inconsistent  with  any 
plausible state of the global economy. 
8   See CGFS, April 2009. 
BIS Review 94/2009 
 3
Policy options  
Addressing  procyclicality  clearly  involves  many  policy  actions.  Those  should  be  part  of  an 
integrated  framework  of  macro  prudential  supervision.  I  will  briefly  deal  with  the  general 
approach, then discuss the instruments available to mitigate procyclicality. 
General approach 
As in many matters of public policy, there is a choice between rules and discretion in dealing 
with procyclicality.  
The  rule  based  approach  can  be  built  on  "automatic  stabilizers"  which  would  constrain 
institutions in their behaviour, regardless of their own individual situations. Examples would 
include contra cyclical capital requirement, for instance, as well as dynamic provisioning.  
Alternatively,  discretionary  action  could  consist  in  "top  down"  interventions  from  macro 
prudential authorities. They would step in and impose (or relax) constraints whenever they 
come to the conclusion that dangerous imbalances are building up (or unwinding). 
We probably cannot dispense of this second approach. The difficulty to date cycles makes it 
dangerous  to  rely  purely  on  automatic  mechanisms,  which  cannot  be  precisely  calibrated. 
Financial cycles, in particular, are driven by changes in risk appetite which are impossible to 
predict. Actually, one essential objective of macro prudential supervision may be to "regulate" 
(not  in  the  legal  sense,  but  economically)  the  aggregate  level  of  risk  appetite  inside  the 
financial  system.  This  unavoidably  involves  some  degree  of  discretionary  judgement.  How 
that judgement is made will determine the relevance and effectiveness of macro prudential 
supervision. 
The prudential apparatus has worked in the past on the presumption that all movements in 
asset  prices  were  based  on  fundamentals.  This  approach  may  prevent  supervisors  from 
dealing with excessive procyclicality until it is too late. The existence of bubbles, for instance, 
is impossible to prove until they burst. And, at least in the initial phase of a bubble, there is 
no lack of "fundamental" explanations for observed movements in asset prices. 
It may be useful, to better deal with procyclicality in the future, to consider some rebalancing 
in the burden of the proof. Significant and lasting departures from past levels or trends in key 
asset prices, risk premia or credit aggregates should trigger a macro prudential review, with 
the  objective  of  detecting  amplification  mechanisms  at  work.  This  seems  justified  when 
looking at the current social costs of previous hesitation.  
This is also a rational course of action. One major source of procyclicality is excessive risk 
taking. Bubbles develop because investors have an incentive to ignore the "tail risk" that the 
bubble may burst. Because bubbles are mostly financed by credit, most of the risk is shifted 
to lenders. This asymmetry in incentives is extremely difficult to eliminate ex ante. Hence the 
need,  for  macro  supervisors,  to  monitor  closely  the  financial  system  and  preserve  their 
possibility to intervene by establishing the kind of presumption I just mentioned.  
Instruments  
The  most  important  instrument  in  our  current  toolkit  are  capital  requirements  put  on  some 
financial intermediaries. Capital requirements primarily act as compulsory buffers imposed on 
banks  and  their  shareholders.  They  also  have  an  incentive  function:  to  drive  and  limit  risk 
taking  by  bank  managers.  So  it  seems  natural,  when  addressing  procyclicality,  to  think  of 
countercyclical capital requirements. 
However,  capital  requirements  may  not  be  binding  when  they  are  needed  most.  If  assets 
market  are  booming  and  perceived  returns  are  high,  banks  will  always  find  the  necessary 
capital,  whatever  the  regulatory  requirement.  They  will  be  able  to  both  meet  those 
requirements and distribute profits. Conversely, capital dries up during downturns, when it is 
4 
 BIS Review 94/2009
most necessary9. There is clearly an asymmetry with strong equity outflows in boom times 
and  no  inflows  in  bad  times.  It  is  not  clear  that  Introducing  counter  cyclical  capital 
requirements will suffice to counteract this very powerful dynamic, especially in bad times.  
It may be necessary to look at other tools in order to address procyclicality and pre-empt the 
build  up  of  imbalances.  Those  tools  have  to  act  more  directly  on  individual  and  collective 
incentives.  This  is  where  accounting  may  matter  most.  Economically,  it  will  always  remain 
difficult, when looking at revenues drawn from a financial investment, to distinguish excess 
return from additional risk taking. But financial reporting may be conceived in such a way that 
this distinction is prudently introduced. There is no reasonable or practical alternative to fair 
value  accounting  for  tradable  securities.  This  does  not  mean,  however,  that  any  single 
valuation  gain  or  loss  should  instantly  be  recognized  as  a  profit  (or  loss)  and  financially 
treated  as  such.  There  is  a  possibility  to  delink  valuation  from  income  /  profit  recognition. 
Some  disconnection  between  the  valuation  process  –  which  should  remain  anchored  on 
market  prices  –  and  income  and  profit  recognition  will  have  to  be  introduced,  if  only  to 
account for risks which are there but have not yet materialized. Dynamic provisioning is one 
technique  for  doing  so,  when  risks  are  closely  related  to  the  economic  cycle.  Valuation 
reserves  may  also  be  used  when  complexity  or  illiquidity  creates  additional  risk  linked  to 
valuation.  Provided  those  adjustments  are  rule  based  and  made  in  a  fully  transparent 
process, they would not reduce the quantity or quality of information available to investors as 
to the real health of financial institutions.  
Another avenue for research would be for the regulatory system to "force" the pricing of risk 
in all its dimensions. There is a clear analogy with tax theory: internalizing the risk eliminates 
market failures. This approach would be best implemented to liquidity risk linked to maturity 
transformation.  Quantitative  liquidity  ratios  are  currently  considered  in  a  number  of 
juridictions to be imposed on financial institutions. However, they may not protect the system 
against an aggregate liquidity shock, when, by definition, the demand for liquidity becomes 
infinite and any buffer proves insufficient. Pricing liquidity ex ante in the system would reduce 
the probability of such a shock and create incentives against relying too much on maturity 
transformation. 
Admittedly,  the  conceptual  challenges  in  quantifying,  for  instance,  liquidity  risk,  are 
enormous.  But  we  live  in  a  world  of  second  best,  and  even  very  approximate  measures 
would do better than nothing at all.  
Thank you. 
References 
Adrian  (T.)  and  Shin  (H.S.)  (2007):  "Liquidity  and  Leverage".  Journal  of  Financial 
Intermediation. Forthcoming. Available on the New York Fed website as Staff Report no 328. 
Adrian (T.) and Shin (H.S.) (2009): "Money, Liquidity and Monetary Policy" Forthcoming in 
American  Economic  Review,  papers  and  proceedings.  Available  on  the  New  York  Fed 
website as Staff Report no 360. 
Committee on the Global Financial System. CGFS Papers No 34. "The role of valuation and 
leverage in procyclicality". April 2009 (available on the Bank for International Settlements –
BIS-website). 
Danielsson (Jon) and Shin(Hyun Song): "Endogenous Risk ";London School of Economics 
September, 2002. 
                                                 
9   For an analysis, see Kashyap and al. (2008). 
BIS Review 94/2009 
 5
Kashyap (AK), Rajan (R.G) and Stein (J.C.) (2008) "Rethinking Capital Regulation". Paper 
presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium. 
6 
 BIS Review 94/2009
