Jean-Claude Trichet: The ECB’s enhanced credit support 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
University of Munich, Munich, 13 July 2009. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be in Munich today and speak at this renowned university with its strong 
economics  faculty.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers,  Professor  Hans-Werner  Sinn  of 
CESifo and Marc Beise, the chief economics editor of Süddeutsche Zeitung, for inviting me 
here. I am delighted to have this opportunity to talk about the ECB’s policy actions in these 
times of exceptional challenges for monetary policy-makers. I also hope to contribute to the 
academic debate on monetary policy. An active exchange of views between academic and 
policy-making circles is important for both sides.  
The Munich seminars have become one of the best-known events of their kind in Europe. 
More events of this type are needed. CESifo – with its close links to the University of Munich 
– has established one of the most active and widely respected platforms for European policy 
debate.  It  is  therefore  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  talking  about  the  field  in  which 
European integration has progressed the furthest, namely monetary policy-making. 
In the last two years the environment in which we operate has changed very profoundly. We 
went through a period of global financial panic, and we are still in demanding and uncharted 
territory. I am therefore pleased to report that the policy toolkit of the European Central Bank 
– a young institution albeit benefiting from a very solid legacy – has been up to the challenge. 
The  ECB’s  actions  since  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis  have  been  bold,  and  yet  firmly 
anchored within the medium-term framework of our monetary policy strategy.  
We took unprecedented action in August 2007, on day one of the financial turmoil, when few 
others had identified the potential for macro financial disruption. We stepped boldly into the 
breach when the collapse of a major financial player last autumn caused interbank funding 
markets to stop functioning. Moreover, since the crisis began, not one systemically important 
financial institution has collapsed in the euro area. This is no small achievement, given the 
damage we have observed as a result of such events.  
Since October 2008, our key policy rate has been cut from 4.25% to 1%. In addition, and just 
as importantly, we have embarked on a policy of fully accommodating banks’ liquidity needs. 
This bold and necessary step has avoided a situation in which stressed liquidity conditions 
spiral into a systemic threat to the stability of our banking system as a whole.  
And  we  have  been  far  from  passive  in  recent  months.  We  have  broadened  the  set  of 
measures that, collectively, represent the policy toolkit that we call “enhanced credit support”. 
I will explain in detail why the approach of “enhanced credit support” was developed, what its 
main elements are, and how it is working for the euro area economy – not just the banks, but 
also  for  the  European  businesses  and  households.  I  will  also  explain  how  the  set  of 
underlying policies can be unwound once the financial crisis eases or if upside risks to price 
stability emerge. 
But let me first say a few words about our assessment of the current situation in the euro 
area. I will take for granted that we share a common understanding of the severity of recent 
events. Right now, economic activity is expected to continue declining for the remainder of 
this year, but significantly less strongly than it did in the first quarter of 2009. Looking ahead 
into next year, following a period of stabilisation, a gradual recovery with positive quarterly 
growth  rates  is  expected  by  mid-2010.  This  is  our  working  hypothesis  at  this  stage.  The 
BIS Review 87/2009 
 1
significant  policy  stimuli  in  the  major  economic  areas  should  support  growth  around  the 
world, including in the euro area.  
Inflation fell into slightly negative territory in June. This outcome was anticipated and mainly 
reflects the earlier sharp decline in global oil prices. It is therefore a welcome development, 
and one that supports households’ real incomes. Looking ahead, we expect prices to remain 
dampened over the medium term. We are particularly pleased that all indicators of inflation 
expectations  over  the  medium  to  longer  term  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the 
Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. Our success in 
firmly anchoring inflation expectations is of crucial importance, and I will talk more about this 
later on. 
Let me also make some general remarks on the principal achievements of the first ten years 
of the euro.  
The euro: performance and institutional foundation 
I.  
The euro is the most visible symbol of European unification. It is now the shared currency of 
16 countries and 329 million people. The number of citizens united by the single currency 
already is in the same order of magnitude as the population of the United States of America. 
The euro was introduced more than ten years ago – in 11 countries at the time. Ten years is 
a short period of time in historical terms, but long enough to take stock of what  has been 
achieved.  
The main achievement can be summarised in a single sentence: the euro is a very stable 
currency  and  all  the  institutional  requirements  are  in  place  to  preserve  its  solidity  in  the 
future. This is what defines success in monetary affairs.  
Being here in Munich, I would say that the promise that the euro will be “stabil wie die Mark” 
has been kept. A glance at the inflation rates makes this clear: the average annual inflation 
rate in the euro area in the first eleven years of the euro will be around 2.0%, notwithstanding 
the tough challenges of successive oil and commodity shocks we had to cope with. This will 
even be slightly lower than the average annual inflation rate in Germany in the 1990s.  
Moreover, the priority given to price stability in the euro area has by no means been at the 
expense  of  employment.  Between  1999  and  2008,  the  number  of  people  employed  in  the 
euro area increased by more than 16 million – significantly more than in the US during the 
same period. In the preceding period, from 1990 to 1998, the increase in employment was 
less than 6 million for the same time span. This can be seen as confirmation that a monetary 
policy oriented towards price stability is fully compatible with job creation. This is not to say 
that we have not to face up with new challenges since the crisis erupted, and that this is a 
time for complacency. But those figures put into perspective what has been achieved since 
the start of the euro.  
Speaking  in  Germany,  and  having  been  the  first  governor  of  the  politically  independent 
Banque de France since 1 January 1994, I will say that we are all aware that assigning an 
independent central bank to the pursuit of price stability was both a historical necessity and a 
key  ingredient  in  economic  success.  It  is  also  well-known  that  the  solid  tradition  of  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank  sprung  out  of  the  painful  experiences  of  the  more  distant  German 
monetary history in the first half of the 20th century, in particular the German hyperinflation of 
the early 1920s, which has left deep scars in the collective memory of both Germany and 
Europe. In a sense, the German experience between the two world wars demonstrates how 
painful deviations from price stability can be – both in economic and in political terms.  
Firm lessons were learned from history in Germany, in particular in the period of the great 
inflation of the seventies, where the Bundesbank, and a very small number of independent 
central banks like the Swiss National Central Bank, gained a world-wide reputation for their 
ability to control inflation. A key ingredient for this success, on top of their independence, was 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2009
an explicit monetary policy strategy. In the case of the Bundesbank, this included a medium-
term policy orientation, the importance attached to monetary developments, and an element 
of rule-based behaviour in policy determination.  
These lessons of history were shared all over Europe. I was the Governor of the Banque de 
France when its independence was granted in January 1994, five years before the euro. As 
soon as independence was granted to the 200-year-old institution, we defined price stability 
as  an  inflation  rate  below  2%  over  the  medium  term.  Applying  the  ancient  motto  of  the 
Banque  de  France  “La  sagesse  fixe  la  fortune”,  which  I  could  translate  as  “Wisdom 
disciplines  fortune”,  we  also  worked  out  a  monetary  policy  concept  based  on  a  two-pillar 
strategy, including a monetary pillar. I was particularly proud that average inflation in France 
was 1.4% per year over five years from 1994 to 1999, fully in line with the definition of price 
stability. It had been an important contribution to the strategy of “competitive disinflation” that 
I  had  advocated  for  France  and  the  economies  participating  in  the  Exchange  Rate 
Mechanism (ERM I).  
With the creation of the euro, that stability culture has been fully “Europeanised”, and was 
given  a  legal  face  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  an  institutional  face  in  the  form  of  the 
European  Central  Bank.  What  has  been  achieved  in  the  first  ten  years  of  the  euro  is 
substantial, both in economic terms and in institutional terms. Very solid foundations are in 
place in order to preserve these achievements, and this gives us confidence for the future.  
Let me now turn to the current crisis and the toolkit developed by the ECB in response. 
Origins and development of the financial crisis 
II.  
In looking back on the years prior to the eruption of the crisis, we have to acknowledge that 
there  was  a  dramatic  shift  in  focus  in  large  parts  of  the  financial  sector  –  away  from 
facilitating trade and real investment towards unfettered speculation and financial gambling. 
Hans-Werner Sinn has called these deviations “Kasino-Kapitalismus”. Of course, we all know 
that financial liberalisation and financial innovation have made important contributions to the 
overall  productivity  of  our  economies.  The  securitisation  of  loans,  for  example,  had 
tremendous potential for the diversification and efficient management of economic risk. But 
securitisation  was  implemented  in  a  precarious  way.  Banks  and  non-banks  were  able  not 
only to sell loans, but also to place them fully off-balance sheet as soon as they had been 
granted. This resulted in weak underwriting standards and a lack of incentives for lenders to 
conduct prudent screening of loans.  
This is true for the most recent product innovations in the field of securitisation. But it is not 
true for a particular financial innovation that is more than 200 years old and was in particular 
introduced in Germany under the name “Pfandbrief”: covered bonds. I will return to this asset 
class of covered bonds later. 
The credit boom leading up to the crisis was exacerbated by three multipliers:  
• 
first,  incentives:  ill-designed  compensation  schemes  for  loan  managers  and  traders 
that reinforced the shortening of their time horizons; 
second,  complexity:  increasingly  complicated  and  opaque  financial  instruments  that 
made  it  difficult  for  holders  of  securities  to  assess  the  quality  of  the  underlying 
investments; and 
third,  global  macroeconomic  imbalances:  a  chronic  shortage  of  savings  in  some 
industrialised economies was made possible by an excess of savings in other parts of 
the world.  
  In mid-2007 the turmoil erupted. This was sudden, but not entirely unexpected. Indeed, as 
long ago as January 2007, I myself expressed the views of my fellow central bankers, when I 
indicated that markets would need to prepare for a general reassessment and repricing of 
BIS Review 87/2009 
 3
risk,  which  was  clearly  underestimated  at  that  time.1  Some  months  later,  this  repricing 
occurred very suddenly, triggering turbulences in the interbank market. The consequences of 
this  very  sharp  repricing  threw  the  credit  boom  into  reverse.  The  asset  cycle  turned,  and 
many of the missing links in the financial chain were exposed.  
 
                                                  
1   See Financial Times of 29 January 2009, page 1. 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2009
 BIS Review 87/2009 
   5
 
The  collapse  in  mid-September  of  last  year  of  a  major  financial  institution  transformed  the 
financial  turmoil  into  a  global  financial  crisis.  Immediately,  financial  intermediaries  restored 
liquidity  buffers,  scaled  down  their  balance  sheets  and  tightened  lending  conditions.  They 
dramatically reduced exposure to the risks that they had imprudently accumulated during the 
period  of  financial  euphoria.  Collectively,  they  engaged  in  a  large-scale  “deleveraging” 
process. Banks’ intermediation was sharply reduced, and loans to companies were curtailed.  
A  long-term  trend  that  had  brought  credit  risk  spreads  on  loans  extended  by  international 
financial intermediaries to historical lows was suddenly reversed. A credit squeeze ensued 
which took a severe toll on the real economy.  
Key characteristics of the euro area 
III.  
The ECB has moved pre-emptively and forcefully to counter the adverse consequences of 
the  financial  crisis.  At  all  times  the  ECB’s  response  has  been  carefully  calibrated  to  the 
structure of the euro area economy.  
Allow  me  to  elaborate  on  this  structure,  which  differs  significantly  from  those  in  other 
advanced  economies,  notably  the  United  States,  which  may  be  the  most  relevant 
comparator.  
6 
 BIS Review 87/2009
 
First,  there  are  profound  differences  in  their  financial  structures.  The  differences  in  the 
composition  of  funding  sources  for  non-financial  corporations  are  striking.  Looking  at  an 
average for the last few years, in the euro area bank financing accounted for roughly 70% of 
firm’s total external financing. In the United States, by contrast, firms rely to a much larger 
extent on market-based sources, which make up about 80% of total external financing. 
The different financial structures have implications for the appropriate design of the monetary 
policy response in the face of a crisis that undermines the stability of the financial system. To 
be effective, ECB policy must focus first and foremost – although not exclusively – on the 
banking sector.  
There  are  also  profound  differences  in  the  economic  structures  of  the  euro  area  and  the 
United States. Let me, for the sake of brevity, single out three characteristics of the euro area 
economy that our policies must take into account in order to be effective.  
• 
First, small and medium-sized enterprises. They play a pivotal role in the euro area 
economy  and  are  particularly  important  for  growth  and  job  creation.  These 
enterprises  cannot  generally  tap  credit  markets  directly.  Guaranteeing  continued 
access to bank credit is vital in order for them to be able to finance their activities.  
Second, the housing market. In the United States it is at the epicentre of the crisis. 
This is not true for the euro area. At the same time, the euro area is indirectly affected 
as banks hold toxic assets partly backed by mortgage loans originated in the United 
States.  Forcefully  addressing  the  toxic  asset  problem  is  a  precondition  for  reviving 
credit  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  Where  necessary,  banks  should  take  full 
advantage of government measures, particularly as regards recapitalisation.  
Third is the flexibility of the economy. Wages and prices of goods and services are 
slower  to  change  in  the  euro  area  than  in  the  United  States.  In  normal  times,  this 
sluggishness has drawbacks as it slows down the adjustment of the economy; in the 
  BIS Review 87/2009 
 7
current circumstances it offers some protection against very bad outcomes, provided 
that the policy frameworks provide a solid anchor for private sector expectations. In 
the  euro  area,  the  institutional  frameworks  provide  such  an  anchor  through  the 
medium-term  stability  orientation  of  policies,  with  fiscal  policies  geared  towards 
sustainability  and  a  monetary  policy  geared 
this 
environment, overly activist policies may risk destabilising expectations, thereby being 
counterproductive.  
towards  price  stability. 
In 
The financial and economic structures I have just described provide the background for our 
policies.  
The ECB’s response to the financial crisis  
IV.  
Let me now turn to the ECB’s responses to the financial crisis. Following the intensification of 
the financial crisis in September of last year – and against the background of rapidly receding 
inflationary pressures – we have taken monetary policy measures that are unprecedented in 
terms of their nature, scope and magnitude. These measures fall into two categories: first, 
standard measures in the form of interest rate changes; second, what have become known 
as  “non-standard”  measures.  The  latter,  taken  together,  constitute  what  I  would  call  the 
“toolkit” for the ECB’s policy of enhanced credit support.  
Interest rates 
Let me begin with interest rates, the standard indicators of stance of monetary policy. Some 
observers tend to reduce monetary policy to the level of the key policy rate. The lower the 
policy  rate,  the  argument  goes,  the  more  effective  is  monetary  policy  in  response  to  a 
downturn.  This  view  is  too  simplistic.  To  compare  only  the  levels  of  policy  rates  without 
consideration for the resulting market rates and other economic variables is to look at just 
one part of a far broader canvas.  
Let  me  give  you  a  concrete  example.  At  1%  at  the  moment,  our  rate  on  refinancing 
operations is higher than the US federal funds rate target range of 0-0.25%. But owing, in 
particular, to the relatively low level of credit and liquidity premia that are observed in our own 
money market, this difference in policy rates does not translate into equivalent differences in 
money market rates. 
8 
 BIS Review 87/2009
 In  the  euro  area,  six-month  and  twelve-month  euro  interbank  rates  are  important 
benchmarks. These rates are widely used by banks to grant floating rate loans to households 
and companies. These six- and twelve-month rates, denominated in euro, are comparable to 
the  corresponding  rates  for  contracts  in  US  dollars.  This  is  due  not  only  to  the  fact  that 
spreads between secured and unsecured money market rates at comparable maturities are 
currently lower than their counterparts in the United States at six-month and twelve-month 
maturities,  but  also  to  our  full  allotment  concept  of  supplying  liquidity,  which  is  part  of  an 
enhanced  credit  support.  In  conclusion,  this  shows  that  in  the  current  circumstances, 
international  comparisons  of  policy  rates,  if  not  done  with  the  appropriate  qualifications, 
provide limited information about the effective credit conditions in individual markets.  
Enhanced credit support  
In recent months policy actions have gone well beyond cuts in policy interest rates. They also 
include  non-standard  measures.  These  measures  are  not  identical  across  currency  areas. 
They  reflect  the  specific  needs  of  the  respective  financial  systems  and  transmission 
mechanisms. As you know, Japan has become known for an approach termed “quantitative 
easing”  which  entails,  among  other  things,  the  expansion  of  the  monetary  base  through 
outright purchases of government bonds. The US Federal Reserve is currently engaged, in 
particular,  in  “credit  easing”,  which  makes  use  of  direct  lending  facilities  vis-à-vis  market 
participants.  
BIS Review 87/2009 
 9
 The ECB is engaged in policies that I have characterised as “enhanced credit support”. Let 
me explain this to you now. This approach focuses primarily on banks as they are the main 
source of credit in the euro area economy and seeks to provide enhanced support for credit 
provision through specific policies. Hence, one can make the following definition: enhanced 
credit  support  constitutes  the  special  and  primarily  bank-based  measures  that  are 
being taken to enhance the flow of credit above and beyond what could be achieved 
through policy interest rate reductions alone. 
Our measures currently comprise five building blocks. 
Liquidity management measures 
1. When the very significant stress in interbank markets first manifested itself in August 2007, 
the  ECB  immediately  stepped  into  the  breach  and  accommodated  banks’  temporarily 
elevated liquidity demand, through a fine-tuning operation on a full allotment at policy rate 
mode. The demand of liquidity was as high as 95 billion euro. 
When, in mid-September 2008, interbank trading came to a virtual halt, the ECB temporarily 
generalised this particular model of liquidity provision: since autumn of last year the unlimited 
provision  of  liquidity  through  “fixed  rate  tenders  with  full  allotment”  has  comprised  the  first 
important building block of our policy of enhanced credit support. 
Our  first  and  primary  concern  was  to  maintain  the  availability  of  credit  for  households  and 
companies  at  accessible  rates.  The  new  fixed  rate  full  allotment  tender  procedure  was 
designed  to  ensure  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  transmission  at  a  time  when 
borrowing  through  interbank  transactions  had  become  abnormally  elevated  for  many 
financial institutions. Since autumn of last year we have stood ready to remedy any shortage 
of liquidity that might occur in our refinancing operations.  
2. The second building block of our new liquidity management approach is the list of assets 
that we take as collateral. This list was already very long before the crisis. We have enlarged 
it  further  and  now  accept  an  even  wider  range  of  securities  as  collateral.  Government 
securities account for less than half of the nominal value of the securities on the list. The rest 
10 
 BIS Review 87/2009
are private securities. By contrast with many other central banks, the ECB already accepted 
private paper before the crisis. In this sense, we were fairly well prepared for the crisis, as we 
had a relatively “modern” collateral framework. As a consequence, the total value of these 
eligible securities is currently €12.2 trillion, equivalent to 130% of the GDP of the euro area. 
This very broad range of eligible collateral has considerably eased banks’ liquidity constraints 
during the crisis. 
The  first  two  building  blocks  offer  unlimited  refinancing  against  a  very  wide  range  of 
collateral.  However,  they  can  only  reach  the  financial  system  because  of  the  very  large 
number  of  counterparties  that  participate  in  our  refinancing  operations.  Currently,  2,200 
credit institutions in the euro area have the opportunity to refinance themselves with us. This 
fact demonstrates the scale of our outreach to the financial system in the euro area and its 
effectiveness in insuring against a systemic liquidity threat.  
3.  The  third  building  block  concerns  the  lengthening  of  the  maturities  of  our  refinancing 
operations. In a first step, we lengthened the maturities to up to six months. Just over two 
weeks ago, we began to provide liquidity for up to one year.  
The first such operation, conducted in late June, led to a record amount of €442 billion of 
liquidity  being  supplied  to  the  euro  area’s  banking  system.  This  exceptional  outcome 
amounts to around 5% of the euro area’s GDP and is a sign of banks’ enduring demand for 
liquidity security. Banks are now able to access such new sources of central bank credit with 
longer-term maturities and borrowing costs at historically low levels. Thanks to this facility, 
they  can  resolve  the  mismatch  between  the  investment  side  and  the  funding  side  of  their 
balance  sheets.  This  is  expected  to  make  their  liquidity  planning  horizon  longer  and  less 
uncertain.  It  will  thereby  encourage  them  to  provide  credit  over  and  above  what  could  be 
expected otherwise.  
It may take some time, however, for the extra liquidity to be transformed into credit. Just after 
the first 12-month funding operation we have seen that some part of the extra liquidity still 
remains within the banking system and is even coming back to the central bank and being 
deposited with us temporarily. Banks will have to gain experience in using the longer-term 
credit that they obtain from their central banks to expand their longer-term assets rather than 
increase  the  availability  of  short-term  liquidity.  We  remind  banks  of  their  responsibility  to 
continue to lend to firms and households at appropriate rates and in suitable volumes. We all 
have to contribute, each of us with our own responsibility, to the continued functioning of our 
economy in these very difficult times.  
4. The fourth building block is that we are currently providing liquidity in foreign currencies, 
particularly in US dollars. This is to avoid any shortages and is arranged via swap lines with 
the  Federal  Reserve.  This  demonstrates  the  considerable  degree  of  cooperation  among 
central banks in order to ease liquidity tensions in the global money markets. In addition, the 
Eurosystem has signed agreements with the central banks of several European countries in 
order to improve the provision of euro liquidity to their banking sectors. 
Covered bond purchases 
5.  The  fifth  building  block  was  added  in  May:  outright  purchases  of  covered  bonds.  This 
measure complements the liquidity management measures I have just described. Covered 
bonds are debt securities issued by banks, which give them access to funding of a longer-
term  nature  than  the  ECB’s  refinancing  operations.  Covered  bonds  thus  allow  banks  to 
manage the maturity mismatch between their assets and liabilities. 
Why  did  we  decide  to  engage  in  purchases  of  this  particular  asset  class?  Several  factors 
guided our decision. 
• 
First, as I have stressed, in the euro area measures to support the flow of credit to the 
non-financial sector need to operate first and foremost through banks. Covered bonds 
were a major source of funds for banks in the euro area before the intensification of 
BIS Review 87/2009 
 11
 the financial crisis last autumn, when the covered bonds market virtually shut down. 
The  Governing  Council  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Eurosystem  could  help  to 
revive this market, in terms of liquidity, issuance and spreads, by engaging in outright 
purchases of covered bonds.  
Second,  covered  bonds  are  different  in  nature  from  the  various  asset-backed 
securities  that  became  so  popular  before  turning  sour  with  the  financial  crisis. 
Importantly,  covered  bonds  do  not  involve  the  transfer  of  the  credit  risk  implied  by 
underlying  assets  from  the  issuer  to  the  investor.  The  credit  risk  stays  with  the 
originator, preserving the incentives for prudent credit risk evaluation and monitoring. 
We  could  therefore  say  that  covered  bonds  are  incentive  compatible  while  many 
asset-backed  securities  were  not,  at  least  not  in  the  way  the  concept  was 
implemented  before  the  crisis.  I  have  previously  mentioned  that  covered  bonds  – 
Pfandbriefe  –  existed  in  Germany  already  200  years  ago.  Given  that  the  financial 
crisis  clearly  exposed  the  dire  consequences  of  the  imprudent  evaluation  of  credit 
risk,  the  usefulness  of  more  conservative  asset  classes  such  as  covered  bonds, 
which have proved to be safe assets over a long time, is obvious.  
We  are  confident  that  this  measure  will  contribute  to  support  financial  markets.  The 
announcement  effect  has  been  encouraging.  The  purchase  programme  started  last  week 
and  will  be  conducted  gradually,  stretching  well  into  next  year.  We  are  already  seeing  a 
number of new issuances of covered bonds and a degree of compression in the spreads in 
this important segment, which might have an influence also on other financial markets.  
Monetary and fiscal assignments 
V.  
This brings me to the last point in my speech. The ECB’s enhanced credit support measures 
are designed in full respect of the euro area macroeconomic framework. Financial support 
measures potentially involving the significant transfer of credit risk from financial institutions 
to the taxpayer clearly fall within the realm of fiscal policy. Our decision to conduct outright 
purchases of covered bonds is fully consistent with this fundamental principle. While they are 
expected to be effective in supporting credit, these purchases do not burden the Eurosystem 
with excessive credit risk. 
More  generally,  I  have  already  mentioned  that  different  environments  call  for  different 
actions, even if there is agreement among central banks about the ultimate objectives. This 
helps  to  explain  why  the  ECB’s  enhanced  credit  support  measures,  by  contrast  with  the 
concepts  of  “credit  easing”  and  “quantitative  easing”,  do  not  involve  outright  purchases  of 
sovereign debt. On this feature, I would like to make three comments, stressing pragmatism, 
principles and preparations for exit. 
First, there is a pragmatic explanation. History matters to a prominent degree. In the United 
States,  for  example,  in  normal  times  outright  purchases  and  sales  of  treasury  bonds  with 
short maturities belong to the routine toolkit of monetary policy implementation. Given that 
tradition,  it  may  be  a  natural  step,  under  non-standard  circumstances,  to  adapt  this 
procedure by significantly expanding the volume of purchases and focusing on governments 
bonds with longer maturities.  
The Eurosystem comes from a different tradition. For us, “reverse transactions” with banks – 
on  the  basis  of  repurchase  agreements  or  collateralised  loans  –  are  the  single  most 
important – and in many respects exclusive – instrument in open market operations. Given 
that tradition, it has been a natural step to extend the maturity of our refinancing operations 
and make adjustments to the collateral requirements.  
Second, principles need to be stressed very firmly. For reasons known to all of us, the euro 
area  has  a  clear  separation  of  responsibilities.  The  ECB’s  enhanced  credit  support  fully 
respects this separation.  
12 
 BIS Review 87/2009
Third,  preparations  for  exit  are  important.  The  Governing  Council  will  ensure  that  the 
measures  taken  are  quickly  unwound,  and  the  liquidity  provided  is  absorbed,  once  the 
macroeconomic  environment  improves.  Long-term  refinancing  operations  (like  operations 
with  shorter  maturity)  provide  liquidity  over  a  fixed  time  horizon  and  run  off  in  a  fully 
predictable  way.  By  contrast,  the  unwinding  of  outright  purchases  typically  requires  an 
additional decision, namely whether to hold the securities to maturity – and if not, when to 
sell.  The  route  taken  by  the  Eurosystem  limits  such  decisions  to  our  covered  bonds 
purchases and for the rest relies on built-in mechanisms for the re-absorption of liquidity.  
By their nature, fiscal policies lack a similarly strong built-in mechanism when it comes to the 
unwinding of stimulus. Discretionary policies need to be invoked to engineer an exit from the 
current  degree  of  fiscal  expansion.  A  return  to  sound,  sustainable  public  finances,  thus 
strengthening  overall  macroeconomic  stability,  must  be  ensured.  Euro  area  governments 
should  prepare  and  communicate  ambitious  and  realistic  fiscal  exit  and  consolidation 
strategies within the framework of the Stability and Growth Pact.  
Conclusions 
Let me draw to a close.  
 
I have described to you the profound changes in the environment in which we have operated 
over the past two years. These changes have made it unavoidable that we take monetary 
policy measures that are unprecedented in nature, scope and magnitude. These measures 
fall  into  two  categories:  first,  standard  measures  in  the  form  of  interest  rate  changes;  and 
second,  a  number  of  non-standard  measures,  which  together  constitute  the  ECB’s  policy 
toolkit of enhanced credit support. These are special and primarily bank-based actions we 
have taken to enhance the flow of credit above and beyond what could be achieved through 
interest rate reductions alone.  
BIS Review 87/2009 
 13
Let me once again emphasise that we conduct all our policies in full continuity of our mission 
which started ten years ago, with foundations that have a much longer history and which are 
well anchored in the most stable monetary policy in Europe – the pursuit of price stability. 
Moreover,  despite  the  need  for  the  policy  innovations  to  address  the  particular  economic 
challenges of our times, all our measures are deliberately designed in a way that they can be 
unwound once any upside risks to price stability should emerge. 
I have also mentioned the existence of different approaches to crisis management of major 
central banks, which are related to differences in the structure of their economies and their 
institutional arrangements. Let me reiterate that we are all united in purpose. It is absolutely 
essential  to  ensure  that  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  price 
stability over the medium term.  
 
This will contribute to what is lacking most, namely confidence on the part of households and 
companies, and will lay the groundwork for a return to sustainable prosperity.  
Right  now  the  scarcest  resource  we  have  is  confidence  in  the  future.  That  is  why  in  the 
present, very demanding, circumstances all necessary steps should be taken to strengthen 
confidence at all levels. This calls for bold yet solidly anchored responses. We must maintain 
the appropriate balance between the need to take immediate action commensurate with the 
gravity of today’s situation, and the equally undeniable obligation to return to a path that is 
sound and sustainable in the medium and long term.  
This is true for all policies: for monetary policy, for fiscal policies, and for executive branches’ 
decisions to support the financial sector.  
I would warn against a common and unfortunate view suggesting that it is currently too early, 
or  even  totally  inopportune,  to  envisage  appropriate  exit  strategies.  Such  a  view  is,  in  my 
opinion, plain wrong – for three reasons: 
14 
 BIS Review 87/2009
First, because decision-makers’ primary quality is that they always display “sang froid” and 
keep  their  composure,  particularly  in  the  most  demanding  and  turbulent  times.  Viewing 
today’s  actions  and  decisions  from  a  longer-term  perspective  is  part  of  the  necessary 
intellectual discipline. 
Second, because nobody should confuse the existence of a credible exit strategy – which 
can be activated at the right moment – with the decision to actually embark on that strategy. 
Often  such  confusion  explains  people’s  fierce  opposition  to  the  mere  existence  of  exit 
strategies.  
And third, because the very existence and the visibility of a credible exit strategy will foster 
confidence today and will therefore contribute to the re-activation of the economy here and 
now.  This  is  true  for  monetary  policy:  our  329  million  fellow  citizens  are  very  profoundly 
attached to price stability in the medium term, and the credibility of our policy is essential for 
improving their confidence now.  
This is equally true for fiscal policy: economic research has demonstrated that two-thirds to 
three-quarters of European households are “Ricardian”. This means that they consume less 
and save more if they lack confidence in the soundness of future public finances. 
The anchoring of sound policies in a medium to long-term framework is more important than 
ever if we want to effectively counter the present adverse circumstances. 
The ECB, for its part, will do all that is necessary to continue to be a solid and reliable anchor 
of stability and confidence in these challenging times. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 87/2009 
 15
