Jean-Claude Trichet: The ECB’s exit strategy 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  CFS 
conference “The ECB and Its Watchers XI”, Frankfurt, 4 September 2009. 
 Introduction 
I.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be with you today to participate in this 11th edition of the ECB Watchers’ 
Conference. I am delighted to see that this conference has established itself so successfully 
as a venue for interaction between the European Central Bank and its observers.  
My remarks today come in the context of the ongoing financial crisis, the most severe the 
developed  world  has  witnessed  for  more  than  sixty  years.  As  the  Governing  Council 
recognised yesterday, “there are increasing signs of stabilisation in economic activity in the 
euro  area  and  elsewhere.  This  is  consistent  with  the  expectation  that  the  significant 
contraction in economic activity has come to an end.” Nevertheless, it would be too soon to 
call the crisis over. The Governing Council also underscored that uncertainty remains high 
and that the recovery is expected to be rather uneven.  
Exceptional  times  have  called  for  exceptional  actions.  Faced  with  the  financial  crisis,  we 
have introduced a set of non-standard measures, which we call “enhanced credit support”. 
These measures are intended to prevent the threat of a drastic loss of liquidity in the financial 
system as a whole and support the flow of credit to firms and households above and beyond 
what could be achieved through policy interest rate reductions alone. 
Given  their  exceptional  nature,  these  measures  will  have  to  be  unwound  once  conditions 
return  to  normal.  Of  course,  we  designed  technically  the  measures  with  their  exit  in  mind, 
and  today’s  conference  provides  an  opportunity  for  me  to  outline  the  overall  exit  strategy 
from the set of measures. To be clear, in this context, I would like to stress that, firstly, the 
term “exit strategy” should be understood as the framework and set of principles guiding our 
approach 
include 
considerations about interest policy. Secondly, the discussion of the exit strategy should not 
be confused with its implementation. As I said,  it would be premature to declare the crisis 
over. Now is not the time to exit. But I would like to make it clear that the ECB has an exit 
strategy,  and  we  stand  ready  to  put  it  into  action  when  the  appropriate  time  comes.  My 
colleague Jürgen Stark, who will be on the first panel on the programme today, will go into 
more detail as regards issues related to timing.  
the  various  non-standard  measures. 
to  unwinding 
It  does  not 
Exit from what? – Enhanced credit support 
II.  
Let me start by taking up things from where I left them a year ago.  
When  I  addressed  this conference at  the  beginning  of  September  2008,  I  reflected  on  the 
direction in which the economy was headed. I looked back over the preceding 12 months of 
financial turbulence, noting that this had marked the end of “a long phase of heightened risk 
tolerance”.  At  the  end  of  my  speech  I  expressed  concerns  that  the  correction  of  financial 
imbalances, and the associated re-pricing of risk, might not have run its full course.  
As we now  know, this was indeed the case. Only ten days later, the re-pricing in markets 
took  a  quantum  leap.  In  mid-September  the  turbulence  turned  into  a  full-blown  crisis.  The 
chart of money market spreads tells this tale clearly. 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 1
 As  you  can  see,  credit  spreads  soared.  Financial  market  activity  fell  dramatically,  volatility 
spiked and the global financial system came close to seizing up. Central banks stepped into 
the breach, addressing this unprecedented market failure. The ECB was in the vanguard of 
actions to contain these intensified tensions, taking a number of standard and non-standard 
measures. The measures by the leading central banks eventually paid off. As you see in the 
chart, money market spreads – a symptom of the market failures that I mentioned – retreated 
from their peaks. They are now back at levels comparable to those before the intensification 
of the crisis last year. But they still remain elevated in a longer time perspective.  
The crisis triggered a freefall in economic activity. The chart shows that within a few months 
only,  from  January  to  July  2009,  the  projections  for  2009  shifted  massively  to  the  left,  in 
highly negative territory. After they centred around -1.5% in January 2009 and -3.2% in April 
2009, they dropped to -4.5% in July, entirely outside the distribution range still a few months 
earlier.  
2 
 BIS Review 103/2009
 One  important  element  of  the  ECB’s  actions  has  been  the  non-standard  measures  I  have 
described  as  “enhanced  credit  support”.1  This  support  collectively  defines  the  special  and 
primarily bank-based measures to enhance the flow of credit over and above what could be 
achieved through policy interest rate reductions alone, and avoid a systemic liquidity threat.  
As you know, the ECB’s enhanced credit support comprises five elements:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
the full allotment of banks’ demands for central bank liquidity at fixed rates;  
the further expansion of the list of assets accepted as collateral in our operations; 
the lengthening of the maturity of our operations that now go up to one year;  
the provision of liquidity in foreign currencies, notably US dollars; and 
finally,  direct  purchases  of  covered  bank  bonds  in  order  to  revive  this  market 
segment, which is important in Europe. 
Let me briefly recall the rationale underlying these five specific measures.  
The first motivation for introducing enhanced credit support was to address the seizing up of 
the money market. If left unaddressed, this seizing up would have rendered the refinancing 
of  many  bank  assets  impossible,  risking  a  massive  and  disorderly  deleveraging  by  credit 
institutions. This, in turn, would have seriously hampered the monetary policy transmission 
mechanism and ultimately curtailed the expansion of credit to firms and households in the 
euro area. The core of the measures that we introduced in October was the “fixed-rate full-
allotment” tender procedure. Banks were granted access to essentially unlimited liquidity at 
our policy interest rate in our regular open market operations. This support enabled them to 
maintain their crucial role in financing the real economy.  
                                                 
1   See the speech “The ECB’s enhanced credit support” (Munich, 13 July 2009). 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 3
As  a  second  measure,  we  expanded  the  collateral  eligible  in  our  liquidity  providing 
operations. This offered an opportunity for banks to refinance assets that had become less 
liquid in the wake of the market turmoil. While the quantitative impact of this measure was 
not large in aggregate terms, it was important as it gave reassurance to banks that a larger 
share of their balance sheet could be refinanced at any time in case of need.  
A  third  motivation  was  to  give  banks  a  more  medium-term  perspective  in  their  liquidity 
planning,  making  them  less  vulnerable  to  short-term  shocks  and  attenuating  the  maturity 
mismatch on their balance sheet. By giving banks a longer planning horizon we could further 
support their credit provision to the economy.  
A fourth issue we needed to address was the currency mismatch in banks’ balance sheets 
and the malfunctioning of the international swap market. This was particularly relevant for US 
dollars, given the need of European banks to fund their dollar assets. We therefore began to 
supply liquidity to European banks in US dollars, backed by a swap facility established with 
the Fed.  
Finally,  the  Eurosystem  acted  in  financial  markets  directly.  The  Governing  Council  chose 
covered bonds due to their particular importance in Europe and the fact that, by carrying a 
signature  from  the  issuing  bank  and  the  underlying  asset,  they  are  akin  to  our  repo 
operations. Our aim was to have a catalytic role: we decided on a purchase programme with 
a volume that was significant enough to improve market functioning but not so large as to 
dominate the market as such. We also chose the covered bond market because we knew we 
could  trigger  new  issuance  activities,  and  thereby  have  a  positive  spillover  effect  on  the 
overall financing of banks as well as on other market segments.  
All  in  all,  there  are  encouraging  signs  that  these  measures  –  in  combination  with  the 
substantial interest rate reductions – are gradually bearing fruit. At the same time, there is no 
room  for  complacency  and  we  are,  as  always,  alert  and  prepared  for  any  unexpected 
developments.  
How to exit? – The ECB’s exit strategy  
III.  
Having described the set of non-standard measures, let me now turn to the question of how 
to exit from them. The rationale for exit from these measures is the inverse of the rationale 
for  their  implementation.  We  have  introduced  exceptional  measures  under  exceptional 
circumstances and will unwind these measures when the situation returns to normal and the 
rationale for the measures fades away.  
Note that an exit strategy is not identical to a particular course of action. Rather, it lays out a 
framework and set of principles to govern actions in the face of circumstances in whatever 
form they take.  
The  distinction  between  a  strategy  and  a  particular  course  of  action  is  well  known  in 
monetary policy. A monetary policy strategy provides the framework for assessing economic 
circumstances and responding to ever changing contingencies. But a strategy does not spell 
out interest rate decisions in the future.  
In my view, the exit strategy from non-standard measures is comparable. As of today, we do 
not have all the information necessary to decide which exit path will be desirable or optimal 
from the perspective of tomorrow. But we have developed a set of criteria that will guide our 
future decisions. In this sense, exit considerations are subject to the same qualification that I 
always make when I speak on behalf of the Governing Council on monetary policy matters: 
we are not pre-committed.  
 
 
4 
 BIS Review 103/2009
Accordingly, as of today, we are not committed to a particular timing or sequence of actions 
for  the  exit  phase.  But  our  future  decisions  will  not  be  arbitrary.  They  will  be  guided  by  a 
framework. In my view, four cornerstones have to be considered in our approach to exit from 
non-standard measures: the link to our monetary policy strategy; the forward-looking initial 
design of the measures; our technical and institutional ability to act; and our reputation for 
swift and decisive action when it is required.  
  BIS Review 103/2009 
 5
Link to the monetary policy strategy 
1.  
The first cornerstone of the our exit strategy is the link to our primary objective and thus to 
our  monetary  policy  strategy.  Evidently,  the  crisis  has  not  changed  the  ECB’s  primary 
objective.  Our  actions  have  resolutely  been  taken  with  this  primary  objective  in  mind:  to 
maintain price stability in the euro area over the medium and longer term.  
By  implication,  any  non-standard  measure  whose  continuation  would  pose  a  threat  to  the 
achievement of price stability must be undone promptly and unequivocally.  
At the same time, if no such risk existed, a non-standard measure could be maintained in 
case we continue to see significantly abnormal tensions, credit dislocations and impairment 
of the monetary policy transmission mechanism.  
But financial institutions ultimately need to stand on their own two feet. Central banks can 
and have provided support to market functioning. But ultimately market activity relies on the 
confidence and trust of market participants themselves. 
The design of the ECB’s measures  
2. 
The ECB’s non-standard measures were designed with exit considerations in mind.  
There was a strong consensus to embark on such policies that would prove unproblematic to 
unwind at a later stage. In this sense, the design of the non-standard measures was chosen 
to facilitate a smooth exit, representing the second cornerstone to be kept in mind.  
This is reflected in two aspects of the design: the fact that a number of measures will phase 
out naturally; and the fact that the size and scope of the outright purchases for which exit 
would require either an unwinding or offsetting operations has been carefully calibrated.  
Phasing out  
a.  
A  degree  of  phasing  out  has  been  built  into  the  exit  process  through  the  design  of  our 
measures.  In  the  absence  of  new  policy  decisions,  many  of  the  measures  will  naturally 
unwind over time. An overwhelming proportion of the additional liquidity provided during the 
financial  crisis  has  been  offered  through  repurchase  agreements.  Once  these  operations 
mature, their impact naturally phases out. Another example concerns the agreements with 
other monetary authorities to provide liquidity in foreign currencies. These agreements are 
priced  in  a  way  that  makes  it  likely  that  they  will  face  less  demand  once  tensions  in  the 
market subside. Hence, here too a “natural phasing out” is envisaged, essentially reflecting 
lower demand.  
Size and scope of the intervention 
b.  
We  have  also  carefully  guarded  against  undertaking  outright  operations  of  a  scope  and 
magnitude  that  would  make  them  difficult  to  offset  or  unwind.  Notably,  the  covered  bonds 
purchase  programme  is  limited  in  size  compared  with  the  overall  scale  of  our  refinancing 
operations  and  compared  with  our  balance  sheet.  Its  effect  on  total  liquidity  can  easily,  if 
desired, be neutralised via adjustments to our monetary policy instruments. 
Ability to act 
3.  
Of  course,  notwithstanding  these  design  features,  exit  will  require  a  number  of  policy 
decisions. Therefore, an important question and the third cornerstone of our exit strategy is 
whether a central bank has the technical and institution capability to take such decisions. 
Technical capability and the operational framework 
a.  
On the technical side, the question is whether we need to set up new rules and procedures 
to exit. This is not the case. The ECB’s operational framework is well equipped to facilitate 
6 
 BIS Review 103/2009
the unwinding of non-standard measures when the need arises. The framework embodies a 
rich  and  flexible  set  of  instruments,  including  fine-tuning  operations,  for  the  absorption  of 
abundant liquidity – promptly if necessary. 
Moreover the framework permits short-term interest rates to be changed while keeping some 
non-standard measures in place, should continued credit support be needed. This feature is 
of  great  consequence:  it  means  that  the  Governing  Council  can  choose  the  way  in  which 
interest  rate  action  could  be  combined  with  the  unwinding  of  the  non-standard  measures. 
There is no pre-determined sequence between a change in interest rates and unwinding of 
non-standard measures. Hence, the Eurosystem retains appropriate flexibility as to the way 
in  which  interest  rate  action  will  be  combined  with  the  unwinding  of  the  additional  credit 
support measures, notably its extended framework for longer-term refinancing operations. 
In short, the ECB has in place all the technical ability to absorb liquidity as required.  
Institutional capability and independence  
b. 
On the institutional side, the question is whether a central bank has the institutional status 
and necessary independence to carry out any action it sees necessary to fulfil its task. The 
Governing  Council  has  the  unfettered  capability  to  take  and  implement  appropriate  policy 
decisions  whenever  circumstances  warrant,  given 
institutional 
independence. This reflects the maintenance of a clear dividing line in the euro area between 
the central bank and the fiscal sphere of responsibilities.  
The fact that the ECB has refrained from purchasing government bonds is in line with this 
institutional  framework.  This  approach  avoids  any  possibly  intricate  interaction  with  other 
policy  actors  on  decisions  relevant  for  exit,  and  maintains  a  clear  separation  of 
responsibilities between the central bank and fiscal authorities.  
the  ECB’s  strong 
Reputation to act when appropriate 
4. 
Any strategy will only be credible if there is no doubt about the ex ante determination of the 
institution  to  implement  the  required  actions.  This  is  the  fourth  cornerstone.  From  this 
perspective, the ECB’s determination to act in a consistent way is beyond any doubt. Over 
the  past  decade,  our  institution  has  established  a  clear  track  record  of  vigilance  and 
reputation for acting in a timely fashion.  
Let me give only two examples: in December 2005 the Governing Council, on the basis of its 
monetary  policy  strategy,  acted  promptly  to  address  mounting  risks  to  price  stability. 
Although many ECB watchers at the time favoured holding or reducing rates, on the basis of 
subsequent events it is widely recognised that this decision was appropriate and served to 
anchor 
that 
underscores the ability to take decisions in difficult circumstances is the rise in interest rates 
in July 2008. It is now often put aside because subsequent developments were overtaken by 
the  eruption  of  the  crisis,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  inflation  expectations  were  rising 
noticeably at the time. The decision of the Governing Council at the time demonstrated its 
determination  to  continue  solidly  anchoring  inflation  expectations  including  in  difficult 
circumstances.  At  the  height  of  the  financial  crisis,  this  reputation  has  helped  to  stabilise 
inflation  expectations, 
the 
materialisation of the risk of deflation. 
inflation  expectations  securely.  A  second  example 
the  euro  area  against 
including  contributing 
longer-term  private 
to  guard 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 7
 Concluding remarks 
IV.  
Allow me to conclude. 
This  morning,  I  have  outlined  four  main  cornerstones  of  the  exit  strategy  from  our  non-
standard monetary policy measures. They reflect: our reputation for swift and decisive action 
when  it  is  required;  our  technical  and  institutional  ability  to  act;  the  forward-looking  initial 
design  of  the  measures;  and,  above  all,  the  link  to  our  monetary  policy  strategy  and  the 
primary  objective  of  securing  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  over  the  medium  and  longer 
term.  
Stressing the importance of the exit strategy should not be confused with its implementation. 
Notwithstanding some recent signs of improvement in the economic outlook, it is premature 
to declare the financial crisis over. From today’s perspective, the need for enhanced credit 
support remains.  
Therefore, for the time being central bank liquidity is likely to remain abundant. This does not 
mean, however, that the broader concept of liquidity in terms of monetary aggregates grows 
strongly.  And  it  is  this  broader  concept,  not  central  bank  liquidity  itself,  which  is  related  to 
inflationary  pressures  over  the  medium  term.  Of  course,  central  bank  credit  and  broader 
monetary  aggregates  are  linked  over  time.  In  a  modern  banking  system,  and  in  normal 
circumstances, central bank credit is largely used by banks – in the form of required reserves 
– to create bank credit, and expand deposits and broad money aggregates. So, an increased 
provision  of  central  bank  credit  can  lead  –  more  or  less  automatically  –  to  an  increase  in 
broad money.  
In  current  conditions,  that  link  has  been  weakened,  however.  Today,  banks  –  in  the 
aggregate – tend to hold part of the central bank credit that they obtain in our refinancing 
operations not as a reserve against an expansion of loans and deposits, but in the form of 
8 
 BIS Review 103/2009
excess reserves deposited with the Eurosystem. This attenuates the automatic link between 
the provision of central bank liquidity and broad money. And, as a consequence, it attenuates 
the inflationary potential of the Eurosystem’s outstanding credit to banks.  
The  exit  strategy,  in  the  end,  will  need  to  be  invoked  at  the  precise  time  in  which  the 
traditional link between broad money and our provision of liquidity to the banking system will 
re-establish itself. This calls for a constant and careful monitoring of the conditions at which 
the Eurosystem supplies central bank credit to banks in view of the evolution of the economy 
and of markets expectations.  
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 103/2009 
 9
