Rundheersing Bheenick: The role of international trade and trade finance 
Address  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the 
Presentation  on  Afreximbank  to  the  Mauritian  Business  Community,  Port  Louis,  16  June 
2009. 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen 
It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  welcome  you  all  today  to  this  Presentation  of  the 
Afreximbank. I extend a particularly warm welcome to Dr Oramah and Mr Chafa. This is a 
critical  element  in  what  might  be  called  our  frontier  expansion  policy,  creating  extended 
links between the core role of a central bank and the wider pastures of trade and the real 
economy. Last month at about the same date, the Bank was co-hosting the first Seminar of 
the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  in  Mauritius.  Today’s  event  is  the  fruit  of  the 
collaboration of our two institutions, Afreximbank and Bank of Mauritius.  
On the occasion of a Board Meeting of Afreximbank held in Mauritius in December last, I had 
drawn the attention of the President and Chairman of the Board of Afreximbank, Mr Jean-
Louis Ekra, on the lack of awareness about Afreximbank’s programmes and facilities by the 
business community and I had expressed my views on how a knowledge of Afreximbank’s 
products could represent a useful tool in the promotion of market and product diversification 
of  our  trade.  I  am  extremely  delighted  that  the  President  of  Afreximbank  has  responded 
positively to my request and I convey my heartfelt thanks to him.  
Today’s  event  gives  me  the  opportunity  to  share  with  you  a  few  thoughts  on  the  role  of 
international  trade  and  trade  finance,  especially  in  the  context  of  the  current  economic 
turmoil,  and  as  Paul  Krugman  has  put  it  in  his  seminal  book  “The  Return  to  Depression 
Economics”; that “Malign neglect” of the “shadow banking system” that has led to the “Loss 
of traction” of the central banks in steadying the real economy in the storm.  
International trade 
Over  many  years,  we  have  seen  that  most  countries  have  progressively  opened  their 
economies  to  international  trade,  either  through  the  multilateral  trading  system,  increased 
regional  cooperation  or  as  part  of  outward-oriented  domestic  reform  programs.  We  have 
gone beyond the system with the third world being merely the exporter of raw materials and 
the  importer  of  manufactures.  International  trade  nowadays  backed  by  the  Internet  has 
created the efficiency for raising standards and conditions of living. It has enabled all nations 
to produce on a higher efficiency scale. It has helped increase productivity. It has allowed the 
instant spread of knowledge and ideas so that the range of choices available to consumers 
has expanded continuously.  
Trade  and  globalization  have  without  doubt  brought  enormous  benefits  to  many  countries 
and citizens of the world. We might disagree on the exact modalities and the sequencing of 
trade and tariff reforms, but few of us would dispute that international trade has been a major 
driver of global economic growth since the end of the Second World War. Trade expansion 
boosted post-war economic recovery in the leading economies of today; Germany and Japan 
are notable examples that come to mind. It figures large in the “growth miracles” of the Asian 
Tigers, Mauritius, but also China! But this has not happened without those countries facing 
their own crises. 
BIS Review79/2009 
 1
The impact of the crisis on trade finance 
Today we are facing the worst economic crisis in generations and this crisis is threatening to 
undo  the  economic  development  that  many  countries  have  achieved  so  far.  Undoubtedly 
world trade has been one of the worst casualties in the global financial crisis. This is even 
threatening  to  “erode  people’s  faith  in  an  open  international  trading  system.”  The  negative 
impact  on  world  trade  finds  its  way  through  two  main  channels.  First  the  credit  crunch 
resulting from the financial market turbulences has led to a fall in the supply of trade finance, 
which has rightly been described as the oil of the wheels of international trade; and secondly 
the  spillover  of  the  financial  crisis  into  the  real  economy  has  caused  the  worst  recession 
since the Great Depression and fuelled a contraction of trade volumes. And those of us who 
believe in open trade almost as an article of faith, have watched with growing disbelief as the 
threat  of  protectionism  started  to  rear  its  ugly  head.  As  economic  activity  collapsed  and 
unemployment  soared  in  many  countries,  protectionist  sentiment  has  risen  along  with  the 
attraction  of  other  trade-distorting  policies.  Many  countries  have  implemented  domestic 
stimulus packages aimed at protecting their businesses and industries, favouring domestic 
goods and services sometimes at the expense of imports. Policy-makers are perfectly aware 
that  such  policy  actions  have  international  implications  –  in  the  short  term  they  can  boost 
domestic demand but in the long term, they undermine the international trading system and 
global wealth and welfare. 
Outlook for world trade for 2009 
If  we  look  at  the  prospects  for  world  trade  for  2009,  we  see  that  the  World  Bank  has 
predicted  that  the  volume  of  world  trade  in  goods  and  services  will  decrease  by  around  6 
percent. According to the World Trade Organisation (WTO), the collapse in global demand is 
expected  to  drive  manufacturing  exports  down  by  roughly  9  percent  in  volume  terms. 
International trade is thus forecast to continue deteriorating and there is even the emergence 
of a wide consensus arguing that in 2009 the global economy will shrink as recession strikes.  
Against this bleak backdrop, I believe it is important to put things into the right perspective. 
Yes, trade can be a powerful engine to transmit shocks, whether positive or negative, from 
one  part  of  the  globe  to  another.  But,  no,  it  is  certainly  not  the  cause  of  the  collapse  in 
demand.  The  financial  crisis,  which  transmuted  into  a  global  economic  crisis,  is  what  has 
driven the world economy to where it is now! 
Lessons from previous crises 
Crises are, without a doubt, challenging times but they bring along a wealth of lessons and 
opportunities  for  those  willing  to  learn  from  past  mistakes.  As  US  President  Obama  has 
recently put it: we must not waste the opportunities this crisis presents.  
The  destructive  protectionist  streak  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Great  Depression  serves  as  a 
stark  reminder  about  the  dangers  of  reverting  to  the  beggar-thy-neighbour  policies  of  the 
past.  We  have  learnt  the  lesson  that  the  scarcity  of  trade  finance  is  unavoidable  during 
crises. The experience of South East Asian countries at the time of the Asian Financial crisis 
a decade ago; of Russia during 1997-98; of Turkey in 2000-01; and of Brazil and Argentina 
during the Argentine crisis of 2001-02, still resonates in our minds. Another lesson learnt is 
that multilateral cooperation can also help make trade finance more affordable and resilient 
in times of crisis. 
WTO has advocated cooperation among all stakeholders in the trade finance market to keep 
the  flow  of  trade  finance  going.  Among  the  measures  proposed  at  the  G20  Summit  is  the 
injection  of  some  USD250  billion  to  support  trade  finance.  Here  in  Mauritius,  despite  the 
resilience of our domestic banking sector, on the first signs of difficulty last November, the 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2009
Bank of Mauritius acted pre-emptively and created a line of credit of USD100 million for trade 
financing purposes.  
Doha Round 
Reviving the Doha Trade Talks – which were not so long ago considered to be as dead as 
our  dear  departed  Dodo  –  is  now  increasingly  seen  as  vital  for  global  economic  recovery. 
Political leaders and policy-makers of the G20 have committed to expedite the conclusion of 
the  Round.  This  view  is  shared  by  WTO  Director-General  Lamy,  who,  underscoring  the 
importance  of  concluding  the  Doha  Round,  warned  that  “the  stress  test  of  the  multilateral 
trading system is still to come”. 
I  align  myself  with  the  view  that  the  mutual  benefits  of  trade  are  too  important  not  to  be 
preserved and it is in the interest of one and all to maintain and enhance trade openness at 
all  costs.  Indeed  I  strongly  believe  that,  protectionist  sentiment  notwithstanding,  trade 
continues  to  function  as  the  hand-maiden  of  economic  growth  and  will  support  global 
economic recovery.  
Regional cooperation/economic integration 
In Mauritius, our trade policy has always been one of openness, whether it is to the world 
economy or to the region. We have of course, never been averse to drawing benefits from 
preferential trade arrangements.  
We  are  a  member  of  various  important  international  organisations  such  as  WTO  and  of 
regional blocks such as COMESA and SADC. More importantly, we have been in the front 
line of African countries to benefit from the African Growth and Opportunity Act. 
For little Mauritius, Africa represents a sizeable market for our products and services and has 
untapped potential. Many local companies are exporting to SADC and COMESA countries 
and they envisage extending their export network to other parts of the continent.  
The Mauritian Banking Sector has been quite resilient to the financial market turbulence, but 
the  interconnectedness that  comes  from  living  in  a  highly  integrated  world  means  that  our 
banks  are  not  immune  to  contagion  effects.  In  the  words  of  Ngozi  Okonjo-Iweala,  the 
managing  director  of  the  World  Bank,  we,  in  the  emerging  economies,  are  "innocent 
bystanders" in the global recession created by developed countries. But we are determined 
to  avoid  becoming  victims  of  the  credit  crunch.  We  do  recognize  the  need  for  collective 
action in order to get through these harsh economic times.  
This gives me the opportunity to articulate my position regarding the strong lobbying of some 
of our exporters in favour of the continued depreciation of our currency. Export lobbies have 
been  clamouring  for  a depreciation  of  the  Rupee  to  ensure  their competitiveness,  if  not  to 
guarantee their very survival. But we need to look at the other side of the coin – consumer 
and producer price inflation arising from pass-through of higher import prices. At a time when 
one of our main concerns is protecting people and their purchasing power, intervention by 
the  Bank  of  Mauritius  to  keep  the  Rupee  at  a  depreciated  level  would  not  only  be 
inappropriate, it would also be irresponsible! 
And  to  put  to  rest,  once  and  for  all,  the  Rupee  depreciation  mantra,  I  need  to  add  that  a 
recent  IMF  mission  has  proposed  to  re-classify  our  exchange  rate  regime  from  managed 
float  to  freely  floating.  I  am  reminded  here  of  the  French  writer,  Jean  Baptiste  Poquelin  – 
many  of  you  probably  know  him  under  his  more  famous  name,  Molière.  Molière  had  one 
well-known  play,  “Le  Bourgeois  Gentilhomme”.  Le  Bourgeois  Gentilhomme  in  Molière  was 
surprised  to  discover  that  he  had  been  speaking  prose  all  his  life!  We  are  surprised  to 
discover that for the last year or so, we’ve been a free floater, not a managed floater. And the 
Fund  has  offered  to  re-classify  us  in  the  light  of  our  past  performance  as  a  free  floating 
BIS Review79/2009 
 3
regime. This puts us in the top category of countries in the likes of UK and the US. This is not 
an  opportune  time  to  embark  on  a  drastic  overhaul  of  our  exchange  rate  regime;  this 
proposal however does offer food for thought about the shape of things to come under the 
emerging new economic order. Financial mercantilism, whether at the level of countries or 
institutions, is simply not a viable way to national economic competitiveness. 
The Additional Stimulus Package and the Budget Speech has made it clear that life support 
for moribund enterprises is not on the agenda. “Preparing for recovery” is!  
In addition to the inescapable “regulatory soul-searching”, the financial crisis and the global 
recession also warrant a revolution in the ways we think about and conduct business. Going 
down  the  well-trodden  path  of  pessimism  while  waiting  for  the  tide  to  turn  is  certainly 
tempting,  but  ultimately  our  ability  to  harness  the  potential  of  the  new  internationalism  will 
depend on how willing we are to move away from established “comfort zones”. 
Afreximbank – opportunities for Mauritius 
Today’s event with Afreximbank is intended to serve as a reminder of the vast possibilities 
that  beckon  for  enterprises  and  financial  institutions  that  choose  to  view  this  crisis  as  an 
invitation to do things differently; to do things better! 
The  initiative  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  to  lend  its  platform  for  Afreximbank  to  market  its 
products is one more step in the direction of regional cooperation and economic integration. I 
know our local investors are looking forward to receive Afreximbank’s support for their trade 
with African countries and other countries in the region as well as with the rest of the world.  
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  always  favoured  an  approach  geared  towards  opening  up  the 
banking sector to other players. We firmly believe that healthy competition always results in 
more choices, coupled with a better service for the users of financial products.  
Traders around the world rely on a high level of trust and confidence in the counterparty to a 
trade operation. One of the things that traders look for in their exchange with buyers in other 
countries  is  the  assurance  that  they  will  indeed  receive  their  payments.  The  2009  Budget 
Speech has proposed the setting up of an Export Credit Insurance Scheme. This reminds me 
of the major role played by the Bank of Mauritius in the 1980’s in setting up the Export Credit 
Guarantee  Scheme  and  in  providing  financial  backing  in  setting  up  the  Export  Credit 
Insurance  Scheme.  This  scheme  was  meant  to  protect  Mauritian  exporters  against  credit 
risks  –  both  commercial  and  country  risks.  Both  schemes  were  managed  by  the 
Development Bank of Mauritius but it was the Bank of Mauritius that guaranteed settlement 
of  all  claims  in  respect  of  the  two  schemes.  The  two  schemes  did  not  meet  with  much 
success and were short-lived. I hope we’ll have better luck with the new version now on the 
drawing board. 
Afreximbank  is  bringing  to  us  today  years  of  experience  and  know-how  in  providing 
insurance and guarantee services covering commercial and non-commercial risks associated 
with African exports. The experience and expertise of Afreximbank in this area could be quite 
useful. 
REPSS 
As  you  know,  the  developing  COMESA  system,  the  Regional  Payment  and  Settlement 
System – REPSS will facilitate cross-border payment and settlement between Central Banks 
in the COMESA region; it is presently in the final stage of testing and will be launched soon. 
The  system  will  stimulate  and  increase  intra-regional  trade  by  working  in  local  currencies, 
thus reducing costs and saving time. I extend an invitation to Afreximbank to join our clearing 
system. 
4 
 BIS Review 79/2009
I now leave you in the able hands of Dr Oramah who will make a presentation on the range 
of products of Afreximbank. Those of you who have booked slots with the delegation from 
Afreximbank  for  one-to-one  encounters  will  be  able  to  attend  the  bilateral  meetings  in  the 
afternoon and tomorrow morning. I hope and wish you to make the most of this presentation 
by Afreximbank. 
Thank you all for your attention. 
BIS Review79/2009 
 5
