Bandid Nijathaworn: The current financial crisis, lessons learned, and 
future implications 
Keynote address by Dr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the 
11th SEACEN Conference of Directors of Supervision of Asia-Pacific Economies, Bangkok, 
29 July 2009. 
 Distinguished Speakers, 
Participants, Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to be giving this morning’s keynote address for the opening of the eleventh 
SEACEN  Conference  of  Directors  of  Supervision  of  Asia-Pacific  Economies  under  the 
theme: “The Current Financial Crisis, Lessons Learned, and Future Implications.” 
This forum gives us an excellent opportunity, at this crucial juncture, to discuss the recent 
global financial crisis and to share amongst ourselves the experience as well as the lessons 
learned,  so  that  we  can  further  strengthen  and  improve  our  financial  systems  and 
supervision. Looking at the agenda, it is certain that the discussion in the next two days will 
be a most valuable one. 
So far, the SEACEN economies, one way or another, have all been affected by the current 
global financial turmoil. As central bankers and regulators, we are faced with the important 
task  of  putting  in  place  future  regulation,  and  the  obvious  place  to  start  is  to  ask  the 
questions whether the crisis could have been prevented or mitigated in the first place, and 
how the lessons learned from the current crisis can be used to prevent the next crisis. 
These  are  not  easy  questions  to  answer.  We  may  be  aided  by  our  understanding  of  the 
common factors shared by past financial crises, and how lessons from the past have helped 
to  shape  the  current  policy.  But  always,  there  will  be  other  or  new  challenges  that  will  be 
difficult  for  us  to  anticipate  or  be  aware  of.  With  these  in  mind,  let  me  share  with  you  my 
thoughts on some of these issues. 
First,  on  the  causes  of  financial  crisis.  According  to  a  well-known  study  by  Reinhart  and 
Rogoff in 2008, financial crises in the past, dated back to the 1800s, shared many common 
causes. Chief among these are macroeconomic imbalances and the roles played by large 
and persistent capital flows, asset price bubbles, and credit boom. Although, compared with 
the Asian financial crisis, the current crisis does differ in terms of the impact, the scale, and 
the role played by financial innovation, but the two crises, nonetheless, do share many of the 
common factors mentioned above. 
For  example,  in  the  case  of  asset price  and  credit  boom,  the  real  house  price  in  the  U.S. 
increased  by  more  than  40  percent  between  2002  and  2006,  while  U.S.  loan  growth, 
particularly  mortgage  loans,  accelerated  during  the  same  period.  These  signs  were  also 
present in East Asia before the 1997 crisis. In the current crisis, the securitization boom and 
the easing of monetary policy in the US helped fund the loan growth, while in the case of the 
Asian  financial  crisis,  it  was  the  large  capital  inflows  in  the  form  of  direct  borrowing  that 
funded the credit boom. In both cases, however, poor underwriting standard by banks was 
an important common contributing factor. 
Looking back, the Asian financial crisis has been an important turning point for policymakers 
in the region, as the lessons learned from the crisis had led to many important policy reform 
initiatives,  all  of  which  aimed  at  strengthening  the  robustness  and  the  risk  management 
discipline of the domestic financial systems, and this brings me to my second point. 
BIS Review 96/2009 
 1
In the case of Thailand, after having restored financial stability in the early 2000s, financial 
reform became a top priority, with emphasis on instilling prudent regulations and strong risk 
management. We adopted a macro-prudential approach in the early 2000s, in recognition of 
the  systemic  linkages  between  the  financial  system  and  the  increasingly  opened  macro-
economic conditions; utilizing our natural institutional advantage as we continue to oversee 
both  monetary  policy  and  financial  institutions  supervision.  Hence,  from  2003  to  2006,  a 
series  of  macro-prudential  measures  were  introduced,  aiming  at  restraining  then  the  rapid 
growth of credit, especially credit card loans and mortgage loans. The preventive measures 
that  were  introduced  included  placing  limits  on  the  loan-to-value  ratio  for  luxury  mortgage, 
raising  minimum  repayment  requirements  for  credit  cards  and  personal  loans,  and 
strengthening  NPL  provisions  by  fair  valuation  standards  of  IAS39.  Looking  back,  these 
measures  have  been  useful  in  curtailing  excessive  leverage  and  household  indebtedness, 
thus helping to maintain stability in our domestic financial system. 
Risk-based supervision was a key driving force to strengthen risk management practices of 
our financial institutions. Financial institutions and central bank laws have been overhauled to 
keep up with the increased complexity of the financial system. The new Financial Institutions 
Business  Act,  enacted  last  August,  empowers  the  Bank  of  Thailand  with  the  authority  to 
regulate  banks  and  non-banks  under  a  consolidated  supervision  regime.  Furthermore,  risk 
management and governance practices of financial institutions have also been strengthened. 
Board of Directors are now held accountable by law for setting the strategic and policy goals 
of banks, while corporate governance guidance and notifications under the fit-and-proper rule 
for the appointment of bank management have been put in place. Financial institutions have 
been  positive  in  embracing  these  changes,  as  they  contribute  to  a  more  open,  more 
accountable, and more transparent financial system. 
Given the dynamic changes in the financial system, it is important for risk management and 
supervision to be forward-looking, and recognize margins of error from risk models. Thus, it 
is sensible to adopt the conservative approach. Here, let me also highlight the importance of 
“stress-testing” as a risk management and supervisory tool. During the past four years, we 
have conducted stress-testing, both top-down and bottom-up by requiring local banks to do 
the same, for risk management and capital planning purposes. Currently, stress-testing has 
become  an  integral  part  of  our  supervisory  process.  From  the  experience  so  far,  we  find 
stress-testing  to  be  an  extremely  useful  process  and  dialogue  for  identifying  potential 
weaknesses of banks in a forward-looking manner, as well as in alerting bank management 
to take the necessary corrective actions. 
As a result of the macro-prudential framework implemented and the emphasis of supervision 
that has been placed on improving risk management of banks, Thai financial institutions, so 
far,  have  remained  resilient  to  impact  of  the  global  financial  turmoil.  I  believe  this  is  a 
common experience here in SEACEN. 
Ladies and gentlemen. 
Looking  ahead,  once  the  global  economic  and  financial  system  recovers,  many  important 
issues  will  require  answers  on  how  to  move  forward  from  the  point  of  view  of  regulatory 
guidance.  On  this,  the  key  issues  that  will  be  most  relevant  to  our  region  in  my  view  will 
include: first, large capital inflows and their implications for risk management capacity of the 
financial system; second, the issue of procyclicality and how to deal with it effectively in the 
context  of  bank  regulation  and  supervision,  and  third,  managing  the  cross-border  spillover 
effects that potentially can be a source of systemic risk. 
First, on the issue of capital flows. At this time, given better growth prospects for emerging 
markets  in  the  near-term,  there  could  be  a  resurgence  of  strong capital  flows  to emerging 
markets once the current global crisis subsides. As large capital inflows are known to be one 
of the key contributing factors of many financial crises in the past, preparing the economic 
and financial system to effectively intermediate it and manage the associated risk to maintain 
financial  stability,  will  be  the  first  and  foremost  challenge  for  SEACEN  regulators  and 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2009
policymakers. In the past, what happened was that, in response to the strong capital inflows 
and abundant liquidity, banks tended to relax their underwriting standards, which gave rise to 
the formation of asset price bubbles. Therefore, going forward, risk management of banks 
must continue to be strengthened and regulators must be prepared to use macro-prudential 
measures  proactively  as  necessary  to  reduce  such  risk.  This  means  credit  standards  and 
bank capital rules must remain vigilant regardless of the abundance of liquidity. 
Second,  the  issue  of  procyclicality  has  gained  the  attention  of  regulators  and  the  banking 
industry for quite some time in the context of Basel II. Since then, especially at the start of 
this crisis when credit crunch has slowed economic activities, a number of proposals have 
been put forward to deal with this issue. So far, the debate remains open. The issues now 
range from the choice between the use of rule versus discretion on bank capital, to the use of 
leverage ratio, and to the implementation issue that includes how to exercise the measures 
effectively  in  the  context  of  a  financial  system  that  is  non-complex,  as  is  the  case  of  the 
SEACEN economies. On this, I have a view that vigorous stress-testing by supervisors and 
banks  can  help  keep  the  effects  of  procyclicality  manageable.  I  hope  this  conference  will 
further discuss this issue. 
Finally,  the  complexity  and  cross-border  linkages  of  financial  systems  will  continue  to 
increase, not decrease, following this crisis. On the other hand, the right and effective global 
regulatory and supervisory structures to handle cross-border implications are still evolving, 
while  information  flows  and  cooperation  among  regulators  and  supervisors,  at  this  time, 
continue  to  be  limited.  It  is  clear  that  without  significant  improvements  in  both  information 
flows  and  cooperation  among  supervisors,  it  will  be  difficult  to  prevent  or  contain  future 
financial crisis spillovers effectively. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  this  eleventh  SEACEN  conference  provides  us  with  an  excellent 
opportunity to discuss these current and important issues. Our challenges are similar, and 
through our coordinated views and collaborated efforts, the SEACEN economies collectively 
will  be  in  a  stronger  position  to  address  these  challenges.  I  wish  all  of  you  a  successful 
conference with a fruitful exchange of ideas and a wonderful collaboration. And last but not 
least, I would like to acknowledge our appreciation to the SEACEN Centre and to our fellow 
supervisors for providing the key supports to this great forum. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 96/2009 
 3
