David Longworth: Financial system policy responses to the crisis 
Remarks by Mr David Longworth, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Financial 
Markets Association of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, 12 March 2009.  
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  Bank  of 
Canada’s website. 
 Good afternoon. It's a pleasure to be here. 
With your professional interests in foreign exchange, money markets, capital markets, and 
derivatives, I'm sure the past year and a half has been exciting and interesting – if those are 
the  right  words.  We've  been  living  through  a  period  of  astonishing  financial  turbulence, 
historic  marketplace  losses,  and  serious  threats  to  financial  stability.  The  real  economy  is 
being affected by this financial turmoil, and Canada is now in the second quarter of a painful 
recession.  
As a result of the crisis, financial decisions are more difficult. Investment plans have been 
scaled back. And confidence has fallen. I think it fair to say that confidence will return when 
people have the sense that policy-makers have not only put into place appropriate policies to 
mitigate the effects of the recession, but have also implemented sound policies to stabilize 
the global financial system and to promote long-term stability and growth.  
In  Canada  and  other  major  economies,  central  banks  have  lowered  policy  interest  rates 
aggressively,  and  governments  have  announced  sizable  fiscal  stimulus  packages.  The 
effects  of  these  actions  will  begin  to  be  felt  in  the  second  half  of  this  year  and  will  build 
through 2010. But to ensure our long-term economic well-being, financial and credit markets 
need to return to good health and stay in good health. To that end, we need policies that 
promote a stable, efficient, and sustainable financial system. 
That is what I would like to discuss today. Specifically, I'd like to talk about two different kinds 
of financial system policy: one that has changed in response to the extraordinary events of 
the  past  year  and  a  half,  and  one  that  needs  to  change  to  enhance  the  stability  of  the 
financial system. First I'll describe how the Bank of Canada has changed its liquidity policies 
and  practices,  especially  since  September  2008.  Then  I'll  describe  developments  in  the 
thinking  on  the  procyclicality  of  the  financial  system  –  particularly  that  of  financial  markets 
and financial market prices.  
The Bank of Canada's liquidity policy response to the crisis 
Last August, about one year into the crisis, I provided an overview of the changes that the 
Bank had made to its liquidity policies.1 Since the onset of the crisis in August of 2007, there 
has  been  a  general  global  decline  –  and  in  some  cases,  a  complete  disappearance  –  of 
liquidity in key funding markets. Liquidity is essential for both the efficiency and the stability of 
the financial system, and this decline, especially in bank-funding liquidity, has been of great 
concern to central banks. The liquidity of bank-funding markets is related to the liquidity of 
asset markets in general, and problems in one market can spill over into the other.  
It was in this context that the Bank for International Settlements' Committee on the Global 
Financial System (CGFS) made recommendations aimed at strengthening the effectiveness 
                                                 
1   See D. Longworth, "Work in Progress: The Bank of Canada's Response to the Financial Turbulence" (speech 
to  the  Canadian  Association  for  Business  Economics,  Kingston,  Ontario,  26  August  2008).  Available  at: 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/2008/sp08-10.html. 
BIS Review 29/2009 
 1
of central banks in dealing with liquidity problems, including pressures in funding-markets.2 
Two  recommendations  focused  on  the  central  bank's  ability  to  conduct  liquidity  operations 
effectively, even when liquidity in key markets is severely constrained. In concrete terms, this 
means  that  central  banks  should  be  prepared,  if  necessary,  to  take  steps  that  go  beyond 
adjusting the aggregate supply of bank reserves to meet changes in demand. These steps 
include providing an increased volume of term funds, conducting operations against a broad 
range of collateral, and conducting operations with a broad range of counterparties. This is 
precisely what the Bank of Canada and other central banks have been doing over the past 
year and a half. 
From  August  2007  to  August  2008,  the  Bank  of  Canada  made  two  significant  changes  to 
support liquidity, and thereby the stability of the Canadian financial system and the efficient 
functioning of financial markets. First, we introduced a term purchase and resale agreement 
(PRA)  facility  to  purchase  securities  from  primary  dealers  and  resell  them  to  the  original 
owners at term. Second, we broadened the range of securities acceptable as collateral for 
the Standing Liquidity Facility (SLF) – the overdraft facility accessible to participants in the 
Large Value Transfer System (LVTS) – to include certain types of asset-backed commercial 
paper (ABCP) and U.S. Treasuries. 
Since  August  2008,  the  Bank  has  both  expanded  its  liquidity  facilities  and  introduced  new 
ones.  
With  regard  to  expansion:  the  regular  term  PRA  facility  has  been  the  "workhorse"  of  the 
Bank's liquidity program since the onset of the crisis. It was reintroduced in September 2008, 
following  a  pause,  starting  in  June,  that  followed  improvements  in  funding  conditions.  The 
term  of  PRAs  was  increased  from  one  month  to  both  one  and  three  months,  and  the 
frequency of term PRA operations was increased to weekly (from biweekly in the spring). In 
addition, we substantially increased the size of this term financing from $4 billion in the spring 
of  2008  to  about  $35  billion  currently.  The  value  outstanding  peaked  at  $37  billion  in 
December  2008.  And  we  expanded  the  list  of  eligible  counterparties  to  include  not  only 
primary dealers, but also all participants in the LVTS. Finally, we expanded the list of eligible 
securities  for  the  term  PRAs  to  include  bank-sponsored  ABCP  and  certain  U.S.  Treasury 
securities, consistent with the expansion of SLF collateral mentioned earlier.  
The Bank of Canada has also introduced three new liquidity facilities since last summer, one 
of  which  is  an  expansion  and  replacement  of  another  [Table:  Bank  of  Canada  Liquidity 
Facilities Introduced since 2007Q4]. 
                                                 
2   Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS),  "Central  Bank  Operations  in  Response  to  the  Financial  Turmoil" 
(CGFS Papers No. 31, BIS, 2008). Available at: http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs31.pdf?noframes=1. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2009
 
The Term Loan Facility was introduced in November. The aim of this facility is to give LVTS 
participants increased flexibility in efficiently managing their balance sheets. It allows direct 
LVTS participants to use their non-mortgage loan portfolios, which consist of high-quality but 
illiquid assets, as collateral for term loans. Two billion dollars is auctioned weekly for a 28-
day  term.  The  maximum  amount  outstanding  at  any  one  time  was  about  $4.2  billion. 
Although the Term Loan Facility has had the highest take-up of the new facilities, its use has 
been  relatively  modest,  largely  because  the  minimum  bid  rate  is  the  Bank  Rate3  [Chart: 
Weekly Par Value Outstanding for BoC Liquidity Facilities]. 
                                                 
3   The Bank Rate is 25 points above the target for the overnight rate. When the expected target for the overnight 
rate is significantly lower than the current target, the "penalty" is effectively larger when the term goes past the 
next fixed announcement date. 
BIS Review 29/2009 
 3
 
At  the  same  time,  we  introduced  a  term  PRA  facility  for  private  sector  money  market 
instruments, the aim of which was to support liquidity in the markets for these instruments. 
Bankers' acceptances and promissory notes, as well as commercial paper, including bank-
sponsored asset-backed commercial paper, were eligible securities for this facility. Primary 
dealers  could  participate,  as  well  as  federally  or  provincially  regulated  market  participants 
who demonstrated significant activity in private money markets. This facility was designed as 
a  backstop  facility,  with  a  high  minimum  bid  rate  of  75  basis  points  above  the  overnight 
indexed swap rate. Given its backstop nature, this facility was rarely used. Of the $1 billion 
offered in the weekly auction for 14 days, a maximum of only $25 million was taken up in any 
one week. 
With  these  new  and  expanded  facilities  in  place  in  Canada,  and  with  improvements  in 
liquidity  facilities  at  other  central  banks  and  actions  taken  by  governments  to  stabilize  the 
financial  system,  there  has  been  a  noticeable  general  improvement  over  the  past  four 
months  in  money  markets  in  Canada  and  elsewhere  [Charts:  Spreads  between  Interbank 
Offered Rates and Overnight Index Swap Rates]. 
Since the beginning of the year, there has also been some improvement in corporate bond 
issuance.  Nevertheless,  there  continue  to  be  problems  in  financial  markets.  In  particular, 
liquidity in secondary markets for fixed-income instruments remains poor; repo-rate spreads 
for private sector instruments – if a quote can even be obtained – are, in many cases, much 
higher than before the market turmoil began;4 commercial paper issuance has declined; and 
there have been no public offerings of term asset-backed securities in months. 
 
                                                 
4   Even before the financial turmoil, the repo market in Canada for private sector instruments was very thin. 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2009
BIS Review 29/2009 
  5
It was against this background that, as part of its provision of liquidity to support the efficient 
functioning of the market for private sector securities, the Bank announced, on 23 February, 
a new term PRA facility for private sector instruments. The new facility expands upon and 
replaces  the  previous  term  PRA  facility  for  private  sector  money  market  instruments.  The 
terms and conditions for the facility were announced on 6 March.5 The first auction will be 
held on 17 March. This liquidity facility should indirectly support credit in Canada by helping 
to improve secondary-market liquidity and to reduce credit spreads. This, in turn, should help 
stimulate the issuance of new corporate instruments [Chart: Canadian Corporate Bond Index 
Option-Adjusted Spreads]. 
 
The new term PRA facility for private sector instruments is aimed at a broader set of market 
participants who do not have access to the regular term PRA facility. They can access the 
facility on an indirect basis via primary dealers. Relative to the previous term PRA facility for 
private sector money market instrument, there are four major changes:  
i. 
the set of eligible securities has been expanded to include eligible corporate bonds 
(those with at least a BBB rating, and including certain callable bonds) in addition to 
private sector money market instruments;  
the set of potential eligible counterparties now also includes federally or provincially 
regulated  market  participants  who  can  demonstrate  significant  activity  in  the 
corporate bond market, in addition to the main participants in the money markets;  
the minimum bid rate has been significantly reduced, as befits a facility that is not 
designed to be just a backstop; and  
ii. 
iii. 
                                                 
5   See http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/notices_fmd/2009/not060309_final_pra.html. 
6 
 BIS Review 29/2009
iv. 
the term of the transactions has been extended to 1 and 3 months from two weeks. I 
should note that the Bank is currently in a consultation process with regard to the 
possible  inclusion  of  term  asset-backed  securities  as  eligible  securities  for  this 
facility.  
An additional liquidity facility that we have in place is a US$30 billion swap line with the U.S. 
Federal  Reserve.  Swap  lines  help  to  avoid  bottlenecks  in  the  international  distribution  of 
liquidity and potentially enable domestic institutions to obtain liquidity in foreign currency, in 
this case, in U.S. dollars. This facility has not been needed at any time throughout the crisis, 
however,  and  it  may  not  need  to  be  used,  because  most  Canadian  banks  have  U.S. 
branches  or  subsidiaries  and  thus  have  access  to  U.S.-dollar  funding  through  the  Fed's 
discount window. 
The Bank of Canada continues to closely monitor the state of liquidity in financial markets, 
and we will continue to provide exceptional liquidity to the Canadian financial system as long 
as conditions warrant. In addition, as the Governor outlined in his speech on 19 November 
2008, the Bank is looking carefully at what it should be doing for the longer term to provide 
for continuously open markets.6  
I  will  turn  now  to  the  second  set  of  policies:  those  that  affect  the  stability  of  the  overall 
financial system. Here I will focus on policies that can affect the degree of procyclicality of 
financial market prices. 
Financial system stability – a macroprudential approach to the procyclicality of 
financial market prices 
Until recently, most financial system policy has focused on individual institutions, with the aim 
of limiting the damage that could be caused by distress at a given institution – the so-called 
"microprudential" approach. 
Over  the  past  few  years,  interest  has  been  growing  in  a  "macroprudential"  approach  to 
regulating  the  financial  system.7  This  approach  aims  to  prevent  or  limit  damage  to  the 
financial  system  as  a  whole,  thereby  avoiding  or  reducing  the  economic  costs  that  attend 
financial  instability.  Such  an  approach  is  needed  because  systemic  risks  arise  from  the 
collective  actions  of  institutions  and  markets.  But  developing  an  effective  macroprudential 
approach  is  easier  said  than  done.  It  depends  crucially  on  understanding  complex 
relationships  across  institutions  and  markets,  and  how  various  factors  can  amplify  the 
procyclicality  of  the  financial  system  –  that  is,  the  tendency  of  the  system's  behaviour  to 
amplify financial and economic cycles. 
A sound macroprudential approach to analysis and regulation needs to focus on all aspects 
of  the  financial  system,  including  amplification  mechanisms  within  the  system,  and  the 
possibility  of  contagion.  To  date,  much  of  the  discussion  on  how  to  move  forward  on  the 
macroprudential agenda has focused on financial institutions: how they relate to one another 
and  how  their  behaviour  is  influenced  by  overall  capital  requirements  and  loan-loss 
                                                 
6   M. Carney, "Building Continuous Markets" (speech to the Canada-United Kingdom Chamber of Commerce, 
London,  England,  19  November  2008).  Available  at:  http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/2008/sp08-
14.html. 
7   An early description of macroprudential policy concerns can be found in: Bank for International Settlements, 
Recent Innovations in International Banking (prepared by a Study Group established by the Central Banks of 
the Group of Ten Countries, Basel, Switzerland, 1986). A fuller description of the macroprudential approach is 
given by Claudio Borio in "Towards a Macroprudential Framework for Financial Supervision and Regulation?" 
(BIS Working Paper No. 128, February 2003). Available at: http://www.bis.org/publ/work128.pdf?noframes=1. 
BIS Review 29/2009 
 7
provisioning practices.8 Much less has been said about the implications of the behaviour of 
institutions for the behaviour of financial markets and financial market prices. This is what I 
will focus on today. 
In particular, regulations and market practices regarding capital for trading book activities, for 
risk-management systems within institutions,9 and for margin requirements can – especially 
if  they  are  too  focused  on  short-run  volatility  –  lead  to  procyclicality  in  asset  prices  and  a 
general amplification of the procyclicality of the financial system as a whole.  
Let  me  explain.  The  value-at-risk  (VaR)  methodology  has  come  to  dominate  not  only  risk-
management systems within institutions, but also the setting of capital requirements on their 
trading  books  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,10  and  the  way  that 
institutions think about setting margin requirements in their securities-financing operations or 
the  initial  margin  for  over-the-counter  derivatives.  The  VaR  methodology  essentially  uses 
recent  historical  data  to  estimate  the  losses  on  the  trading  book  (typically  over  a  one-  to 
sixty-day period) that would come from a negative shock whose size would be exceeded only 
(say) an estimated one per cent of the time. 
Problems can arise if most participants in a given market use the same short historical period 
to calculate a simple VaR, which is then used to carry out risk management within institutions 
for a given allocation of economic capital, to calculate regulatory capital requirements, and to 
set  margin  requirements  for  counterparties.  When  that  happens,  the  dynamics  of  asset 
prices could be most unfortunate in response to a significant shock.  
Consider first the case of an improvement in the fundamentals of a given asset. This would 
lead  to  an  increase  in  the  market  price  of  that  asset  and,  typically,  to  a  reduction  in  the 
volatility of its price as well. This, in turn, would lead to a lower VaR for the existing portfolio. 
As  a  result,  the  capital  requirements  would  fall,  a  bigger  trading  book  could  be  held  for  a 
given  allocation  of  economic  capital,  and  margin  requirements  could  be  lowered  for 
counterparties.  Those  counterparties,  in  turn,  would  participate  more  actively  in  markets.11 
Market  liquidity  would  increase  as  more  trading  occurred  in  a  growing  range  of  assets. 
Perceived  risk  would  fall  as  asset  prices  rose  and  volatility  continued  to  fall.  A  "virtuous 
circle" for prices and volatility would result, not unlike what was seen in the 2003-06 period. 
As a result, however, assets may become overvalued as risks become underpriced. 
Next, consider what would happen if there was a downward shock to asset prices, resulting 
from a change in fundamentals, or an increase in volatility, resulting from the withdrawal of a 
major institution from trading. In this case, everything would work in reverse. The rise in VaR 
would  mean  a  reduction  in  the  size  of  trading  books  for  a  given  allocation  of  economic 
capital.  Margin  requirements  for  counterparties  would  be  raised.12  Institutions  would 
therefore  sell  assets,  driving  prices  down  further  and  increasing  volatility.  A  vicious  circle 
would result (as it did in the lead-up to the rescue of Bear Sterns and particularly following 
                                                 
8   Bank  of  Canada  Governor  Mark  Carney  addressed  procyclical  capital  adequacy  in  "From  Hindsight  to 
Foresight"  (speech  to  Women  in  Capital  Markets,  Toronto,  Ontario,  17  December  2008).  Available  at: 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/2008/sp08-16.html. 
9   Some of the lessons that the current crisis holds for risk management can be found in P. Duguay, "Financial 
Stability through Sound Risk Management" (speech to the Risk Management Association, Toronto Chapter, 
Toronto, Ontario, 8 January 2009). Available at: http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/2009/sp09-1.html. 
10   The  1996  "market  risk  amendment"  to  the  Basel  I  Framework  included  a  VaR-based  methodology  to  set 
capital requirements for the trading books of banks. 
11   For useful information on "liquidity spirals," see M.K. Brunnermeier and L.H. Pedersen, "Market Liquidity and 
Funding Liquidity," Review of Financial Studies (forthcoming). 
12   Margin requirements have risen enormously since the beginning of the financial turbulence in August 2007. 
This was documented, for instance, in the IMF's October 2008 Global Financial Stability Report (Chapter 1, 
Box 1.5, 41-43). Available at: http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/gfsr/2008/02/pdf/text.pdf 
8 
 BIS Review 29/2009
the failure of Lehman Brothers). For those of you active in foreign exchange markets, I would 
note that following the Asian crisis of 1997-98, some of these same factors were thought to 
have contributed to that crisis.13  
Now, the assumption that most market participants use the same risk-management systems 
based  on  short  historical  samples  is  very  much  an  exaggeration.  Some  researchers, 
however, have argued that enough institutions follow very similar risk-management systems 
that  the  dynamics  described  above  can  happen,  and  indeed  have  happened,  in  the  real 
world  in  response  to  sizable  shocks.14  Moreover,  in  its  Global  Financial  Stability  Report 
issued in the second half of 2007, the International Monetary Fund concluded – based on 
simulations  it  carried  out,  which  seemed  realistic  based  on  observed  risk-management 
practices – that "seemingly prudent behavior by individual firms, reacting to similar market-
risk systems, could serve to amplify market volatility in periods of stress beyond what would 
otherwise have occurred."15 Observations and anecdotal information following the failure of 
Lehman Brothers suggest that this behaviour of firms was very important in amplifying price 
volatility in the autumn of 2008. Analysis of such behaviour strongly suggests the need for a 
macroprudential approach.  
Policy proposals to deal with procyclicality in financial markets stemming from VaR 
I would now like to turn to what can be done to reduce the procyclicality in financial markets 
that  comes  from  the  use  of  VaR-based  methodologies  that  are  too  dependent  on  short 
historical samples. 
Two main principles have been proposed. The first is that, in parallel with the probability of 
default on credit exposures on the banking book being calculated on a "through-the-cycle" 
basis,  VaR  for  the  trading  book  also  be  calculated  on  a  through-the-cycle  basis.  One 
implication  of  this  principle  is  that  all  historical  data  should  be  exploited  to  calculate  the 
distribution of possible losses for a given asset or asset class. The second principle is that a 
"stress  VaR"  –  a  VaR  calculated  on  the  basis  of  assumed  stress  conditions  –  should  be 
used,  especially  to  consider  the  heightened  correlation  of  losses  across  various  assets  or 
asset classes. It is well known that correlations among losses in categories of risky assets 
increase  dramatically  (sometimes  approaching  one),  when  the  financial  system  is  under 
great stress.  
Unfortunately, there are many firms that either do not perform such calculations or do not act 
upon  them.  Were  all  firms  to  undertake  and  act  upon  such  calculations  when  short-run 
volatility decreased, VaR calculations would not decrease, because through-the-cycle stress 
VaRs would not be affected. As a result, the amplification mechanisms affecting prices and 
volatility described above would not be at play in boom times. In times of decreasing asset 
prices, some amplification could occur if the decreases were large enough. But to the extent 
that  firms  were  allowed  to  undertake  their  own  through-the-cycle  stress  VaR  calculations, 
there  would  probably  be  much  less  similarity  in  their  calculations  than  there  is  now,  when 
there is a much greater effect coming from those institutions that are effectively acting on the 
basis of short-sample VaRs. Thus, there would likely be less amplification.  
                                                 
13   See,  for  example,  A.  Persaud,  "Sending  the  Herd  Off  the  Cliff  Edge:  The  Disturbing  Interaction  Between 
Herding and Market-Sensitive Risk Management Practices" (BIS Papers, No. 2, Proceedings of a Workshop 
held 
at: 
http://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap02l.pdf. 
Settlements, 
International 
Available 
2001). 
Bank 
April 
the 
for 
at 
14   See  A.  Persaud  (previous  footnote)  and  the  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System,  "A  Review  of 
Financial  Market  Events  in  Autumn  1998"  (CGFS  Publications  No.12,  Bank  for  International  Settlements, 
1999). This latter text has a section (see page 14) on the over-reliance on quantitative tools. 
15   International Monetary Fund, "Do Market Risk Management Techniques Amplify Systemic Risks?" in Global 
Financial Stability Report October 2007, 52-76. 
BIS Review 29/2009 
 9
in 
improvement 
Now to specific policy proposals. First, such through-the-cycle stress VaRs could also form 
the  basis  for  capital  requirements  set  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision 
(BCBS)  and  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  for  the 
trading  books  of  banks  and  securities  dealers.  Recently,  the  BCBS  has  proposed  a  small 
step  in  this  direction  by  adding  a  stress  VaR  to  the  calculation  of  its  trading-book  capital. 
Second,  regulators  could  encourage  an 
internal  risk-management 
procedures  in  the  institutions  they  regulate  to  emphasize  through-the-cycle  VaR.  Third, 
minimum margin requirements for securities-financing operations and initial margin for over-
the-counter  derivatives  transactions  could  be  set  on  the  basis  of  through-the-cycle 
calculations and expected to remain constant.16 Regulation might be required to accomplish 
this. 
Finally,  the  IMF  has  noted  that  having  some  institutions  that  are  not  subject  to  regulatory 
capital  requirements  for  their  trading  books  is  helpful  because  these  institutions  will  have 
more  independence  in  the  way  that  they  carry  out  their  risk  management.17  This 
independence  of  action  would  tend  to  increase  market  liquidity,  reduce  volatility,  and 
therefore reduce procyclicality. However, sharp procyclical increases in margin requirements 
tend  to  preclude  these  typically  leveraged  institutions  from  participating  and  providing 
needed market liquidity at the times it's most needed. 
If all these specific proposals were put in place, there would likely be a significant reduction 
in the procyclicality of asset prices – particularly the procyclicality that stems from the drying 
up of liquidity in a period of falling prices and spiking volatility. 
Conclusion 
A  strong  economy  requires  a  sound  financial  system.  It's  important  to  make  sure  that  the 
policies  that  shape  that  system  are  designed  not  only  to  help  financial  markets  operate 
effectively, but also to support stability over the long term.  
Liquidity is essential to a well-functioning economy, and central banks have an important and 
evolving role in helping to maintain the liquidity of key markets. Over the past year and a half, 
the  Bank  of  Canada  has  introduced  new  liquidity  facilities  and  expanded  existing  ones. 
Although some markets remain impaired, these facilities have helped to restore liquidity in a 
number of key markets. We continue to monitor the situation carefully, and we will continue 
to  provide  exceptional  liquidity  to  the  Canadian  financial  system  as  long  as  conditions 
warrant. 
Macrofinancial stability is equally essential to a well-functioning economy, and central banks 
are  in  a  unique  position  to  promote  it  through  the  development  of  macroprudential  policy, 
especially  in  the  area  of  reducing  the  procyclicality  of  financial  markets.  While  much  work 
remains to be done, there is a growing appreciation of the importance of this issue.  
The progress that we have made and are making to develop effective financial system policy 
will help to return markets to better health. It will also help to restore confidence, and to build 
a stronger, more sustainable economy in the years to come.  
                                                 
16   The  Counterparty  Risk  Management  Policy  Group  has  urged  market  participants  to  establish  margin 
requirements and initial margins that are stable over the cycle. CRMPG, "Containing Systemic Risk: The Road 
to Reform" (Report of the CRMPG-III 6 August 2008). 
17   "Because they are not required to calculate and hold a minimum of economic capital, such pools of private 
capital can have the freedom to take advantage of the possible herd behaviour of others that could result from 
those  that  apply  more  rigid  risk  management  procedures  required  of  regulated  institutions."  IMF,  Global 
Financial Stability Report October 2007, 72. 
10 
 BIS Review 29/2009
