Jean-Claude Trichet: The global dimension of the crisis 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Foreign 
Correspondents’ Club of Japan, Tokyo, 18 April 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to thank Foreign Correspondents’ Club of Japan for inviting me to talk about the 
global  financial  and  economic  situation  and  outlook.  It  is  for  me  a  great  pleasure  to  be  in 
Japan,  and  an  opportunity  to  reflect  about  the  financial  crisis.  Japan  is  indeed  a  striking 
example  on  how  a  crisis  that  started  in  a  segment  of  the  US  financial  markets  eventually 
spread all over the world: while Japanese financial institutions’ limited exposure to the US 
sub-prime  market  allowed  Japan  to  relatively  withstand  the  first  period  of  the  turmoil,  the 
intensification of the crisis as of September 2008 also impacted significantly the Japanese 
economy through multiple channels. A broadly similar pattern holds true for the euro area, 
and ultimately also for the emerging market economies. In my address to you today, I will 
take a global perspective on the crisis, its root causes and the policy response.  
What the crisis has changed and how fast 
One striking aspect of the current crisis is how quickly it has reversed some of the features of 
the global economy that seemed well-performing in recent years, at least to many observers. 
Let me highlight four areas were we have seen changes as being particularly abrupt. These 
areas  are  housing,  finance,  trade  and  international  capital  flows.  In  all  these  areas,  what 
looked like an established trend that economic agents relied on has changed very quickly, 
triggering a chain of reactions that few people had anticipated and leading policy makers to 
take prompt and decisive action:  
• 
First,  the  mortgage  market  meltdown  in  the  United  States  disproved  the  previous 
thesis  that  house  prices  would  not  fall  nation-wide.  Such  belief  was  widely  shared 
among investors and misled them to lend abundantly to households that did not have 
sufficient  resources.  There  are  of  course  different  ways  to  compute  the  change  in 
house prices; according to some measures1, house prices in the United States nearly 
doubled in nominal terms between the early 2000 and 2006. The subsequent fall in 
US house prices (by an estimated 25% in two years) has fuelled delinquencies and 
foreclosures and led to the dramatic fall in the price of asset backed securities, which, 
alongside  other  factors,  now  plagues  the  balance  sheets  of  so  many  financial 
institutions.  
Second, the major financial shock of mid-September 2008 put the world economy on 
a  completely  different  path  by  triggering  a  broad-based  reappraisal  of  risks  and  a 
global fall in confidence. This has led to a strong commitment by all relevant world 
policy makers to no longer let any systemically relevant financial institution fail. 
Third,  international  trade  flows,  which  had  grown  very  robustly  in  recent  decades 
thanks to waves of liberalisation, have suddenly abated towards the end of 2008 and 
then strongly contracted in some areas, further propagating the effects of the crisis 
across countries. According to projections by international institutions, world trade is 
anticipated to shrink in 2009 for the first time since 1945.2 In the last quarter of 2008, 
                                                   
1   The so-called Case-Schiller index is a widely used measure. 
2   By 13% in 2009 according to the OECD. 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 1
real exports fell by 6.5% in the United States, by 6.7% in the euro area, by 13.8% in 
Japan and by an estimated 10% in China: these numbers stand in sharp contrast with 
developments in the past decades. During the 1990s, world trade rose by around 7% 
on average each year. In addition to the magnitude of the contraction in world trade, 
its  suddenness  is  also  very  noticeable  as  trade  fell  markedly  in  the  last  quarter  of 
2008, immediately after the intensification of the crisis in mid-September. Related to 
this,  the  broad  consensus  in  support  of  free  trade,  which  has  prevailed  in  past 
decades,  has  to  be  preserved  with  reinforced  determination,  whilst  risks  of 
protectionist pressures are mounting in many countries. I therefore strongly welcome 
the  commitment  taken  by  the  G20  to  notify  promptly  the  World  Trade  Organisation 
(WTO) of any such measures, with the WTO then reporting publicly on adherence of 
G20  members  to  their  pledge  not  to  repeat  the  historic  mistakes  of  protectionism 
made in previous eras.  
Fourth,  another  type  of  international  flows  that  has  contracted  sharply  is  financial 
private flows to emerging economies, leading to balance of payment strains in some 
of  these  countries.  It  is  estimated  that  net  private  capital  flows  to  emerging  and 
developing economies fell by a factor of 6 between 2007 and 2008. Again, balance of 
payment strains had by many observers been dismissed as memory of the past. The 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), which not long ago was facing a problem of falling 
resources  because  fewer  programs  had  been  launched,  has  in  most  recent  times 
been confronted with the opposite problem – an issue also tackled by the G20, who 
agreed at the London Summit to treble IMF resources. 
 These examples illustrate how massive the problems were, which were building up under the 
surface of the global economy. One key word here is synchronisation. I have mentioned how 
quickly trade and financial flows, which used to act as powerful drivers of globalization, have 
abated  at  the  end  of  last  year,  further  propagating  the  effect  of  the  crisis  across  borders. 
What was remarkable in the “boom” period between 2004 and 2007 is not only the fact that a 
large number of economies was growing very fast, but also the fact that virtually no country 
was  left  behind:  all  systemically  important  economies  registered  positive  growth  rates. 
Similarly,  in  this  crisis,  all  regions  are  affected,  albeit,  again,  to  a  different  extent,  and  all 
economies are going through one of their most difficult episodes in decades.  
The root causes of the crisis 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  root  causes  of  the  crisis.  The  present  crisis  cannot  be  easily 
explained by one or two factors; rather, a combination of micro and macro factors has been 
at play.  
Micro factors, related to insufficient financial oversight and massive underestimation of risk, 
are  the  immediate  cause  of  the  financial  crisis  as  I  have  already  stressed  on  earlier 
occasions.  I  will  argue,  however,  that  macro  factors  are  important  for  explaining  the 
emergence of the crisis, as they have created the preconditions for micro factors to unfold.  
Structural factors, global imbalances and risk premia 
Generally,  the  macro  root  causes  of  the  financial  crisis  can  be  associated  with  two 
measurable developments: low risk premia and the accumulation of global imbalances. I will 
argue that there is an interplay between these two developments that help us to understand 
the relationship between macro fundamentals and the emergence of the financial crisis.  
The first measurable development relates to the price side and is reflected, as I mentioned 
before,  by  exceptionally  low  risk  premia  in  virtually  all  markets.  Of  course,  one  could 
provide  specific  explanations  to  any  particular  market  that  could  rationalize  the  decline  in 
individual  risk  premia.  One  striking  feature  has  been,  however,  the  persistent  and 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2009
synchronized  decline  in  risk  premia  across  all  markets.  Estimated  risk  premia  in  the 
stock market before the intensification of the crisis in September 2008 were one third and 
two  thirds  below  their  values  at  the  beginning  of  the  1980s,  in  the  euro  area  and  the  US 
respectively.  Term  premia  in  bond  markets  had  lost  before  the  crisis  three  fourth  of  their 
estimated  value  at  the  middle  of  the  1990s.  The  premium  for  investments  in  houses  has 
followed  a  similar  trend  in  particular  in  the  United  States.  Finally,  the  cost  of  corporate 
borrowing  in  excess  of  a  riskless  rate,  which  remunerates  credit  risk,  had  also  decreased 
significantly  in  both  economies.  Obviously,  we  observed  the  same  movements  across  all 
markets.  
Facts common to multiple markets suggest the existence of a common factor: one of 
these common factors, I will argue, was the lack of sufficient medium-term orientation 
of global macro policies.  
A second measurable macro development on the quantity side is the accumulation of “global 
imbalances”.  The  expression  “global  imbalances”  refers  to  saving-investment  imbalances 
within  –  and  external  imbalances  among  –  a  number  of  systemically  relevant  countries, 
which were unsustainable over a medium- to long-term perspective.  
Conceptually,  it  is  helpful  to  separate  the  drivers  of  global  imbalances  into  structural  and 
cyclical components.3
Structural  issues  have  been  at  play  in  the  development  of  imbalances  in  advanced 
economies. While main distortions were to find at the micro level, they had important 
macroeconomic implications. As argued before, insufficient oversight of financial markets 
in  advanced  economies,  which  ultimately  allowed  for  the  originate-and-distribute  banking 
model to develop, led to a separation of those holding credit risks from those monitoring and 
managing them. The resulting excessive focus on near-term returns led to a misjudgement of 
the  underlying  risk,  and  created  wrong  incentives  for  originators.  Such  an  environment 
created  the  conditions  for  the  observed  herding  behaviour,  in  which  risk  control  easily 
became a secondary issue. At the same time, rapid financial innovation and the emergence 
of  new,  non-standardised  structural  products  made  the  risk  assessment  difficult  for  rating 
agencies, leading to considerable underpricing of the embedded unit of risk and to biased 
expectations  about  the  evolution  of  asset  wealth.  Ultimately,  at  the  macro  level,  this 
system led to an inefficient allocation of capital and resulted in very low savings rates 
in some systematically important advanced economies. 
Structural factors have dominated the emergence of excess savings in emerging Asia. 
The  latter  happened  in  a  context  of  quickly  rising  incomes,  growing  productivity  and 
commodity  prices  in  emerging  economies,  and  was  partly  attributable  to  structural  factors 
such as:  
• 
the  propensity  of  residents  to  accumulate  precautionary  savings  due  to  lacking 
welfare provisions; and  
relative financial underdevelopment.  
• 
Recent  studies  show4  that  the  lower  degree  of  financial  development  in  emerging 
economies, compared with mature economies, has been one important driver of capital flows 
to  mature  economies.  In  fact,  the  lack  of  supply  in  “safe”  financial  assets  in  emerging 
economies can trigger capital flows to regions that are able to produce the desired assets. 
Evidence indeed confirms the large scope for emerging economies to catch up in financial 
                                                 
3   Bracke, Bussière, Fidora and Straub (2008): “A Framework Assessing Global Imbalances,” ECB Occasional 
Paper No.78. 
4   Dorrucci,  Meyer-Cirkel  and  Santabárbara  (2009):  “Domestic  financial  development  in  emerging  economies: 
Evidence and implications”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 102 (April). 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 3
terms, while at the same time pointing to an accelerating pace of financial development since 
the  late  1990s  in  most  of  these  countries.  In  particular,  in  the  past  decade  the  funding  of 
emerging  economies  in  domestic  financial  markets  has  been  increasing  at  a  much  faster 
pace  than  in  the  advanced  economies.  As  a  result,  in  2007  the  funding  of  emerging 
economies in domestic markets accounted for about half the ratio observed in the EU, the 
US, and Japan – compared with less than one third of the ratio in 1998.  
Indeed,  some  of  these  structural  factors  can  be  addressed  by  proper  policies 
implemented  over  sufficiently  long-term  horizons.  For  instance,  the  provision  of  public 
goods  in  emerging  economies  to  increase  the  degree  of  social  security  would  reduce 
uncertainty and precautionary savings motives. Similarly, further development of efficient and 
liquid  domestic  financial  markets  would  contribute  to  somewhat  lower  savings  and  better 
channel them to domestic investment. 
Globally, very low risk premia coupled with limited volatility created the macro preconditions 
that encouraged the global “search for yield”. Of course, the progressive build-up of systemic 
risk  via  a  generalised  underestimation  of  the  quantity  of  risk  that  pushed  risk  premia  to 
unsustainably low levels was in particular permitted by the inefficiencies in financial market 
regulations.  
The associated “underpricing of the unit of risk” fuelled the overpricing of house and financial 
assets and encouraged the creation of ill-designed and not transparent structured financial 
products. More generally, it led to a widespread deterioration in lending standards and credit 
quality and increasing confidence in leverage activities in several mature economies. 
The policy response 
How have economic policies responded to the current crisis? The current crisis has shown 
that  there  is  a  need  for  more  rigorous  regulation  of  the  global  financial  system.  Such 
regulation  needs  to  meet  two  fundamental  requirements.  First,  it  needs  to  prevent  the 
excessive risk taking that we have been observing in financial markets over the past years 
and  that  led  to  the  creation  of  asset  price  bubbles  and  large  imbalances  in  the  global 
economy.  At  the  same  time,  it  needs  to  create  an  environment  that  is  conducive  to 
sustainable growth for our economies in the long run. In this respect, I should remind that a 
process  of  multilateral  surveillance  of  global  imbalance  had  been  agreed  and  put  in  place 
under the aegis of the IMF; while a clear diagnosis of the sources of these imbalances and 
the  necessary  policy  responses  emerged  among  the  relevant  partners,  it  is  clear  that 
engaging  resolutely  in  the  implementation  of  the  pertinent  policy  prescriptions  remained 
extremely difficult before the crisis erupted. 
The  international  community  has  swiftly  reacted  to  the  need  for  greater  coordination  of 
policies and regulation of international financial markets. In this respect, it is worth coming 
back to the outcome of the recent meeting of the G20 in London. Governments have agreed 
to establish a new Financial Stability Board (FSB) with a strengthened mandate and enlarged 
membership,  as  a  successor  to  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF).  New  principles  on 
remuneration will be implemented to guarantee the sustainability of compensation schemes 
and  to  prevent  the  financial  market  participants  from  focussing  excessively  on  short  term 
returns.  Regulation  and  oversight  will  be  extended  to  all  systemically  important  financial 
institutions, instruments and markets. This will also embrace, for the first time, systemically 
important hedge funds. The FSB will co-operate with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
to  identify  systemic  economic  and  financial  risks.  At  the  same  time,  the  international 
community has agreed to triple IMF resources to 750 billion US dollar and to support trade 
finance for an amount of 250 billion US dollars. The sheer size of these commitments clearly 
shows  that  the  international  community  is  determined  to  prevent  a  retrenchment  of  global 
capital  and  trade  flows  and  to  guarantee  the  stability  of  the  international  financial  and 
economic system.  
4 
 BIS Review 49/2009
National  governments  have  in  addition  undertaken  an  unprecedented  concerted  fiscal 
expansion to stimulate demand and foster confidence in our economies. Governments have 
also decided on a broad set of measures to support the banking sector and strengthen the 
stability  of  the  international  financial  system.  These  measures  include  the  injection  of  new 
capital, guarantees on bank debt and deposits, as well as large-scale schemes that aim at 
coping with the issue of impaired assets. For example, governments in the euro area alone 
have committed more than 2 trillion euro in the form of capital injections, liability guarantees, 
impaired asset relief and funding guarantees, which altogether corresponds to around 23% 
of euro area GDP.  
I thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 49/2009 
 5
