William C Dudley: Financial market turmoil – the Federal Reserve and the 
challenges ahead  
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Council on Foreign Relations Corporate Conference 2009, 
New York, 6 March 2009. 
 Thank you for having me here today. It is a pleasure being back to speak at the Council. In 
the past, my Federal Reserve colleague, Governor Daniel Tarullo, gathered panels of Wall 
Street economists here at the Council to talk about economic issues. When he invited me to 
participate,  it  was  challenging  work  because  Dan  always  asked  us  about  our  economic 
forecasts! And he remembered and recounted our past mistakes (and our much rarer, more 
prescient forecasts)!  
Before I begin, let me emphasize that my comments represent my own views and opinions 
and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the  views  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or  of  the 
Federal Reserve System. 
What has happened to the global financial system is momentous. We have seen – despite 
extraordinary  actions  by  central  banks  and  governments  around  the  world  –  a  severe 
impairment of the intermediation process between borrowers and savers. We have seen a 
massive  deleveraging  of  the  non-bank  financial  sector.  We  have  seen  a  tightening  in 
financial market conditions even as the Federal Reserve has pushed the federal funds rate 
down close to zero. The result has been a severe loss of confidence among consumers and 
business and a global recession. 
Today  I  would  like  to  talk  a  bit  about  what  went  wrong,  where  we  are  today,  some  new 
initiatives that are underway, what lessons we should take from the crisis and some steps we 
need to take so this doesn’t happen again. 
It is well-recognized that one important catalyst for this financial crisis was the easy credit 
and loose underwriting practices that fueled the boom in the U.S. housing sector. The ability 
of virtually anyone to get a loan to buy a house pushed up home prices significantly faster 
than incomes. To keep the boom going, underwriting standards were progressively relaxed, 
but even with that support to demand, inevitably the boom proved unsustainable.  
As the boom reversed and housing prices began to fall, the bad underwriting practices and 
the  mispricing  of  risk  became  readily  apparent.  When  prices  are  rising  no  one  needs  to 
default,  they  always  have  the  option  of  refinancing  or  selling  the  house  at  the  now  higher 
price. But when prices are dropping, there is no easy way out. The result has been a sharp 
rise in delinquencies and foreclosures as the bust has played out.  
The fact that these poorly underwritten loans were used in the construction of very complex 
collateralized debt obligations or CDOs, with risks that were not well understood and grossly 
mispriced  –  made  a  bad  situation even  worse.  Investors  who  thought  they  had  purchased 
safe AAA-rated assets found that these assets were very vulnerable to a housing bust and 
that the ratings were unreliable predictors of the risk of loss.  
The poor performance of these securities, in turn, made investors much less willing to invest 
in structured-finance products more generally. Secondary market liquidity evaporated, which 
exacerbated the difficulty in valuing the securities. This made the market even less attractive, 
causing risk premia to widen further, which only worsened the valuation problems.  
As this process unfolded, the result was a virtual shutdown of the securitization market for 
residential mortgage assets not backed by the federal government directly (Ginnie Mae) or 
implicitly  (Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac).  The  subprime  and  the  Alt-A  mortgage  markets, 
BIS Review 28/2009 
 1
which relied heavily on the securitization process dried up. Of course, this just reinforced the 
downward  pressure  on  housing  prices,  which,  in  turn,  led  to  increased  delinquencies  and 
foreclosures.  This  deterioration  undermined  the  value  of  the  securities  further.  It  was  a 
vicious  feedback  loop  in  action.  The  poor  performance  of  highly-rated  mortgage  securities 
caused investors to begin to shun securitizations more generally.  
The  shutdown  of  the  securitization  markets  led  to  significant  pressure  on  bank  balance 
sheets.  Banks  could  no  longer  securitize  non-conforming  mortgages  or  the  collateralized 
loan obligations associated with leveraged buyouts and other private equity activity that they 
had financed. Moreover, bank backstop liquidity lines were triggered as SIVs and conduits 
could  no  longer  issue  asset-backed  commercial  paper.  Finally,  banks  took  large  mark-to-
market losses on their trading books and had to increase their loan loss provisions.  
As the crisis continued into 2008, the squeeze on bank balance sheets intensified. This was 
driven by several important developments. First, the demise of Bear Stearns increased the 
pressure on the other broker dealers to deleverage. They did this, of course, by becoming 
less willing to lend funds to their counterparties, such as hedge funds, and by shrinking their 
trading books. In the week leading up to Bear’s demise a nasty feedback loop ensued: forced 
asset  sales  increased  price  volatility.  This  led  to  higher  haircuts  by  dealers  on  their 
counterparties, which led to more forced asset sales and still higher volatility.  
Second,  the  failure  of  Lehman  in  September  accelerated  the  pace  of  this  deleveraging 
process.  Major  bank  intermediaries  were  frightened  by  what  had  happened  and  were 
unwilling  to  engage  with  each  other.  Prime  money  market  mutual  funds  suffered  large 
outflows. Investors fled as the news came out that the Reserve Fund had “broken the buck” 
because of large losses generated by its holdings of Lehman paper.  
By late September we were in a very bad spot. Banks weren’t willing to lend to each other 
even at very short term maturities. LIBOR – the London Interbank Offered Rate, which is the 
rate that banks offer to lend to each other – soared even as the Federal Reserve continued 
to  lower  its  federal  funds  rate  target  and  injected  extra  reserves  into  the  banking  system. 
Merrill Lynch agreed to merge with Bank of America. The equity prices of the two remaining 
independent  investment  banks  –  Goldman  Sachs  and  Morgan  Stanley  –  weakened,  their 
credit  default  swap  spreads  widened  and  this  began  to  undermine  their  ability  to  obtain 
funding. In response, Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley jumped over the regulatory wall 
and became bank holding companies. 
Hedge funds were forced to liquidate assets as financing terms tightened. As a group, their 
performance  deteriorated  sharply  beginning  in  late  summer.  This  provoked  investor 
redemptions – further accelerating the speed and scope of the deleveraging cycle. 
Although  housing  and  housing  finance  may  have  been  at  the  epicenter  of  the  crisis,  it  is 
important, however, to recognize that the crisis goes much deeper. In part, it was rooted in 
the overconfidence of investors and borrowers that paid little attention to liquidity and rollover 
risk  and  seemed  blind  to  the  risk  of  a  global  downturn.  It  was  also  rooted  in  the  gaps  in 
supervision  and  regulation  that  allowed  a  whole  range  of  financial  intermediaries  and 
businesses to become more leveraged, in many cases funding long-term illiquid assets with 
short-term borrowing. 
To some extent, what has happened can be tied to changes in the nature of the business 
cycle  and  how  those  changes  influenced  expectations.  Put  simply,  when  business  cycles 
become more damped and recessions less frequent and less severe, this will cause financial 
market participants to take on more risk. This will not appear to be problematic during the 
expansion stage. But it will make the financial system much more vulnerable when the bust 
does  occur.  Occurring  with  less  frequency,  the  bust  will  be  a  bigger  surprise  to  market 
participants.  They  will  be  less  well-prepared  with  the  capital  buffers  and  liquidity  cushions 
needed to traverse an adverse economic environment. 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2009
The  complete  breakdown  in  trust  across  markets  has  been  remarkable.  Essentially,  it  has 
gone like this: Even if I think you are a good credit, I am not going to lend to you, because 
others may not share the same opinion. The problem is if no one else thinks you are good, I 
may not be able to get my money back if I need it. Conversely, others are not willing to lend 
to you, even though they think you are a good credit, because they are not convinced that I 
will do so. The result is that no one lends, financial conditions tighten and this exacerbates 
the  downward  pressure  on  the  economy.  As  economic  conditions  deteriorate,  this 
undermines  the  financial  strength  of  the  major  financial  institutions,  further  reinforcing  the 
downward spiral in confidence. 
Another bad dynamic that exacerbated the crisis has been the reluctance of some banks to 
raise the additional capital they might need should the economic outlook deteriorate sharply. 
Repeatedly over the past 18 months we have heard – from the GSEs, from the investment 
banks, from the commercial banks – now is not a good time to raise capital. This desire to 
postpone capital raising stems, in part, to the fact that bank executives often do not want to 
dilute the existing shareholders (which, of course, include themselves). 
I believe that the management calculus has often gone like this: In good states of the world, I 
have enough capital. In bad states of the world, perhaps I don’t. But to raise enough capital 
to guarantee I can endure all the potential bad states of the world, I will have to massively 
dilute my existing shareholders now. So the self-interested thing to do is to avoid the dilution 
and hope for a good state of the world. 
This does not always work well in practice. Once capital preservation becomes paramount, 
deleveraging intensifies and counterparties grow more wary about engaging. This dynamic, 
in turn, makes a bad state of the world more likely. What may be sensible for each institution 
individually, may collectively be a bad idea. That is because each firm does not internalize 
the cost that their decision not to raise capital has on the overall financial system. 
A healthy banking system is always essential. But never has that been more true right now 
given  what  has  happened  to  the  securitization  markets  and  the  broad  “shadow”  banking 
system.  
So where are we now?  
In my view, the deleveraging process is still far from complete. Hedge fund redemptions have 
soared. It would not be surprising that when we’re done, hedge fund assets (before leverage) 
will  have  fallen  in  half  or  more  from  their  peak  of  about  $2  trillion.  Of  course,  the  Madoff 
scandal and other episodes of misappropriated funds have further undermined confidence, 
reinforcing the redemption pressure. 
Most  importantly,  the  pressure  on  the  financial  system  has  been  exacerbated  by  the 
deterioration  in  the  economic  outlook  following  the  Lehman  failure.  Before  last  fall,  the 
causality ran mostly from the turmoil in the financial system to the real economy. Since then, 
the real economy has contracted sharply and this has reinforced the balance sheet pressure 
on banks and the forced deleveraging process. 
So where do we go from here?  
Well  fortunately,  it  is  not  all  bad  news  –  there  are  a  number  of  programs  that  have  been 
enacted that have already made a difference. And several new initiatives are being enacted 
now that should help to support and bolster the financial system. 
Those  areas  where  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Federal  government  have  responded  in 
force are doing somewhat better. Banks and dealers have plenty of access to liquidity. The 
Term Auction Facility or TAF – in  which funds are auctioned off to banks – and the Term 
Securities Lending Facility or TSLF – in which auctions are held to borrow Treasuries from 
the Federal Reserve – have recently been undersubscribed, indicating that the facilities have 
been sufficiently sized to meet the demand for liquidity. The FDIC has also guaranteed bank 
BIS Review 28/2009 
 3
and bank holding company funding through its Temporary Guarantee Liquidity Program. As a 
result, bank term funding spreads have narrowed a bit this quarter.  
However, while the Federal Reserve can provide liquidity to the banks and dealers and the 
FDIC can reduce counterparty concerns via its guarantee program, these steps cannot force 
banks and dealers to on lend these funds to their customers.  
This is where several new initiatives may show the way forward.  
First, the Federal Reserve has begun to bypass the banks and dealers, which are balance 
sheet constrained, and instead has begun to provide liquidity directly to borrowers. One of 
these programs, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility or CPFF has been up and running 
since late October.  
Under  the  terms  of  the  CPFF,  the  Federal  Reserve  offered  to  purchase  A1-P1  rated 
commercial paper at 84-day maturity from issuers. Although A1-P1 rated paper is the highest 
quality stuff, it makes up almost all of the CP market. The only catch is that the CPFF will 
only buy at rates that are quite high compared to the rates one would expect in the market 
during normal times. The Fed has to charge a high rate and up-front fees to provide some 
equity in the fund to offset potential credit losses.  
This facility has worked extremely well in restoring market function in the commercial paper 
market. Initially, there was a surge of issuance into the facility. Commercial paper rates in the 
market were high and the issuers wanted to extend the maturity of their obligations. But since 
that  time,  purchases  have  slowed  sharply.  Following  the  introduction  of  the  CPFF, 
commercial paper rates in the marketplace dropped below the rates charged by the CPFF. 
As a result, issuance into the program has collapsed because many issuers can now raise 
funds more cheaply in the private market. About half of the maturing paper in the CPFF has 
not  been  rolled  over.  As  a  result,  the  amount  of  CPFF  holdings,  which  peaked  at  around 
$350 billion in mid-January, has fallen by over $100 billion, to below $250 billion. To date at 
least, the CPFF has worked as planned and has been very successful in rehabilitating the 
commercial paper market. 
Second, the Term Asset-Backed Security Loan Facility or TALF will provide balance sheet 
capacity  directly  to  investors  beyond  the  banking  and  dealer  community.  This  program  is 
designed to restart the securitization markets.  
The TALF is being rolled out in two stages. In the first stage, which I’ll call TALF Version 1.0, 
the  Federal  Reserve  will  provide  non-recourse  loans  to  investors  against  AAA-rated 
consumer asset-backed securities collateral. Primary dealers will serve as the contact point 
with  these  investors  to  make  it  easier  for  the  Fed  to  interface  with  potentially  hundreds  of 
investors.  
The  AAA-rated  securities  eligible  as  collateral  for  this  non-recourse  lending  program  are 
used to fund a wide variety of consumer and business loans, including student , credit card, 
auto and small business administration loans. The market for these securities had dried up 
because  the  traditional  investors  in  these  securities  –  SIVs,  bank-related  conduits  and 
securities  lenders  –  have  either  disappeared  or  are  balance  sheet  constrained.  This  has 
reduced the availability of credit for consumers and led to higher borrowing costs.  
The first subscriptions for financing under TALF Version 1.0 will occur on March 17. The first 
batch of new securitizations will be funded on March 25.  
TALF  Version  2.0  will  follow.  This  will  broaden  the  TALF  into  new  asset  classes  such  as 
Commercial Mortgage Backed Securities. Development of this phase is still in its early days. 
But it anticipated that the size and scope of TALF will expand sharply in the months ahead.  
So how will the TALF restart securitization activity and provide balance sheet capacity to the 
private sector? By providing leverage and 3-year term, non-recourse financing to investors, 
the TALF should increase the demand for AAA-rated securitizations. Yields of LIBOR + 400 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2009
basis  points  may  not  be  sufficiently  attractive  on  an  unleveraged  basis,  but  at  10  times 
leverage the returns become very attractive.  
The  non-recourse  nature  of  the  loans  is  also  important.  If  the  price  of  the  security  falls 
considerably, the investor just loses an amount equal to size of the haircut. For example, if 
the haircut was 10% and the value of the security was $100, the most the investor could lose 
would be $10. Thus, the facility eliminates much of the downside risk that would arise from a 
very  deep  recession  or  the  fire  sales  of  assets  that  could  cause  prices  to  drop  sharply 
temporarily.  
This is a very exciting program because it provides balance sheet capacity to risk capital that 
cannot currently get leverage. It goes beyond current programs. Just as important, once it is 
up and running it can be scaled up and out in many different dimensions. In principle, it could 
be  applied  to  other  distressed  asset  classes,  it  could  move  down  the  credit  spectrum  to 
lower-rated tranches, and it could be used to fund older vintage assets.  
Two other important initiatives are also in train that deserve note.  
Last week the Treasury and the major banking supervisors announced the details of a capital 
stress  assessment  process  for  all  bank  holding  companies  with  assets  in  excess  of  $100 
billion. This process is designed to ensure that the banking system has sufficient, high-quality 
capital  to  be  able  to  absorb  the  losses  that  would  likely  be  generated  by  an  economic 
scenario considerably worse than generally expected. The stress assessment assumes an 
adverse economic environment. For example, under this scenario, the unemployment rate is 
anticipated  to  average  more  than  10%  in  2010,  considerably  higher  than  the  consensus 
economic forecast.  
The stress assessment will unfold in three steps. First, each bank holding company will be 
asked  to  evaluate  the  credit  losses  that  are  likely  to  occur  under  an  adverse  economic 
environment. These losses would then be evaluated relative to the bank holding company’s 
ability to absorb those losses.  
Second, if this analysis indicated that the banking organization was likely to fall short of well-
capitalized  in  the  stress  environment,  the  bank  holding  company  would  be  able  to  obtain 
additional capital via mandatory convertible preferred stock purchased by the Treasury.  
Third, if the stress scenario were actually to occur, generating losses that depleted common 
equity  capital  below  what  is  deemed  adequate,  then  the  mandatory  convertible  preferred 
would  be  available  to  be  converted  into  common  equity.  The  government’s  mandatory 
convertible preferred investment is, in some sense, contingent capital that is available to be 
converted into common equity only as needed.  
I believe this program is very important if we are to break the adverse dynamic that I outlined 
early. As I mentioned earlier, many bank holding companies don’t have an incentive to raise 
sufficient capital to ensure that they can handle a very bad outcome. That is because such 
capital-raising would severely dilute existing shareholders. This implies that, left to their own 
devices, banks might end up being undercapitalized in a stress environment. The risk of this 
outcome  makes  these  banks  (and  their  counterparties)  very  cautious  in  terms  of  their 
behavior. This cautiousness, which is rational for each bank and counterparty individually, is 
bad for the system because it constrains the supply of credit and results in tighter financial 
conditions. This, in turn, makes the bad economic outcome more likely.  
The stress assessment regime that is being implemented should help to break this dynamic. 
Banking  institutions  will  end  up  with  sufficient  capital  to  withstand  even  an  adverse 
environment. This should reassure banks and investors that the banking system will remain 
resilient.  With  more  capital  in  place,  more  lending  should  take  place.  This,  in  turn,  should 
reduce the likelihood that the bad economic scenario will, in fact, be realized. The result: a 
virtuous rather than a vicious circle! 
BIS Review 28/2009 
 5
The point of the stress assessment is not to pick winners or losers, but instead to ensure that 
the  banking  system  and  all  the  major  banks  have  sufficient  capital  to  withstand  a  very 
adverse  environment.  Following  the  conclusion  of  the  stress  assessment  process,  the 
government is committed to supplying whatever amount of capital is needed to ensure that 
all the major banks will remain viable.  
The second major initiative that deserves mention is the PPIF or Public-Private Investment 
Fund. This facility, which would be underpinned by TARP capital and private capital, would 
purchase illiquid, legacy assets. Although the terms and conditions of the PPIF have not yet 
been announced, this facility should help put a floor under the prices of lower-quality assets 
and provide a means for banks to shed such assets from their balance sheets.  
Despite all these efforts, I don’t want to give you the impression that all will be well soon – 
that seems unlikely. It will take time for the deleveraging process to come to an end and, as 
the recent employment data have underscored, the economy has considerable momentum to 
the downside. But the Federal Reserve is prepared to do whatever it takes, within the bounds 
of its legal authority, to keep markets working and credit available and affordable.  
Finally, what are the lessons to be learned from this crisis? What do we need to fix in order to 
make our financial system more robust and our economy less vulnerable? Let me offer up a 
short list of seven areas that we might focus on – recognizing that this list is by no means 
complete or exhaustive. 
• 
We need more transparency and homogeneity in securities. The difficulty in valuing 
opaque and heterogeneous securities has led to greater illiquidity, price volatility and 
market risk, bigger haircuts and more forced deleveraging. Opacity has also led to 
an undue reliance on credit ratings.  
We need central counterparties or CCPs for over-the-counter derivatives in order to 
reduce settlement risk. To do this properly, we will have to work with international 
supervisors, regulators, and governments to achieve global solutions. On this score, 
lots of progress has been made in the credit default swap space – with several new 
CCPs likely to be up and running in months, if not weeks. But we can do much more 
in this area. 
We need an accounting and disclosure regime that allows investors to meaningfully 
ascertain the risks they are taking. For example, the same assets are often carried 
on different bank books at different prices. If you can’t trust the valuation marks on 
the  assets,  how  robust  can  confidence  be  in  the  ability  of  the  financial  system  to 
withstand stormy weather?  
We  need  a  resolution  mechanism  for  bank  holding  companies  and  non-bank 
financial  institutions  –  legislation  is  needed  here.  Judging  from  the  actions  of  the 
past  year,  there  are  indeed  institutions  that  are  “too  big  to  fail”,  at  least  in  certain 
circumstances. Let’s set up a resolution framework that is robust and transparent so 
everyone understands the rules of the road and likely outcomes beforehand. An ad 
hoc approach increases uncertainty and reduces policymaker credibility.  
If large systemically important institutions are indeed too big to fail, then there needs 
to  be  an  explicit  quid  pro  quo  for  this.  Otherwise,  this  implicit  support  will  create 
moral  hazard  and  discriminate  against  smaller  institutions.  In  particular,  important 
institutions  cannot  be  allowed  to  stay  outside  in  the  sun  during  good  times,  but 
allowed to come inside the regulatory net when it is raining. 
We need a more robust capital regime for banks. Measures of regulatory capital lag 
far behind the real-time market-based measures of capital and risk. Moreover, the 
capital regime is procyclical. Banks are constrained in the amount of reserves they 
can build in good times as a buffer against cyclical downturns. Finally, banks balk at 
cutting dividends to conserve capital or replenishing the capital they sorely need in 
     6 
 BIS Review 28/2009
 the  middle  of  crisis.  These  incentives  reinforce  the  downward  pressure  on  the 
financial system during times of stress. 
We need a more effective regulatory system. We need a systemic risk authority that 
has both the responsibility and the powers to look across the entire financial system 
–  both  depository  institutions  and  the  capital  markets.  Our  regulatory  regime  is 
incredibly balkanized, which makes coordination difficult and means that important 
information  can  fall  between  the  cracks.  It  also  leads  to  less  accountability  for 
supervisory shortcomings and failures, which is another area where we have to do 
better.  
This list is just a hint of the agenda that lies ahead. We need to put our financial system into 
the repair shop for intensive reconstruction. We need to do this in order to rebuild confidence 
and  to  ensure  that  we  do  not  repeat  the  type  of  financial  boom  and  bust  that  has 
characterized this cycle.  
Thank you very much for your kind attention, I would be happy to take questions.  
BIS Review 28/2009 
 7
