Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with the “Junge Zeitung” of the 
Frankfurter Neue Presse 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, conducted 
by a group of pupils in the framework of the project “Junge Zeitung” of the Frankfurter Neue 
Presse on 8 September 2009 and published on 12 September 2009. 
 Mr. President, as “Mr. Euro”: How many Euros do you have in your wallet? 
Not many. (Counts) I have 50 Euro in 20, 10 and 5 euro notes und 4.50 in euro coins. I think 
I don’t need more today. 
In your opinion: How important is the Euro for Europe?  
The  Euro  is  extremely  important  for  Europe.  If  you  go  back  to  the  vision  of  the  founding 
fathers  of  Europe,  more  than  50  years  ago:  They  wanted  to  establish  a  common  market, 
what we would call now a single market for our continent. An achieved single market also 
calls for a single currency. What would be the single market of the United States of America 
if they had different currencies in Florida, California, and Massachusetts? The Euro is also 
the powerful symbol of our European unity. 
What do you like about the Germans – and what not?  
I have known a number of German friends for a very long period of time. I had the privilege to 
work very closely with my friends Hans Tietmeyer, Karl-Otto Pöhl and Helmut Schlesinger. I 
had  an  extremely  good  relationship  with  President  Köhler,  when  he  and  I  were  both 
Staatssekretär in our respective countries and were negotiating the Maastricht Treaty. And 
working with Otmar Issing and Jürgen Stark to the success of the euro has also been a great 
privilege.  As  you  see,  amongst  many  others,  German  friends  with  whom  we  have  worked 
actively  for  the  success  of  the  European  endeavour.  And  I  have  always  appreciated  the 
capacity  of  the  German  culture  and  the  German  public  opinion  to  support  sound  and 
reasonable monetary  and  economic  policies  over  the  last  60  years.  What  I  perhaps  like  a 
little  less  is  the  level  of  anxiety,  of  “Angst”,  which  exists.  That  is  sometimes  too  high  and 
doesn’t fit, in my opinion, to the kind of qualities that the German culture has. 
Do you still learn the German language?  
Yes. (wieder deutsch) Ich lerne Deutsch, aber es ist schwierig, und ich bin etwas aus der 
Übung.  We  speak  English  most  of  the  time.  Ich  sprach  Deutsch  in  Osnabrück  (beim 
Sparkassen-Forum 2009 at the invitation of President Pöttering, at the time president of the 
European Parliament): It seems to me that I was well understood by the audience and I was 
very happy with that. 
Does a President of the ECB still have a private life? How often do you meet your children? 
I have two sons and four granddaughters. I meet my family as an average once every month, 
of course, more during vacation.  
You work in Frankfurt, a great city of culture. Have you ever visited a museum?  
True. I already knew Frankfurt. But when I came to live in Frankfurt I was very impressed by 
the  number  of  museums  and  the  quality  of  exhibitions,  as  also  shown  in  international 
rankings. I was also quite amazed by the number of opera houses in the area: Frankfurt of 
course,  but  also  Wiesbaden,  Mainz  and  Darmstadt  that  you  can  reach  by  car  within  three 
quarters of an hour. 
Do you have enough time to visit a museum? 
BIS Review 108/2009 
 1
My wife and I, we go regularly to the Städel and the Schirn, to name a few. We discovered a 
lot  here.  For  example,  we  were  very  impressed  by  the  exhibitions  about  Picasso’s  theatre 
decorations or the impressionist ladies.  
And going to the opera? 
What I discovered in Germany was not only that you have a lot of opera houses in a small 
region  but  also  that  the  production,  the  costumes,  the  “Bühne”  were  always  very  modern, 
which is impressive. 
Do you have a favourite opera? 
Yes, Don Juan. 
How many days of an average week do you usually spend in Frankfurt? 
My  week  often  consists  of  seven  working  days,  because  we  always  have  international 
meetings during the weekends, recently the G20 at the level of Ministers and Governors, for 
instance, in London and immediately after two very important meetings in Basel. My life is 
very  intense,  as  is  normal:  As  an  average  of  the  five  normal  working  days  I  spend  three 
working days in Frankfurt and two days elsewhere in Europe and the weekend, very often, in 
international meetings in the rest of the world. 
Do you have time for hobbies or sports? 
I walk. When I am on vacation I like sailing and other sea sports.  
Do you read any German literature?  
When I came to Frankfurt, whilst I had enormously appreciated Thomas Mann, I plunged into 
Goethe. I re-read “Werther”, this remarkable novel. I learned a lot about Goethe, Germany 
and also Frankfurt, in particular from “Dichtung und Wahrheit”. In a different cultural field Wim 
Wenders impressed me very much, especially the movie “Der Himmel über Berlin”, on the 
two angels over divided Berlin, their meditation and the “temptation of flesh”. The dialogues 
are from the German speaking writer Peter Handke. 
You already told us how busy you are. But do you have time to just stand in the kitchen and 
prepare your own meal?  
Often, when my wife is not here, I prepare my meal. It is not that I have the time, but that I 
must do it. 
So you don’t enjoy it? 
Not too much.  
But do you enjoy the wine from the Rheingau? 
Yes, I was already used to excellent German white wines. And I’m very impressed by the 
progress  the  winemakers  made  with  red  wines,  which  are  more  challenging  to  produce  at 
this level of quality. 
What do you like in the German kitchen?  
I don’t know whether I should confess that in Frankfurt: I have a dedication to “Weißwurst”! I 
would prefer it very much to the regular “Frankfurter” sausages. But I’m not – not yet! – bold 
enough to take it for breakfast, with beer, like in Bavaria…  
Do you go to restaurants?  
From time to time, usually in the Westend, where there is an impressive number of Italian 
restaurants.  
How often do you travel to St. Malo?  
Not sufficiently, in my opinion. For vacation, and, apart from vacation, very rarely. 
2 
 BIS Review 108/2009
Your plans after the end of your term in November, 2011? 
We’ll see. I have no plans till now. But I’m sure I will be very active.  
With employees from how many nations do you cooperate with? 
Here in this institution, we have the 27 nationalities that exist in the European Union. On top 
of that we have some other nationalities for limited periods of time.  
What do I need to study in order to get a job at the ECB?  
Of  course  there  are  a  lot  of  possibilities.  We  need  experts  in  finance,  economics, 
management  of  human  resources,  legal  issues,  administration,  accounting,  etc.  etc...  We 
need a wide range of expertise. 
Where do I apply for a job? 
We have a website where you can apply. All procedures and rules are published there as 
well. 
How many young employees do you hire each year? 
The order of magnitude is around 130 as an average. In 2008 we recruited exactly 129 new 
members of staff.  
The blue “Euro” monument in front of this building – will it move to the Großmarkthalle too? 
It has not been decided yet. Perhaps Frankfurt would love to have this symbol of the Euro at 
the heart of the City of the Euro. Perhaps it would be better to have it with us. We will see. 
What’s the time schedule for the new skyscraper?  
The plan is that it will be achieved by the end of 2013 and that we will organise the move-in 
during the first semester of 2014.  
And the costs? 
As far as the construction costs are concerned of 500 million euro (based on constant prices 
of 2005). I would stick to that. 
Do you sometimes get annoyed with the preservationists/Denkmalschützern? 
We had some discussion, but now we have a good accord. 
What about the new Euro notes, due to come in some years: Which design do you imagine?  
You know that the first notes show bridges and gates in the various architectural styles of 
Europe. That has been appreciated very much by the people. Architecture is a remarkable 
symbol  of  Europe:  Historically  an  architectural  element  might  be  born  in  a  certain  place, 
perhaps in Greece or in Rome or in other nations, but then it spreads all over Europe. This 
shows the capacity of the European to be very diverse, but to have a fundamental unity and 
their diversity. You won’t be surprised by the new series of notes because we will continue to 
have the same symbols.  
At the moment, there is no inflation. Can you say that you accomplished your mission? Or 
does the ECB fear deflation? 
We have a responsibility to deliver price stability for 330 million fellow citizens. This is our 
primary  goal  according  to  the  Treaty  and  this  is  what  the  people  are  calling  on  us.  Our 
definition  of  price  stability  is  clear:  inflation  below,  but  close  to  two  percent.  Since  the 
inception of the single currency we have preserved the Euro area well against inflation – and 
in the most recent period we also preserved well the Euro area from the materialisation of the 
risk of deflation. That being said we must remain alert.  
What was most impressive moment during your career? 
There have been a number of moments that I felt were important and impressive.  
BIS Review 108/2009 
 3
I’ve been associated very closely to the construction of Europe, particularly to the strategy of 
my  own  country  towards  monetary  and  fiscal  stability  and  structural  reforms.  When  we 
decided to start this strategy – which I call the “competitive disinflation strategy” – in 1982-
1983 it was a very moving moment.  
I  experienced  also  very  tense  moments  in  the  80’s  and  the  90’s  as  president  of  the  Paris 
Club for rescheduling the debts of the developing and emerging countries. I presided over 
the rescheduling of the debt of Brazil, of Poland, of Egypt, of Soviet Union.  
Finally I participated actively in the Maastricht Treaty negotiation. When it was decided by the 
heads of States and Governments that we will start the Euro no later than January, 1999, it 
was a moving historical moment.  
And more recently when on the 9th of August 2007 the Executive Board of the ECB had to 
take bold decisions to cope with the start of the turbulences on the money market that was 
also an important moment. (Anmerkung der Red.: Die EZB pumpte zu diesem Datum in bis 
dahin  nicht  gekanntem  Umfang  Liquidität  in  den  Markt  und  war  damit  die  weltweit  erste 
Notenbank, die auf die Krise reagierte.) 
Do you personally still convert to Franc?  
No. 
Do you understand the Germans sometimes still regret the loss of their old D-Mark?  
The promise which was made to all nationalities, and in particular to the Germans before the 
euro started was the following: The new currency will be at least as confidence-inspiring and 
as  a  good  store  of  value  as  the  previous  national  one.  And  I  can  say  today  to  you:  The 
promise  has  been  met.  The  Euro,  which  is  now  almost  eleven  years  old,  is  as  good  a 
currency, as solid and stable as was the DM. 
4 
 BIS Review 108/2009
