Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The euro area's exchange rate policy and the 
experience with international monetary coordination during the crisis 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at a conference entitled “Towards a European Foreign Economic Policy”, organised by 
the European Commission, Brussels, 6 April 2009. 
 Introduction 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  today.  The  title  of  today’s  conference 
“Towards  a  European  foreign  economic  policy”  could  hardly  be  more  topical.  Indeed,  the 
world  is  facing  challenges  not  seen  for  decades  –  challenges  that  are  truly  global.  The 
solutions will thus need to be global too.  
Inevitably,  the  political  power  and  economic  weight  of  individual  states  and  regions  will 
matter when designing these global solutions. If Europe wants to punch in proportion to its 
economic  weight,  moving  towards  a  common  foreign  economic  policy  is  essential.  I  have 
expressed my preference for such a policy on various occasions.  
In  the  area  of  exchange  rate  policy  –  the  topic  of  my  speech  today  –  the  euro  area  has 
already  achieved  unity.  It  speaks  with  one  voice.  Exchange  rate  policy  is  the  exclusive 
competence  of  the  Community.  Hence,  the  individual  Member  States  can  no  longer  act 
autonomously in this field.  
At the same time, in its resolution of 1997, the European Council stated that “exchange rates 
should  be  seen  as  the  outcome  of  all  other  economic  policies”.  This  represents  a  general 
feature of exchange rate policies, as the exchange rate cannot be determined by one single 
actor.  It  always  depends  on  the  decisions  and actions  of  at  least  two parties.  Indeed,  any 
bilateral exchange rate depends on the actions and policies of both sides. Moreover, this rate 
can also be influenced by the actions and policies of third countries.  
As a consequence, exchange rate policy is by nature international and needs to operate in a 
context of international cooperation. The euro area’s exchange rate policy cannot be seen in 
isolation from those of the US, Japan, China, and many others.  
The international dimension of exchange rate policy and its implications for global economic 
stability came sharply into focus during the 1930s, when a series of competitive devaluations 
plunged  the  world  into  an  economic  depression.  For  this  reason,  the  Bretton  Woods 
conference assigned  a central  role to  the  IMF  in  the  monitoring  of  exchange  rate policies. 
Given the deepening integration of the world economy over the last decade, the IMF decided 
in 2007 to strengthen its surveillance of exchange rate developments, in particular to ensure 
that exchange rate policies do not jeopardise the stability of the world economy.  
Today I intend to cover four items: the implications of the single currency for exchange rate 
policy, the institutional arrangements for the euro area’s exchange rate policy, exchange rate 
developments during the crisis and, finally, some other dimensions of international monetary 
cooperation. 
A single currency – a single exchange rate policy  
What did the creation of the euro mean for exchange rate policy? Prima facie, the answer is 
straightforward. Having a single currency automatically implies having a single exchange rate 
and thus also a single exchange rate policy. Yet the repercussions of EMU go beyond these 
“automatic” consequences.  
BIS Review 44/2009 
 1
Prior to EMU, Europe consisted of open and, for the most part, small economies. Because of 
the very large size of the external sector compared with the national economy, the exchange 
rate played a very important role in the economic performance of these countries. The move 
to  monetary  union  implied  the  creation  of  a  new  economic  entity  –  “euroland”  –  which  is 
much bigger and much more closed than its component states. This obviously reduces the 
importance of the exchange rate for “domestic” economic developments.  
In addition, monetary union – by definition – did away with nominal exchange rates between 
its  participants.  As  a  result,  gone  are  the  days  when  an  economic  or  financial crisis  could 
also trigger an exchange rate crisis. 
By setting up a bigger and less open economic entity and by eliminating intra-area exchange 
rates, the euro acts as a shield against external turbulence.. The economic crisis has clearly 
demonstrated this. In rough financial waters, it pays off to be on a large, solid and stable ship 
rather than on a small vessel. Size matters in a global world. Allow me therefore to make a 
bold point: the euro has arguably been the best exchange rate policy decision which Europe 
has ever taken.  
Institutional arrangements for exchange rate policy in the euro area 
This  brings  me  to  my  second  topic:  the  institutional  arrangements  for  the  euro  area’s 
exchange  rate  policy.  In  describing  these  arrangements,  we  should  distinguish  between 
three categories of countries: EU countries which do not take part in ERM II, EU countries 
which are part of ERM-II, and non-EU countries. 
First, consider the EU countries which do not take part in ERM II.  As EU Member States, 
these countries are subject to the Treaty. And the Treaty is crystal clear: each country must 
treat its exchange rate policy as a matter of common interest.1 This obligation should not be 
taken lightly. In fact, it should be taken very seriously. The question arises whether the single 
market can function smoothly when the exchange rate is allowed – or even encouraged – to 
depreciate  sharply.  Using  the  exchange  rate  as  an  instrument  to  gain  a  competitive 
advantage over others may fuel resentment and stoke protectionist pressures. It falls upon 
the Commission and the Council to ensure respect for this Treaty provision. 
Second, consider the EU countries which do take part in ERM II. ERM II is an exchange rate 
arrangement that links the currencies of some EU Member States outside the euro area with 
the  single  currency.  The  framework  helps  to  ensure  that  euro  area  candidates  orient  their 
policies towards stability and sustainable convergence. By simulating some of the economic 
conditions which exist within a monetary union, ERM II also functions as a “training room” 
which prepares and helps prospective euro area entrants on their road towards adopting the 
euro.  
Finally, with respect to non-EU countries, the euro area has adopted a flexible exchange rate 
regime.  The  external  value  of  the  euro  vis-à-vis  the  currencies  of  third  countries  is  thus 
determined  by  the  market.  By  adopting  this  line,  the  euro  area  has  continued  the  policy 
towards  third  countries  pursued  by  its  component  countries  prior  to  EMU.  The  rationale 
behind this decision is twofold. First, the absence of an exchange rate commitment allows 
the  ECB  to  focus  squarely  on  its  euro  area  objective,  which  is  the  preservation  of  price 
stability.  Second,  the  creation  of  the  euro  implied  the  creation  of  a  bigger  and  less  open 
economic entity – the euro area – in which the exchange rate plays a much less influential 
role. Accordingly, it would have been nonsensical to subject the euro area’s monetary policy 
to  an  external  requirement  –  namely  an  exchange  rate  target  –  rather  than  internal 
requirements. The euro area was not alone in adopting a flexible exchange rate regime. Most 
                                                 
1   Article 124.2 TEC. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2009
mature  economies  and  some  emerging  economies  also  pursue  a  floating  exchange  rate 
regime.  
This begs an important question: if you leave it to the market to determine exchange rates, 
does  this  mean  that  there  is  no  role  to  be  played  by  policy-makers  at  all?  The  answer  is 
clearly  no.  Also  countries  with  a  floating  exchange  rate  conduct  an  exchange  rate  policy. 
There are three reasons for this. 
First,  exchange  rate  markets  are  prone  to  episodes  of  overshooting  and  undershooting. 
Public  intervention  –  in  the  form  of  public  statements  or  even  outright  interventions  in  FX 
markets – may thus be warranted.  
Second,  inadequate  macroeconomic  or  structural  policies  in  a  neighbouring  country  may 
provoke substantial exchange rate movements  that have a detrimental impact on the euro 
area. Again, public intervention may be warranted.  
And third, not all countries have adopted a floating exchange rate regime. These countries 
may  sometimes  take  steps  to  prevent  the  necessary  adjustment  of  their  exchange  rates, 
which  in  turn  impacts  on  economic  developments  in  the  euro  area.  Also  here,  public 
intervention may be warranted.  
This leads me to another question: does the euro area have the instruments and procedures 
it needs to effectively implement its exchange rate policy? Here, the answer is clearly yes. 
The euro area is fully equipped to implement an effective exchange rate policy. Such a policy 
requires four main ingredients:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
In practice, the role of the main actors, typically governments and central banks, depends on 
the precise architecture of foreign exchange policies, as I will explain. The central bank has 
to be involved, given its economic and technical expertise, but also because any intervention 
must  be  consistent  with  the  monetary  policy  stance.  Finance  ministries  are  often  involved 
because  they  own  the  foreign  reserves.  Moreover,  the  success  of  exchange  rate  policies 
also depends on supportive domestic policy action. Indeed, regardless of the precise design 
of  competences,  all  institutional  arrangements  in  this  policy  field  provide  for  a  close 
interaction between governments and central banks. Let’s now consider these four elements 
in greater detail.  
1. 
first, monitoring and assessing exchange rate markets and developments; 
second, discussing market developments with the other major partners; 
third, making public statements; and 
fourth, intervening in the foreign exchange markets. 
Monitoring and assessing exchange rate markets and developments. This is not an 
easy  job.  Indeed,  there  is  no  fully  reliable  compass  for  assessing  whether  an 
exchange rate is out of line with fundamentals. Moreover, there is no single indicator 
for exchange rate developments. Rather, the indicator to be chosen depends on what 
we want to find out. Bilateral exchange rates shed light on the relative movements of 
the economies of the two countries. Yet for many other questions – such as overall 
competitiveness developments – we need to have a look at the effective exchange 
rate.  In  the  euro  area,  exchange  rate  developments  are  regularly  monitored  and 
assessed by the ECB. These assessments are shared, as appropriate, with euro area 
finance ministers and the Commission in the Eurogroup. Since the start of the euro, 
there have been no disagreements at the technical level either on the assessment or 
on the action to be taken.  
Discussions  with  the  other  major  partners.  This  is  key,  since  the  effectiveness  of 
policy action critically depends on it being coordinated with other relevant countries. 
The euro area conducts such discussions at three levels. First, in the context of the 
G7, the Presidents of the Eurogroup and of the ECB represent the euro area and are 
2. 
BIS Review 44/2009 
 3
closely involved in the relevant deliberations. Second, discussions on exchange rates 
also take place at the IMF. Here, the potential for the euro area to speak with one 
voice  has  not  yet  been  fully  exploited.  A  third  forum  for  discussing  exchange  rate 
issues  is  in the  context of  bilateral  relations.  Progress  has also  been made  on  this 
front, notably by setting up a forum for discussion with the Chinese authorities.  
Public  verbal  interventions.  Statements  of  this  kind  are  sometimes  made  on 
exchange  rates 
the  Eurogroup  and  ECB 
representatives  make  a  major  contribution  to  the  preparation  of  the  relevant 
communiqués.  The  views  expressed  by  the  two  representatives  have  always  been 
consistent and ensured an effective message.  
Interventions in foreign exchange markets. The euro area is fully equipped to conduct 
– if necessary – such interventions. It did so, very effectively, in the autumn of 2000. 
This instrument is in the hands of the ECB, which can assess when and how to use it 
in the light of the prevailing market conditions and its monetary policy stance.  
the  context  of 
the  G7.  Both 
in 
3. 
4. 
To  sum  up,  the  euro  area  has  all  the  necessary  instruments  to  implement  an  effective 
exchange rate policy for the euro. Is there scope for improvement? I see three areas where 
further progress should be made. 
First,  there  is  a  need  for  verbal  discipline  when  making  statements  on  exchange  rates. 
Especially  in  the  early  years  of  EMU,  public  statements  on  exchange  rate  developments 
were too frequently made by individual policy-makers who were not mandated to speak on 
behalf of the euro area. At times, this has undermined the credibility and effectiveness of the 
euro area’s exchange rate policy. Only the  President of the ECB and the President of the 
Eurogroup should comment on the exchange rate of the euro. The authorities which are not 
mandated to speak should heed the adage: “silence is golden”. 
Second, policy-makers should take into account the potential implications of their domestic 
policies on exchange rate developments.  
Third, the euro area should speak with one voice on exchange rate issues in all international 
institutions.  This  holds  in  particular  for  the  IMF,  which  since  2007  has  been  enhancing  its 
surveillance  of  exchange  rate  policies.  Even  though  a  single  currency  implies  a  single 
exchange rate, the euro area representatives in the IMF Executive Board do not always sing 
from  the  same  hymn  sheet  when  discussing  exchange  rate  developments  in  other  major 
countries. It is my conviction that a unified representation of the euro area countries at the 
IMF would strengthen the exchange rate policy of the euro. 
Exchange rate developments during the crisis 
Let  me  now  turn  briefly  to  exchange  rate  developments  since  the  outbreak  of  financial 
turbulence in the summer of 2007. During the last year and a half, foreign exchange markets 
have witnessed sharp swings in all major bilateral rates. Foreign exchange volatility – both 
realised and implied – has reached historical levels (see Fig. 1). More recently, the situation 
seems  to  have  improved  as  realised  volatility  eased  substantially.  Yet  the  markets’ 
perception of risk still remains elevated compared with longer term averages.2
Despite the extremely volatile environment, the spot foreign exchange market seems to be 
functioning normally. Looking at the euro/dollar bilateral rate, bid-ask spreads (expressed as 
percentages of the spot rate) have remained largely unaffected by the rise in realised and 
                                                 
2   Analysing options’ maturities (see Fig. 2 for the euro/dollar rate) reveals that the increase in the perception of 
risk was concentrated over the shorter horizons (one to six months), while it remained more contained at the 
one-year  horizon.  Since  the  beginning  of  2009,  shorter-term  expectations  of  exchange  rate  volatility  have 
been significantly scaled down, signalling a return to ‘normal’ market conditions. 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2009
implied  volatilities  (see  Fig.  3),  and  broadly  in  line  with  their  averages  since  2004. 
Nonetheless, some tensions have emerged in the forward foreign exchange market. The US 
dollar  funding  needs  have  led  to  tensions  in  global  money  markets3  and  forced  many 
institutions  to  convert  euros  into  dollars  through  FX  swaps.  In  addition,  tensions  have  not 
remained confined to the shortest horizons, but also spread to longer maturities, as banks 
have realised that the financial crisis might last longer than anticipated.4
Turning  to  exchange  rate  movements,  until  the  summer  of  2008,  the  US  dollar  weakened 
against the euro, while the Japanese yen remained broadly stable. This reflected the market 
perception that the turbulence originated in the United States (see Fig. 4).  
Subsequently however, and especially after the Lehman collapse, the euro weakened both 
against  the  US  dollar  and  the  Japanese  yen.  The  dollar  benefited  from  increasing  risk 
aversion worldwide as well as from temporary factors associated with a widespread shortage 
of  dollar  liquidity  in  financial  markets.  The  yen  for  its  part  was  boosted  by  falling  policy 
interest  rates  worldwide  and  rising  financial  volatility.  Combined,  these  factors  led  to  a 
massive unwinding of the carry trade positions that had been established in the low-volatility 
environment before the summer of 2007. 
On  27  October  of  last  year  the  G7  issued  a  joint  statement  warning  about  disorderly 
developments  in  the  foreign  exchange  of  the  yen.  The  Japanese  currency  stabilised 
thereafter. 
Overall,  the  euro  did  not  record  exceptional  movements  in  nominal  effective  terms.  It 
appreciated  by  around  5%5  between  September  2007  and  March  2009.  This  appreciation 
stemmed  from  significant  gains  vis-à-vis  the  pound  sterling  and  other  central  and  eastern 
European  currencies,  and  was  balanced  by  the  euro’s  depreciation  against  the  Japanese 
yen, the Swiss franc and the US dollar (see Fig. 5). Notably, in its last report on the World 
Economic Outlook, the IMF considered the real effective exchange rate of the euro to be on 
the strong side of medium-term fundamentals.6  
Looking more closely at the euro-dollar exchange rate, some observers have expressed their 
surprise at the appreciation of the dollar against the euro since mid-2008. Some considered 
this  appreciation  to  be  at  odds  with  the  US-related  origin  of  the  crisis,  especially  the 
weaknesses in the US financial system, and the persistent – albeit gradually improving – US 
current account deficit.  
It  is  said  that  the  recent  dollar  appreciation  can  be  traced  back  in  part  to  the  markets' 
perception of the international status of the dollar, playing the role of safe haven in periods of 
heightened  risk  aversion.  The  strong  correlation  between  rising  volatility  and  US  dollar 
strengthening at a daily frequency points in this direction. The dollar appreciation at the end 
of 2008 is consistent with a significant rise in net portfolio inflows into the US (in particular for 
short-term liabilities, including T-bills).7
Tensions  have  also  been  visible  between  the  currencies  of  some  of  the  new  EU  Member 
States; indeed, the currencies of most of those countries weakened significantly vis-à-vis the 
euro.  Beyond  country-specific  factors,  this  reflected  the  sharp  deterioration  in  economic 
activity and outlook and, most notably, a reversal of capital flows, as a result of heightened 
                                                 
3   With a widening of the spread between interbank interest rates and overnight index swap (OIS) rates. 
4   Empirical evidence (BIS, QR, March 2008) shows that the FX swaps were a key channel through which the 
financial turmoil spread from money markets to longer term cross-currency swap markets. 
5   Vis-à-vis the currencies of 21 important trading partners of the euro area. 
6  
7   Source: US Department of the Treasury, Treasury International Capital System, http://www.ustreas.gov/tic/. 
IMF, World Economic Outlook Report (October 2008), p. 54. 
BIS Review 44/2009 
 5
global  risk  aversion  and  increased  home  bias.  The  functioning  of  ERM  II  was  overall  not 
adversely impaired, despite the exceptional rise in foreign exchange volatility.  
Other dimensions of international monetary coordination 
Apart from exchange rate policy, there are other important aspects of international monetary 
coordination  which  have  come  to  the  fore  in  the  current  crisis.  On  top  of  their  regular 
exchanges of information and views, central bankers have engaged in unprecedented joint 
actions  to  provide  liquidity,  reduce  financial  market  strains,  and  counter  negative  spillover 
effects  on  the  real  economy.  For  example,  on  8  October  2008  the  ECB  cut  interest  rates 
simultaneously  with  six  other  central  banks,  against  a  backdrop  of  lower  inflationary 
pressures.  
Another example can be found in the area of liquidity management. A key tool in this respect 
has been the US dollar Term Auction Facility, in which the ECB agreed with the US Federal 
Reserve  to  grant  loans  in  dollars  to  euro  area  banks.  These  USD  liquidity-  providing 
operations  have  increased  over  time  in  terms  of  size  and  number  of  participants,  with  a 
substantial number of central banks now participating. The Eurosystem has also entered into 
an  agreement  with  the  Swiss  National  Bank  in  order  to  facilitate  the  provision  of  liquidity 
denominated in Swiss francs to euro banks. Finally, the Eurosystem has signed agreements 
with the central banks of several European countries in order to improve the provision of euro 
liquidity to their banking sectors. 
Since  the  start  of  the  crisis,  we  have  therefore  achieved  a  level  of  trust  and  cooperation 
within the central banking community that some would have considered unthinkable a couple 
of  years  ago.  As  the  ECB  President  put  it  a  couple  of  weeks  ago,  global  cooperation  by 
central banks is now mirroring the globalisation of finance. 
Conclusions 
To conclude, the euro area has an exchange rate policy and it has been implementing it over 
the last ten years, with full cooperation between the authorities in charge, including over the 
recent months. 
International monetary coordination has gone beyond exchange rates, and involved several 
aspects  of  central  banking,  including  on  one  occasion  a  coordinated  interest  rate  change. 
Such  coordination  is  aimed  at  the  specific  circumstances  of  the  crisis  and  has  helped  to 
restore confidence in financial markets. Having said that, financial and economic conditions 
do  differ  across  the  major  countries,  and  we  should  not  expect  that  coordination  means 
uniformity  of  action.  Monetary  policy  in  the  different  areas  of  the  world  needs  to  take  into 
account the specificities related in particular to the shocks that affect the economies and the 
transmission mechanism of monetary policy. When these specificities are appropriately taken 
into  consideration,  the  actions  of  the  various  monetary  authorities  appear  overall  quite 
homogeneous and consistent. 
6 
 BIS Review 44/2009
Appendix:  
Figure 1: Developments in volatility 
Panel A: realised volatility 
Equity markets 
 
euro/dollar exchange rate 
 
Panel B: implied volatilities 
Source: Bloomberg, Thomson Financial Datastream and ECB staff calculations. 
Note: daily data, % annualised. Last observation 10 March 2009. 
 BIS Review 44/2009 
 7
Figure 2: Developments in the term structure of the euro/dollar rate volatility  
Note:  The  chart  shows  the  implied  volatilities,  at  selected  dates,  taken  from  at-the-money  options  on  the 
euro/dollar rates, at the six options’ maturities reported on the x-axis. 
 
 
 Figure 3: euro/dollar rate: bid-ask spread and volatilities 
Note: weekly data; last observation is 16 March 2009; the bid-ask spread is expressed as a percentage of the 
spot rate. Implied and realised volatilities are expressed as percentages in annualised terms. 
 8 
 BIS Review 44/2009
Figure 4: Developments in main bilateral rates 
Note: daily data since 1 Sep. 2007; last observation 17 March 2009. 
 
 
 Figure 5: Changes in the nominal effective and in selected bilateral rates of the euro 
 9
BIS Review 44/2009 
 