Christian Noyer: Publication of Bank of France’s Financial Stability 
Review “The future of financial regulation” 
Remarks by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the publication of Bank 
of  France’s  Financial  Stability  Review  “The  future  of  financial  regulation”,  London,  4 
September 2009. 
 It's  a  pleasure  to  welcome  you  here,  in  London,  on  the  eve  of  a  very  important  G20 
Ministerial meeting  and  to  introduce  the  latest  issue  of  our  Financial  Stability  Review.  It  is 
also a privilege to have such a distinguished panel for this introduction and I want to express 
my gratitude to all. 
The Review is about the Future of Financial Regulation. Our hope was to help and contribute 
to the international discussions and the publication of this Review could not be timelier. 
The financial crisis has taught us some very hard lessons. While there are many causes to 
the  crisis,  including,  maybe,  macro  economic  policies,  it  is  also  clear  that  it  forces  us  to 
reconsider  the  way  we  regulate  and  supervise  the  financial  system.  That  is  what  we  are 
doing, and this will take a significant part in tomorrow's discussions between G20 Ministers 
and Central Bank Governors. At stake is the scope of financial regulation, its nature, and its 
objectives. 
The scope of financial regulation  
We  entered  this  crisis  with  many  unregulated  entities  playing  a  major  role  in  the  financial 
system.  So,  from  a  supervisory  perspective,  they  were  huge  "black  holes",  including  what 
has  been  called  a  "shadow  banking  system"  where  most  of  the  excesses  of  securitisation 
took place. 
Not  any  more.  During  the  last  twelve  months,  a  coordinated  effort  by  industrialized  and 
emerging countries alike has brought most important financial actors under the umbrella of 
supervision.  Principles  and  rules  have  been  enacted  for  rating  agencies  to  deal  with  their 
conflicts of interest, enhance their rating process, increase transparency and their oversight 
through  compulsory  registration.  Hedge  funds  will  go  through  a  process  of  licensing  and 
oversight:  they  will  have  to  meet  transparency  requirements  towards  both  investors  and 
regulators.  Finally,  off  balance  sheet  activities  will  be  consolidated  and  disciplined  through 
changes in the accounting and prudential frameworks. 
The nature of financial regulation and supervision is changing.  
Here, I see two major trends. 
We  must  complement  micro-supervision  with  macro-financial  supervision,  taking  into 
account 
institutions,  markets, 
instruments  and  the  cumulative  risks  and  dynamics  which  they  create.  System-wide 
phenomena  that  went  unchecked,  such  as  the  aggregate  rise  in  leverage  and  maturity 
transformation, must no longer escape our vigilance.  
All countries are moving in that direction. In Europe, following the de Larosière report, we are 
creating a European Systemic Risk Board. In the United States, it has been proposed that 
the Federal Reserve will become the future systemic supervisor. In France, the Government 
has  decided  a  reform  where  insurance  and  banking  supervision  will  be  merged  under  the 
umbrella of a “systemic” college under the auspices of the Banque de France. Clearly, the 
move  towards  macro  financial  supervision  means  that  Central  Banks  will  have  to  assume 
interconnectedness  of 
importance  and 
the  systemic 
BIS Review 104/2009 
 1
field  reasons.  Finally, 
improved  coordination  between  supervisors 
additional  responsibilities.  History  tells  us  that  the  missions  of  Central  Banks  have  taken 
major turns following financial crises. 
Second,  regulation  will  become  more  global.  Emerging  market  economies  might  feel  that 
they are not part of the problem since they did not play a role in starting the crisis; but they 
are major actors and are part of the solution. Henrique Mereilles sitting at the table next to 
me is truly a sign of times, a sign clearly underlined by the increasing role of G2O and the 
recent expansion of the FSB.  
International  standards  in  the  field  of  prudential  rules  have  already  paved  the  way  for  an 
international  level  playing  field.  I  strongly  hope  that  Basel  II  can  soon  become  a  truly 
universal standard and framework for banking supervision. Beyond prudential rules, it is of 
the utmost importance that convergence be achieved in accounting standards if only for level 
playing 
through 
supervisory colleges for all systemic actors (not just banks) will be a significant progress.  
The objectives of financial regulation have shifted.  
It  remains  important  to  increase  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system.  We  need  to 
ensure that intermediaries build, over time, stronger capital and liquidity cushions, especially 
for  trading  activities.  The  Basel  committee  has  been  very  active  and  currently  is  devising 
proposals.  
But  our  main  priority  is  to  reduce  procyclicality  in  our  financial  systems.  Stronger 
capital and liquidity cushions must be built in good times and drawn down in bad times. The 
essential  contribution  however  will  come  from  a  change  in  our  provisioning  rules.  The 
objective is to build automatic and “through the cycle” stabilizers in a transparent way and 
according to a rule based system. I believe there is a lot to learn from the Spanish dynamic 
provisioning approach. 
Finally, nothing will work if we do not address the issue of incentives. In a market based 
economy, incentives determine the behaviours of agents. Regulators must aim at creating an 
environment that is conducive to both efficiency and stability and that can avoid excessive 
risk taking. 
This  is  why  compensation  practices  are  so  important.  They  should  be  structured  so  as  to 
induce  appropriate  risk  behaviour  and  encourage  "true"  financial  innovation.  Competition 
between financial institutions in hiring staff creates a coordination problem and leads to many 
excesses,  acknowledged  by  the  institutions  themselves.  Compensation  policies  should 
therefore be guided by clear and internationally agreed rules covering: (i) the involvement of 
senior management in traders’ compensation policies, (ii) detailed disclosure requirements, 
(iii) clear and direct links between the payment of bonuses and the longer term profitability of 
institutions, i.e. that a significant proportion of these payments should be deferred over time, 
allowing for possible reductions in case losses materialize. This is an area, more than in any 
other  where  “business  as  usual”  cannot  apply  anymore.  Considering,  especially,  recent 
profits,  it  is  clear  that  they  would  not  have  been  possible  without  the  wide  array  of  public 
support and guarantees which have benefited the financial industry. It is only legitimate to 
ask that those profits should primarily be used to bolster capital and allow banks to focus on 
their core task of financing the economy. 
Tomorrow’s meeting will be an opportunity to ascertain that we have made a lot of progress 
but  that  much  work  remains  to  be  done.  It  is  an  ongoing  process,  best  described  as 
“rebuilding the plane as we fly it", clearly a very challenging and perilous task. 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2009
