Lucas Papademos: Tackling the financial crisis – policies for stability 
and recovery 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Annual Dinner of the Society of Business Economists, London, 11 February 2009. 
 Introduction  
I.  
When I accepted your kind invitation to address the Annual Dinner of the Society of Business 
Economists – for which I thank you – I knew I would be coming to the City of London at a 
time  when  the  general  economic  sentiment,  especially  in  the  financial  markets  and  the 
banking  sector,  might  be  matching  the  weather  conditions:  not  exactly  sunny  and 
occasionally frosty. I also knew that I would be speaking to members of your Society at a 
very challenging time for economists. Over the past year and a half, and especially since last 
September,  the  assessment  of  the  state  of  our  economies,  the  forecast  of  the  economic 
outlook  and  the  formulation  of  economic  policy  have  become  particularly  challenging 
because  of  the  extraordinary  uncertainty  characterising  the  behaviour  of  consumers  and 
firms  and  the  functioning  of  markets.  Long  gone  are  the  days  when  economics  and 
economists were described with indifference or even in unflattering terms. According to the 
Oxford English Dictionary: 
“in the 19th century, economics was the hobby of gentlemen of leisure and the vocation of a 
few  academics”  and  “economists  wrote  about  economic  policy  but  were  rarely  consulted 
before decisions were made.”  
Those days are gone. We are now in “‘the age of economists’, when the demand for their 
services seems insatiable.” And this is even more so in the midst of the financial crisis that 
we  have  been  experiencing  for  some  time  now,  and  the  associated  fallout  on  the  real 
economy.  
At  the  present  juncture,  economists  in  business  and  policy-making  institutions  continue  to 
face a mountain of thorny and complex issues. To address these, it is necessary to use not 
only our knowledge and experience, but also some “mountaineering” skills. I find it intriguing 
that the Society of Business Economists was founded in the year 1953, which was marked 
by a groundbreaking mountaineering achievement: it is the year in which Sir Edmund Hillary 
and  Tenzing  Norgay  climbed  Mount  Everest  for  the  first  time.  Our  experience  with  the 
ongoing  financial  crisis  sometimes  reminds  us  of  those  mountaineers:  like  them,  we  have 
been  facing  constantly  changing  and  often  stormy  conditions,  and  we  have  had  to  march 
through uncharted territory. As monetary policy-makers, we have found it necessary to adapt 
our  equipment  –  our  instruments  and  operating  procedures  –  to  changing  circumstances. 
And we have been equally determined to master the challenges that lie ahead. But in order 
to  do  so  successfully,  it  is  essential  that  we  have  clear  objectives,  that  we  pursue  an 
appropriate strategy and that we adhere to solid principles guiding us towards achieving our 
policy goals.  
So  what  further  steps  and  actions  should  be  taken  in  order  to  successfully  “climb  that 
mountain”  and  reach  our  policy  objectives?  What  course  should  we  take  in  order  to  steer 
clear of the precipices of plunging markets, to prevent financial and economic hypothermia, 
and  to  ensure  that  our  policy  equipment,  that  is,  our  policy  tools,  remain  effective?  In  my 
remarks tonight, I would like to address two specific questions:  
• 
First,  what  are  the  necessary  policy  actions  that  can  preserve  price  and  financial 
stability, restore confidence and foster economic recovery?  
Second, what macroprudential supervisory policies and institutional and regulatory 
reforms should be pursued in order to avoid the emergence of market excesses and 
 BIS Review 16/2009 
 1
financial  imbalances  in  the  future  and  minimise  the  likelihood  of  another  financial 
crisis in the long run? 
II.  
Policies to preserve stability, restore confidence and foster economic 
recovery 
Over  the  past  five  months,  since  the  financial  turmoil  intensified  and  economic  conditions 
deteriorated  substantially,  central  banks  and  governments  have  taken  unprecedented 
measures to preserve stability and cushion the impact of the financial crisis on the economy:  
unprecedented have been the measures taken by the major central banks since the 
• 
eruption  of  the  crisis,  as  judged  (i)  by  the  size  and  frequency  of  money  market 
operations to provide liquidity; (ii) by the enlargement of the pool of eligible collateral 
and  the  expansion  of  their  balance  sheets;  (iii)  by  the  speed  and  magnitude  of 
monetary policy easing since October 2008; and (iv) – in some cases – by the use 
of unconventional or non-standard policy tools; 
unprecedented have been the measures taken or announced by governments (i) to 
support  the  banking  sector  through  recapitalisations,  government  guarantees  on 
bank  debt,  and  asset-relief  schemes;  and  (ii)  to  stimulate  aggregate  demand 
through fiscal packages. 
 The policies implemented so far have helped to stabilise the banking system and to mitigate 
the  effects  of  the  financial  turbulence  on  the  economy.  Nevertheless,  financial  stresses 
remain  and  economic  conditions  are  deteriorating  in  Europe  and  throughout  the  world. 
According to the latest forecasts of the IMF and the European Commission, global economic 
activity is expected to increase only slightly by 0.5% and the euro area economy is likely to 
contract at an average annual rate of about 2% this year.1 Moreover, there are concerns that 
a negative feedback loop between the financial sector and the real economy may emerge in 
some countries, which may result in a prolonged period of weakness in economic activity and 
entail deflation risks. 
The inflation outlook for the euro area 
The preservation of price stability over the medium term is the overriding policy objective for 
the  ECB.  By  achieving  this  objective,  we  contribute  to  financial  stability  and  support 
sustainable  growth.  Since  mid-2008,  annual  (HICP)  inflation  in  the  euro  area  declined 
steadily  from  4%  in  July  2008  to  1.1%  in  January  2009  (according  to  Eurostat’s  flash 
estimate).  This  decline  in  headline  inflation  reflects  largely  the  substantial  fall  in  global 
commodity prices and associated “pipeline” price pressures over this period. Annual inflation 
rates  are  projected  to  decline  further  in  the  coming  months,  mainly  due  to  expected  lower 
commodity  prices  and  base  effects  stemming  from  past  energy  prices,  but  also  owing  to 
diminishing domestic inflationary pressures in an environment of subdued economic activity. 
Around  the  middle  of  this  year,  annual  inflation  may  reach  very  low  levels,  but  then  it  is 
expected to increase again and be in line with our definition of price stability, that is, inflation 
rates  of  below,  but  close  to,  2%.  Several  available  indicators  of  medium-term  inflation 
expectations support this assessment. 
This  likely  time  profile  of  inflation  should  be  seen  against  the  background  of  an  extended 
period of significant economic downturn in the euro area and all other advanced economies. 
                                                 
1   The European Commission, in its January 2009 interim forecasts sees a contraction of the EU economy of -
1.8%  and  of  the  euro  area  economy  of  -1.9%.  The  most  recent  IMF  projections  (January  2009  World 
Economic  Outlook)  forecast  a  contraction  of  the  euro  area  economy  by  -2.0%,  and  only  marginal  positive 
growth for the world economy of +0.5%. 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2009
Further unexpected declines in energy prices owing to weak global demand and a sharper or 
more  protracted  slowdown  in  economic  activity  could  reduce  price  pressures  further. 
Therefore it cannot be excluded that euro area inflation may reach a level close to zero for a 
short period of time. Such a possibility, however, does not imply the emergence of deflation 
risks  because  it  is  likely  to  be  short-lived  and  should  not  affect  medium-term  inflation 
expectations. Indeed, the ECB is committed to keeping inflation expectations firmly anchored 
in line with our definition of price stability. Moreover, although underlying domestic pressures 
are  likely  to  moderate  in  the  coming  quarters,  wage  and  price-setting  behaviour  is 
characterised by considerable inertia. It is also possible that domestic cost pressures may 
turn out to be stronger than expected – a prospect that is supported by recent developments 
in wage and unit labour cost growth.2 For all these reasons, our current assessment is that 
the  risk  of  deflation  in  the  euro  area  remains  remote  despite  the  expected  weakness  in 
economic activity this year. 
The prospects for economic growth 
The latest data and survey indicators point to a substantial decline of real GDP in the fourth 
quarter of 2008 and to a continued weakness in economic activity in the euro area in the first 
half of this year. Confidence is at historically low levels, world trade has sharply declined and 
financing  conditions  remain  tight.  All  these  factors  are  adversely  affecting  aggregate 
demand.  Recently,  some  survey  indicators  showed  signs  of  stabilisation.  It  is  too  early  to 
declare that we may be reaching the bottom of the downturn on the basis of these signals. 
Other indicators point to a less encouraging, if not gloomier, outlook. In other words, what we 
see flashing amid the clouds that cover the economic landscape right now could either be a 
silver lining and a first ray of light, or the harbinger of stormier weather conditions.  
The  risks  to  economic  growth  remain  on  the  downside.  Among  the  factors  that  may 
adversely  affect  economic  activity  is  the  prospect  of  growing  protectionism.  Economic 
nationalism  is  an  emerging  threat  to  global  economic  recovery  and  should  be  avoided. 
Another risk is the possibility that the financial crisis may have a greater negative impact on 
the  real  economy  than  currently  expected.  This  could  be  the  outcome  of  the  mutually 
reinforcing effects of weak economic activity, deteriorating bank asset quality and constraints 
on the supply of bank credit. 
The  intensification  and  broadening  of  the  financial  market  turmoil  since  September  has 
significantly affected the pace of broad money growth and the expansion of bank credit to the 
private sector. The flow of bank loans to the private sector has decelerated steadily in recent 
months,  and  in  December  it  turned  negative  for  the  first  time  since  the  outbreak  of  the 
financial  turbulence.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  some  positive  developments.  The 
substantial  reduction  in  ECB  interest  rates  since  last  October  is  being  passed  through  to 
lower bank lending rates, thus easing financing conditions for companies and households. I 
also find it encouraging that money market conditions have improved gradually but steadily. 
Money market spreads have progressively narrowed, even though they remain at elevated 
levels  and  the  turnover  in  unsecured  money  market  remains  rather  low.  The  evidence, 
however, also suggests that financial institutions pursue the deleveraging process mainly by 
tightening credit standards and curbing new lending. 
Monetary policy 
Against this background of rapid disinflation, weak economic activity and persisting financial 
market stresses, the ECB will continue to face the twin challenge of securing price stability 
and contributing to financial stability in the euro area. To meet this challenge, the conduct of 
                                                 
2   Unit labour costs in the euro area rose by 3.6% in the third quarter of 2008 compared with 3.2% in the second 
quarter, despite the decline in GDP growth occurred over that period. 
BIS Review 16/2009 
 3
monetary  policy  by  the  ECB  has  been  based  on  its  medium-term  oriented  strategy  and  a 
fundamental principle: the separation of the monetary policy from liquidity management. The 
monetary  policy  stance  is  defined  by  the  level  of  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  and  is 
determined with a view to achieving the primary objective of preserving price stability over 
the medium term. Liquidity management aims at ensuring the orderly functioning of money 
markets  which  is  necessary  for  the  efficient  transmission  of  monetary  policy  and  for  the 
mitigation of financial stability risks. The separation principle implies that the policy interest 
rate  is  not  employed  to  alleviate  stresses  in  the  financial  system  if  upside  risks  to  price 
stability prevail. If the preservation of price stability is secured over the medium term and will 
not  be  jeopardised  by  a  change  in  the  monetary  policy  stance,  the  interest  rate  can  be 
adjusted to mitigate the impact of financial market stresses on the economy, including their 
potential effect on medium-term price developments.  
For more than a year since the outbreak of the financial turmoil in August 2007, the ECB did 
not  reduce  its  key  policy  rates  in  view  of  significant  medium-term  inflation  risks,  but 
intervened in a decisive manner in the money markets, by taking “unprecedented” measures 
to  provide  liquidity  so  as  to  maintain  orderly  market  conditions  and  contain  the  spillover 
effects of financial market tensions on the real economy. Since October 2008, following the 
intensification and broadening of the financial crisis and in view of the significant change in 
the balance of risks to price stability, the ECB responded in a timely manner both with an 
unprecedented  –  in  terms  of  speed  and  magnitude  –  easing  of  monetary  policy  (having 
reduced  its  policy  rate  by  225  basis  points  in  a  period  of  three  months)  and  by  taking 
unprecedented – and indeed “unconventional” or “non-standard” measures – in the money 
markets by providing unlimited funding in euro (but also in other currencies) over periods of 
up to six months against an expanded range of eligible collateral. As a result, the size of the 
Eurosystem’s balance sheet increased by 37% during the fourth quarter of 2008 to a total of 
just over €2 trillion at the end of last year. This simultaneous easing of monetary policy and 
liquidity  provision  was  fully  consistent  with  the  separation  principle  and  the  medium-term 
orientation  of  our  strategy  because  of  the  new  constellation  of  risks  to  price  stability  and 
financial stability.  
The  unprecedented  reduction  in  the  ECB’s  policy  rates  and  the  extraordinary  increase  of 
liquidity in the money market have been helping to mitigate the impact of the processes of 
disinflation and deleveraging on the real economy. Consequently, they have been containing 
the  possible  emergence  of  “endogenous”  risks to  price  and  financial  stability.  At  the  same 
time,  we  continue  to  be  confronted  with  exceptionally  high  uncertainty.  The  transmission 
mechanism of monetary policy has been affected by the strains in the money market and the 
ongoing adjustment of banks’ balance sheets as well as by the increased risk aversion and 
reduced  confidence  of  consumers,  firms  and  investors.  Accordingly,  we  will  continue  to 
monitor  closely  all  relevant  developments.  In  early  March,  with  the  benefit  of  additional 
information and the ECB staff macroeconomic projections, we will assess the medium-term 
outlook  for  price  stability  and  the  associated  potential  risks.  If  inflationary  pressures  are 
diminishing and risks to price stability are assessed to be on the downside, a further easing 
of monetary policy may be appropriate in order to maintain inflation over the medium term at 
a  level  consistent  with  price  stability,  that  is,  below,  but  close  to,  2%  and  keep  inflation 
expectations firmly anchored in line with this objective.  
An important issue which has been discussed extensively recently is whether the persisting 
strains  in  the  money  market  and  the  significant  tightening  of  credit  conditions  –  and  the 
possible  emergence  of  supply  constraints  –  in  the  bank  credit  market  require  further 
measures  to  be  taken  by  central  banks  and  governments  in  order  to  preserve  financial 
stability  and  support  the  recovery  of  the  economy.  Such  measures  have  been  taken  or 
pledged in the past in the United States, the UK and the euro area. And yesterday, the US 
government announced an extensive new package of measures to “stabilise and repair the 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2009
financial system, and support the flow of credit necessary for recovery.”3 In the euro area, as 
I  previously  noted,  the  ECB  has  already  taken  non-standard  measures  in  the  past  by 
changing  aspects  of  its  operational  framework  to  provide  unlimited  liquidity  to  financial 
institutions at a fixed interest rate against an expanded list of collateral. Are these measures 
sufficient?  Or  are  additional  measures  necessary  to  secure  price  stability  and  preserve 
financial stability under the current circumstances? Let me make three pertinent points: 
• 
First, the purpose of such measures is to improve the functioning of markets and the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  when  these  are  impaired  by  exceptionally  high 
uncertainty  and  elevated  risk  perception.4  Clearly,  the  dysfunctioning  of  markets 
because of increased uncertainty and risk cannot be addressed by a change in the 
stance of monetary policy.  
Second, any measures that may be deemed appropriate to improve the functioning 
of markets and help stabilise the financial system may be taken independently of the 
level of policy rates. This is what the ECB has done in the past when it took “non-
standard”  measures.  Put  differently,  I  do  not  see  a  dependence,  or  necessary 
sequence,  between  the  level  or  path  of  policy  rates  and  the  possible  adoption  of 
“non-standard”  measures  aimed  at  improving  the  functioning  of  markets  and 
preserving the stability of the banking system. Indeed, a possible implementation of 
such  measures  can  be  seen  as  an  application  of  the  “separation  principle”  I 
previously  mentioned  between  interest  rate  decisions  and  other  central  bank 
operations.  
Third, as always, we will do whatever we judge to be necessary and appropriate to 
maintain price stability and contribute to the preservation of financial stability.  
  Other policies to tackle the crisis 
Having said that, it should also be clear that we cannot rely solely on central bank policies to 
address all the consequences of the financial crisis and its fall-out on the economy. Other 
policies  and  measures  are  required  to  tackle  the  challenges  we  are  facing  in  the  financial 
sector, in the real economy and in the complex interaction between the two. After all, Hillary 
and  Tenzing  also  did  not  conquer  the  world’s  highest  mountain  by  themselves;  they  were 
helped  by  a  large  team  that  was  part  of  their  expedition.  In  fact,  as  they  were  ascending 
towards the summit, they reached levels of altitude where further safe progress was possible 
only with the support of additional oxygen equipment. I am stretching the metaphor here, but 
dealing with the problems faced by some banks, and facilitating the provision of credit to the 
economy, may require the supply of “additional oxygen” in the form of government measures 
aimed at strengthening the banks’ balance sheets, both on the liability and the asset sides.  
Since  last  autumn,  governments  have  provided,  or  pledged,  a  substantial  amount  in 
guarantees  for  new  debt  issuance  by  banks  and  have  recapitalised  a  number  of  financial 
institutions. The latest figures (end-January 2009) show that the stock of guaranteed bank 
bonds  globally  will  soon  reach  a  level  of  €300  billion,  of  which  one  quarter  concerns  euro 
area banks. These are substantial figures, though we should bear in mind that it takes some 
time for the measures to be completely implemented and to show their full effects.  
                                                 
3   Remarks by US Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, “Introducing the Financial Stability Plan”, 10 February 
2009. 
4   The tensions in the money markets reflect the reluctance of banks to lend to each other because of persisting 
concerns about the creditworthiness of their counterparts and uncertainty about their own liquidity needs. And 
the tighter credit standards and conditions reflect, inter alia, banks’ concerns about asset quality and credit 
risk. 
BIS Review 16/2009 
 5
Additional measures to support the asset side of banks’ balance sheets 
It may be necessary, however, in order to safeguard banking sector stability and restore an 
adequate  flow  of  credit  to  the  economy,,  that  these  measures,  which  were  aimed  at 
supporting the liability side of banks’ balance sheets be complemented in certain cases by 
additional  measures  designed  to  support  the  asset  side.  Various  approaches  have  been 
considered,  ranging  notably  from  (i)  asset  removal  schemes  involving  the  removal  of  the 
“problem”  assets  from  the  balance  sheets,  through  direct  government  purchases  or  by 
transferring  them  to  “bad  banks”  or  asset  management  vehicles;  to  (ii)  asset  insurance 
schemes  that  limit  the  valuation  losses  of  impaired  assets  by  invoking  a  government 
guarantee  while  keeping  them  on  the  balance  sheets  of  institutions  concerned,  and  (iii) 
including  various  hybrid  schemes  that  combine  features  of  asset  insurance  and  asset 
removal.  
The appropriate design and the effective implementation of asset support measures require 
addressing a number of complex issues. Past experience and the assessment of alternative 
schemes on the basis of a number of criteria, suggest that there is no single approach that 
would be uniformly superior independently of the circumstances of the financial institutions 
concerned. Rather, the measures would need to be designed on a case-by-case basis and in 
a  pragmatic  manner.  In  fact,  hybrid  schemes  have  often  been  chosen  as  the  most 
appropriate. The chosen scheme should aim to achieve a number of objectives: (i) it should 
safeguard financial stability and effectively restore the flow of credit to the private sector; (ii) it 
should also ensure that a level playing-field in the EU financial market is maintained to the 
maximum extent possible; and (iii) it should contain the impact on public finances and limit 
moral  hazard.  At  the  current  juncture,  we  see  the  financial  stability  objective  and  the 
restoration of an adequate flow of credit to the economy as the overriding concern. But the 
other objectives must also be met.  
Bearing in mind these objectives, the European Commission, in cooperation with the ECB, 
has developed a list of guiding principles for the design and implementation of asset support 
schemes  in  order  to  address  the  most  critical  issues,  which  concern  the  eligibility  of 
institutions and assets, the valuation of assets and the risk-sharing mechanism, to create the 
right incentives and minimize the impact of the measures on public finances. What we need 
in the EU is a common consistent framework that will help ensure the attainment of the three 
objectives in an efficient and effective manner. 
Fiscal policies 
While  such  schemes,  as  well  as  the  government  guarantees  and  recapitalisations,  should 
assist in restoring a degree of normality to the functioning of the financial system, mitigating 
the fallout of the crisis on the real economy calls for a different set of policy tools, notably 
fiscal  policy.  In  other  words,  if  banks  need  some  “additional  oxygen”,  so  does  the 
macroeconomy.  As  always,  the  content  and  quality  of  the  remedy,  and  the  dose  to  be 
administered, are crucial. Specifically, the various ingredients of the fiscal stimulus packages 
need to be carefully chosen, in order to ensure that the measures taken will be effective in 
supporting  the  economic  recovery  in  a  timely  manner  and  that  taxpayers’  money  is 
appropriately  and  efficiently  spent,  that  is,  it  generates  real  economic  benefits  and  is  not 
wasted. We therefore call for prudence in the design of fiscal stimulus packages: they should 
be timely, targeted and temporary. Needless to say, the appropriate dose of fiscal stimulus 
will depend not only on the particular economic situation in each country, but also on its fiscal 
position. It is crucial that the confidence of the public in the soundness of public finances is 
not undermined. The stimulus packages should therefore contain a credible exit strategy, so 
that the desired support of economic activity in the short term is not jeopardised by the long-
term negative effects associated with unsustainable public finances.  
6 
 BIS Review 16/2009
III.  
Policies to reduce the procyclicality and safeguard the stability of the financial 
system 
Any seasoned mountaineer also gives some thought to whether his gear has served him well 
during an expedition, and what devices may need to be exchanged or rearranged to make 
sure  he  is  well-equipped  for  the  next  climb.  Likewise,  policy-makers  around  the  world  are 
assessing  whether  –  and  to  what  extent  –  certain  features  of  the  financial  system 
encouraged market excesses and the build-up of large financial imbalances. And they are 
considering what changes should be made to the financial system and to the regulatory and 
supervisory framework to reduce the pro-cyclical behaviour of financial markets.  
In my view, the past two years have demonstrated a number of weaknesses of the financial 
system.  It  is  imperative  for  policy-makers  –  and  market  participants  –  to  address  these 
weaknesses so as to avoid the recurrence of similar excesses and imbalances in the future. 
For  us  as  central  bankers,  it  is  essential  for  an  additional  reason:  even  if  tackling  the 
structural  weaknesses  is  a  task  for  the  longer  term,  we  need  to  start  now  in  order  to 
contribute to the restoration of confidence also in the short term. The markets need to see 
that  serious  and  concerted  efforts  are  undertaken  to  safeguard  financial  stability  in  a 
sustained  manner.  Several  important  activities  are  underway  in  this  respect.  At  the  global 
level, under the aegis of the G-20 and the Financial Stability Forum, and in Europe, on the 
basis  of  the  ECOFIN  Council’s  roadmaps.  The  various  measures  being  discussed  and 
agreed in these fora aim at addressing the inherent procyclicality of the financial system. The 
focus of the work is on: (i) regulatory aspects, and notably capital requirements; (ii) fair-value 
accounting  and  provisioning  regimes;  (iii)  incentive  schemes;  and  (iv) transparency  and 
disclosure  rules.  Moreover,  steps  are  being  taken  to  strengthen  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory  framework  in  Europe  in  order  to  enhance  both  crisis  prevention  and  crisis 
management. There is no time on this occasion to go into details on all of these issues, but 
let  me  comment  on  three:  (1)  accounting  standards;  (2)  capital  requirements  –  and  the 
complex interrelation between the two – and (3) the need to strengthen the macroprudential 
supervision of financial markets and institutions. 
Let  me  start  with  accounting  standards.  Finance  and  accounting  have  close  and  powerful 
links. The current fair-value accounting rules have been identified as having contributed to 
financial  market  dynamics.  The  “self-reinforcing  downward  spiral  of  higher  haircuts,  forced 
sales, lower prices, higher volatility and still lower prices”5 has become an all too frequent 
phenomenon in financial markets. When markets are dysfunctional or illiquid, I have doubts 
whether  marking-to-market  provides  accurate  or  useful  information,  especially  from  a 
medium or longer-term perspective. Moreover, the current impairment rules have not allowed 
banks to have forward-looking provisions or dynamic provisioning, so that they would build 
up provisions in good times and draw them down when the cycle turns and defaults surface.  
This should make us think again. Accounting standards do not exist in a vacuum – they have 
an  impact  on  financial  stability  and  ultimately  on  the  real  economy.  We  should  therefore 
reflect on how we can dampen or correct the procyclical impact of fair-value accounting and 
provisioning regimes, without compromising the provision of accurate and useful information 
or a “true and fair view” to investors.  
Second, capital requirements. The current framework based on Basel II involves greater risk 
sensitivity, because it links required capital to the perceived riskiness of assets which is likely 
to change in the course of the economic cycle. What the capital regime should do – but is not 
doing at present – is to promote the creation of capital buffers and restrain the build-up of 
excessive risk-taking during the upswing of the economic cycle while containing the costs of 
financial distress in the downturn. In order to achieve this, authorities are currently discussing 
                                                 
5   Remarks by the President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Timothy Geithner, before the US Senate 
Banking Committee, 21 November 2008. 
BIS Review 16/2009 
 7
whether  the  capital  requirements  could  be  supplemented  by  a  measure  to  help  contain 
leverage.  
Macroprudential supervision and the role of central banks 
The final point I would like to make concerns the financial stability framework in Europe and 
the role of central banks in it. One of the key lessons from the crisis is that in an increasingly 
market-based  and  interconnected  financial  system,  disturbances  are  likely  to  affect  core 
market mechanisms, such as the distribution of liquidity; they have cross-border implications; 
and they are likely to propagate in a more unpredictable manner. An adequate appreciation 
of these dynamics requires a systemic perspective for the analysis of financial stability which 
normally lies with the central banks, but requires also a close interaction between them and 
prudential supervisors.  
Central banks can make an important contribution to financial stability by performing several 
tasks  that  can  strengthen  the  “macroprudential  supervision”  of  the  financial  system.  The 
precise  content  of  the  term  is  not  always  clearly  and  precisely  defined.  In  general  terms, 
macroprudential  supervision  –  rather  than  concentrating  on  the  health and  performance  of 
individual financial institutions – aims to limit system-wide distress by calibrating prudential 
controls accordingly. Financial stability risk depends on the collective behaviour of institutions 
– it is “endogenous” – because, collectively, financial institutions can influence asset prices, 
which  can  significantly  affect  the  health  of  the  economy  as  a  whole.  This,  in  turn,  can 
produce powerful feed-back effects on the soundness of the institutions. In concrete terms, 
macro-prudential  supervision  should  involve  financial  stability  monitoring  and  analysis,  the 
development  of  early  warning  indictors;  macro-stress  testing  to  verify  the  resilience  of  the 
system, the definition of reporting and disclosure  requirements to ensure the availability of 
relevant  information,  as  well  as  macro-prudential  regulation,  aimed  at  countering  the 
potential  procyclicality  of  regulatory  requirements  and  avoiding  excessive  leverage,  risk 
concentration and liquidity mismatch in the financial system. 
Given the increasing financial integration in Europe, and especially within the euro area, and 
notably the growing number and systemic relevance of cross-border banking groups, central 
banks in general, and the ECB and the Eurosystem in particular, are well placed to assume 
the tasks of macro-prudential supervision. Key requirements for an effective implementation 
of this task are (i) access to relevant supervisory information on large cross-border financial 
institutions and (ii) the establishment of mechanisms and procedures that would ensure that 
the  assessment  and  advice  concerning  corrective  actions  that  aim  at  containing  risks  and 
vulnerabilities is duly reflected in the actions of national supervisory authorities.  
Concluding remarks  
IV.  
Will  appropriate  macroeconomic  policies  and  a  strengthened  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework be able to prevent future financial crises? Can we design a “crisis-proof financial 
system”?  Thinking  about  these  questions,  I  am  reminded  of  an  episode  during  a  visit  of 
Mahatma Gandhi to London, before Indian independence. He was then asked by a reporter: 
“What do you think of European civilisation?” Gandhi answered: “I think it would be a good 
idea.” A crisis-proof financial system would indeed be a “good idea”. It would, however, be 
foolhardy  to  presume  that  better  regulation,  more  effective  supervision  and  longer-term 
stability-oriented macroeconomic policy would suffice to eliminate the cyclical features of the 
financial  system  and  the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances  in  the  future.  Market  participants 
have  an  important  role  to  play  –  and  a  self-interest  –  in  addressing  some  of  the  revealed 
weakness in the financial system, and in strengthening market discipline. What we, policy-
makers, can do, and should aim at, is to ensure that the macroeconomic policies we pursue 
and  the  regulatory  framework  we  design  do  not  exacerbate  cyclical  fluctuations,  and  that, 
when  financial  imbalances  and  market  excesses  emerge  and  are  identified,  we  have  the 
appropriate tools to address them in an effective manner. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
8 
 BIS Review 16/2009
