Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir: Islamic financial services industry – 
developments in Malaysia 
Speech by Mr Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, 
at the Signing Ceremony of Memorandum of Participation for Commodity Murabahah House, 
Kuala Lumpur, 28 July 2009. 
 to 
the  already  robust 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  at  the  Signing  Ceremony  of  Memorandum  of 
Participation  for  Commodity  Murabahah  House  (CMH).  This  event,  jointly  hosted  by  Bank 
Negara  Malaysia  and  Bursa  Malaysia,  marks  another  milestone  in  the  development  of  the 
Islamic financial services industry. This pioneering effort, mooted about two years ago, is a 
collaborative  initiative  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  Securities  Commission  of  Malaysia  (SC), 
Bursa Malaysia and the market players under the MIFC initiative. CMH, which is scheduled 
to  be  launched  in  mid-August,  is  a  purposefully  designed  exchanged-traded  platform  to 
facilitate  commodity  murabahah  transactions.  It  is  the  first  internet  based  platform  in  the 
world with crude palm oil (CPO) as its underlying base commodity. I am also pleased to note 
here  that  CMH  has  received  the  endorsement  of  the  Ministry  of  Plantation  Industries  and 
Commodities and is supported by the Malaysian Palm Oil Board (MPOB), Malaysian Palm 
Oil  Association  (MPOA)  and  Malaysian  Palm  Oil  Council  (MPOC)  as  well  as  the  CPO 
industry players. 
CMH  will  provide  another  dimension 
liquidity  management 
infrastructure of the Islamic banking industry in Malaysia; thus providing market players with 
greater  tools  to  manage  their  assets  and  liabilities.  CMH  is  expected  to  unlock  a  vast 
potential  of  opportunities  for  the  Islamic  financial  industry.  It  can  provide  a  wider  range  of 
new  instruments  not  only  for  liquidity  management  and  risk  management  purposes  but 
players can derive additional linkages by utilising CMH to facilitate issuance of sukuk and in 
the creation of financing and deposit products.  
Besides having the potential of providing wider product selections, CMH could create a more 
transparent  and  streamlined  commodity  transaction  practices  based  on  the  concept  of 
murabahah  or  tawarruq.  Leveraging  on  the  experience  of  Bursa  Malaysia  in  the  area  of 
exchange traded products, CMH is able to eliminate uncertainty in the transactions and could 
mitigate risks such as legal risk, market risk and counter-party risk.  
We are most grateful to the CPO suppliers for participating in this initiative. For CMH to be 
successful,  it  requires  the  cooperation  of  the  players  in  the  CPO  market.  With  greater 
involvement  of  players  in  the  commodity  industries,  CMH  would  be  able  to  unlock  the 
potential of your business operation by enabling the stocks to be exploited for this exchanged 
traded mechanism.  The success of the CMH depends on the continuous support of the CPO 
suppliers.   The  CMH  could  also  explore  the  possibility  of  sourcing  CPO  supplies  from 
abroad. 
This  innovative  effort  which  has  been  endorsed  by  the  Shariah  Advisory  Council  of  Bank 
Negara  Malaysia  and  the  Securities  Commission  has  the  potential  to  appeal  to  a  wider 
market  audience  in  and  outside  of  Malaysia.  The  CMH,  which  will  showcase  the 
sophistication of Malaysia's Islamic financial industry, has tremendous global potentials. As 
the  CMH  is  designed  to  be  a  multi-currency  platform,  it  could  enhance  liquidity  and  risk 
management capacity of the international Islamic banking community. Furthermore, it could 
be harnessed into a cost effective global platform to develop universally acceptable Islamic 
financial products for the financial and capital market. Overtime, in making CMH into a truly 
global exchange, the scope of the exchange-traded product offerings could be expanded to 
include  other  commodities  and  the  level  of  participation  should  be  expanded  to  include 
players from outside the financial services industry as well. 
BIS Review 93/2009 
 1
The  MIFC  initiative  which  was  launched  in  2006  has  the  objective  to  internationalise 
Malaysia's Islamic financial industry and integrate it with the global Islamic financial system. 
Thus,  for  the  MIFC,  CMH  provides  an  important  link  to  elevate  further  the  capacity  of 
Malaysia to serve as a global hub for Islamic finance. It will support the development of a 
strong network with other financial centres and increase the inter-linkages. The CMH could 
play a significant role under this initiative by facilitating the capital and liquidity flows from one 
financial centre to the other. It is envisaged that CMH could be a component to alleviate the 
problems  arising  from  a  lack  of  cross-border  inter-bank  transactions  currently  faced  in  the 
global  Islamic  financial  landscape.  Eventually,  by  enabling  the  flows  of  funds  amongst  the 
global Islamic financial institutions, this would increase the inter-dependency and networking 
amongst themselves.  
Now I wish to update on the progress of the MIFC. Malaysia is still the largest sukuk market 
commanding  over  60%  of  the  global  sukuk  market.  For  the  year  ended  2008,  new  sukuk 
issuance  in  Malaysia  was  the  highest  globally  at  over  36  percent.  Currently  there  are  9 
Islamic fund management companies that have been approved by  SC to set up business. 
Within  the  MIFC  community,  there  are  also  14  Islamic  banks  with  international  currency 
business  units  (ICBU)  and  three  international  Islamic  banks  (IIB).  To  further  entrench  the 
Islamic financial market, the government has recently announced a number of liberalisation 
policies to enhance global linkages and accelerate the realisation of the MIFC agenda.  The 
announcement  includes  the  offering  of  two  mega  Islamic  banks  licences,  where  they  will 
predominantly be wholesale Islamic banks undertaking to a large extent international Islamic 
financial  business.  Furthermore,  two  family  Takaful  licences  are  being  offered.  For  the 
existing  Islamic  banks,  the  government  is  giving  flexibility  to  increase  the  foreign  equity 
participation to 70% of shareholding. Furthermore, 5 foreign legal firms will also be allowed to 
set-up operation in Malaysia. 
Today,  with  signing  of  the  memorandum  of  participation  marks  the  beginning  of  a  new 
chapter in Islamic finance. I would encourage each stakeholder, particularly Bursa, to exploit 
the  vast  potentials  of  this  new  entity  and  take  this  opportunity  to  enhance  research  and 
product development capacities. Going forward the long term viability of BCH will depend on 
its ability to create a wide range of innovative product offerings that are endorsed by globally 
renowned Shariah scholars and on the continuous strong support from the key stakeholders.   
On  that  note,  allow  me  to  congratulate  the  parties  involved  in  today's  signing  of 
Memorandum  of  Participation  –  the  Commodity  Murabahah  House,  participating  Islamic 
banks and the CPO suppliers – for showing and giving your commitment to making the CMH 
a reality. Also I wish to take this opportunity to extend my deepest appreciation to the team at 
Bursa  Malaysia,  Bank  Negara  and  SC  who  had  conceptualised  the  idea  and  all  other 
stakeholders who have worked hard to make this noble initiative come true, insyaAllah.  
2 
 BIS Review 93/2009
