Glenn Stevens: Public policy and the payments system 
Text by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, of the Third Annual 
Ian Little Memorial Lecture, Melbourne, 25 March 2009. 
 Introduction 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  in  Melbourne  to  deliver  the  Ian  Little  Memorial  Lecture.  I 
worked  with  Ian  when  we  were  both  young  recruits  in  the  Research  Department  of  the 
Reserve  Bank  in  the  early  1980s.  I  remember  an  easygoing  young  man  with  a  cheerful 
disposition, and a mop of curly dark hair. Even then, Ian was a clear thinker with a strong 
commitment to good public policy. So it was not really surprising that, having left the Reserve 
Bank in the late 1980s and succeeded in the private sector, he returned to public service in 
the Victorian Department of Treasury. In that role, as many of you here know better than I do, 
he shone. 
I  would  occasionally  run  into  Ian  at  conferences  and  he  would  always  impress  on  me,  a 
macroeconomist  working  in  the  central  bank,  the  need  to  acknowledge  the  importance  of 
microeconomic  policy  reforms  in  bettering  economic  performance.  It  is  a  simple,  but 
important, point. While macroeconomic policies are to the fore right now around the world, as 
governments and central banks seek to foster recovery from recession, in the long term our 
living standards depend more on innovation and productivity, and less on the manipulation of 
interest  rates  or  aggregate  spending  decisions  by  governments,  than  common  discussion 
often  admits.  Real  prosperity  depends  critically  on  the  supply  side  of  the  economy  –  the 
realm of microeconomic policies. 
It  is in  that spirit  that  I wish  to  speak  today  about  something  that  I  have  not  addressed  in 
public before, namely, the payments system. Although the Reserve Bank is best known for 
its  macroeconomic  policy  responsibilities,  it  has,  in  fact,  an  important  microeconomic 
responsibility, namely, the competitiveness and efficiency of the payments system, including 
at the retail level. This obligation was given to the Payments System Board of the Reserve 
Bank, as a result of the Wallis Committee process in the mid 1990s – hence, my topic this 
evening. 
Motivation 
We might begin by asking: why is an efficient payments system important? 
The  answer  is  that  the  payments  system  facilitates  all  economic  and  financial  activity, 
whether it be the day-to-day payments that you and I make, payments between businesses 
or transactions in financial assets. There are around 18 million transactions in Australia every 
day,  with  a  value  of  around  $230  billion.  With  so  many  payments,  even  relatively  small 
inefficiencies  can  potentially  have  significant  implications  for  the  costs  of  the  payments 
system. Part of the Reserve Bank’s job, therefore, is to promote efficient arrangements in the 
payment  system  in  the  interest  of  the  broader  economy.  Earlier  reforms  to  the  high-value 
payment system improved efficiency and safety, but in the retail payment area, progress has 
been slower. 
In fulfilling its responsibilities over the past 10 years, the Reserve Bank has in some fairly 
high-profile instances ultimately resorted to regulation. This has not been because we have 
had  a  strong  predilection  for  regulatory  solutions.  On  the  contrary,  the  Reserve  Bank  has 
usually  first  sought  to  achieve  improvements  in  competition  and  efficiency  without  direct 
regulation.  In  particular,  it  has  sought  to  encourage  the  players  in  the  payments  space  to 
identify  potential  improvements  and  to  undertake  reforms  to  achieve  these.  But  such 
BIS Review 36/2009 
 1
industry-led reforms have sometimes been difficult to achieve, and so the Reserve Bank has 
ultimately been required to take a stronger role, including by regulating.  
I want to examine why this is the case, both at a general level and by reference to a recent 
example. These observations are framed by the particular challenges the Reserve Bank has 
faced in promoting competition and efficiency in the payments system, but the conclusions 
apply  to  a  number  of  other  areas  where  regulators  are  working  to  spur  improvements  in 
efficiency and productivity. 
Co-operation and competition in networks 
In  payment  systems,  as  with  other  networks,  a  certain  amount  of  co-operation  between 
participants  is  needed  to  ensure  that  the  system  provides  benefits  to  users.  For  example, 
when you or I purchase something at a retailer, it should not matter with whom the retailer 
banks, or with whom you or I bank. We expect to be able to rely on the banking system to 
transfer money from us to the retailer. We expect that, when we pull out our debit or credit 
card to pay, it just works. That requires a detailed set of co-operative arrangements between 
financial institutions to accommodate payments between each other’s customers. 
These same institutions are also competing with each other, however, to attract customers. A 
common way to compete is to offer products or features not offered by one’s competitors. 
But  if  the  ability  to  offer  that  new  product  relies  on  competitors  making  changes  to  their 
systems, innovation may be stymied. Why would other banks be willing to incur the costs of 
developing the relevant systems in order to help customers of their competitors? 
The  tension  between  these  two  separate  dynamics  –  the  need  for  co-operation  and  the 
impulse to competition – means that the industry may have difficulty taking decisions in the 
interests  of  the  system  as  a  whole,  and  of  the  community  more  broadly.  In  such 
circumstances,  someone  –  an  industry  group  or  a  regulator  –  may  need  to  play  a  co 
ordinating  role,  to  encourage  improvements  in  the  common  infrastructure  that  benefit  all, 
while still allowing competitive forces between the banks to ensure that the new products are 
priced competitively and packaged to meet customers’ needs. 
Of  course,  these  issues  are  neither  new  nor  unique  to  the  payments  industry.  It  is  well 
accepted in the economic literature that in industries that rely on networks of infrastructure 
(so-called  “network  industries”)  there  is  an  incentive  to  co-operate  in  order  to  gain 
efficiencies, but a socially optimal level of co-operation might not be achieved.  
One illustration of this point which has been cited in the network literature is the development 
of the rail network in the United States in the 19th century.1
The early US railway system consisted of a large number of individual links between pairs of 
destinations,  often  on  different  track  gauges  and  designs.  There  was  a  clear  public  (and 
private) benefit in linking these “networks” to allow goods or passengers to cross efficiently 
from  one  railway  to  another.  But,  nonetheless,  railways  were  often  designed  to  be 
incompatible, so as to prevent competitors from siphoning off traffic. 
Eventually,  the  commercial  logic  for  some  degree  of  co-operation  was  sufficient  to  ensure 
that standardisation occurred and this brought with it large productivity gains. For instance, in 
the space of a decade, the time for shipment of goods by rail from Philadelphia to Chicago 
was reduced from nine weeks to three days.2 Despite these pay offs, standardisation was 
                                                 
1   Carlton  DW  and  JM  Klamer  (1983),  “The  Need  for  Coordination  among  Firms,  with  Special  Reference  to 
Network Industries”, The University of Chicago Law Review, 50(2), pp 446-465. 
2   See Carlton and Klamer (1983), p 455. 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2009
still  not  complete.  In  fact,  the  only  way  railways  could  reach  an  optimal  level  of 
standardisation was horizontal integration – merging competing railways. 
While  all  this  sounds  a  million  miles  away  from  Australia’s  payments  system  in  the  21st 
century,  the  parallels  are  quite  strong.  For  example,  like  the  linking  of  the  railways,  the 
realisation that a single, interconnected EFTPOS system was more valuable than a number 
of  individual  EFTPOS  systems  that  could  not  talk  to  one  another  drove  co  operation  and 
standardisation quite early in the development of that system. But despite the benefits that 
brought,  co  operation,  standardisation  and  innovation  in  Australia’s  EFTPOS  system  have 
not  progressed  as  far  as  is  desirable.  The  EFTPOS  system  has  essentially  remained 
unchanged since its establishment in the 1980s. The fact that the system is built on bilateral 
links  between  all  the  major  participants  means  that  there  is  no  one  standardised 
communications  protocol  between  the  participants.  Furthermore,  co  operative  efforts  to 
innovate  or  upgrade  the  system  are  complicated  because  they  require  all  bilateral 
relationships to be renegotiated. This is, in fact, a difficulty with many of Australia’s payment 
systems  –  they  are  based  on  bilateral  links,  with  no  established  mechanism  to  foster 
improvements and expansion in the network. 
So  left  to  their  own  devices,  networks  may  stop  short  of  an  efficient  level  of  co-operation. 
Incomplete standardisation may result, and innovation or movement from one standard to a 
superior one may be difficult because of co-ordination problems, even where the benefits to 
society outweigh the costs. 
The literature points to several reasons for this potential outcome, some of which are evident 
from the example I have already given.  
The first is the classic economic externality. Firms within the network may be concerned that 
if they agree a common standard with a competitor, that competitor may be able to capture 
some of the benefits of moving to that standard. Why would I pay all the cost of converting 
my railway line to a gauge that can connect with another railway, when my competitor will 
gain as much of my rail traffic as I will of his? The implication is that competitors in a network 
might not individually make decisions that are optimal for the network as a whole. 
The  second  is  the  ineffectiveness  of  voluntary  strategies  for  achieving  co-operation  in  a 
network  industry  owned  by  competing  firms.  Establishment  of  industry  bodies  to  agree 
standards  is  a  common  approach,  but  the  success  of  these  bodies  has  been  mixed. 
Agreement tends to be delayed where there are vested interests and, in some cases, non 
standardisation is used as a barrier to entry by competitors.3  
Third,  there  is  often  a  tendency  towards  “excess  inertia”  in  standards.4  Problems  with  co-
ordinating the movement from an old standard to a superior standard (such as the movement 
to  new  system  architecture  in  a  payment  system)  may  mean  that  the  movement  does  not 
occur,  or  occurs  very  slowly,  even  where  the  benefits  to  society  outweigh  the  costs  of 
switching.  These  co  ordination  problems  may  be  caused  by  an  uneven  distribution  of  the 
costs and benefits of switching standards, or by uncertainty regarding the movement of rival 
firms to the new standard.5
                                                 
3   For  example,  see  David  P  and  S  Greenstein  (1990),  “The  Economics  of  Compatibility  Standards:  An 
Introduction to Recent Research”, Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 1(1), pp 3-41; Farrel J and 
P Klemperer (2007), “Co-ordination and Lock-in: Competition with Switching Costs and Network Effects”, in M 
Armstrong and R Porter (eds), Handbook of Industrial Organization, Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 1967-2072; and 
for  the  Australian  context,  Lowe  P  (2005),  “Innovation  and  Governance  of  Payment  Systems”,  Address  to 
Banktech.05 Conference, Sydney, 16 September. 
4   For example, see Farrel and Klemperer (2007). 
5   There can also be, in some cases, a tendency towards overly rapid changes in standards (so called “excess 
momentum”), which can lead to the premature adoption of a new standard that is less efficient than the old 
standard. Further, those who benefit disproportionately from a change to a new standard will fail to consider 
BIS Review 36/2009 
 3
A recent Australian example 
From first principles, therefore, we might expect that achieving agreement among Australian 
financial institutions on development of the payments system might not be easy. So it has 
proved.  There  are  a  number  of  examples  of  this,  but  a  recent  one  is  the  efforts  by  the 
industry at reform of the ATM system. 
As you may be aware, there have recently been some changes to the way ATM transactions 
at machines not owned by your bank are priced and paid for. Instead of paying a relatively 
obscure “foreign ATM fee”, that was charged to your bank account at the end of the month, 
people are now presented with the cost of the transaction in real time. These changes will, in 
our view, allow competitive forces to come into play in a way that was previously impossible. 
But it is the process of achieving the reforms, more than the likely benefits, on which I want 
to focus this evening. In particular, it required changes in the bilateral links between all the 
major players in the system. In this sense, the problems were akin to those of the US railway 
system  –  how  do  we  get  all  the  competitors  to  agree  to  change  their  bilateral  links  in  a 
standardised way?  
Work by the industry on the reforms started as long ago as 2001. While some progress was 
made  over  the  next  few  years,  participants  ultimately  could  not  agree  and  asked  the 
Payments System Board for guidance on the way forward. Finally, after much cajoling by the 
Reserve  Bank,  the  new  arrangements  were  implemented  earlier  this  month  –  some  eight 
years after discussions on the issue commenced. Ironically, the package implemented differs 
very  little  from  the  proposal  put  forward  by  the  industry  group  itself  in  2004,  which  was 
subsequently  abandoned  owing  to  irreconcilable  differences  between  some  of  the  parties. 
Moreover, despite a firm desire by the industry to implement the new arrangements without 
Reserve Bank intervention, the industry ultimately asked the Reserve Bank to use its powers 
to help finalise the process. 
This  is  not  a  unique  example.  Reforms  to  most  of  Australia’s  payment  systems  including 
cheques, direct entry and EFTPOS  faced similar challenges. As we have seen, this is not 
altogether surprising given the network nature of the payments system and the number of 
players which must co-operate, but also compete. 
The bilateral architecture that I have already mentioned is also a difficulty. Every large bank 
has  an  agreement  with  every  other  large  bank  about  how  to  handle  payments  from  one 
another’s customers. The more banks there are, the more  agreements are necessary and 
the  more  complicated  the  system  becomes.  To  use  the  railway  line  analogy,  the  more 
customised tracks are built, the more difficult the task of ultimately converting all tracks to a 
standard gauge. 
This has two implications. First, while these bilateral agreements can be helpful in getting a 
system  started  initially,  and  may  subsequently  work  well  for  those  already  in  the  system, 
potential new entrants face the prospect of negotiating numerous different connections. This 
can act as a barrier to entry, inhibiting competition. 
Second, because upgrading the network requires participants to agree, since they all must 
make  changes,  each  participant  therefore  can  effectively  veto,  or  at  least  delay,  any 
decisions  affecting  the  network.  Because  different  participants  have  different  technology 
cycles and different strategic interests, there is a high probability that some participants will 
be unwilling to proceed at any given point in time. If a participant thinks a particular change 
may  provide  another  participant  with  a  potential  competitive  advantage,  it  will  probably 
attempt  to  delay.  Indeed,  if  one  participant  sees  a  potential  competitive  advantage  in  a 
                                                                                                                                                      
the loss of network benefits to those who are reluctant or late to change, and these participants may end up 
remaining on the old standard with a reduced network. See Farrel and Klemperer (2007). 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2009
change, it is almost guaranteed that another will see a disadvantage and, therefore, seek to 
block the change. This results in a significant co ordination problem for the industry.  
The result is that, in the underlying architecture of the Australian payments system, very little 
has  changed  over  the  past  20  or  30  years,  even  though  technology  has  evolved  in  the 
quarter of a century since the technology underlying the ATM and EFTPOS systems was first 
established.  So  while  the  payments  system  infrastructure  has  served  Australia  well, 
pressures for change are building. The network structure needs to be updated and services 
to  customers  are  starting  to  fall  behind  those  available  in  other  countries.  In  the  past,  the 
Reserve  Bank  has  identified  real-time  internet  payments,  business-to-business  payments 
and online payment mechanisms as examples where progress has been made overseas but 
not, to date, in Australia. 
The resulting co-ordination challenges were very evident in the process of reform in the ATM 
system. With each of the parties having different objectives, consensus was hard to achieve. 
For example, small institutions would only consider a system that allowed them to form fee-
free networks among themselves – otherwise they would be at a competitive disadvantage to 
the  big  banks  with  their  large  ATM  networks.  But  larger  institutions  saw  an  opportunity  to 
obtain a competitive advantage if smaller institutions could not form larger fee-free networks. 
There was also reluctance to liberalise access to the system. While improved access would 
serve  to  increase  the  benefits  of  the  system  as  a  whole  and  therefore  the  participants 
collectively, each bank tended to focus on the costs it would bear individually as well as the 
competition it would face. In short, there were problems because there was no participant in 
the system thinking of the benefit to the system as a whole with the power to effect change. 
Now in many countries, this role is handled by a single private sector entity that manages a 
system or systems. For example, the credit card schemes have a central body responsible 
for  governance,  innovation  and  promotion.  Their  incentive  is  to  do  things  that  expand  the 
network, making its use easier and more attractive and increasing the number of participants. 
They have, in effect, internalised some of the externalities inherent in the network. While the 
credit  card  systems  have  had  other  elements  that  unduly  limited  competition  in  some 
respects, the centralised approach is arguably superior for network innovation and growth. 
That  central  body  can  determine  standards  and  co-ordinate  change.  These  arrangements 
are  also  more  access-friendly  in  that  a  new  entrant  need  only  establish  one,  standardised 
connection to the system. Some private payment systems in other countries have such an 
entity – for example, LINK which manages the ATM system in the United Kingdom, Interac 
which manages the equivalent of the EFTPOS and ATM systems in Canada, and Paymark 
which  manages  New  Zealand’s  EFTPOS  network.  But  that  entity  is  missing  in  Australian 
payment systems. 
What role for public policy? 
These considerations all suggest that there is an important potential role for public policy in 
promoting change in the payments system. While the academic literature is divided generally 
on  the  role  of  regulation  in  network  industries,  there  seems  to  be  support  for  careful 
regulatory  intervention  in  industries  with  competing  network  components  where  sufficient 
standardisation or a move between standards cannot be achieved in a timely manner. There 
also seems to be considerable sense in having an entity with responsibility to consider the 
interests of the system (and society) as a whole and the power to achieve reform to that end. 
Indeed,  the  need  to  have  a  body  responsible  for  promoting  the  public  interest  through 
competition and efficiency in the payments system was recognised by the Wallis Committee 
over a decade ago. It led directly to the establishment of the Payments System Board at the 
Reserve Bank and the granting of its current statutory goals and powers. 
The fact that the central bank fulfils this oversight role in Australia is unusual internationally – 
in  many  countries,  issues  of  competition  in,  and  efficiency  of,  payment  systems  fall  to 
competition authorities. But it is nevertheless common to find structures in place in network 
BIS Review 36/2009 
 5
industries to assist in promoting access and the efficient setting of standards – whether this 
is a body that merely assists with co-ordination or one that has powers to enforce or perhaps 
set standards. We see this in network industries in Australia, such as telecommunications, 
electricity and ports, where there is frequently some sort of public body with oversight of the 
network, perhaps operating in conjunction with an industry body or bodies.  
Of  course,  such  bodies  should  not  take  a  decision  to  regulate  hastily.  In  most  cases,  a 
graduated  approach  to  regulation  in  these  areas  is  pursued,  reflecting  a  reluctance  to 
assume  that  a  regulatory  solution  is  necessarily  superior,  or  that  the  government  would 
necessarily be able to choose the best standard, particularly in a highly technical or rapidly 
changing field. The typical approach of network regulators is to prefer a co operative industry 
approach to standard setting, to provide some suasion where this process is unsuccessful, 
but  ultimately  to  set  standards  if  necessary.  Where  intervention  is  required,  the  academic 
literature suggests that we might look first of all to ensure compatibility between competing 
standards – for instance, by rules governing access and interconnection between competing 
networks – before setting detailed standards themselves. 
So there is not a presumption that a black-letter regulatory solution will be adopted. In fact, at 
the  time  that  the  current  regulatory  arrangements  for  Australia’s  payment  systems  were 
established, there was an expectation that a co-regulatory model would be followed. In this 
view, industry would progress reform for the most part and the Reserve Bank’s powers would 
be used only occasionally, as a last resort, where reform could not otherwise be achieved. 
As it has turned out, however, the Reserve Bank’s powers have had to be used more often 
than  I  suspect  was  initially  imagined.  The  Reserve  Bank  always  explores  ways  that  its 
statutory goals of competition and efficiency in the payments system can be achieved without 
resorting  to  its  direct  regulatory  powers.  But  the  history  of  the  ATM  reforms  demonstrates 
how difficult it is for pure industry-based reform to move ahead without at least some push 
from a public policy body.  
Possible approaches 
Reflecting  on  that  experience  then,  and  looking  to  the  future,  the  question  is  how  best  to 
strike  the  balance  and  to  facilitate  reform  most  effectively.  There  are  a  few  possible 
approaches – each one more interventionist than the previous one. 
First, the Reserve Bank could agree targets and timelines with the industry, but without any 
explicit regulation or penalty for failure to meet those targets. This approach is similar to the 
approach  that  the  existing  industry  payments  body,  the  Australian  Payments  Clearing 
Association  (APCA),  takes  with  many  of  its  projects.  Provided  agreement  on  the  need  for 
change  can  be  reached  (no  small  achievement),  APCA  plays  a  co-ordinating  role  in 
organising a project plan, providing some resources and setting timelines and targets, though 
in  the  past  these  projects  have  tended  to  focus  on  technical  issues  rather  than  strategic 
directions.  
In  the  absence  of  agreement  on  the  need  for  change,  however,  industry-based  projects  – 
which, after all, rely on mutual agreement – tend not to proceed sufficiently quickly. 
That observation leads to the second option – the possibility of the Reserve Bank using overt 
regulation may be enough to forge agreement among industry participants. This is the path 
that was predominantly followed in progressing reform of the ATM system, and in a number 
of  other  reforms  to  the  payments  system. Where  industry  agreement  on  an issue  was  not 
forthcoming,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  engaged  the  various  sides  to seek  a  solution with  the 
clear possibility that it might regulate if agreement could not be reached. This approach was 
essentially behind the establishment of the Payments Council in the United Kingdom, and the 
6 
 BIS Review 36/2009
development of the UK’s “Faster Payments”6 – both of these initiatives were undertaken with 
the knowledge that, were something not done, there would be official intervention. 
While this can work, and emphasises the co ordination role that the Reserve Bank can play 
in the industry, the experience with the ATM system suggests that it still may be a drawn-out 
process.  Individual  participants  with  a  preference  for  the  status  quo  have  no  incentive  to 
push the plan along and so it relies on the Reserve Bank setting a timetable for agreement 
and implementation – a timetable that is invariably argued to be “challenging”. 
A third, more intrusive, option is for the Reserve Bank to set explicit standards – what may be 
viewed as more traditional regulation. This is the approach that was taken when dealing with 
the credit card schemes, where the Reserve Bank set a number of standards dealing with 
the  level  of  interchange  fees  and  the  imposition  of  surcharges.  This  approach  could, 
however,  also  be  used  to  achieve  industry  co-ordination  around  technical  issues.  For 
example,  the  Reserve  Bank  could  set  technical  standards  where  the  industry  has  been 
unable to agree on a common standard itself. 
Such  an  approach  may  yet  become  relevant  in  Australia’s  electronic  payments  system, 
especially  where  co-ordination  problems  are  inhibiting  innovation.  As  an  example,  some 
have suggested that the Reserve Bank could play a role in the further development of the 
EFTPOS  system.  The  system  was  designed  originally  to  transfer  money  from  consumer 
accounts  to  merchant  accounts.  These  transfers  are  initiated  when  an  EFTPOS  card  is 
swiped  through  a  merchant’s  terminal  and  the  impact  on  the  customer’s  account  is 
immediate. In recent years, however, there has been demand to use the system in a different 
way, to send payments into consumers’ accounts in real time. These demands flowed initially 
from  the  government  looking  to  ensure  benefit  payments  reach  recipients  as  quickly  as 
possible  –  for  example,  when  providing  emergency  funds  after  a  natural  disaster.  The 
EFTPOS system at present can accommodate these sorts of payments only in a limited way. 
While  some  participants  in  the  industry  have  seen  benefit  in  expanding  the  EFTPOS 
message format to enable such transactions, there has been limited progress. A requirement 
by  the  Reserve  Bank  that  all  participants  in  the  industry  be  able  to  accept  instructions 
conforming  to  a  common  message  standard  would  facilitate  access  by  new  entrants,  and 
thus competition. If the Reserve Bank chose to require use of an international standard, that 
could also facilitate more competition from overseas providers of payment related services. A 
mandate  from  the  Reserve  Bank  that  EFTPOS  message  formats  must  be  able  to  support 
credit  transactions  might  likewise  lay  the  foundation  for  innovation  in  the  EFTPOS  system 
based on these transactions more quickly than the industry might be able to achieve by itself. 
Notwithstanding its regulations with respect to card payment systems, the Reserve Bank has 
in  the  past  preferred  the  first  two  of  the  above  options.  This  is  particularly  the  case  with 
respect to issues relating to technical standards and system architecture, where the Reserve 
Bank  has  on  occasion  raised  the  issues  but  left  the  industry  to  drive  reforms.  We  remain 
conscious of the risks that public intervention itself may be an impediment to innovation. As 
we  have  said  a  number  of  times,  our  hope  is  that  the  industry  will  deal  with  these  issues 
itself.  But  we  also  know  that  if  the  industry  fails  to  push  ahead  with  improvements  to  the 
system, Australians will be denied the full benefits of a modern retail payments system. 
To  a  large  extent,  the  future  approach  of  the  Payments  System  Board  depends  on  the 
behaviour of industry participants. If industry agreement on further reforms can be reached 
relatively  quickly,  then  the  need  for  the  Reserve  Bank’s  co-ordinating  role  to  be 
interventionist is limited. On the other hand, if, as on some past occasions, the industry is 
unable  to  carry  forward  reform  and  innovation  by  itself,  the  Reserve  Bank  would  consider 
making more extensive use of the tools at its disposal.  
                                                 
6   “Faster Payments” is a system to allow internet banking payments to be made in close to real time. 
BIS Review 36/2009 
 7
Conclusion 
The economics of networks are complex, and the role of public policy is a delicate one. The 
aim is to ensure, as far as we can, that the correct balance is struck between the need for co-
operation and the benefits of competition. Co-operation is required in order to ensure that the 
benefits of an extensive, and reasonably standardised, network can be enjoyed by the public, 
raising  economic  welfare.  Competition  is  vital  in  the  long  run  to  make  sure  that  costs  are 
minimised  and  the  incentive  to  respond  to  changing  consumer  preferences  maximised. 
Policy has to recognise and fulfil its role in dealing with the externalities inherent in the set of 
decisions  made  by  private  market  participants,  while  also  respecting  and  maintaining  the 
competitive dynamic. 
We  recognise  that  the  roles  of  the  industry  participants  and  the  regulator  are  mutually 
interdependent. We trust that the industry does too. The Payments System Board is content 
to  confine  itself  to  encouraging  industry  solutions  and  being  the  occasional  catalyst  for 
agreement among the parties, where that achieves the goals the Board has been given. But 
it  is  and  must  be  also  prepared,  if  needed,  to  use  regulatory  powers  more  forcefully.  In 
judging which approach is preferred, we will respond to the industry’s behaviour, just as they 
respond to ours. 
The approach we adopt in any instance has to be tailored to the circumstances and we will 
ourselves on occasion need to innovate. What will be constant is the set of statutory goals 
given  to  the  Payments  System  Board  –  controlling  risk,  and  promoting  competition  and 
efficiency  in  the  payments  system.  The  Payments  System  Board  is  committed  to  those 
objectives  and  will  be  pragmatic,  but  determined,  in  pursuing  them.  We  look  forward  to 
effective engagement with the industry in the process. 
8 
 BIS Review 36/2009
