Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Procyclicality in the banking activity 
Speech by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the Conference 
on Procyclicality and the Role of Financial Regulation, organised by the Bank of Spain and 
the Financial Stability Institute, Madrid, 4 May 2009. 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen. First of all I would like to welcome you to the Bank of 
Spain. Also, let me thank you all for your presence here today to discuss on one of the most 
difficult and relevant topics affecting financial regulation: procyclicality in banking activity. 
Let  me  also  thank  the  BIS  Financial  Stability  Institute,  and  in  particular  its  Chairman, 
Mr. Josef Tošovský, for all the support and good advice received during these last few weeks 
during the preparation of this event that we have co-organized. 
We  are  very  pleased  to  have  as  speakers  in  this  conference  a  large  group  of  excellent 
professionals who are directly involved in financial supervision and regulation. A high level 
meeting  like  this  one  is  a  major  opportunity  to  start  building  up  a  common  and  efficient 
framework in order to face the procyclicality issue. 
Cyclicality  can  be  considered  an  inherent  part  of  economic  activity.  Banking  activity  is  no 
exception; it is also affected by the upswings and downturns of the real sector cycles. Not 
only history proves this, but current events do also. Any doubt about this has been violently 
resolved  after  the  summer  of  2007.  But  even  if  we  accept  that  little  can  be  done  to  avoid 
economic cycles, this should not be an excuse for us, central bankers and supervisors. Our 
responsibility  is  to  develop  macro-prudential  approaches  and  the  appropriate  regulatory 
measures  to  help  banks  reduce  the  impact  of  future  economic  cycles  and  diminish  their 
procyclical  behaviour.  This  should  be  achieved  for  the  sake  of  financial  stability  with  the 
minimum economic and social costs, which is the main objective of supervisory authorities 
In fact, banking behaviour can be not only cyclical but procyclical, that is, it can exacerbate 
the cyclical behaviour of the real economy. As it has been said many times, there is nothing 
more  procyclical  than  a  badly  managed  bank. In  good  times  it incurs in  more  risks  than  it 
reasonably should through, for example, excessive lending with poor standards. In bad times 
it changes its lending policies reducing drastically the loans to the economy and exacerbating 
the downturn. 
There are several causes that explain this procyclical behaviour but I will focus on the one 
that affects us most and towards which all of our work should be devoted: banking regulation 
and supervision. 
Basel II was seen as a major step towards a better alignment between credit risk incurred by 
banks and regulatory minimum capital requirements. This link between risk and capital has 
forced  supervisors  to  better  understand  the  main  drivers  behind  credit  risk  and  the 
idiosyncrasy  of  banks’  credit  models,  their  risk  pricing  and  general  portfolio  management. 
Basel  II,  in  this  way,  has  motivated  supervisors  to  analyse  more  deeply  all  that  surrounds 
banks’  main  business  with  the  benefit  of  a  clearer  understanding  of  the  underpinnings  of 
banks’ risks. 
Needless to say, the introduction of a risk sensitive capital framework is based on the idea 
that,  as  credit  conditions  deteriorate,  minimum 
increase  and 
consequently,  more  cyclicality  is  added  into  the  system.  Particularly,  under  the  internal 
ratings  based  approach  (IRB),  capital  requirements  are  an  increasing  function  of  the  main 
credit  risk  drivers,  probability  of  default  (PD),  loss  given  default  (LGD),  and  exposure  at 
default  (EAD),  obtained  for  each  loan.  The  problem  is  that  this  formulation  may  have 
distorting  consequences  in  the  evolution  of  regulatory  requirements  along  the  economic 
cycle.  That  is,  in  downturn  conditions  these  risk  parameters  would  deteriorate,  leading  to 
requirements  must 
BIS Review 552009 
 1
greater  capital  requirements,  whereas  in  upswings  these  risk  indicators  would  improve, 
resulting in lower regulatory needs. 
Nevertheless, the new Basel II Framework itself offers specific guidance that may soften the 
cyclical fluctuations in capital requirements. The calculation of risk parameters consisting on 
long run averages and the inclusion of a downturn bias in certain estimates would provide 
more  stable  parameters  and  requirements  without  abandoning  the  advantages  of  a  risk 
sensitive  scheme  across  different  banks.  This  approach  has  been  the  one  mostly 
implemented in Spanish IRB banks. 
This is the guidance Basel II itself offers to mitigate procyclicality but one might think that it is 
insufficient. In this case, one of the many additional possibilities currently under discussion to 
reduce  the  potential  undesirable  effects  of  Basel  II  is  to  scale  the  capital  requirements 
obtained through the IRB function by using a countercyclical multiplier. 
In  order  to make  this multiplier  countercyclical,  it  would  be  built  as  a  function  of a  reliable 
economic  activity  variable  (for  instance  GDP  growth  rate).  As  it  happens  with  other 
alternatives, its main pros and cons should be carefully assessed. The multiplier is easy to 
obtain, transparent (as depends on a reliable macro variable), it has a low implementation 
cost  and,  finally,  it  would  be  of  a  uniform  and  wide  applicability.  Among  its  drawbacks  we 
found  that,  first,  it  implies  undertaking  an  external  modification  on  the  capital  requirement 
figure  and,  second,  that  the  multiplier  is  built  using  a  domestic  variable,  which  may  make 
international comparison very difficult. 
No  matter  what  the  result  of  the  previous  debate  is,  either  the  use  of  counter-cyclical  risk 
estimations or the use of a capital multiplier, we should explore the use of complementary 
measures  to  attain  our  final  goal  of  financial  stability  and  to  minimise  the  social  costs  of 
procyclicality; for example, dynamic provisions. 
As  most  of  you  already  know,  this  type  of  provision  uses  historical  information  on  credit 
losses to estimate a general provision for homogenous loan portfolios. It reflects a collective 
assessment of credit losses at the balance sheet date (i.e. it covers incurred losses not yet 
identified in specific individual loans). This provision builds up a buffer during the benign part 
of the cycle, which starts to be released when recession comes knocking on banks’ doors. 
Counter-cyclicality is intrinsic to dynamic provisions and part of its usefulness can be seen in 
the  resilience  shown  so  far  by  Spanish  banks  in  the  current  crisis.  Furthermore,  its  direct 
impact on the profit and loss account (reflecting losses at a time when these losses are really 
being built up in balance sheets) constitutes a way to make banks more aware of how credit 
must  be  priced,  reducing  the  underestimation  of  loans  risk  premia  and,  to  some  extent, 
compensating the relaxation of credit granting standards in good times. It also delivers the 
right  information  to  investors  about  the  financial  position  of  the  bank.  In  all,  dynamic 
provisioning allows a proper recognition of credit risk. 
I must also admit that there are voices raised by some institutions that do not agree with this 
view, and particularly, accounting standard setters. In this respect, we should call for further 
dialogue between accounting rule setters and supervisors as well as a clarification regarding 
roles and objectives of each of them. I really think that our objectives are compatible and that 
delivering the relevant information to investors should not be an impediment for supervisors 
to ensure the stability of the banking sector by promoting the most adequate measures that 
experience and results have proved to be useful. 
Very much in line with dynamic provisions, the buildup of capital buffers also deserves room 
in  our  discussions.  These  buffers,  created  in  periods  of  good  economic  conditions  and 
necessarily  associated  with  the  adequate  mechanisms  to  draw  them  down  during 
recessions, may come in the form of non-distributable reserves to compensate economic-
cycle losses. Nevertheless, the possible advantages and disadvantages of such a measure 
should  be  accurately  calculated  and  appropriately  compared  to  those  coming  from  other 
tools that act in the same way but affect the profit and loss account. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2009
We  should  not  forget  the  interconnection  that  exists  between  valuation,  leverage  and 
procyclicality and how these issues should be properly managed under a macro-prudential 
perspective.  The  introduction  of supplementary  floors  to capital  requirements  under  a  risk-
sensitive  approach,  could  be  a  safety  net,.  Setting  limits  on  the  build-up  of  leverage  in 
periods  of  rapid  credit  growth  can  be  seen  as  a  way  of  strengthening  the  incentives  for 
correct  risk  pricing  of  institutions,  as  well  as  a  deterrent  of  excessive  risk-taking. 
Furthermore, the development of valuation reserves should also be under our consideration 
as a way to mitigate the cyclicality inherent in risky and illiquid securities. 
Improvement  of  general  stress  test  practices  and  their  wide  implementation,  particularly 
during the most favorable part of the economic cycle, should also be included in our toolbox 
approach to fight against procyclicality. Solid stress test frameworks will allow assessing the 
adequacy of buffers, both in their construction and in their applicability over the cycle. 
Finally, remuneration schemes may be another tool for dampening the undesired cyclical 
fluctuations  of  banking  activity.  The  assessment  of  different  alternatives  for  appropriate 
remuneration schemes, on the basis of correct incentives and horizons, constitutes the right 
starting point from which to explore how excesses or bad alignments may have contributed 
to accelerate or amplify disorders within the financial system. 
As you have seen, we are not lacking ideas on how to reduce procyclicality. Rather, our main 
problem is to select what are the best tools to include in our toolbox. In this sense, I am sure 
that your contributions in this seminar will be extremely useful for this purpose. 
Now, let me give the floor to Mr. Josef Tošovský, with whom I have the honor to chair this 
opening session and to whom I personally thank his presence in this conference. 
BIS Review 552009 
 3
