Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Security management – a challenging balancing 
act 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Bank Security Management Association, Inc. (BSMA) 
Induction, Central Bank of the Philippines, Manila, 16 January 2009. 
 The officers and directors of the Bank Security Management Association, Inc. (BSMA) led by 
President Edwin Ermita, special guests, fellow central bankers, good morning. 
I am very pleased to meet the leadership of the Bank Security Management Association and 
engage  you  in  a  dialogue.  You  and  the  members  BSMA  are  responsible  for  providing  the 
highest level of protection to Philippine banking institutions in general and to bank employees 
and clients in particular.  
For  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  therefore,  you  represent  a  vital  component  of  our 
continuing efforts to ensure the health and stability of our banking system.  
Through the years, securing a bank has evolved from the traditional watchdog concept to the 
use of state-of-the-art security devices and gadgets. Given the rising violence we have seen 
in recent bank robberies, you have to ensure that you develop in parallel with your operating 
environment.  
Your  additional  challenge  is  to  provide  effective  security  to  bank  properties  and  most 
especially to the people within your premises while making sure that customers do not feel 
intimated or threatened by security personnel.  
You  and  I  know  that  bank  clients  are  civilians  who  are  not  used  to  armed  personnel. 
Therefore,  they  may  complain  or, worse,  move  their  account  if  they  feel  that  your  security 
men are somewhat threatening. I know it is easier said than done but your objective should 
be for security personnel to remain courteous while being visible, firm, and alert as security 
personnel.  
Director  Ed  Gatumbato,  the  head  of  Bangko  Sentral’s  security  department,  is  constantly 
challenged by this balancing act. I am sure you will have a lot to talk about.  
Last year, September 3 to be exact, I signed Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) Circular 620, 
the revised rules and regulations on bank protection pursuant to Monetary Board Resolution 
No. 1057 dated August 14, 2008. The objective of this circular is to strengthen and broaden 
the security of banks to cover not only physical security but also on other crimes perpetrated 
against  the  banking  institutions  such  as  external  and  internal  frauds,  cash  in  transit 
operations  as  well  as  the  conduct  of  investigation  of  such  cases.  This  means  that  the 
concept  of  bank  security  management  now  goes  beyond  guard  force  deployment  and 
monitoring.  
Broader  authority  and  responsibility  for  security  management  personnel  clearly  requires 
reorientation and training of both officers and staff of your departments.  
For at the end of the day, even with the most expensive security gadgets, it is the training of 
your  personnel,  their  ability  to  discern  potential  danger  or  fraud,  and  skills  honed  through 
constant practice that will spell the difference between success and failure for your security 
management.  
Now is the best time therefore for BSMA to take the lead in this direction by keeping your 
association united and constantly engaged in dialogues to keep up to date with the industry 
best practices.  
BIS Review 5/2009 
 1
And so, once again, I congratulate the BSMA and its leadership for having a proactive stance 
in dealing with bank security management.  
I wish you all the success in keeping the banking community and its clients safe and secure.  
Mabuhay ang BSMA! Salamat sa inyong lahat. 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2009
