Masaaki Shirakawa: Recent economic and financial developments and 
the conduct of monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  to  commemorate  the 
100th anniversary of the Kanazawa Branch, Kanazawa, 25 May 2009. 
 Introduction 
I am honored to have the opportunity to speak before business leaders in the Hokuriku area 
today.  I  would  like  to  express  my  deep  gratitude  for  your  close  cooperation  with  the 
Kanazawa Branch of the Bank of Japan. 
In response to strong requests from three prefectures in the Hokuriku area, the Kanazawa 
Branch was established in 1909 as the Bank's first branch in the districts of Honshu Island 
along the Japan Sea. Since then, the Kanazawa Branch has been operating in tandem with 
the  development  of  the  Hokuriku  economy,  and  this  year  the  branch  celebrates  its  100th 
anniversary.  The  Bank  has  32  branches,  including  the  Kanazawa  Branch,  and  12  local 
offices  in  Japan.  Each  of  them  conducts  a  variety  of  central  banking  operations,  such  as 
smooth provision of banknotes and coins, settlement of funds, treasury funds services, and 
research  and  analysis  of  financial  institutions'  business  conditions  and  of  economic  and 
financial developments in the region. Although these operations sound unspectacular, they 
constitute a part of the important infrastructure that supports financial and economic activity 
in  each  region.  In  fiscal  2008,  the  sum  of  receipts  and  payments  of  banknotes  at  the 
Kanazawa Branch was around 2 trillion yen – 200 million notes of 10,000 yen bill. During the 
last  100  years,  the  Kanazawa  Branch  has  strived  to  maintain  an  uninterrupted  supply  of 
banknotes in spite of occasional difficulties such as heavy snow and major earthquakes. We 
have  renewed  our  determination  to  continue  to  fulfill  our  role  of  providing  firm  support  for 
financial and economic activity in each region. I would like to express my gratitude again for 
your  support  and  would  like  to  ask  for  your  continued  cooperation  with  the  Kanazawa 
Branch. 
Before we exchange views, I would like to speak about the current situation of and outlook 
for the Japanese and overseas economies and also about the Bank's thinking regarding its 
conduct of monetary policy. I will mainly talk about economic and financial developments in 
Japan  and  abroad  from  a  macroeconomic  viewpoint,  but  we  do  fully  understand  that  the 
situation varies significantly for different regions and industries, and also for different sizes of 
firm. In fact, the Bank gathers microeconomic information about industries and firms in each 
region  from  each  branch,  based  on  which  the  Bank  assesses  economic  and  price 
developments from a macroeconomic viewpoint and conducts monetary policy. 
Developments in the world economy 
I. 
I  will  start  with  the  current  situation  of  the  world  economy.  The  pace  of  deterioration  in 
economic conditions around the world gradually accelerated from the beginning of 2008 and 
they  have  deteriorated  simultaneously  and  sharply  especially  since  the  failure  of  Lehman 
Brothers  in  September.  The  sharp  downturn  in  the  world  economy  was  overwhelming, 
considerably exceeding the projections made by international institutions, governments and 
central banks around the world, and private research firms. For example, the International 
Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  projection  of  world  growth  for  2009  was  3.9  percent  in  July  2008,  a 
rather high figure in retrospect. However, it was significantly revised downward to 0.5 percent 
in January 2009, and further revised downward to minus 1.3 percent in April – a significant 
downward revision of more than 5 percentage points in ten months.  
BIS Review 64/2009 
 1
fixed 
investment,  and  business 
Although many reasons are provided for the downturn in the world economy since last year, I 
think that the following three factors are of great importance.  
First is the global accumulation of excesses and their subsequent adjustments. During the 
mid-2000s,  financial  and  economic  activity  overheated  against  the  background  of  the 
continued benign environment of high growth, low inflation, and low interest rates, leading to 
an  accumulation  of  various  excesses.  For  example,  in  the  area  of  financial  activity,  risk 
evaluation by investors and financial institutions became lax, leading to a global credit bubble 
symbolized by the subprime mortgage problem. In a credit bubble, an increase in credit and 
leverage, and overheating in economic activity are two sides of a same coin. Examples are a 
substantial  increase  in  housing  investment  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  and  an 
expansion  in  demand  for  durable  goods,  such  as  automobiles,  around  the  world  including 
emerging and commodity-exporting economies. On the corporate side, production capacity 
was  augmented  by  an  expansion  in  business  fixed  investment  to  match  a  substantial 
increase  in  demand  or  by  an  assumption  held  by  more  than  a  few  firms  that  a  strong 
increase in demand will continue. However, looking back, such high growth supported by the 
credit bubble could not continue for long. When financial institutions, firms, and households 
start the process of adjusting excesses in economic activity, spending activity such as private 
consumption,  housing 
investment  will  be  reduced 
substantially.  Thus,  the  most  basic  reason  for  the  current  global  economic  downturn 
exceeding  many  forecasts  can  be  attributed  to  an  unprecedented  size  of  and  the  global 
spreading of the accumulated excesses both in financial and economic activity.  
Second  is  an  extreme  decline  in  the  functioning  of  financial  systems  worldwide  since  the 
emergence of the financial crisis triggered by the failure of Lehman Brothers last September. 
Due to the failure of Lehman Brothers, provider of funds, such as financial institutions and 
institutional investors, became extremely cautious to take counterparties' credit risks. This led 
to  a  sharp  decline  in  the  volume  of  transactions,  not  only  in  the  interbank  market  where 
financial  institutions  exchange  funds,  but  also  in  markets  for  housing  loans  and  other 
securitized  products,  and  in  the  CP  and  corporate  bond  markets  where  firms  raise  funds, 
leading to a situation of a de facto dysfunction of financial markets. In addition, banks, faced 
with  withdrawal  of  deposits  and  concerns  over  their  financial  positions  in  addition  to  the 
impairment of their capital bases, suddenly tightened their lending attitudes. If the functioning 
of the financial system declines substantially, in terms of its function to intermediate funds in 
the  financial  markets  and  of  extending  credit  by  financial  institutions,  it  is  inevitable  that 
economic  activity  will  be  adversely  affected.  Furthermore,  the  deterioration  in  economic 
activity further worsened the business conditions of financial institutions by turning housing 
and  corporate  loans  into  impaired  assets,  and  this  in  turn  further  aggravated  economic 
activity – an emergence of a negative chain reaction. This is the mechanism of the so-called 
adverse  feedback  loop  between  financial  and  economic  activity,  which  has  been  used  to 
describe the deterioration in global economic conditions from last autumn.  
Moreover,  a  chain  reaction  of  the  financial  crisis  spread  across  the  border  to  various 
countries and regions. The spreading of the U.S. and Western European financial crises to 
emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  such  as  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  and 
Latin  America,  was  a  background  factor  which  further  increased  the  severity  of  the  global 
economic downturn. Financial institutions in emerging and commodity-exporting economies 
had  not  invested  much  in  securitized  products  backed  by  subprime  mortgages,  which 
became  the  direct  cause  of  the  current  financial  crisis,  and,  in  this  sense,  the  amount  of 
losses  they  incurred  was  limited.  Therefore,  at  the  beginning  of  the  financial  crisis,  there 
were  views  that  the  effects  of  the  crisis  on  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies 
would be limited. However, U.S. and Western European financial institutions and investors 
had  been  also  assuming  an  important  role  in  intermediating  funds  to  these  economies. 
Therefore,  the  rapid  decrease  in  loans  extended  to  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies  by  U.S.  and  Western  European  financial  institutions  led  to  a  significant  credit 
contraction and a sharp deterioration in economic conditions also in these economies. Thus, 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2009
the financial crisis that started in the United States and Europe spread to financial markets 
around  the  globe  including  those  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  and 
expanded the adverse feedback loop between financial and economic activity globally.  
Third is substantial adjustments in production and inventories on a global scale. From last 
autumn, firms were suddenly faced with a large build-up of inventories due to a sharp decline 
in  global  demand.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  only  way  to  reduce  inventories  was  to 
substantially reduce production. Such reduction was most prominent in the area of durable 
consumer goods and capital goods.  
I have talked about three major factors that led to the current global economic downturn. But 
the direct causes of the rapid downturn since last autumn were the second and third factors, 
namely,  the  impact  of  the  global  credit  contraction  triggered  by  the  failure  of  Lehman 
Brothers and large adjustments in production and inventories. Most recently, with the effects 
of these factors abating gradually, some signs of a slowdown in the pace of deterioration of 
the world economy or a leveling out are being observed. 
With regard to financial conditions, money markets are beginning to regain stability on the 
whole  due  in  part  to  the  various  measures  taken  by  central  banks  such  as  provision  of 
abundant  liquidity.  Confidence  in  the  soundness  of  financial  systems  seems  to  be  turning 
toward improvement after the announcement by the U.S. authorities of measures to stabilize 
the  U.S.  financial  system.  To  restore  stability  in  countries'  financial  systems,  disposing  of 
financial institutions' impaired assets and enhancement of their capital bases are necessary. 
In the United States, examination of the adequacy of financial institutions' capital bases was 
conducted by using the so-called stress test to test whether the current level of capital bases 
was sufficient to withstand an increase in losses in the case of a deep recession. Based on 
the results of the stress test, U.S. financial institutions are currently working on strengthening 
their  capital  bases.  Developments  in  the  stock  market  since  the  release  of  the  stress  test 
results seem to indicate that these measures to stabilize the financial system are generally 
welcomed.  
In addition, data and anecdotal evidence show that there has been appreciable progress in 
the  area  of  global-scale  adjustments  in  production  and  inventories.  For  example,  it  is 
confirmed  that  inventory  adjustments  of  automobiles  and  electronic  parts  have  made 
progress in China and in emerging economies, such as South Korea, as well as in the United 
States and Europe. It is expected that this will have positive effects on production, and in fact 
some evidence of these effects is already observed in Japan and China.  
Will the world economy level out and start to recover? If so, how sustainable will the recovery 
be? Based on the factors that have contributed to the downturn of the world economy, which 
I  mentioned  earlier,  the  keys  in  projecting  the  future  path  are  how  adjustments  of 
accumulated excesses proceed and when the adverse feedback loop between financial and 
economic  activity  stops  operating.  Adjustments  are  currently  being  made  gradually  in  the 
housing market in the United States and Europe, and the saving rate of households in the 
United  States  has  recently  started  rising,  indicating  that  there  is  progress  toward  reducing 
excesses  in  consumption  and  debt.  Needless  to  say,  the  amount  of  excesses  cannot  be 
grasped  accurately  in  advance.  However,  given  that  high  economic  growth  continued  in 
many years prior to the current crisis, the possibility that adjustments of excesses will take 
considerable time cannot be ruled out. In addition, reduction of excesses in economic activity 
and resolving impaired assets in financial institutions are two sides of a same coin. Although 
there has also been some progress made in the latter, as I mentioned earlier, it seems that 
more  time  and  efforts  are  necessary  to  see  progress  in  the  restructuring  of  the  financial 
system to the extent that one can conclude that the risk of adverse feedback loop between 
financial  and  economic  activity  has  receded.  Of  course,  there  is  an  economic  cycle, 
experiencing both an economic recovery and a downturn, even in the middle of the process 
of  adjusting  excesses.  In  fact,  economic  recoveries  were  observed  in  the  1990s  in  Japan. 
Nevertheless, only mild economic recoveries were realized until the adjustments of excesses 
BIS Review 64/2009 
 3
were completed. In order for the economy to start a full-fledged and autonomous recovery, 
completion  of  adjustments  of  excesses  and  a  firm  footing  toward  the  restructuring  of  the 
financial system is a prerequisite. 
Based  on  the  factors  that  I  have explained  so  far,  the  world  economy  is  expected  to  start 
recovering  due  to  the  effects  of  macroeconomic  policies  and  financial  system  measures 
adopted  by  governments  and  central  banks  around  the  world  and  to  the  progress  in 
adjustments of excesses in the private sector. However, the pace of recovery will likely be 
only  moderate,  and  we  also  need  to  fully  bear  in  mind  the  fact  that  there  are  high 
uncertainties regarding the scenario of the recovery itself.  
The current state of and outlook for Japan's economy 
II.  
Having explained the current situation of and outlook for the world economy, I will now move 
on to developments in Japan's economy.  
The slowing of Japan's economic activity accelerated from around spring last year. And after 
the failure of Lehman Brothers last autumn, exports – particularly of automobiles, electrical 
machinery,  and  general  machinery  such  as  engineering  and  construction  machinery  – 
decreased  sharply,  and,  as  a  result,  production  registered  an  unprecedented  decline.  The 
reason for Japan's economic downturn being sharp relative to other industrialized countries 
is  that  the  manufacturing  industries,  especially  high-tech  ones,  constitute  a  large  part  of 
economy activity in Japan and they tend to be influenced most by developments in the world 
economy.  Recently,  however,  some  brighter  signs  are  beginning  to  appear  in  exports  and 
production,  reflecting  the  signs  of  recovery  in  the  world  economy,  despite  the  continued 
deterioration  in  domestic  economic  conditions.  Specifically,  the  pace  of  decline  in  exports 
slowed  and  has  recently  leveled  out  against  the  background  of  recovery  in  demand  from 
China  and  progress  in  adjustments  of  overseas  inventories  such  as  automobiles  and 
electronic  goods.  Production  also  showed  a  monthly  increase  in  March,  due  partly  to  the 
progress  in  adjustments  of  inventories  at  home  and  abroad  including  automobiles  and  IT-
related  goods,  after  recording  monthly  declines  of  around  10  percent  in  January  and 
February.  In  addition,  information  provided  at  interviews  with  the  management  of  firms 
indicates that production will likely continue to increase going forward.  We therefore judge 
that exports and production are beginning to level out. On the other hand, domestic private 
demand,  such  as  consumption  and  business  fixed  investment,  is  likely  to  continue  to 
weaken, given that the situation in household income and firms' profits, which hold the key in 
determining the future outlook for domestic private demand, is being adversely affected with 
a lag by a significant decline in production and will remain severe for the time being.  
Based on the above assessment, the pace of deterioration in economic conditions is likely to 
moderate gradually, leading to a leveling out of the economy taken as a whole, given that 
exports and production are expected to level out and start recovering and the effects of the 
fiscal stimulus are likely to appear. Further ahead, from the latter half of fiscal 2009 onward, 
assuming that the world economy will show a mild recovery, as I mentioned earlier, the most 
likely  outlook  projects  that  Japan's  economy  will  start  recovering,  supported  partly  by  the 
positive  effects  of  measures  to  stabilize  the  financial  system  and  of  fiscal  and  monetary 
policy measures.  
Meanwhile, on the price front, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index 
(CPI) for all items excluding fresh food rose to 2.4 percent last summer due mainly to the rise 
in crude oil prices, but declined thereafter to around 0 percent reflecting the decline in prices 
of petroleum products and the stabilization of food prices. Looking ahead, the year-on-year 
rate of decline in the CPI (excluding fresh food) will likely accelerate through the middle of 
this fiscal year reflecting the deterioration in demand conditions in addition to the fact that the 
level of CPI at this time last year was elevated due mainly to the rise in prices of petroleum 
products  and  food.  Thereafter,  however,  assuming  that  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2009
expectations remain stable, the rate of decline in the CPI (excluding fresh food) is likely to 
moderate as the effects of the changes in the prices of petroleum products abate.  
The above projections regarding future economic activity and prices continue to be attended 
by  considerable  uncertainties.  Those  that  demand  attention  are  the  downside  risks.  The 
Bank will continue to carefully monitor developments in economic activity and prices bearing 
in mind these downside risks.  
Financial conditions 
III. 
Developments in the world economy and in global financial markets are the major downside 
risks  to  Japan's  economy,  but  I  have  already  elaborated  on  them  and  I  will  now  turn  to 
Japan's financial conditions.  
From last autumn, the effects of the financial crises in the United States and Europe spread 
to financial markets in Japan. In the money market, tensions increased as can be observed 
in wider spreads between interbank funding rates and short-term government security rates. 
The issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds sharply deteriorated.  
The  initial  cause  of  the  recent  tightening  in  financial  conditions  was  the  global  credit 
contraction.  Therefore,  the  recent  changes  in  financial  conditions  are  characterized  by  the 
sharper  deterioration  in  financial  positions  of  large  firms  than  in  those  of  small  firms.  The 
heightened pressures in the global financial and capital markets directly affected the financial 
positions of large firms through increased difficulty in raising funds from foreign banks and 
from  the  domestic  CP  and  corporate  bond  markets.  Large  firms  increased  the  volume  of 
borrowing  from  banks  and  tried  to  hold  ample  liquidity  at  hand  due  to  increased  concerns 
over  future  financial  conditions.  The  deterioration  in  financial  positions  of  large  firms 
negatively influenced the financial positions of small firms through various channels.  
In view of these assessments, the Bank took aggressive policy actions in order to provide 
abundant liquidity in the money market and to facilitate corporate financing. These actions 
include the outright purchases of CP and corporate bonds. Although CP and corporate bonds 
are  fund-raising  tools  used  mainly  by  large  firms,  the  revival  of  the  functioning  of  these 
markets  is  expected  to  gradually  affect  the  financial  positions  of  small  firms  through 
improvements in banks' lending capability and in conditions for the provision of trade credit 
by large firms. In fact, as a result of the provision of ample liquidity by the Bank, the money 
market  has  gradually  regained  stability  and  the  term  interest  rates,  which  are  used  as  the 
reference  rate  when  firms  actually  raise  funds,  declined.  With  further  assistance  from  the 
Bank  such  as  the  outright  purchases  of  CP,  the  issuing  conditions  for  CP  have  been 
improving. As a result of the failure of Lehman Brothers last autumn, market perceptions of 
firms became increasingly severe, and firms were unable to issue CP unless it was offered 
with  large  new  issue  spreads  added  on  to  the  short-term  government  security  rates. 
However, the issuing conditions for CP started improving since around the end of last year 
when  the  authorities,  including  the  Bank  of  Japan,  took  several  actions,  and  recently,  the 
new issue spreads for CP with high credit ratings have come down to the level prior to the 
failure  of  Lehman  Brothers.  In  the  case  of  CP  with  lower  credit  ratings,  the  new  issue 
spreads have also been declining steadily. In addition, most recently, the new issue spreads 
of corporate bonds have declined somewhat. Looking at the track record of corporate bonds 
issued, while only some of the highest rated bonds could be issued during the period from 
last autumn through the end of last fiscal year, bonds with lower ratings have been issued 
recently, indicating a substantial improvement in the issuing conditions.  
Since the issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds have improved steadily and firms' 
demand to hold ample liquidity has declined, the severity in the financial positions of large 
firms  has  subsided.  In  addition,  policy  actions  such  as  the  emergency  guarantee  scheme 
have played a role in supporting the financial positions of small firms.  
BIS Review 64/2009 
 5
Thus, the tension in the environment surrounding corporate financing has eased relative to 
some time ago. However, we judge that conditions continue to be severe on the whole given 
that a large number of firms are reporting that their financial positions are weak and lending 
attitudes of financial institutions are severe against the backdrop of deterioration in corporate 
profits. Going forward, given the continued severe conditions surrounding corporate profits, 
there is a risk that, depending on future economic conditions, financial institutions and market 
participants may become stricter with regard to taking on corporate credit risks. Furthermore, 
we think it necessary to keep in mind the possibility of banks becoming strongly conscious of 
capital  constraints  and  tightening  their  lending  attitudes  if  stock  prices  should  decline 
substantially.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  continue  to  carefully  monitor  developments  in 
corporate financing. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
IV.  
I have so far explained financial and economic conditions here and abroad. Confronted with 
the drastic changes in economic and financial conditions, countries around the world have 
taken policy actions aggressively since last autumn. Central banks have also taken a variety 
of  policy  measures.  Reflecting  the  nature  of  the  current  economic  crisis,  where  the  world 
economy  faced  a  simultaneous  and  sharp  downturn,  policy  responses  of  central  banks 
including the Bank of Japan have become quite similar. These can be broadly categorized in 
three main areas.  
First is the reduction in the policy interest rate. As you know, the Bank of Japan has reduced 
its policy interest rate down to 0.1 percent, and central banks in other major countries have 
also substantially reduced their policy interest rates. As a result, interest rates charged for 
overnight funds in the interbank market now stand at 0.1 percent in Japan, 0.2 percent in the 
United  States,  0.25  percent  in  Canada,  and  around  0.5  percent  in  the  euro  area  and  the 
United  Kingdom.  However,  while  major  overseas  countries  have  also  reduced  the  level  of 
interest rates down to nearly zero, they are, at the same time, aware of the side effects that 
extremely low interest rates may have on the functioning of money markets and the business 
conditions of financial institutions. They, therefore, have not adopted the zero interest rate 
policy  which  the  Bank  had  adopted  in  the  past  where  the  policy  interest  rate  was  brought 
down literally to within a hairbreadth of 0 percent.  
Second  is  ensuring  financial  market  stability  through  the  provision  of  abundant  liquidity. 
Central  banks  have  been  providing  abundant  liquidity  in  their  currency,  while  adopting 
measures  such  as  lengthening  the  terms  of  funds  provided.  Furthermore,  in  the  current 
financial crisis, central banks in major countries are providing dollar liquidity in coordination 
with the Federal Reserve, and this measure seems to be making substantial contributions in 
stabilizing financial markets.  
Third  is  restoring  the  proper  functioning  of  financial  intermediation.  In  this  regard,  despite 
their  common  aims,  they  differ  in  terms  of  where  the  priority  is  attached  reflecting  the 
differences in the structure of financial intermediation in each country. At the end of 2007, the 
ratio of bank lending relative to nominal GDP, which can be used as a guide to capture the 
differences in the structure of financial intermediation, was 63 percent in the United States, 
145  percent  in  the  euro  area,  and  136  percent  in  Japan.  On  the  other  hand,  the  ratio  of 
outstanding bonds issued by the private sector relative to nominal GDP was 168 percent in 
the United States, 81 percent in the euro area, and 94 percent in Japan. As these figures 
show,  the  role  of  financial  intermediation  in  the  United  States  is  carried  out  mainly  by  the 
capital markets, whereas in the euro area it is bank lending. Japan comes in between the 
United States and the euro area, but the share of bank lending is relatively high. Reflecting 
these differences in the structure of financial intermediation, the Federal Reserve has been 
conducting  large-scale  purchases  of  assets  such  as  CP  and  real  estate  mortgage-backed 
securities (RMBS) directly in the markets to restore the functioning of capital markets. The 
Federal Reserve calls it a "credit easing policy." On the other hand, the European Central 
6 
 BIS Review 64/2009
Bank  (ECB)  has  introduced  measures  to  restore  the  financial  intermediation  function  of 
banks.  Specifically,  the  ECB  has  expanded  the  range  of  eligible  collateral  that  banks  can 
submit in order to acquire funds from the central bank, and has been providing banks with 
unlimited amount of longer funds up to the value of eligible collateral at a fixed interest rate. 
Meanwhile, the Bank of Japan has been taking actions to both restore the functioning of the 
markets and strengthen the financial intermediation function of banks. In the area of restoring 
the functioning of capital markets, the Bank has been conducting outright purchases of CP 
and corporate bonds through banks, although the scale of purchases is small relative to the 
United States where the degree of impairment of market functioning has been substantial. In 
addition, in the area of strengthening the financial intermediation function of banks, the Bank, 
similar to the ECB, has been expanding the range of eligible collateral, and has also been 
providing long-term funds at low interest rates against corporate debt submitted as collateral. 
Through these measures, the Bank is aiming to facilitate smooth extension of bank credit.  
In  addition  to  the  measures  in  three  main  areas,  the  Bank  has  prepared  facilities  such  as 
purchases  of  stocks  held  by  banks  and  provision  of  subordinate  loans  to  banks.  These 
facilities  are  designed  to  serve  as  safety  valves  for  the  proper  functioning  of  financial 
intermediation  by  alleviating  concerns  over  raising  capital  even  in  stress  conditions  where 
individual banks become strongly conscious of capital constraints due to concerns over a fall 
in stock prices. The purchases of CP and corporate bonds also have the function as safety 
valves  when  corporate  financing  becomes  tight.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  there  are  various 
risks facing corporate financing, and a risk of another decline in the functioning of the CP and 
bond  markets  cannot  be  ruled  out.  In  the  event,  financial  institutions  that  hold  CP  and 
corporate bonds can submit them to the Bank for funding. Thus the purchases are designed 
to  serve  as  a  safety  net  to  restore  the  market  functioning  if  the  CP  and  corporate  bond 
markets should become unstable.  
These  are  the  policy  measures  that  the  Bank  has  taken  and  the  thinking  behind  their 
introduction. The Bank, paying attention for the time being to the downside risks to economic 
activity and prices, will continue to exert its utmost efforts as the central bank, utilizing these 
tools,  to  facilitate  the  return  of  Japan's  economy  to  a  sustainable  growth  path  with  price 
stability.  
Closing remarks 
I have discussed the current financial and economic conditions in Japan and abroad as well 
as  the  outlook,  and  our  thinking  regarding  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  If  I  may 
summarize what I have explained earlier, the sharp deterioration in economic and financial 
conditions  in  Japan  and  abroad  since  last  autumn  is  starting  to  level  out  and  there  is  a 
prospect of a mild recovery ahead. However, considering the fact that the current economic 
downturn has occurred during the process of the adjustment of various excesses that had 
accumulated worldwide over the past several years, it is very likely that the severe economic 
conditions will continue for some time, and the recovery thereafter will inevitably be mild and 
attended  by  high  uncertainty.  Under  these  circumstances,  policymakers  around  the  globe, 
including  the  Bank,  have  been  taking  a  variety  of  actions.  These  actions  are  playing  an 
important role in temporarily mitigating the negative effects of economic and financial shocks 
and preventing the economy from sinking even further. The future path of the economy after 
recovering from the shocks will reflect the true strength inherent in the economy, that is, the 
potential  growth  rate.  The  major  factor  determining  the  potential  growth  rate  is  growth  in 
productivity.  Japan's  economy  cannot  be  expected  to  prosper  without  improving  its 
productivity through innovation. Fiscal and monetary policies are important, but they merely 
assume a supporting role in facilitating adjustments of excesses and proactive efforts by the 
private sector.  
Needless  to  say,  making  the  most  of  the  market  mechanism  is  a  prerequisite  in  order  to 
realize innovation. Nevertheless, distrust in the market mechanism seems to be increasing, 
BIS Review 64/2009 
 7
due to the emergence of the global financial crisis and to the fact that excess financial activity 
was one of the major factors behind the crisis. In the area of financial activity, appropriate 
regulation and supervision are prerequisites for the financial markets and financial institutions 
to  properly  fulfill  their  role  of  financial  intermediation.  I  will not  go  into details  on  this  point 
because  I  have  already  expressed  my  opinion  in  my  speech  the  other  day.1  Active 
discussions  to  redesign  the  frameworks  for  regulation  and  supervision  have  been  held 
worldwide,  and  the  Bank  has  been  taking  part  in  many  of  such  discussions.  Through  the 
experience  of  the  current  financial  crisis,  I  am  deeply  recognizing  the  importance  of  the 
designing  of  the  financial  architecture  that  enables  the  market  mechanism  to  function 
appropriately as well as the significance of the implementation of economic policies based on 
the market mechanism.  
No one can predict exactly how the world economy will evolve after the current turmoil has 
ceased.  Needless  to  say,  however,  Japanese  firms  need  to  continue  to  strive  to  find  new 
frontiers,  adapting  to  the  changes  in  the  global  economy  while  making  the  most  of  their 
advantages.  
Only through these efforts can a full-fledged recovery in Japan's economy be attained. The 
Bank  would  like  to  strongly  support  these  efforts  from  the  financial  side  to  facilitate  the 
autonomous recovery of Japan's economy.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                 
1   See  Shirakawa,  Masaaki,  "Preventing  the  Next  Crisis:  The  Nexus  between  Financial  Markets,  Financial 
Institutions and Central Banks," May 13, 2009. 
8 
 BIS Review 64/2009
