Fatos Ibrahimi: Macroeconomic developments and the characteristics 
of the Albanian financial system 
Speech by  Mr Fatos Ibrahimi, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Crans 
Montana Forum “The Albanian banking system in front of the international financial crisis”, 
Tirana, 27 March 2009. 
 Dear participants, 
Let  me  start  by  thanking  the  organizers  of  this  meeting,  for  enabling  this  joint  discussion 
regarding  the  status  of  our  financial  sectors  and  the  measures  which  are  necessary  to 
sustain its resistance to the negative effects of this unprecedented global crisis. Indeed, what 
started  as  financial  crisis  in  the  US,  has  transformed  itself  into  an  economic  crisis,  that  is 
having  dire  consequences  in  real  sectors  of  the  world  economy.  The  hope  is  that,  like 
earthquake  bands,  the  magnitude  of  the  crisis  effects  will  fade  out  as  it  widens  and  is 
confronted with measures taken by countries to resist it. 
I  will  start  by  describing  the  main  macroeconomic  developments  of  our  economy  and  the 
characteristics  of  our  financial  system.  Then  I  will  mention  some  of  the  related  measures 
taken by Bank of Albania, in its role as the monetary and supervisory authority of the country, 
and our expectations for the foreseeable future. 
Our economy has been in a solid path of growth for the last decade, with an average annual 
growth  of  around  6  percent.  It  has  benefited  from  economic  reforms  that  have  provided 
development  opportunities  for  our  business  sector,  have  opened  markets,  have  increased 
competition,  have  stimulated  flexible  labor  markets  and  have  increased  social  revenues. 
Both fiscal and monetary policies have been cautious in providing the necessary stimulus to 
the economic growth, by being consistent and disciplined in the pursuit of their objectives to 
achieve fiscal consolidation and ensure a low-inflation environment. The size of the annual 
budget deficit in relation to GDP has been between 3 %, leaping to 5.7 % for 2008, while the 
public  debt  has  been  stable,  reaching  up  to  around  55.6  %  for  2008.  The  annual  inflation 
growth rate has been for a long time within the corridor defined by the Bank of Albania of 2 - 
4  percent  (and  close  to  the  Bank  of  Albania  target  of  3  percent),  indicating  success  in 
anchoring  market  participants  expectations  for  price  developments  in  the  economy.  This 
steady good economic performance has been supported by a flexible exchange rate that has 
been instrumental in supporting and maintaining a balanced growth, by maintaining the right 
incentives for interaction between domestic and foreign counterparties. 
Fundamental  changes  have  occurred  in  the  financial  sector  too,  thanks  to  consistent  and 
successful  reforms  in  the  last  decade.  Nowadays  the  banking  sector  in  Albania  counts  16 
banks,  all  in  private  hands,  where  the  foreign  capital  dominates.  During  time,  the  banking 
sector has increased the number of branches, has improved its products to the public and 
has  increased  its  intermediating  role  to  provide  an  important  contribution  in  the  economic 
development of the country. At the same time, the entrance of well-know European banking 
groups from Austria, Greece, Italy and France, has been associated with consolidation in the 
banking  industry.  As  it  is  the  case  in  the  entire  region,  the  banking  sector  dominates  the 
financial sector in our country. 
Our  supervisory  work  aims  at  adopting  the  best  international  standards  in  the  field.  As  a 
result,  our  legal  and  regulatory  framework  is  considered  to  be  consistent  in  achieving  our 
objective  of  a  stable  and  sound  development  of  the  banking  activity,  and  is  continuously 
improved. From the practical aspect, we combine both regulatory and risk based supervision. 
BIS Review 43/2009 
 1
The data reported from the banking sector are analyzed off-site and verified on-site. We also 
try  to  stay  in  close  contacts  and  cooperate  with  foreign  supervisory  authorities,  as  an 
important instrument in improving the effectiveness of the supervisory work. 
Nowadays,  the  assets  of  the  banking  sector  represent  around  87  percent  of  the  country’s 
GDP. Loan portfolio has reached around 37 percent of GDP. Due to increasing competition 
after the privatization, its growth has been very strong in the last 4 years, albeit starting from 
a low base. Deposits represent around 80 percent of the banking sector liabilities, and the 
loan/deposit  ratio  stood  at  around  62  percent.  Hence,  the  banking  sector  relies  heavily  in 
domestic deposits, both in national and foreign currencies, to perform its lending activity. The 
foreign currency position of the banking sector is quite balanced, as assets and liabilities in 
foreign currency stand respectively at around 49 percent of total assets, and liabilities of the 
banking sector to nonresidents (almost entirely in foreign currency) is only 10 percent of total 
liabilities. The banking sector is well-capitalized and liquid. The capital adequacy ratio stands 
at around 17 percent, compared to the required minimum of 12 percent. Liquid assets to total 
assets, is at around 43 percent. In the last 4 years, the average return on equity has been 
above  20  percent  while  the  average  return  on  assets  has  been  around  1.5  percent.  The 
branch  network  of  the  sector  counts  around  350  branches  all  over  the  country.  In  the  last 
three  years  mainly,  the  banking  sector  has  also  introduced modern  payment  infrastructure 
and products, to allow for increasing usage of electronic payment cards and internet banking. 
Despite solid performance in the last years the Bank of Albania has been vigilant to point out 
areas of the banking activity, related with domestic developments that required attention from 
the  banking  industry.  Until  before  the  appearance  of  this  international  financial  crisis,  we 
have  expressed  our  concern  regarding  the  rapid  increase  in  lending  which,  until  2007 
reached up to 8-9 percentage points in terms of annual growth to GDP. The composition of 
the  loan  portfolio,  which  is  dominated  by  the  euro  dominated  loans,  is  also  a  point  of 
concern,  although  this  position  is  supported  by  a  strong  presence  of  foreign  currency 
denominated  liabilities  in  banks  balance  sheets,  a  generally  supportive  environment  of 
exchange rates and interest rates over time and very close trade links to Euro-area countries 
like Italy and Greece. In this regard, Bank of Albania has been consistent in its approach to 
introduce regulatory measures that would discourage rapid increase in lending, encourage 
banks to lend more in domestic currency and increase transparency toward clients on banks 
products and services. 
Since the middle of last year, Bank of Albania has been vocal in its concern regarding the 
indirect  impact  of  the  financial  crises,  in  particular  regarding  the  performance  of  the  real 
economy. We pointed out risks to economic growth related with a potential decline in credit 
from the banking sector, an increasing trade deficit (due to a slowdown in exports), a sharp 
contraction of remittances (due to perception of lower wealth and increasing unemployment 
in the developed countries). We stated that at these times, there is a much stronger need for 
a  careful  monetary  policy  and  responsible  fiscal  policy.  When  it  comes  to  the  monetary 
policy, we have been careful in maintaining incentives for promoting savings in local currency 
assets  and  anchoring  expectations  for  low  and  stable  inflation  rates.  From  an  operational 
perspective,  over  the  second  half  of  last  year,  the  Bank  of  Albania  took  a  number  of 
measures: 
• 
strengthening the surveillance of financial market developments, and in particular of 
the banking sector; 
strengthening  bilateral  and  multilateral  meetings  with  bank  representatives,  asking 
them for increased vigilance due to current international market conditions; 
increasing  contacts  with  other  domestic  institutions  that  regulate  and  monitor  the 
financial markets, in particular with the Authority of Financial Market Supervision; 
increasing  the  number  of  publications,  including  the  Financial  Stability  Report  2007 
(Sept.)  and  the  Statement  on  Financial  Stability  (Oct.),  which  try  to  analyze  the 
BIS Review 43/2009
   2 
     elements  of  the  crisis  and  its  potential  effects  on  Albanian  Banking  Sector  and  the 
economy; 
increasing the presence in the Media, to explain the crisis, to clarify the position of our 
banking sector toward the potential crisis effects, and to maintain public confidence in 
the banking sector; 
changing  and  improving  the  reporting  framework  of  banks,  in  particular  regarding 
their  exposure  to  international  markets  (and  the  mother-banks)  and  their  liabilities 
(deposits and exposure to credit lines) from mother-banks); 
reviewing  our  “back-up”  plans  to  assess  the  possibility  of  new  actions,  should  we 
encounter a worsening scenario; 
changing  the  form  of  our  open  market  operations  and  starting  to  execute  “open 
amount/fixed price” weekly reverse repurchase transactions and longer maturity ones, 
to better suit the liquidity needs of the banks. 
When it comes to cooperation with the home countries, we have very much appreciated their 
measures  to  enhance  the  safety  of  their  banks,  as  this  provides  a  sense  of  financial 
infrastructure security in our host-countries as well. We believe that these measures will be 
adjusted  to  a  developing  environment,  and  will  be  instrumental  to  also  target  some  of  the 
concerns of the host countries related with: a) the importance of maintaining reasonable flow 
of  funds  in  euro  from  the  headquarters  of  the  banking  groups  toward  their  foreign 
subsidiaries, both for liquidity and lending support; b) the importance of gradually steering the 
lending portfolio of their foreign subsidiaries toward local currency of the host countries. 
Events  of  the  second  half  of  2008  have  shown  us  the  importance  of  having  a  balanced 
economy  and  a  solid  financial  and  banking  sector.  Despite  the  increasing  effects  of  the 
international  crisis,  the  economy  showed  a  solid  growth,  in  an  environment  of  declining 
inflationary pressure. Impact of the international crisis started to materialize in the last quarter 
of the year, as shown in developments of the balance of payments and in the banking sector 
balance sheet. Indeed, a fall in external demand and a rise in unemployment rates in some 
of the EU neighbor countries caused a decline in the remittances and in exports. In addition, 
public  sensitivity  to  (sometimes  unbalanced)  news  on  international  crisis  developments, 
increased the uncertainty about the safety of their savings in the banking sector, and caused 
some  deposits  withdraw.  In  spite  of  this,  due  to  satisfactory  levels  of  capitalization  and 
liquidity,  the  banking  sector  coped  well  with  such  developments.  In  terms  of  general 
developments, the banking sector asset annual growth slowed to 12 percent, compared to 19 
percent  of  the  previous  year.  In  addition  to  a  decline  in  loan  growth,  the  loan  quality  also 
worsened and non-performing loans reached 6.6 percent of total loans. But the comfortable 
ratio of loans to deposits still supported a solid annual credit growth of around 35 percent. 
The financial result of the banking sector for 2008 was positive but lower than the previous 
year  due  to  a  slowdown  in  profit-making  activities.  The  exchange  rate  of  the  domestic 
currency was stable over the year and with depreciating tendencies versus the euro and the 
American dollar over the first quarter. 
In relation to expected domestic developments for 2009, we expect economy to face greater 
challenges.  Economic  growth  will  be  positive,  but  almost  half  of  what  was  in  2008.  The 
planned fiscal stimulus will be harder to reach, due to potentially higher difficulties in realizing 
revenues and in providing other sources for financing the expenditures. Hence, there might 
be  a  need  to  prioritize  fiscal  expenditures  over  the  year.  Financial  intermediation  of  the 
banking sector, to the public and the private sector, could be lower and potentially with higher 
cost, due to supply and demand factors. Due to tighter financing conditions, businesses and 
households are expected to undergo a painful but necessary adjustment process in the short 
term.  This  might  prove  to  be  beneficial  in  terms  of  efficiency  gain  in  the  medium  term. 
Inflation may temporarily go under the corridor of the Bank of Albania, but is expected to be 
within the corridor for most of the year. Monetary policy will make sure that proper incentives 
BIS Review 43/2009 
 3
to hold local currency denominated assets are maintained and that inflation expectations are 
kept  anchored  at  the  target  of  Bank  of  Albania.  This  is  expected  to  also  be  important  in 
maintaining adequate financial intermediation capacity in the medium term. The profitability 
of the banking sector is expected to be lower this year, due to lower  volume of the profit-
making  activities  (lower  credit  supply/demand),  potentially  higher  financing  costs  and 
increasing provisions for non-performing loans. But this is not expected to have a substantial 
effect  on  capital  adequacy  and  liquidity  indicators.  More  than  sufficient  capitalization  and 
liquidity parameter of the banking activity will protect the stability of the banking sector and of 
the financial system going forward. 
While  the  international  crisis  is  impacting  every  country,  the  magnitude  of  the  impact  will 
depend  on  length  of  the  international  crisis  and  the  state  of  that  country’s  economy. 
Expectations for the recovery of the world economy, somewhere between end of this year – 
beginning  of  next  year,  if  materialized,  will  remove  the  uncertainty  and  the  psychological 
boost will likely support the sense of earlier and stronger economic benefits. In spite of the 
difficulties ahead, it is deemed that the position of the Albanian economy and of our financial 
system is balanced and capable of withstanding the impact of this international crisis. In this 
effort, our economy will find support in factors related with the flexibility of the real sectors 
and  of  businesses,  the  appropriate  level  of  some  macroeconomic  indicators  related  with 
fiscal and monetary areas, the stability of the banking sector and the very limited exposure to 
nonresident’s assets and liabilities, the ability of the public authorities to maintain fiscal and 
monetary  discipline  and  to  act  in  a  decisive  and  harmonized  way  to  support  economic 
growth. 
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2009
