Mario Draghi: Interview with CNN  
Interview  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  with  CNN,  at  the  World 
Economic Forum, Davos, 2 February 2009. 
 Introduction  by  Richard  Quest:  A  European  country  that  is  struggling  in  the  throes  of 
recession  is  Italy  where  business  sentiment  has  fallen  in  January  for  the  eighth  month 
running. It is now at its lowest level on record. Mario Draghi is the Governor of the Bank of 
Italy and he is also the Chairman of the Financial Stability Forum. Last week I spoke to him 
at the World Economic Forum in Davos. It was clear that we had to understand and I needed 
to understand from him the situation that we face.  
A  I  think  it’s  worthwhile  speaking  of  what  ought  to  be  done  rather  than  how  the  situation 
stands. I think the first consideration is speed is of the essence. All governments in the world 
have designed something, have thought about something, but only very few of them have 
actually done something. So I think the general consensus of …, I mean here, but I should 
say everywhere, is that fiscal packages that are large, that are lasting, and broad-based are 
key to the recovery and I think that’s… and they should be speedily implemented.  
Q Well the problem with what you’ve just said is no-one will disagree with you but it’s taking a 
very long time to get that activity under way. I’ll give you an example. Subprime was August 
07. The freezing of markets was July to September 08. We are January 09 and we have had 
bailouts but not really much stimulus package yet.  
A Unfortunately the same thing happened with the Great Depression. The first signs of the 
Great  Depression  started  a  few  years,  several  years  before  actual  fiscal  action  had  been 
implemented. So we don’t want to repeat that mistake. I think we have reached the stage 
where I would say most governments are ready to act and overall consensus is there. So it’s 
time to move now. On the monetary front however, I don’t want to stay only with the fiscal 
side,  on  the  monetary  front  I  think  the  response  by  central  banks  has  been  prompt  and 
massive and has certainly been very effective. But it’s clear that now there isn’t much room 
left to go to have lower interest rates. And also one should keep in mind that monetary policy 
takes  time  to  produce  its  effects  and  it  does  produce  its  effects  only  through  the  banking 
sector,  which  is  not  in  good  health.  So  unless  we  restore  the  banking  sector’s  health, 
monetary policy action is going to take time.  
Q We’ve had a partial recapitalization of banks and some say there’s still not enough. We are 
moving  towards  the  aggregator  bank  in  the  US  or  a  good  bank/bad  bank  where  the  toxic 
assets … Italy has never really been infected by toxic assets. That probably didn’t … that’s a 
blessing now.  
A I mean, let me say something about the banking sector in general. Market place people, 
public opinion have lost confidence in the banks’ balance sheets. So the prerequisite for any 
action  should  be  that  we  have  a  very  significant  transparency  operation  there  going  on.  I 
think that several of the ideas that have been designed in the last year, like the TARP, the 
very same bad bank, the idea of segregating toxic assets within banks’ balance sheets are 
all  good  ideas  that  could  somehow  produce  the  conditions  for  doing  this  transparency 
operation. But unless that is done, when I say transparency, I mean full recognition of the 
size of what is toxic; but let me finish, unless that is done no significant private flows will go 
into the banking industry.  
Q By saying that you clearly believe that we have not had full transparency yet of the level of 
toxic assets still outstanding.  
A Well, let me tell you, let me give you an example. As late as the Fall of 2008 major banks – 
and  I  will  not  name  the  country  where  this  was  happening  –  were  having  the  same  toxic 
BIS Review 11/2009 
 1
assets  posted  at  figures  ranging  between  50  and  90  cents  per  dollar,  so  that  is  a  good 
example of lack of transparency.  
Q I asked Governor Draghi whether he expected ever in his career to have to deal with a 
crisis like this. He told me, “Frankly no.” 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2009
